FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

were made, were anathematized as hateful in God's sight. This is
clear from the same chapter, where we read further on (Dt. 7:26):
"Neither shalt thou bring anything of the idol into thy house, lest
thou become an anathema like it." Another reason was lest, by
taking silver and gold, they should be led by avarice into idolatry to
which the Jews were inclined. The other precept (Dt. 23) about
covering up excretions, was just and becoming, both for the sake of
bodily cleanliness; and in order to keep the air wholesome; and by
reason of the respect due to the tabernacle of the covenant which
stood in the midst of the camp, wherein the Lord was said to dwell;
as is clearly set forth in the same passage, where after expressing
the command, the reason thereof is at once added, to wit: "For the
Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to
give up thy enemies to thee, and let thy camp be holy, and let no
uncleanness appear therein." The figurative reason for this precept,
according to Gregory (Moral. xxxi), is that sins which are the fetid
excretions of the mind should be covered over by repentance, that
we may become acceptable to God, according to Ps. 31:1: "Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered."
Or else according to a gloss, that we should recognize the unhappy
condition of human nature, and humbly cover and purify the stains
of a puffed-up and proud spirit in the deep furrow of selfexamination.
Reply to Objection 1:: Sorcerers and idolatrous priests made use, in
their rites, of the bones and flesh of dead men. Wherefore, in order to
extirpate the customs of idolatrous worship, the Lord commanded
that the priests of inferior degree, who at fixed times served in the
temple, should not "incur an uncleanness at the death" of anyone
except of those who were closely related to them, viz. their father or
mother, and others thus near of kin to them. But the high-priest had
always to be ready for the service of the sanctuary; wherefore he
was absolutely forbidden to approach the dead, however nearly
related to him. They were also forbidden to marry a "harlot" or "one
that has been put away," or any other than a virgin: both on account
of the reverence due to the priesthood, the honor of which would
seem to be tarnished by such a marriage: and for the sake of the
children who would be disgraced by the mother's shame: which was
most of all to be avoided when the priestly dignity was passed on
from father to son. Again, they were commanded to shave neither
head nor beard, and not to make incisions in their flesh, in order to
exclude the rites of idolatry. For the priests of the Gentiles shaved
both head and beard, wherefore it is written (Bar 6:30): "Priests sit in