enjoyment? It is not possible that any evil can happen from a soul that is
afflicted. [James 2:6] Paul knew the gain of this: therefore he says, "Tribulation
works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes
not ashamed." [Romans 5:3] Then let us not sink in our afflictions, but in all
things give thanks, that so we may get great gain, that we may be well-pleasing
to God, who permits afflictions. A great good is affliction: and we learn this from
our own children: for without affliction (a boy) would learn nothing useful. But
we, more than they, need affliction. For if there, when the passions (as yet) are
quiet, (chastisement) benefits them, how much more us, especially possessed as
we are by so many! Nay, we behoove rather to have schoolmasters than they:
since the faults of children cannot be great, but ours are exceeding great. Our
schoolmaster is affliction. Let us then not draw it down willingly upon ourselves,
but when it has come let us bear it bravely, being, as it is, always the cause of
numberless good things; that so we may both obtain grace from God, and the
good things which are laid up for them that love Him, in Christ Jesus our Lord,
with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor,
now and evermore, world without end. Amen.

Homily 43 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XX. 1
"And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto him the disciples, and
embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia."
There was need of much comforting after that uproar. Accordingly, having
done this, he goes into Macedonia, and then into Greece. For, it says, "when he
had gone over those parts, and had given them much exhortation, he came into
Greece, and there abode three months. And when the Jews laid wait for him, as
he was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia." (v. 2,
3.) Again he is persecuted by the Jews, and goes into Macedonia. "And there
accompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians,
Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of Asia,
Tychicus and Trophimus. These going before tarried for us at Troas." (v. 4, 5.)
But how does he call Timothy a man "of Thessalonica?" This is not his meaning,
but, "Of Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus and Gaius: of Derbe,
Timothy," etc., these, he says, went before him to Troas, preparing the way for
him. "And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and
came unto them to Troas in five days; where we abode seven days." [Acts 20:6]
For it seems to me that he made a point of keeping the feasts in the large cities.
"From Philippi," where the affair of the prison had taken place. This was his
third coming into Macedonia, and it is a high testimony that he bears to the
Philippians, which is the reason why he makes some stay there. "And upon the
day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached
unto them, ready to depart on the morrow; and continued his speech until
midnight." [Acts 20:7] It was then the (season between Easter and) Pentecost.
See how everything was subordinate to the preaching. It was also, it says, the
Lord's day. Not even during night-time was he silent, nay he discoursed the