THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.37, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: For this very reason He wished the legal
victims to be offered for Him who was the true Victim, in order that
the figure might be united to and confirmed by the reality, against
those who denied that in the Gospel Christ preached the God of the
Law. "For we must not think," says Origen (Hom. xiv in Luc.) "that
the good God subjected His Son to the enemy's law, which He
Himself had not given."
Reply to Objection 4: The law of Lev. 12:6,8 "commanded those who
could, to offer, for a son or a daughter, a lamb and also a turtle dove
or a pigeon: but those who were unable to offer a lamb were
commanded to offer two turtle doves or two young pigeons" [Bede,
Hom. xv in Purif.]. "And so the Lord, who, 'being rich, became poor
for our sakes, that through His poverty we [you] might be rich," as is
written 2 Cor. 8:9, "wished the poor man's victim to be offered for
Him" just as in His birth He was "wrapped in swaddling clothes and
laid in a manger" [Bede on Lk. 1]. Nevertheless, these birds have a
figurative sense. For the turtle dove, being a loquacious bird,
represents the preaching and confession of faith; and because it is a
chaste animal, it signifies chastity; and being a solitary animal, it
signifies contemplation. The pigeon is a gentle and simple animal,
and therefore signifies gentleness and simplicity. It is also a
gregarious animal; wherefore it signifies the active life.
Consequently this sacrifice signified the perfection of Christ and His
members. Again, "both these animals, by the plaintiveness of their
song, represented the mourning of the saints in this life: but the
turtle dove, being solitary, signifies the tears of prayer; whereas the
pigeon, being gregarious, signifies the public prayers of the
Church" [Bede, Hom. xv in Purif.]. Lastly, two of each of these
animals are offered, to show that holiness should be not only in the
soul, but also in the body.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.37, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it was fitting that the Mother of God

should go to the temple to be purified?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was unfitting for the Mother of God
to go to the Temple to be purified. For purification presupposes
uncleanness. But there was no uncleanness in the Blessed Virgin, as
stated above (Questions 27,28). Therefore she should not have gone
to the Temple to be purified.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Lev. 12:2-4): "If a woman, having
received seed, shall bear a man-child, she shall be unclean seven
days"; and consequently she is forbidden "to enter into the
sanctuary until the days of her purification be fulfilled." But the
Blessed Virgin brought forth a male child without receiving the seed
of man. Therefore she had no need to come to the Temple to be
purified.
Objection 3: Further, purification from uncleanness is accomplished
by grace alone. But the sacraments of the Old Law did not confer
grace; rather, indeed, did she have the very Author of grace with her.
Therefore it was not fitting that the Blessed Virgin should come to
the Temple to be purified.
On the contrary is the authority of Scripture, where it is stated (Lk.
2:22) that "the days of" Mary's "purification were accomplished
according to the law of Moses."
I answer that, As the fulness of grace flowed from Christ on to His
Mother, so it was becoming that the mother should be like her Son in
humility: for "God giveth grace to the humble," as is written James
4:6. And therefore, just as Christ, though not subject to the Law,
wished, nevertheless, to submit to circumcision and the other
burdens of the Law, in order to give an example of humility and
obedience; and in order to show His approval of the Law; and, again,
in order to take away from the Jews an excuse for calumniating Him:
for the same reasons He wished His Mother also to fulfil the
prescriptions of the Law, to which, nevertheless, she was not
subject.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the Blessed Virgin had no
uncleanness, yet she wished to fulfil the observance of purification,