SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.2.

that "to think" is taken secondly for an act of the deliberating
intellect, and thirdly for an act of the cogitative power.
Accordingly, if "to think" be understood broadly according to the
first sense, then "to think with assent," does not express completely
what is meant by "to believe": since, in this way, a man thinks with
assent even when he considers what he knows by science, or
understands. If, on the other hand, "to think" be understood in the
second way, then this expresses completely the nature of the act of
believing. For among the acts belonging to the intellect, some have a
firm assent without any such kind of thinking, as when a man
considers the things that he knows by science, or understands, for
this consideration is already formed. But some acts of the intellect
have unformed thought devoid of a firm assent, whether they incline
to neither side, as in one who "doubts"; or incline to one side rather
than the other, but on account of some slight motive, as in one who
"suspects"; or incline to one side yet with fear of the other, as in one
who "opines." But this act "to believe," cleaves firmly to one side, in
which respect belief has something in common with science and
understanding; yet its knowledge does not attain the perfection of
clear sight, wherein it agrees with doubt, suspicion and opinion.
Hence it is proper to the believer to think with assent: so that the act
of believing is distinguished from all the other acts of the intellect,
which are about the true or the false.
Reply to Objection 1: Faith has not that research of natural reason
which demonstrates what is believed, but a research into those
things whereby a man is induced to believe, for instance that such
things have been uttered by God and confirmed by miracles.
Reply to Objection 2: "To think" is not taken here for the act of the
cogitative power, but for an act of the intellect, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: The intellect of the believer is determined to
one object, not by the reason, but by the will, wherefore assent is
taken here for an act of the intellect as determined to one object by
the will.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the act of faith is suitably distinguished

as believing God, believing in a God and believing in God?
Objection 1: It would seem that the act of faith is unsuitably
distinguished as believing God, believing in a God, and believing in
God. For one habit has but one act. Now faith is one habit since it is
one virtue. Therefore it is unreasonable to say that there are three
acts of faith.
Objection 2: Further, that which is common to all acts of faith should
not be reckoned as a particular kind of act of faith. Now "to believe
God" is common to all acts of faith, since faith is founded on the
First Truth. Therefore it seems unreasonable to distinguish it from
certain other acts of faith.
Objection 3: Further, that which can be said of unbelievers, cannot
be called an act of faith. Now unbelievers can be said to believe in a
God. Therefore it should not be reckoned an act of faith.
Objection 4: Further, movement towards the end belongs to the will,
whose object is the good and the end. Now to believe is an act, not
of the will, but of the intellect. Therefore "to believe in God," which
implies movement towards an end, should not be reckoned as a
species of that act.
On the contrary is the authority of Augustine who makes this
distinction (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxi---Tract. xxix in Joan.).
I answer that, The act of any power or habit depends on the relation
of that power or habit to its object. Now the object of faith can be
considered in three ways. For, since "to believe" is an act of the
intellect, in so far as the will moves it to assent, as stated above
(Article 1, ad 3), the object of faith can be considered either on the
part of the intellect, or on the part of the will that moves the intellect.
If it be considered on the part of the intellect, then two things can be
observed in the object of faith, as stated above (Question 1, Article
1). One of these is the material object of faith, and in this way an act
of faith is "to believe in a God"; because, as stated above (Question
1, Article 1) nothing is proposed to our belief, except in as much as it
is referred to God. The other is the formal aspect of the object, for it