over the weak, so that the weakness of the flesh will be absorbed by the strength of the Spirit; and
that the man in whom this takes place cannot in that case be carnal, but spiritual, because of the
fellowship of the Spirit. Thus it is, therefore, that the martyrs bear their witness, and despise death,
not after the infirmity of the flesh, but because of the readiness of the Spirit. For when the infirmity
of the flesh is absorbed, it exhibits the Spirit as powerful; and again, when the Spirit absorbs the
weakness [of the flesh], it possesses the flesh as an inheritance in itself, and from both of these is
formed a living man,—living, indeed, because he partakes of the Spirit, but man, because of the
substance of flesh.
3. The flesh, therefore, when destitute of the Spirit of God, is dead, not having life, and cannot
possess the kingdom of God: [it is as] irrational blood, like water poured out upon the ground. And
therefore he says, "As is the earthy, such are they that are earthy." But where the Spirit of the
Father is, there is a living man; [there is] the rational blood preserved by God for the avenging [of
those that shed it]; [there is] the flesh possessed by the Spirit, forgetful indeed of what belongs to
it, and adopting the quality of the Spirit, being made conformable to the Word of God. And on this
account he (the apostle) declares, "As we have borne the image of him who is of the earth, we shall
also bear the image of Him who is from heaven." What, therefore, is the earthly? That which
was fashioned. And what is the heavenly? The Spirit. As therefore he says, when we were destitute
of the celestial Spirit, we walked in former times in the oldness of the flesh, not obeying God; so
now let us, receiving the Spirit, walk in newness of life, obeying God. Inasmuch, therefore, as
without the Spirit of God we cannot be saved, the apostle exhorts us through faith and chaste
conversation to preserve the Spirit of God, lest, having become non-participators of the Divine
Spirit, we lose the kingdom of heaven; and he exclaims, that flesh in itself, and blood, cannot
possess the kingdom of God.
4. If, however, we must speak strictly, [we would say that] the flesh does not inherit, but is
inherited; as also the Lord declares, "Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the earth by
inheritance;" as if in the [future] kingdom, the earth, from whence exists the substance of our
flesh, is to be possessed by inheritance. This is the reason for His wishing the temple (i.e., the flesh)
to be clean, that the Spirit of God may take delight therein, as a bridegroom with a bride. As,
therefore, the bride cannot [be said] to wed, but to be wedded, when the bridegroom comes and
takes her, so also the flesh cannot by itself possess the kingdom of God by inheritance; but it can
be taken for an inheritance into the kingdom of God. For a living person inherits the goods of the
deceased; and it is one thing to inherit, another to be inherited. The former rules, and exercises
power over, and orders the things inherited at his will; but the latter things are in a state of subjection,
are under order, and are ruled over by him who has obtained the inheritance. What, therefore, is it
that lives? The Spirit of God, doubtless. What, again, are the possessions of the deceased? The