difficulty of bearing internal sufferings, by reason of which, however,
one is not properly called a martyr, except by a kind of comparison.
It is in this sense that Jerome speaks.
Reply to Objection 5: The sufferings of penance are not a martyrdom
properly speaking, because they do not consist in things directed to
the causing of death, since they are directed merely to the taming of
the flesh: and if any one go beyond this measure, such afflictions
will be deserving of blame. However such afflictions are spoken of
as a martyrdom by a kind of comparison. and they surpass the
sufferings of martyrdom in duration but not in intensity.
Reply to Objection 6: According to Augustine (De Civ. Dei i) it is
lawful to no one to lay hands on himself for any reason whatever;
unless perchance it be done by Divine instinct as an example of
fortitude that others may despise death. Those to whom the
objection refers are believed to have brought death on themselves
by Divine instinct, and for this reason the Church celebrates their
martyrdom [SS, Question 64, Article 5].
Reply to Objection 7: If any one receive a mortal wound for the faith
and survive, without doubt he merits the aureole: as instanced in
blessed Cecilia who survived for three days, and many martyrs who
died in prison. But, even if the wound he receives be not mortal, yet
be the occasion of his dying, he is believed to merit the aureole:
although some say that he does not merit the aureole if he happen to
die through his own carelessness or neglect. For this neglect would
not have occasioned his death, except on the supposition of the
wound which he received for the faith: and consequently this wound
previously received for the faith is the original occasion of his death,
so that he would not seem to lose. the aureole for that reason,
unless his neglect were such as to involve a mortal sin, which would
deprive him of both aurea and aureole. If, however, by some chance
or other he were not to die of the mortal wound received, or again if
the wounds received were not mortal, and he were to die while in
prison, he would still merit the aureole. Hence the martyrdom of
some saints is celebrated in the Church for that they died in prison,
having been wounded long before, as in the case of Pope Marcellus.
Accordingly in whatever way suffering for Christ's sake be continued
unto death, whether death ensue or not, a man becomes a martyr
and merits the aureole. If, however, it be not continued unto death,
this is not a reason for calling a person a martyr, as in the case of
the blessed Sylvester, whose feast the Church does not solemnize

as a martyr's, since he ended his days in peace, although previously
he had undergone certain sufferings.
Reply to Objection 8: Even as temperance is not about pleasures of
money, honors, and the like, but only about pleasures of touch as
being the principal of all, so fortitude is about dangers of death as
being the greatest of all (Ethic. iii, 6). Consequently the aureole is
due to such injuries only as are inflicted on a person's own body and
are of a nature to cause death. Accordingly whether a person lose
his temporalities, or his good name, or anything else of the kind, for
Christ's sake, he does not for that reason become a martyr, nor merit
the aureole. Nor is it possible to love ordinately external things more
than one's body; and inordinate love does not help one to merit an
aureole: nor again can sorrow for the loss of corporeal things be
equal to the sorrow for the slaying of the body and other like things
[SS, Question 124, Article 5].
Reply to Objection 9: The sufficient motive for martyrdom is not only
confession of the faith, but any other virtue, not civic but infused,
that has Christ for its end. For one becomes a witness of Christ by
any virtuous act, inasmuch as the works which Christ perfects in us
bear witness to His goodness. Hence some virgins were slain for
virginity which they desired to keep, for instance blessed Agnes and
others whose martyrdom is celebrated by the Church.
Reply to Objection 1:: The truth of faith has Christ for end and
object; and therefore the confession thereof, if suffering be added
thereto, merits an aureole, not only on the part of the end but also on
the part of the matter. But the confession of any other truth is not a
sufficient motive for martyrdom by reason of its matter, but only on
the part of the end; for instance if a person were willing to be slain
for Christ's sake rather than sin against Him by telling any lie
whatever.
Reply to Objection 1:: The uncreated good surpasses all created
good. Hence any created end, whether it be the common or a private
good, cannot confer so great a goodness on an act as can the
uncreated end, when, to wit, an act is done for God's sake. Hence
when a person dies for the common good without referring it to
Christ, he will not merit the aureole; but if he refer it to Christ he will
merit the aureole and he will be a martyr; for instance, if he defend
his country from the attack of an enemy who designs to corrupt the
faith of Christ, and suffer death in that defense.