and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

## No One Can Harm the Man Who

Does Not Harm Himself
1. I know well that to coarse-minded persons, who are greedy in the pursuit
of present things, and are nailed to earth, and enslaved to physical pleasure, and
have no strong hold upon spiritual ideas, this treatise will be of a strange and
paradoxical kind: and they will laugh immoderately, and condemn me for
uttering incredible things from the very outset of my theme. Nevertheless, I shall
not on this account desist from my promise, but for this very reason shall
proceed with great earnestness to the proof of what I have undertaken. For if
those who take that view of my subject will please not to make a clamour and
disturbance, but wait to the end of my discourse, I am sure that they will take my
side, and condemn themselves, finding that they have been deceived hitherto,
and will make a recantation, and apology, and crave pardon for the mistaken
opinion which they held concerning these matters, and will express great
gratitude to me, as patients do to physicians, when they have been relieved from
the disorders which lay seige to their body. For do not tell me of the judgment
which is prevailing in your mind at the present time, but wait to hear the
contention of my arguments and then you will be able to record an impartial
verdict without being hindered by ignorance from forming a true judgment. For
even judges in secular causes, if they see the first orator pouring forth a mighty
torrent of words and overwhelming everything with his speech do not venture to
record their decision without having patiently listened to the other speaker who
is opposed to him; and even if the remarks of the first speaker seem to be just to
an unlimited extent, they reserve an unprejudiced hearing for the second. In fact
the special merit of judges consists in ascertaining with all possible accuracy
what each side has to allege and then bringing forward their own judgment.
Now in the place of an orator we have the common assumption of mankind

which in the course of ages has taken deep root in the minds of the multitude,
and declaims to the following effect throughout the world. "All things" it says
have been turned upside down, the human race is full of much confusion and
many are they who every day are being wronged, insulted, subjected to violence
and injury, the weak by the strong, the poor by the rich: and as it is impossible to
number the waves of the sea, so is it impossible to reckon the multitude of those
who are the victims of intrigue, insult, and suffering; and neither the correction
of law, nor the fear of being brought to trial, nor anything else can arrest this
pestilence and disorder, but the evil is increasing every day, and the groans, and
lamentations, and weeping of the sufferers are universal; and the judges who are
appointed to reform such evils, themselves intensify the tempest, and inflame the
disorder, and hence many of the more senseless and despicable kind, seized with
a new kind of frenzy, accuse the providence of God, when they see the
forbearing man often violently seized, racked, and oppressed, and the audacious,
impetuous, low and low-born man waxing rich, and invested with authority, and
becoming formidable to many, and inflicting countless troubles upon the more
moderate, and this perpetrated both in town and country, and desert, on sea and
land. This discourse of ours of necessity comes in by way of direct opposition to
what has been alleged, maintaining a contention which is new, as I said at the
beginning, and contrary to opinion, yet useful and true, and profitable to those
who will give heed to it and be persuaded by it; for what I undertake is to prove
(only make no commotion) that no one of those who are wronged is wronged by
another, but experiences this injury at his own hands.
2. But in order to make my argument plainer, let us first of all enquire what
injustice is, and of what kind of things the material of it is wont to be composed;
also what human virtue is, and what it is which ruins it; and further what it is
which seems to ruin it but really does not. For instance (for I must complete my
argument by means of examples) each thing is subject to one evil which ruins it;
iron to rust, wool to moth, flocks of sheep to wolves. The virtue of wine is
injured when it ferments and turns sour: of honey when it loses its natural