teachers, we are thus distressed, what must we suppose he suffered, alone among
so many? But should I speak of the circumstances of that strange and wonderful
rain? Or should I speak of Abraham, his wanderings one upon another, the
carrying away of his wife, the dangers, the wars, the famines? Should I speak of
Isaac, what fearful things he underwent, driven from every place, and laboring in
vain, and toiling for others? Or of Jacob? For indeed to enumerate all his
[afflictions] is not necessary, but it is reasonable to bring forward the testimony,
which he himself [gave] when speaking with Pharaoh; "Few and evil are my
days, and they have not attained to the days of my fathers." [Genesis 47:9] Or
should I speak of Joseph himself? Or of Moses? Or of Joshua? Or of David? Or
of Elijah? Or of Samuel? Or would you [that I speak] of all the prophets? Will
you not find that all these were made illustrious from their afflictions? Tell me
then, dost thou desire to become illustrious from ease and luxury? But you can
not.
Or should I speak of the Apostles? Nay but they went beyond all. And
Christ said this, "In the world you shall have tribulation." [John 16:33] And
again, "You shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice." [John 16:20]
And, that "Strait and narrow is the way that leads unto life." [Matthew 7:14] The
Lord of the way said, that it is "narrow and strait"; and do you seek the "broad"
[way]? How is this not unreasonable? In consequence you will not arrive at life,
going another [way], but at destruction, for you have chosen the [path] which
leads there.
Would you that I bring before you those [that live] in luxury? Let us ascend
from the last to the first. The rich man who is burning in the furnace; the Jews
who live for the belly, "whose god is their belly" [Philippians 3:19], who were
ever seeking ease in the wilderness, were destroyed; as also those in Sodom, on
account of their gluttony; and those in the time of Noah, was it not because they
chose this soft and dissolute life? For "they luxuriated," it says, "in fullness of
bread." [Ezekiel 16:49] It speaks of those in Sodom. But if "fullness of bread"
wrought so great evil, what should we say of other delicacies? Esau, was not he

in ease? And what of those who being of "the sons of God" [Genesis 6:2], looked
on women, and were borne down the precipice? And what of those who were
maddened by inordinate lust? And all the kings of the nations, of the
Babylonians, of the Egyptians, did they not perish miserably? Are they not in
torment?
5. And as to things now, tell me, are they not the same? Hear Christ saying,
"They that wear soft clothing are in kings' houses" [Matthew 11:8], but they who
do not [wear] such things, are in Heaven. For the soft garment relaxes even the
austere soul, breaks it and enervates it: yea, even if it meet with a body rough
and hard, it speedily by such delicate treatment makes it soft and weak.
For, tell me, for what other reason do you suppose women are so weak? Is it
from their sex only? By no means: but from their way of living, and their
bringing up. For their avoiding exposure, their inactivity, their baths, their
ointments, their multitude of perfumes, the delicate softness of their couches,
makes them in the end such as they are.
And that you may understand, attend to what I say. Tell me; take from a
garden a tree from those standing in the uncultivated part and beaten by the
winds, and plant it in a moist and shady place, and you will find it very unworthy
of that from which you originally took it. And that this is true, [appears from the
fact that] women brought up in the country are stronger than citizens of towns:
and they would overcome many such in wrestling. For when the body becomes
more effeminate, of necessity the soul also shares the mischief, since, for the
most part, its energies are affected in accordance with the [body]. For in illness
we are different persons owing to weakness, and when we become well, we are
different again. For as in the case of a string when the tones are weak and
relaxed, and not well arranged, the excellence of the art is also destroyed, being
obliged to serve the ill condition of the strings: so in the case of the body also,
the soul receives from it many hurts, many necessities. For when it needs much
nursing, the other endures a bitter servitude.
6. Wherefore, I beseech you, let us make it strong by work, and not nurse it