## Homily 16 on the Statues
This Homily was delivered on the occasion of the Prefect entering the
Church, for the purpose of pacifying the minds of the people, in consequence
of a rumour of an intended sack having been announced to him, when all were
meditating flight. It treats also on the subject of avoiding oaths, and on the
words of the Apostle, "Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ."
1. I commend the Prefect's consideration, that seeing the city agitated, and
every one purposing a flight, he has come here and afforded you consolation,
and has led you to entertain favourable hopes. But for you I blushed, and was
ashamed, that after these long and frequent discourses ye should have needed
consolation from without. I longed that the earth would open and swallow me
up, when I heard him discoursing with you, alternately administering comfort, or
blaming such ill-timed and senseless cowardice. For it was not becoming, that
you should be instructed by him; but you ought yourselves to be teachers to all
the unbelievers. Paul did not permit even going to law before the unbelievers;
[1 Corinthians 6:1] but thou, after so much admonition of our Fathers, hast
needed teachers from without; and certain vagabonds and miscreants have again
unsettled this great city, and set it upon flight. With what eyes shall we hereafter
look upon the unbelievers, we who were so timid and cowardly? With what
tongue shall we speak to them, and persuade them to exercise courage as to
approaching evils, when we became through this alarm more timid than any
hare? "But what could we do," says some one, "we are but men!" This is indeed
the very reason why we ought not to be terrified, because we are men, and not
brutes. For these are scared by all manner of sounds and noises; because they
have not reasoning power, which is adequate to dispel fear. But thou who hast
been honoured with the gift of speech and reason, how is it that you sink to their
ignoble condition? Hath some one entered the city, and announced the march of

soldiers against it? Be not terrified, but leaving him, bend the knee: call upon
your Lord: groan bitterly, and He will keep off the dreaded event.
2. You had heard indeed a false report of the march, and were in danger of
being severed from the present life. But that blessed Job, when the messengers
came one after another, and he had heard them announcing their dreadful news,
and adding thereto the insupportable destruction of his children, neither cried nor
groaned, but turned to prayer, and gave thanks to the Lord. Him do thou too
imitate; and when any comer announces that soldiers have encircled the city, and
are about to plunder its wealth, flee to your Lord and say, "The Lord gave, the
Lord has taken away; as it seems good to the Lord, so is it done. Blessed be the
name of the Lord for ever." The experience of the actual events did not terrify
him; yet the mere report frightens you. And how are we to be accounted of, who
when we are commanded boldly to encounter death itself, are thus affrighted by
a false rumour! The man who is bewildered constructs fear which is unreal; and
trouble which is not visible; but he who abides in a settled and tranquil condition
of soul, breaks in pieces even that which is real. Do you see not pilots; when the
sea is raging, and the clouds are rushing together, and the thunders are bursting
forth, and all on board are in confusion, they seat themselves at the helm without
tumult or disturbance; giving earnest heed to their own art, and considering how
they may ward off the effects of the approaching storm. Be these your example;
and laying hold of the sacred anchor, the hope that is in God, remain unshaken
and immoveable. "Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sand; and the
rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that
house; and it fell, and great was the fall of it." [Matthew 7:26-27] Do you see
that it is the character of folly to fall down headlong, and to be overthrown? Or
rather, we were not only reduced to the condition of that foolish man, but our fall
was still more wretched. For the house of that man fell down after the rivers and
rains had descended, and the winds had beaten upon it; but we, when there were
no winds striking, nor floods invading, nor blasts assaulting, before the