SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.6.

are venial sins, when reason does not consent to them.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Article 2) pride is a general
sin, not by its essence but by a kind of influence, in so far as all sins
may have their origin in pride. Hence it does not follow that all sins
are mortal, but only such as arise from perfect pride, which we have
stated to be a mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Pride is always contrary to the love of God,
inasmuch as the proud man does not subject himself to the Divine
rule as he ought. Sometimes it is also contrary to the love of our
neighbor; when, namely, a man sets himself inordinately above his
neighbor: and this again is a transgression of the Divine rule, which
has established order among men, so that one ought to be subject to
another.
Reply to Objection 3: Pride arises from virtue, not as from its direct
cause, but as from an accidental cause, in so far as a man makes a
virtue an occasion for pride. And nothing prevents one contrary from
being the accidental cause of another, as stated in Phys. viii, 1.
Hence some are even proud of their humility.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether pride is the most grievous of sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that pride is not the most grievous of
sins. For the more difficult a sin is to avoid, the less grievous it
would seem to be. Now pride is most difficult to avoid; for Augustine
says in his Rule (Ep. ccxi), "Other sins find their vent in the
accomplishment of evil deeds, whereas pride lies in wait for good
deeds to destroy them." Therefore pride is not the most grievous of
sins.
Objection 2: Further, "The greater evil is opposed to the greater
good," as the Philosopher asserts (Ethic. viii, 10). Now humility to
which pride is opposed is not the greatest of virtues, as stated above
(Question 61, Article 5). Therefore the vices that are opposed to
greater virtues, such as unbelief, despair, hatred of God, murder, and
so forth, are more grievous sins than pride.
Objection 3: Further, the greater evil is not punished by a lesser evil.
But pride is sometimes punished by other sins according to Rm.
1:28, where it is stated that on account of their pride of heart, men of
science were delivered "to a reprobate sense, to do those things
which are not convenient." Therefore pride is not the most grievous
of sins.
On the contrary, A gloss on Ps. 118:51, "The proud did iniquitously,"
says: "The greatest sin in man is pride."
I answer that, Two things are to be observed in sin, conversion to a
mutable good, and this is the material part of sin; and aversion from
the immutable good, and this gives sin its formal aspect and
complement. Now on the part of the conversion, there is no reason
for pride being the greatest of sins, because uplifting which pride
covets inordinately, is not essentially most incompatible with the
good of virtue. But on the part of the aversion, pride has extreme
gravity, because in other sins man turns away from God, either
through ignorance or through weakness, or through desire for any
other good whatever; whereas pride denotes aversion from God
simply through being unwilling to be subject to God and His rule.
Hence Boethius [Cassian, de Caenob. Inst. xii, 7] says that "while all
vices flee from God, pride alone withstands God"; for which reason it
is specially stated (James 4:6) that "God resisteth the proud."