through ignorance suffered evils without number. And this he hints in the
conclusion, saying, "Look, you despisers, and behold." And observe how, this
being harsh, he cuts it short. Let not that, he says, come upon you, which was
spoken for the others, that "I work a work which you shall in no wise believe,
though one declare it unto you." [Acts 13:41] Marvel not that it seems
incredible: this very thing was foretold from the first— (that it would not be
believed). "Behold, you despisers," as regards those who disbelieve in the
Resurrection.
This too might with reason be said to us: "Behold you despisers." For the
Church indeed is in very evil case, although you think her affairs to be in peace.
For the mischief of it is, that while we labor under so many evils, we do not even
know that we have any. "What do you say? We are in possession of our
Churches, our Church property, and all the rest, the services are held, the
congregation comes to Church every day." True, but one is not to judge of the
state of a Church from these things. From what then? Whether there be piety,
whether we return home with profit each day, whether reaping some fruit, be it
much or little, whether we do it not merely of routine and for the formal
acquittance of a duty ([ἀ] [φοσιούμενοι]). Who has become a better man by
attending (daily) service for a whole month? That is the point: otherwise the very
thing which seems to bespeak a flourishing condition (of the Church,) does in
fact bespeak an ill condition, when all this is done, and nothing comes of it.
Would to God (that were all), that nothing comes of it: but indeed, as things are,
it turns out even for the worse. What fruit do you get from your services? Surely
if you were getting any profit by them, you ought to have been long leading the
life of true wisdom ([τἥς φιλοσοφίας]), with so many Prophets twice in every
week discoursing to you, so many Apostles, and Evangelists, all setting forth the
doctrines of salvation, and placing before you with much exactness that which
can form the character aright. The soldier by going to his drill, becomes more
perfect in his tactics: the wrestler by frequenting the gymnastic ground becomes
more skilful in wrestling: the physician by attending on his teacher becomes

more accurate, and knows more, and learns more: and thou— what have you
gained? I speak not to those who have been members of the Church only a year,
but to those who from their earliest age have been attending the services. Think
you that to be religious is to be constant in Church-going ([παραβάλλειν τᾕ
συνάξει])? This is nothing, unless we reap some fruit for ourselves: if (from the
gathering together in Church) we do not gather ([συνάγωμεν]) something for
ourselves, it were better to remain at home. For our forefathers built the
Churches for us, not just to bring us together from our private houses and show
us one to another: since this could have been done also in a market-place, and in
baths, and in a public procession:— but to bring together learners and teachers,
and make the one better by means of the other. With us it has all become mere
customary routine, and formal discharge of a duty: a thing we are used to; that is
all. Easter comes, and then great the stir, great the hubbub, and crowding of— I
had rather not call them human beings, for their behavior is not commonly
human. Easter goes, the tumult abates, but then the quiet which succeeds is again
fruitless of good. "Vigils, and holy hymn-singing."— And what is got by these?
Nay, it is all the worse. Many do so merely out of vanity. Think how sick at heart
it must make me, to see it all like (so much water) poured into a cask with holes
in it! But you will assuredly say to me, We know the Scriptures. And what of
that? If you exemplify the Scriptures by your works, that is the gain, that the
profit. The Church is a dyer's vat: if time after time perpetually ye go hence
without receiving any dye, what is the use of coming here continually? Why, the
mischief is all the greater. Who (of you) has added ought to the customary
practices he received from his fathers? For example: such an one has a custom of
observing the memorial of his mother, or his wife, or his child: this he does
whether he be told or whether he be not told by us, drawn to it by force of habit
and conscience. Does this displease you, you ask? God forbid: on the contrary, I
am glad of it with all my heart: only, I would wish that he had gained some fruit
also from our discoursing, and that the effect which habit has, were also the
effect as regards us (your teachers)— the superinducing of another habit. Else