SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.5.

necessity of starting on the pilgrimage at once, and of making long
stages, or of doing much work, either for one's bodily livelihood, or
for some need of the spiritual life, and it be impossible at the same
time to keep the fasts of the Church, one is not bound to fast:
because in ordering fasts the Church would not seem to have
intended to prevent other pious and more necessary undertakings.
Nevertheless, in such cases one ought seemingly, to seek the
superior's dispensation; except perhaps when the above course is
recognized by custom, since when superiors are silent they would
seem to consent.
Reply to Objection 4: Those poor who can provide themselves with
sufficient for one meal are not excused, on account of poverty, from
keeping the fasts of the Church. On the other hand, those would
seem to be exempt who beg their food piecemeal, since they are
unable at any one time to have a sufficiency of food.
Reply to Objection 5: This saying of our Lord may be expounded in
three ways. First, according to Chrysostom (Hom. xxx in Matth.), who
says that "the disciples, who are called children of the bridegroom,
were as yet of a weakly disposition, wherefore they are compared to
an old garment." Hence while Christ was with them in body they
were to be fostered with kindness rather than drilled with the
harshness of fasting. According to this interpretation, it is fitting that
dispensations should be granted to the imperfect and to beginners,
rather than to the elders and the perfect, according to a gloss on Ps.
130:2, "As a child that is weaned is towards his mother." Secondly,
we may say with Jerome [Bede, Comment. in Luc. v] that our Lord is
speaking here of the fasts of the observances of the Old Law.
Wherefore our Lord means to say that the apostles were not to be
held back by the old observances, since they were to be filled with
the newness of grace. Thirdly, according to Augustine (De Consensu
Evang. ii, 27), who states that fasting is of two kinds. one pertains to
those who are humbled by disquietude, and this is not befitting
perfect men, for they are called "children of the bridegroom"; hence
when we read in Luke: "The children of the bridegroom cannot fast
[Hom. xiii, in Matth.]," we read in Mt. 9:15: "The children of the
bridegroom cannot mourn." The other pertains to the mind that
rejoices in adhering to spiritual things: and this fasting is befitting
the perfect.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.5.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the times for the Church fast are fittingly

ascribed?
Objection 1: It would seem that the times for the Church fast are
unfittingly appointed. For we read (Mt. 4) that Christ began to fast
immediately after being baptized. Now we ought to imitate Christ,
according to 1 Cor. 4:16, "Be ye followers of me, as I also am of
Christ." Therefore we ought to fast immediately after the Epiphany
when Christ's baptism is celebrated.
Objection 2: Further, it is unlawful in the New Law to observe the
ceremonies of the Old Law. Now it belongs to the solemnities of the
Old Law to fast in certain particular months: for it is written (Zach.
8:19): "The fast of the fourth month and the fast of the fifth, and the
fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth shall be to the house of
Judah, joy and gladness and great solemnities." Therefore the fast of
certain months, which are called Ember days, are unfittingly kept in
the Church.
Objection 3: Further, according to Augustine (De Consensu Evang.
ii, 27), just as there is a fast "of sorrow," so is there a fast "of joy."
Now it is most becoming that the faithful should rejoice spiritually in
Christ's Resurrection. Therefore during the five weeks which the
Church solemnizes on account of Christ's Resurrection, and on
Sundays which commemorate the Resurrection, fasts ought to be
appointed.
On the contrary, stands the general custom of the Church.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 1,3), fasting is directed to
two things, the deletion of sin, and the raising of the mind to
heavenly things. Wherefore fasting ought to be appointed specially
for those times, when it behooves man to be cleansed from sin, and
the minds of the faithful to be raised to God by devotion: and these
things are particularly requisite before the feast of Easter, when sins
are loosed by baptism, which is solemnly conferred on Easter-eve,
on which day our Lord's burial is commemorated, because "we are
buried together with Christ by baptism unto death" (Rm. 6:4).
Moreover at the Easter festival the mind of man ought to be devoutly
raised to the glory of eternity, which Christ restored by rising from
the dead, and so the Church ordered a fast to be observed