upon us by a just judgment whatever You have brought." [Nehemiah 9:33] If
"our sins rise up against us, undertake for us, for your Name's sake;"
[Jeremiah 14:7] and do not permit us any more to experience such grievous
troubles. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for Yours is the
kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 18 on the Statues
The former subject of the Sedition continued; also of fasting; and upon
the Apostolic saying, "Rejoice in the Lord always."
1. I have observed many persons rejoicing, and saying one to another, "We
have conquered; we have prevailed; the half of the fast is spent." But I exhort
such persons not to rejoice on this account, that the half of the fast is gone, but to
consider whether the half of their sins be gone; and if so, then to exult. For this is
a fit subject of gratification. This is what is to be sought after, and for which all
things are done, that we may correct our defects; and that we may not quit the
fast the same persons as we entered upon it, but in a cleansed state; and that
having laid aside all that belongs to evil habits, we may thus keep the sacred
feast, since if the case be otherwise, we shall be so far from obtaining any
advantage, that the completion of the fast will be the greatest injury to us. Let us,
therefore, not rejoice that we have gone through the length of the fast, for this is
nothing great; but let us rejoice, if we have got through it with fresh attainments,
so that when this is over, the fruit of it may shine forth. For the gain of winter is
more especially manifested after the season is gone by. Then, the flourishing
grain, and the trees teeming with leaves and fruit, proclaim, by their appearance,
the benefit that has accrued to them from the winter! Let the same thing also take
place with us. For during the winter, we have enjoyed various and frequent
showers, having been during the fast partakers of a continued course of
instruction, and have received spiritual seeds, and cut away the thorns of luxury.
2. Wherefore let us persevere, retaining with all diligence what we have
heard; that when the fast is over, the fruit of the fast may abound, and that by the
good things we gathered from the fast, we may remember the fast itself. If thus
we fashion ourselves, we shall, when the fast returns, welcome it again with
pleasure. For I see many who are so feeble-minded, that at the present season

they are anxious about the following Lent; and I have heard many saying, that
after their liberation from the fast, they are insensible to any pleasure from this
remission, on account of their anxiety about the coming year. What can be more
feeble-minded than this? I ask; and what is the cause of this? It is, that when the
fast is arrived, we do not take pains that the concerns of the soul may be well
ordered, but we limit the fast solely to an abstinence from food. Since, were we
to reap the full benefit of it in a reformation of conduct, we should wish the fast
to come round every day, receiving in very deed an experience of its good
effects; and we should never cast away the desire of it, or be dejected and
anxious while expecting it.
3. For there is nothing whatever that will be able to afflict one who is well
ordered in mind, and careful about his own soul; but he will enjoy a pure and
continued pleasure. And that this is true you have today heard from Paul, who
exhorts us, saying, "Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, rejoice."
[Philippians 4:4] I know indeed that to many this saying seems impossible. "For
how is it possible," says some one, "that he who is but a man, can continually
rejoice? To rejoice is no hard matter, but to rejoice continually, this seems to me
to be impossible." For many are the causes of sadness, which surround us on all
sides. A man has lost either a son, or a wife, or a beloved friend, more necessary
to him than all kindred; or he has to sustain the loss of wealth; or he has fallen
into sickness; or he has to bear some other change of fortune; or to grieve for
contemptuous treatment which he did not deserve; or famine, or pestilence, or
some intolerable exaction, or circumstances in his family trouble him—nay,
there is no saying how many circumstances of a public or private nature are
accustomed to occasion us grief. How then, he may say, is it possible to "rejoice
always?" Yea, O man! It is possible; and if it were not so, Paul would not have
given the exhortation; nor would a man endowed with spiritual wisdom have
offered such counsel; and for this reason I have constantly said to you, and will
not cease to say, that what ye could no where have learned from any other, that
wisdom ye may here meditate. For mankind are universally desirous of pleasure,