an act of vengeance. For the difficulty is to make a beginning and to find an
opening for the reconciliation: but when that has once been cleared in whatever
way it may be, all which follows will be smooth and easy. For even if at first the
man who has been annoyed feeds his enemy in the hope of punishing him, yet
becoming his friend by the act of giving him food he will be able to expel the
desire of vengeance. For when he has become a friend he will no longer feed the
man who has been reconciled to him, with an expectation of this kind. Again he
who has given the provocation, when he sees the man who has been wronged
electing to give him meat and drink, casts out all his animosity, both on account
of this deed, and also of his fear of the punishment which is in store for him,
even if he be excessively hard and harsh and stony hearted, being put to shame
by the benevolence of him who gives him food, and dreading the punishment
reserved for him, if he continues to be an enemy after accepting the food.
For this reason Paul did not stop even here in his exhortation, but when he
has emptied each side of wrath he proceeds to correct their disposition, saying,
"be not overcome of evil." "For if," he says, "you continue to bear resentment
and to seek revenge you seem indeed to conquer your enemy, but in reality you
are being conquered by evil, that is, by wrath: so that if you wish to conquer, be
reconciled, and do not make an attack upon your adversary;" for a brilliant
victory is that in which by means of good, that is to say by forbearance, you
overcome evil, expelling wrath and resentment. But the injured man, when
inflamed with passion would not have borne these words. Therefore when he
had satisfied his wrath he proceeded to conduct him to the best reason for
reconciliation, and did not permit him to remain permanently animated by the
wicked hope of vengeance. Do you perceive the wisdom of the lawgiver? And
that you may learn that he introduced this law only on account of the weakness
of those who would not otherwise be content to make terms among themselves,
hear how Christ, when He ordained a law on this same subject did not propose
the same reward, as the Apostle; but, having said "Love your enemies, do good
to them that hate you," which means give them food and drink, He did not add

"for in so doing you shall heap coals of fire on their heads:" but what did He
say? "that you may become like your Father who is in Heaven." [Matthew 5:44]
Naturally so, for He was discoursing to Peter, James, and John and the rest of the
apostolic band: therefore He proposed that reward. But if you say that even on
this understanding the precept is onerous you improve once more the defence
which I am making for Paul, but you deprive yourself of every plea of
indulgence. For I can prove to you that this which seems to you onerous was
accomplished under the Old Dispensation when the manifestation of spiritual
wisdom was not so great as it is now. For this reason also Paul did not introduce
the law in his own words, but used the very expressions which were employed
by him who originally brought it in, that he might leave no room for excuse to
those who do not observe it: for the precept "if your enemy hunger feed him, if he
thirst give him drink" is not the utterance of Paul in the first instance, but of
Solomon. [Proverbs 25:21-22] For this reason he quoted the words that he might
persuade the hearer that for one who has been advanced to such a high standard
of wisdom to regard an old law as onerous and grievous which was often
fulfilled by the men of old time, is one of the basest things possible. Which of
the ancients, you ask, fulfilled it? There were many, but among others David
especially did so more abundantly. He did not indeed merely give food or drink
to his enemy, but also rescued him several times from death, when he was in
jeopardy; and when he had it in his power to slay him he spared him once, twice,
yea many times. As for Saul he hated and abhorred him so much after the
countless good services which he had done, after his brilliant triumphs, and the
salvation which he had wrought in the matter of Goliath, that he could not bear
to mention him by his own name, but called him after his father. For once when
a festival was at hand, and Saul, having devised some treachery against him, and
contrived a cruel plot, did not see him arrive— "where," said he, "is the son of
Jesse?" [1 Samuel 20:23] He called him by his father's name, both because on
account of his hatred he could not endure the recollection of his proper name,
and also because he thought to damage the distinguished position of that