things to come, but in another way also, God has made virtue easy, assisting us
everywhere, and putting His hand to our work. And if you will only contribute a
little zeal, everything else follows. For to this end He will have you too to labor a
little, even that the victory may be yours also. And just as a king would have his
own son present indeed in the array; he would have him shoot with the bow, and
show himself, that the trophy may be reckoned his, while he achieves it all
Himself: even so does God in our war against the devil: He requires of you one
thing alone, that you show forth a sincere hatred against that foe. And if you
contribute this to Him, He by Himself brings all the war to an end. Though thou
burn with anger, with desire of riches, with any tyrannical passion whatever; if
He see you only stripping yourself and prepared against it, He comes quickly to
you, and makes all things easy, and sets you above the flame, as He did those
children of old in the Babylonian furnace: for they too carried in with them
nought but their good will.
In order then that we also may extinguish all the furnace of disordered
pleasure here, and so escape the hell that is there, let these each day be our
counsels, our cares, and our practice, drawing towards us the favor of God, both
by our full purpose concerning good works, and by our frequent prayers. For
thus even those things which appear insupportable now, will be most easy, and
light, and lovely. Because, so long as we are in our passions, we think virtue
rugged and morose and arduous, vice desirable and most pleasing; but if we
would stand off from these but a little, then both vice will appear abominable
and unsightly, and virtue easy, mild, and much to be desired. And this you may
learn plainly from those who have done well. Hear, for instance, how of those
passions Paul is ashamed, even after his deliverance from them, saying, "For
what fruit had ye then in those things, whereof you are now ashamed?"
[Romans 6:21] But virtue, even after his labor, he affirms to be light, calling the
laboriousness of our affliction momentary and "light," and rejoicing in his
sufferings, and glorying in his tribulations, and taking a pride in the marks
wherewith he had been branded for Christ's sake.

In order then that we too may establish ourselves in this habit, let us order
ourselves each day by what has been said, and "forgetting those things which are
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, let us press on
towards the prize of the high calling:" [Philippians 3:13-14] unto which God
grant that we may all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and power for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 17 on Matthew

Matthew 5:27-28.
" You have heard that it was said to them of old time, You shall not commit
adultery; but I say unto you, that every one who looks upon a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart."
Having now finished the former commandment, and having extended it
unto the height of self-denial, He, advancing in course and order, proceeds
accordingly unto the second, herein too obeying the law.
"And yet," it may be said, this is not the second, but the third; for neither is
the first, "You shall not kill," but "The Lord your God is one Lord."
Wherefore it is worth inquiring too, why He did not begin with that. Why
was it then? Because, had He begun from thence, He must have enlarged it also,
and have brought in Himself together with His Father. But it was not as yet time
to teach any such thing about Himself.
And besides, He was for a while practising His moral doctrine only, being
minded from this first, and from His miracles, to convince the hearers that He
was the Son of God. Now, if He had said at once, before He had spoken or done
anything, You have heard that it was said to them of old time, "I am the Lord
your God, and there is none other but me," but I say unto you, Worship me even
as Him; this would have made all regard Him as a madman. For if, even after
His teaching, and His so great miracles, while not even yet was He saying this
openly, they called Him possessed with a devil; [John 8:48] had He before all
these attempted to say any such thing, what would they not have said? What
would they not have thought?
But by keeping back at the proper season His teaching on these subjects, He
was causing that the doctrine should be acceptable to the many. Wherefore now
He passed it by quickly, but when He had everywhere established it by His