there are properties in God; as we have shown (Question 32, Article
2). These are designated by abstract terms, being forms, as it were,
of the persons. So, since the nature of a form requires it to be "in"
that of which it is the form, we must say that the properties are in the
persons, and yet that they are the persons; as we say that the
essence is in God, and yet is God.
Reply to Objection 1: Person and property are really the same, but
differ in concept. Consequently, it does not follow that if one is
multiplied, the other must also be multiplied. We must, however,
consider that in God, by reason of the divine simplicity, a twofold
real identity exists as regards what in creatures are distinct. For,
since the divine simplicity excludes the composition of matter and
form, it follows that in God the abstract is the same as the concrete,
as "Godhead" and "God." And as the divine simplicity excludes the
composition of subject and accident, it follows that whatever is
attributed to God, is His essence Itself; and so, wisdom and power
are the same in God, because they are both in the divine essence.
According to this twofold identity, property in God is the same
person. For personal properties are the same as the persons
because the abstract and the concrete are the same in God; since
they are the subsisting persons themselves, as paternity is the
Father Himself, and filiation is the Son, and procession is the Holy
Ghost. But the non-personal properties are the same as the persons
according to the other reason of identity, whereby whatever is
attributed to God is His own essence. Thus, common spiration is the
same as the person of the Father, and the person of the Son; not that
it is one self-subsisting person; but that as there is one essence in
the two persons, so also there is one property in the two persons, as
above explained (Question 30, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 2: The properties are said to be in the essence,
only by mode of identity; but in the persons they exist by mode of
identity, not merely in reality, but also in the mode of signification;
as the form exists in its subject. Thus the properties determine and
distinguish the persons, but not the essence.
Reply to Objection 3: Notional participles and verbs signify the
notional acts: and acts belong to a "suppositum." Now, properties
are not designated as "supposita," but as forms of "supposita." And
so their mode of signification is against notional participles and
verbs being predicated of the properties.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the persons are distinguished by the

relations?
Objection 1: It would seem that the persons are not distinguished by
the relations. For simple things are distinct by themselves. But the
persons are supremely simple. Therefore they are distinguished by
themselves, and not by the relation.
Objection 2: Further, a form is distinguished only in relation to its
genus. For white is distinguished from black only by quality. But
"hypostasis" signifies an individual in the genus of substance.
Therefore the hypostases cannot be distinguished by relations.
Objection 3: Further, what is absolute comes before what is relative.
But the distinction of the divine persons is the primary distinction.
Therefore the divine persons are not distinguished by the relations.
Objection 4: Further, whatever presupposes distinction cannot be
the first principle of distinction. But relation presupposes distinction,
which comes into its definition; for a relation is essentially what is
towards another. Therefore the first distinctive principle in God
cannot be relation.
On the contrary, Boethius says (De Trin.): "Relation alone multiplies
the Trinity of the divine persons."
I answer that, In whatever multitude of things is to be found
something common to all, it is necessary to seek out the principle of
distinction. So, as the three persons agree in the unity of essence,
we must seek to know the principle of distinction whereby they are
several. Now, there are two principles of difference between the
divine persons, and these are "origin" and "relation." Although these
do not really differ, yet they differ in the mode of signification; for
"origin" is signified by way of act, as "generation"; and "relation" by
way of the form, as "paternity."
Some, then, considering that relation follows upon act, have said
that the divine hypostases are distinguished by origin, so that we
may say that the Father is distinguished from the Son, inasmuch as
the former begets and the latter is begotten. Further, that the
relations, or the properties, make known the distinctions of the