THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.51, C.3.

as the Lord's body was buried in a clean winding-sheet."
Reply to Objection 4: Christ was buried "in a garden" to express that
by His death and burial we are delivered from the death which we
incur through Adam's sin committed in the garden of paradise. But
for this "was our Lord buried in the grave of a stranger," as
Augustine says in a sermon (ccxlviii), "because He died for the
salvation of others; and a sepulchre is the abode of death." Also the
extent of the poverty endured for us can be thereby estimated: since
He who while living had no home, after death was laid to rest in
another's tomb, and being naked was clothed by Joseph. But He is
laid in a "new" sepulchre, as Jerome observes on Mt. 27:60, "lest
after the resurrection it might be pretended that someone else had
risen, while the other corpses remained. The new sepulchre can also
denote Mary's virginal womb." And furthermore it may be
understood that all of us are renewed by Christ's burial; death and
corruption being destroyed. Moreover, He was buried in a monument
"hewn out of a rock," as Jerome says on Mt. 27:64, "lest, if it had
been constructed of many stones, they might say that He was stolen
away by digging away the foundations of the tomb." Hence the
"great stone" which was set shows that "the tomb could not be
opened except by the help of many hands. Again, if He had been
buried in the earth, they might have said: They dug up the soil and
stole Him away," as Augustine observes [Catena Aurea]. Hilary
(Comment. in Matth. cap. xxxiii) gives the mystical interpretation,
saying that "by the teaching of the apostles, Christ is borne into the
stony heart of the gentile; for it is hewn out by the process of
teaching, unpolished and new, untenanted and open to the entrance
of the fear of God. And since naught besides Him must enter into our
hearts, a great stone is rolled against the door." Furthermore, as
Origen says (Tract. xxxv in Matth.): "It was not written by hazard:
'Joseph wrapped Christ's body in a clean winding-sheet, and placed
it in a new monument,'" and that "'he rolled a great stone,' because
all things around the body of Jesus are clean, and new, and
exceeding great."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.51, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ's body was reduced to dust in the

tomb?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's body was reduced to dust in
the tomb. For just as man dies in punishment of his first parent's sin,
so also does he return to dust, since it was said to the first man after
his sin: "Dust thou art, and into dust thou shalt return" (Gn. 3:19).
But Christ endured death in order to deliver us from death. Therefore
His body ought to be made to return to dust, so as to free us from
the same penalty.
Objection 2: Further, Christ's body was of the same nature as ours.
But directly after death our bodies begin to dissolve into dust, and
are disposed towards putrefaction, because when the natural heat
departs, there supervenes heat from without which causes
corruption. Therefore it seems that the same thing happened to
Christ's body.
Objection 3: Further, as stated above (Article 1), Christ willed to be
buried in order to furnish men with the hope of rising likewise from
the grave. Consequently, He sought likewise to return to dust so as
to give to them who have returned to dust the hope of rising from the
dust.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 15:10): "Nor wilt Thou suffer Thy
holy one to see corruption": and Damascene (De Fide Orth. iii)
expounds this of the corruption which comes of dissolving into
elements.
I answer that, It was not fitting for Christ's body to putrefy, or in any
way be reduced to dust, since the putrefaction of any body comes of
that body's infirmity of nature, which can no longer hold the body
together. But as was said above (Question 50, Article 1, ad 2),
Christ's death ought not to come from weakness of nature, lest it
might not be believed to be voluntary: and therefore He willed to die,
not from sickness, but from suffering inflicted on Him, to which He
gave Himself up willingly. And therefore, lest His death might be
ascribed to infirmity of nature, Christ did not wish His body to
putrefy in any way or dissolve no matter how; but for the
manifestation of His Divine power He willed that His body should
continue incorrupt. Hence Chrysostom says (Cont. Jud. et Gent.