αὐτοὺς μάλιστα ὡφέλειGod's grace and election, and reminding them of the old
times, inasmuch as God chose him into His own lot or portion, as of old He took
the Levites. He also dwells upon the circumstances respecting Judas, showing
that the reward of the treachery was made itself the herald of the punishment.
For he "acquired," he says, "a field out of the reward of the iniquity." Observe
the divine economy in the event. "Of the iniquity," he says. For there are many
iniquities, but never was anything more iniquitous than this: so that the affair
was one of iniquity. Now not only to those who were present did the event
become known, but to all thereafter, so that without meaning or knowing what
they were about, they gave it a name; just as Caiaphas had prophesied
unconsciously. God compelled them to call the field in Hebrew "Aceldama."
Matthew 26:24] By this also the evils which were to come upon the Jews were
declared: and Peter shows the prophecy to have been so far in part fulfilled,
which says, "It had been good for that man if he had not been born." We may
with propriety apply this same to the Jews likewise; for if he who was guide
suffered thus, much more they. Thus far however Peter says nothing of this.
Then, showing that the term, "Aceldama," might well be applied to his fate, he
introduces the prophet, saying, "Let his habitation be desolate." For what can be
worse desolation than to become a place of burial? And the field may well be
called his. For he who cast down the price, although others were the buyers, has
a right to be himself reckoned owner of a great desolation. This desolation was
the prelude to that of the Jews, as will appear on looking closely into the facts.
For indeed they destroyed themselves by famine, and killed many, and the city
became a burial-place of strangers, of soldiers, for as to those, they would not
even have let them be buried, for in fact they were not deemed worthy of
sepulture.
"Wherefore of these men which have companied with us," continues Peter.
Observe how desirous he is they should be eye-witnesses. It is true indeed that
the Spirit would shortly come; and yet great care is shown with regard to this
circumstance. "Of these men," he says, "which have companied with us, all the

time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us." He shows that they had
dwelt with Christ, not simply been present as disciples. In fact, from the very
beginning there were many that then followed Him. Observe, for instance, how
this appears in these words: "One of the two which heard John speak, and
followed Jesus.— All the time," he says, "that the Lord Jesus went in and out
among us, beginning from the baptism of John." [John 1:40] True! For no one
knew what preceded that event, though they did learn it by the Spirit. "Unto that
same day that He was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness
with us of His resurrection." He said not, a witness of the rest of his actions, but
a witness of the resurrection alone. For indeed that witness had a better right to
be believed, who was able to declare, that He Who ate and drank, and was
crucified, the same rose again. Wherefore it was needed that he should be a
witness, not only of the time preceding this event, nor only of what followed it,
and of the miracles; the thing required was, the resurrection. For the other
matters were manifest and acknowledged, but the resurrection took place in
secret, and was manifest to these only. And they do not say, Angels have told us;
but, We have seen. For this it was that was most needful at that time: that they
should be men having a right to be believed, because they had seen.
"And they appointed two," it is said. Why not many? That the feeling of
disappointment might not reach further, extending to many. Again, it is not
without reason that he puts Matthias last; he would show, that frequently he that
is honourable among men, is inferior before God. And they all pray in common
saying, "You, Lord, which know the hearts of all men, show. You," not "We." And
very seasonably they use the epithet, "heart-knowing:" for by Him Who is this
must the choice be made. So confident were they, that assuredly one of them
must be appointed. They said not, Choose, but, "Show the chosen one;" knowing
that all things were foreordained of God; "Whom You chose: one of these two,"
say they, "to have his lot in this ministry and apostleship." For there was besides
another ministry ([διακονία]). "And they gave them their lots." For they did not
yet consider themselves to be worthy to be informed by some sign. And besides,