one or the other. This then let us correct, this let us repossess, this let us regulate,
and all will then be easy to us.
For as the artificer works the wood the same, whether his axe be of iron or
of gold, or rather he does it the better with an implement of iron, so here too, the
straight path of virtue is more easily kept in a state of poverty. For touching
riches we read, "It is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 19:24] But He has
made no such declarations about poverty; nay, the very reverse. "Sell your
goods, and give to the poor, and come follow Me" [Matthew 19:21]; as if the act
of following were to spring from the selling.
Never then let us flee from poverty as an evil, for it is the procurer of
heaven. Again, let us never follow riches as a good; for they are the ruin of such
as walk unwarily, but in everything directing our eyes to God, let us, as occasion
requires, use those gifts which He has vouchsafed us, both strength of body, and
abundance of money, and every other gift; for it is unnatural that we, who have
our being for Him, should make these things serviceable to others, yet not to
Him who has made us. He formed your eye: make it serviceable to Him, not to
the devil. But how serviceable to Him? By contemplating His creatures and
praising and glorifying Him, and by withdrawing it from all gaze at women. Did
He make your hands? Preserve them for His use, not for the devil, not putting
them out for robbery and rapine, but for His commandments and for good deeds,
for earnest prayers, for holding out help to the fallen. Hath He made your ears?
Give these to Him, and not to effeminate strains nor to disgraceful tales; but "let
all your communication be in the law of the Most High." [Sirach 9:15] For
"stand," he says, "in the multitude of the elders, and whoever is wise, cleave unto
him." [Sirach 6:34] Did he make your mouth? Let it do nought that is displeasing
to Him, but sing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs. "Let no corrupt speech
proceed out of your mouth," says the Apostle, "but such as is good for edifying
as the need may be, that it may give grace to them that hear" [Ephesians 4:29];
for edification and not for subversion, for fair words and not for evil speaking

and plotting against other, but the very opposite. He has made your feet, not that
you should run to do evil, but to do good. He made your belly, not that you
should cram it to bursting, but to practice lessons of wisdom. For the production
of children, He implanted desire in your mind, not for fornication, nor for
adultery. He gave you understanding, not to make of you a blasphemer or a
reviler, but that you might be without falsehood. He gave us both money to be
used on fitting occasion, and strength likewise to be used on fitting occasion. He
instituted arts, that our present state of existence might be held together by them,
not that we should separate ourselves from spiritual things, not that we should
devote ourselves to the base arts but to the necessary ones, that we might
minister to one another's good, and not that we should plot one against another.
He gave us a roof, that it might afford shelter from the rain, and no more, not
that it should be decked out with gold, while the poor man perishes with hunger.
He gave clothing to cover us, not to make a display withal, not that things like
these should have much gold lavished upon them, and that Christ should perish
naked. He gave you a place of shelter, not that you should keep it to yourself, but
to offer it to others also. He gave you land, not that, cutting off the chief portion
of it, you should spend the good gifts of God upon harlots, and dancers, and
actors, and flute players, and harp players, but upon those that hunger and are in
want. He gave you the sea to sail on, that you might not be wearied with
journeying, not that you should pry into its depths, and bring up thence precious
stones and all the other things of the same kind, nor that you should make this
your business.
"Why then are there precious stones?" he says. Nay, do you tell me why
these stones are such, and why one class are regarded as of great value, while the
others are more useful? For these may be conducive to building, but those to no
purpose; and these are stronger than those. "But they," he says, "produce a
beautiful effect." How so? It is a matter of fancy. Are they whiter? No, they are
not whiter than pure white marble, nor nearly equal to it. But are they stronger?
Not even this can be said for them. Well then, are they more useful? Are they