SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.151, C.4.

has experienced venereal lust should cease to have had that
experience. For God cannot make that which is done not to have
been done, as stated in the FP, Question 25 , Article 4.
Reply to Objection 4: Virginity as a virtue denotes the purpose,
confirmed by vow, of observing perpetual integrity. For Augustine
says (De Virgin. viii) that "by virginity, integrity of the flesh is vowed,
consecrated and observed in honor of the Creator of both soul and
flesh." Hence virginity, as a virtue, is never lost without sin.
Reply to Objection 5: Conjugal chastity is deserving of praise merely
because it abstains from unlawful pleasures: hence no excellence
attaches to it above that of chastity in general. Widowhood, however,
adds something to chastity in general; but it does not attain to that
which is perfect in this matter, namely to entire freedom from
venereal pleasure; virginity alone achieves this. Wherefore virginity
alone is accounted a virtue above chastity, even as magnificence is
reckoned above liberality.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.151, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether virginity is more excellent than

marriage?
Objection 1: It would seem that virginity is not more excellent than
marriage. For Augustine says (De Bono Conjug. xxi): "Continence
was equally meritorious in John who remained unmarried and
Abraham who begot children." Now a greater virtue has greater
merit. Therefore virginity is not a greater virtue than conjugal
chastity.
Objection 2: Further, the praise accorded a virtuous man depends on
his virtue. If, then, virginity were preferable to conjugal continence, it
would seem to follow that every virgin is to be praised more than any
married woman. But this is untrue. Therefore virginity is not
preferable to marriage.
Objection 3: Further, the common good takes precedence of the
private good, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 2). Now marriage
is directed to the common good: for Augustine says (De Bono
Conjug. xvi): "What food is to a man's wellbeing, such is sexual
intercourse to the welfare of the human race." On the other hand,
virginity is ordered to the individual good, namely in order to avoid
what the Apostle calls the "tribulation of the flesh," to which married
people are subject (1 Cor. 7:28). Therefore virginity is not greater
than conjugal continence.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Virgin. xix): "Both solid reason
and the authority of Holy Writ show that neither is marriage sinful,
nor is it to be equaled to the good of virginal continence or even to
that of widowhood."
I answer that, According to Jerome (Contra Jovin. i) the error of
Jovinian consisted in holding virginity not to be preferable to
marriage. This error is refuted above all by the example of Christ
Who both chose a virgin for His mother, and remained Himself a
virgin, and by the teaching of the Apostle who (1 Cor. 7) counsels
virginity as the greater good. It is also refuted by reason, both
because a Divine good takes precedence of a human good, and
because the good of the soul is preferable to the good of the body,
and again because the good of the contemplative life is better than
that of the active life. Now virginity is directed to the good of the soul