SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.3.

him or with some like purpose, he utters a railing or reviling not
formally and essentially, but accidentally and materially, in so far to
wit as he says that which might be a railing or reviling. Hence this
may be sometimes a venial sin, and sometimes without any sin at all.
Nevertheless there is need of discretion in such matters, and one
should use such words with moderation, because the railing might
be so grave that being uttered inconsiderately it might dishonor the
person against whom it is uttered. In such a case a man might
commit a mortal sin, even though he did not intend to dishonor the
other man: just as were a man incautiously to injure grievously
another by striking him in fun, he would not be without blame.
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to wittiness to utter some slight
mockery, not with intent to dishonor or pain the person who is the
object of the mockery, but rather with intent to please and amuse:
and this may be without sin, if the due circumstances be observed.
on the other hand if a man does not shrink from inflicting pain on the
object of his witty mockery, so long as he makes others laugh, this is
sinful, as stated in the passage quoted.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as it is lawful to strike a person, or
damnify him in his belongings for the purpose of correction, so too,
for the purpose of correction, may one say a mocking word to a
person whom one has to correct. It is thus that our Lord called the
disciples "foolish," and the Apostle called the Galatians "senseless."
Yet, as Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 19), "seldom and
only when it is very necessary should we have recourse to
invectives, and then so as to urge God's service, not our own."
Reply to Objection 3: Since the sin of railing or reviling depends on
the intention of the utterer, it may happen to be a venial sin, if it be a
slight railing that does not inflict much dishonor on a man, and be
uttered through lightness of heart or some slight anger, without the
fixed purpose of dishonoring him, for instance when one intends by
such a word to give but little pain.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether one ought to suffer oneself to be reviled?

Objection 1: It would seem that one ought not to suffer oneself to be
reviled. For he that suffers himself to be reviled, encourages the
reviler. But one ought not to do this. Therefore one ought not to
suffer oneself to be reviled, but rather reply to the reviler.
Objection 2: Further, one ought to love oneself more than another.
Now one ought not to suffer another to be reviled, wherefore it is
written (Prov. 26:10): "He that putteth a fool to silence appeaseth
anger." Therefore neither should one suffer oneself to be reviled.
Objection 3: Further, a man is not allowed to revenge himself, for it is
said: "Vengeance belongeth to Me, I will repay" [Heb. 10:30]. Now by
submitting to be reviled a man revenges himself, according to
Chrysostom (Hom. xxii, in Ep. ad Rom.): "If thou wilt be revenged, be
silent; thou hast dealt him a fatal blow." Therefore one ought not by
silence to submit to reviling words, but rather answer back.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 37:13): "They that sought evils to
me spoke vain things," and afterwards (Ps. 37:14) he says: "But I as
a deaf man, heard not; and as a dumb man not opening his mouth."
I answer that, Just as we need patience in things done against us, so
do we need it in those said against us. Now the precepts of patience
in those things done against us refer to the preparedness of the
mind, according to Augustine's (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 19)
exposition on our Lord's precept, "If one strike thee on thy right
cheek, turn to him also the other": that is to say, a man ought to be
prepared to do so if necessary. But he is not always bound to do this
actually: since not even did our Lord do so, for when He received a
blow, He said: "Why strikest thou Me?" (Jn. 18:23). Consequently the
same applies to the reviling words that are said against us. For we
are bound to hold our minds prepared to submit to be reviled, if it
should be expedient. Nevertheless it sometimes behooves us to
withstand against being reviled, and this chiefly for two reasons.
First, for the good of the reviler; namely, that his daring may be
checked, and that he may not repeat the attempt, according to Prov.
26:5, "Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he imagine himself to
be wise." Secondly, for the good of many who would be prevented
from progressing in virtue on account of our being reviled. Hence