SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.3.

which is prepared for man by Christ.
Reply to Objection 5: Apart from the mysteries of the spiritual
interpretation, this place would seem to be inaccessible, chiefly on
account of the extreme heat in the middle zone by reason of the
nighness of the sun. This is denoted by the "flaming sword," which
is described as "turning every way," as being appropriate to the
circular movement that causes this heat. And since the movements
of corporal creatures are set in order through the ministry of the
angels, according to Augustine (De Trin. iii, 4), it was fitting that,
besides the sword turning every way, there should be cherubim "to
keep the way of the tree of life." Hence Augustine says (Gen. ad lit.
xi, 40): "It is to be believed that even in the visible paradise this was
done by heavenly powers indeed, so that there was a fiery guard set
there by the ministry of angels."
Reply to Objection 6: After sin, if man had ate of the tree of life, he
would not thereby have recovered immortality, but by means of that
beneficial food he might have prolonged his life. Hence in the words
"And live for ever," "for ever" signifies "for a long time." For it was
not expedient for man to remain longer in the unhappiness of this
life.
Reply to Objection 7: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xi, 39),
"these words of God are not so much a mockery of our first parents
as a deterrent to others, for whose benefit these things are written,
lest they be proud likewise, because Adam not only failed to become
that which he coveted to be, but did not keep that to which he was
made."
Reply to Objection 8: Clothing is necessary to man in his present
state of unhappiness for two reasons. First, to supply a deficiency in
respect of external harm caused by, for instance, extreme heat or
cold. Secondly, to hide his ignominy and to cover the shame of
those members wherein the rebellion of the flesh against the spirit is
most manifest. Now these two motives do not apply to the primitive
state. because then man's body could not be hurt by any outward
thing, as stated in the FP, Question 97, Article 2, nor was there in
man's body anything shameful that would bring confusion on him.
Hence it is written (Gn. 2:23): "And they were both naked, to wit
Adam and his wife, and were not ashamed." The same cannot be
said of food, which is necessary to entertain the natural heat, and to
sustain the body.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.3.

Reply to Objection 9: As Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xi, 31), "We
must not imagine that our first parents were created with their eyes
closed, especially since it is stated that the woman saw that the tree
was fair, and good to eat. Accordingly the eyes of both were opened
so that they saw and thought on things which had not occurred to
their minds before, this was a mutual concupiscence such as they
had not hitherto."