FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.10.

Reply to Objection 1: We impetrate in prayer things that we do not
merit, since God hears sinners who beseech the pardon of their sins,
which they do not merit, as appears from Augustine [Tract. xliv in
Joan.] on Jn. 11:31, "Now we know that God doth not hear sinners,"
otherwise it would have been useless for the publican to say: "O
God, be merciful to me a sinner," Lk. 18:13. So too may we impetrate
of God in prayer the grace of perseverance either for ourselves or for
others, although it does not fall under merit.
Reply to Objection 2: The perseverance which is in heaven is
compared as term to the free-will's movement; not so, the
perseverance of the wayfarer, for the reason given in the body of the
article.
In the same way may we answer the third objection which concerns
the increase of grace, as was explained above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether temporal goods fall under merit?

Objection 1: It would seem that temporal goods fall under merit. For
what is promised to some as a reward of justice, falls under merit.
Now, temporal goods were promised in the Old Law as the reward of
justice, as appears from Dt. 28. Hence it seems that temporal goods
fall under merit.
Objection 2: Further, that would seem to fall under merit, which God
bestows on anyone for a service done. But God sometimes bestows
temporal goods on men for services done for Him. For it is written
(Ex. 1:21): "And because the midwives feared God, He built them
houses"; on which a gloss of Gregory (Moral. xviii, 4) says that "life
everlasting might have been awarded them as the fruit of their
goodwill, but on account of their sin of falsehood they received an
earthly reward." And it is written (Ezech. 29:18): "The King of
Babylon hath made his army to undergo hard service against
Tyre . . . and there hath been no reward given him," and further on:
"And it shall be wages for his army . . . I have given him the land of
Egypt because he hath labored for me." Therefore temporal goods
fall under merit.
Objection 3: Further, as good is to merit so is evil to demerit. But on
account of the demerit of sin some are punished by God with
temporal punishments, as appears from the Sodomites, Gn. 19.
Hence temporal goods fall under merit.
Objection 4: On the contrary, What falls under merit does not come
upon all alike. But temporal goods regard the good and the wicked
alike; according to Eccles. 9:2: "All things equally happen to the just
and the wicked, to the good and to the evil, to the clean and to the
unclean, to him that offereth victims and to him that despiseth
sacrifices." Therefore temporal goods do not fall under merit.
I answer that, What falls under merit is the reward or wage, which is
a kind of good. Now man's good is twofold: the first, simply; the
second, relatively. Now man's good simply is his last end (according
to Ps. 72:27: "But it is good for men to adhere to my God") and
consequently what is ordained and leads to this end; and these fall
simply under merit. But the relative, not the simple, good of man is
what is good to him now, or what is a good to him relatively; and this