only does He discourse, but also unto the rich. For either sort were entrusted
with riches; those that teach with the more necessary wealth, you with what is
inferior. When then at the time that the teachers are scattering abroad the greater,
you are not willing to show forth your liberality even in the less, or rather not
liberality but honesty (for you give the things of another), what excuse will you
have? But now, before the punishment of them that do the contrary things, let us
hear the honor of him that approves himself. "For verily I say unto you, He will
set him over all His goods."
What can be equal to this honor? What manner of speech will be able to set
forth the dignity, the blessedness, when the King of Heaven, He that possesses
all things, is about to set a man over "all His goods?" Wherefore also He calls
him wise, because he knew, not to give up great things for small, but having
been temperate here, has attained to Heaven.
4. After this, as He ever does, not by the honor only laid up for the good,
but also by the punishment threatened against the wicked, does He correct the
hearers. Wherefore also He added, "But and if the evil servant say in his heart,
my Lord delays His coming; and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and
shall eat and drink with the drunken: the Lord of that servant shall come in a
day when he looks not for Him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall
cut him asunder, and shall appoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."
But if any one should say, Do you see what a thought has entered into his
mind, because of the day's not being known, "my Lord," he says, "delays His
coming?" we should affirm, that it was not because the day is not known, but
because the servant is evil. Else wherefore came not this thought into the heart of
the faithful and wise servant. For what, even though the Lord tarry, O wretched
man, surely you look that He will come. Why then do you not take care?
Hence then we learn, that He does not so much as tarry. For this judgment
is not the Lord's, but that of the evil servant's mind, wherefore also he is blamed
for this. For in proof that He does not tarry, hear Paul saying, "The Lord is at

hand, be careful for nothing;" [Philippians 4:5-6] and, "He that comes will come,
and will not tarry." [Hebrews 10:37]
But do thou hear also what follows, and learn how continually He reminds
them of their ignorance of the day, showing that this is profitable to the servants,
and fitted to waken and thoroughly to rouse them. For what though some gained
nothing hereby? For neither by other things profitable for them were some
profited, but nevertheless He ceases not to do His part.
What then is the purport of that which follows? "For He shall come in a
day when he looks not for Him, and in an hour that he is not aware of;"
[Matthew 24:50] and shall inflict upon him extreme punishment. Do you see
how even everywhere He puts this, the fact of their ignorance, indicating that it
was profitable, and by this making them always earnest minded? For this is the
point at which He labors, that we should be always on the watch; and since it is
always in luxury that we are supine, but in afflictions we are braced up, therefore
everywhere He says this, that when there is relaxation, then come the terrors.
And as further back He showed this by the example of Noah, even so here He
says it is, when that servant is drunken, when he is beating, and that his
punishment shall be intolerable.
But let us not regard only the punishment appointed for him, but let us look
to this other point too, lest we ourselves also be un awares to ourselves doing the
same things. For to this servant are they like, who have money, and give not to
the needy. For you too are steward of your own possessions, not less than he
who dispenses the alms of the church. As then he has not a right to squander at
random and at hazard the things given by you for the poor, since they were given
for the maintenance of the poor; even so neither may thou squander your own.
For even though you have received an inheritance from your father, and hast in
this way all you possess, even thus all are God's. And then thou for your part
desirest that what you have given should be thus carefully dispensed, and do you
not think that God will require His own of us with greater strictness, or that He
suffers them to be wasted at random? These things are not, they are not so.