you also the cause of their insensibility. What then is the cause? They are naked
among many that are thus naked, wherefore neither are they ashamed, like as
neither are we in the baths. So that if indeed there were many clothed with
virtue, then would their shame appear more. But now this above all is a worthy
subject for many tears, that because the bad are many, bad things are not even
esteemed as a disgrace. For besides the rest, the devil has brought about this too,
not to allow them to obtain even a sense of their evil deeds, but by the multitude
of them that practise wickedness, to throw a shade over their disgrace; since if it
came to pass that he was in the midst of a multitude of persons practising selfrestraint, such a one would see his nakedness more.
That they are more naked than the possessed is evident from these things;
and that they go into the deserts, neither this again could any one gainsay. For
the wide and broad way is more desert than any desert. For though it have many
that journey on it, yet none from among men, but serpents, scorpions, wolves,
adders, and asps. Such are they that practise wickedness. And this way is not
only desert, but much more rugged than that of the mad. And this is hereby
evident. For stones and ravines and crags do not so wound those that mount
them, as robbery and covetousness the souls that practise them.
And that they live by the tombs, like the possessed, or rather that they
themselves are tombs, is plain by this. What is a tomb? A stone having a dead
body lying in it. Wherein then do these men's bodies differ from those stones?
Or rather, they are more miserable even than they. For it is not a stone containing
a dead body, but a body more insensible than stones, bearing about a dead soul.
Wherefore one would not be wrong in calling them tombs. For so did our Lord
too call the Jews, for this reason most especially; He went on at least to say,
"Their inward parts are full of ravening and covetousness."
Would ye that I show next, how they also cut their heads with stones?
Whence then first, I pray you, will you learn this? From the things here, or from
the things to come? But of the things to come they have not much regard; we
must speak then of the things here. For are not anxieties more grievous than

many stones, not wounding heads, but consuming a soul. For they are afraid, lest
those things should justly go forth out of their house, which have come unto
them unjustly; they tremble in fear of the utmost ills, are angry, are provoked,
against those of their own house, against strangers; and now despondency, now
fear, now wrath, comes upon them in succession, and they are as if they were
crossing precipice after precipice, and they are earnestly looking day by day for
what they have not yet acquired. Wherefore neither do they feel pleasure in the
things they have, both by reason of not feeling confidence about the security of
them, and because with their whole mind they are intent upon what they have
not yet seized. And like as one continually thirsting, though he should drink up
ten thousand fountains, feels not the pleasure, because he is not satisfied; so also
these, so far from feeling pleasure, are even tormented, the more they heap
around themselves; from their not feeling any limit to such desire.
And things here are like this; but let us speak also of the day to come. For
though they give not heed, yet it is necessary for us to speak. In the day to come
then, one will see everywhere such men as these undergoing punishment. For
when He says, "I was an hungered, and you gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and
you gave me no drink;" [Matthew 25:42] He is punishing these; and when He
says, "Depart into the eternal fire prepared for the devil," He is sending there
them that make a bad use of riches. And the wicked servant, who gives not to his
fellow-servants the goods of his Lord, is of the number of these men, and he that
buried his talent, and the five virgins.
And wherever you shall go, you will see the covetous punished. And now
they will hear, "There is a void between us and you;" now, "Depart from me into
the fire that is prepared." [Matthew 25:41] And now being cut asunder, they will
go away, where there is gnashing of teeth, and from every place one may see
them driven, and finding a place nowhere, but gathered in hell alone.
5. What then is the use of the right faith to us for salvation, when we hear
these things? There, gnashing of teeth, and outer darkness, and the fire prepared
for the devil, and to be cut asunder, and to be driven away; here, enmities, evil