SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.6.

with which position Aristotle reproaches (De Anima iii, 3) those who
held that "such is the will of man, as is the day which the father of
men and of gods," i.e. the sun or the heavens, "brings on" [Odyssey
xviii, 135].
Hence the heavenly bodies cannot be the direct cause of the freewill's operations. Nevertheless they can be a dispositive cause of an
inclination to those operations, in so far as they make an impression
on the human body, and consequently on the sensitive powers
which are acts of bodily organs having an inclination for human acts.
Since, however, the sensitive powers obey reason, as the
Philosopher shows (De Anima iii, 11; Ethic. i, 13), this does not
impose any necessity on the free-will, and man is able, by his
reason, to act counter to the inclination of the heavenly bodies.
Accordingly if anyone take observation of the stars in order to
foreknow casual or fortuitous future events, or to know with
certitude future human actions, his conduct is based on a false and
vain opinion; and so the operation of the demon introduces itself
therein, wherefore it will be a superstitious and unlawful divination.
On the other hand if one were to apply the observation of the stars in
order to foreknow those future things that are caused by heavenly
bodies, for instance, drought or rain and so forth, it will be neither an
unlawful nor a superstitious divination.
Wherefore the Reply to the First Objection is evident.
Reply to Objection 2: That astrologers not unfrequently forecast the
truth by observing the stars may be explained in two ways. First,
because a great number of men follow their bodily passions, so that
their actions are for the most part disposed in accordance with the
inclination of the heavenly bodies: while there are few, namely, the
wise alone, who moderate these inclinations by their reason. The
result is that astrologers in many cases foretell the truth, especially
in public occurrences which depend on the multitude. Secondly,
because of the interference of the demons. Hence Augustine says
(Gen. ad lit. ii, 17): "When astrologers tell the truth, it must be
allowed that this is due to an instinct that, unknown to man, lies
hidden in his mind. And since this happens through the action of
unclean and lying spirits who desire to deceive man for they are
permitted to know certain things about temporal affairs." Wherefore
he concludes: "Thus a good Christian should beware of astrologers,
and of all impious diviners, especially of those who tell the truth, lest

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.6.

his soul become the dupe of the demons and by making a compact
of partnership with them enmesh itself in their fellowship."
This suffices for the Reply to the Third Objection.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.7.