Lazarus for the matter of punishment; for his punishment was just this that
vehemently desiring one little drop, he obtained it not. And this very thing all
covetous persons seem to me continually to suffer, and to resemble him where he
begs that he may obtain that drop, and obtains it not. For their soul is more on
fire than his.
Well indeed has one said, that all lovers of money are in a sort of dropsy;
for as they, bearing much water in their bodies, are the more burnt up: so also the
covetous, bearing about with them great wealth, are greedy of more. The reason
is that neither do the one keep the water in the parts of the body where it should
be, nor the other their desire in the limits of becoming thought.
Let us then flee this strange and craving ([ξένην καὶ κενὴν]: a play on the
sound of the words,) disease; let us flee the root of all evils; let us flee that which
is present hell; for it is a hell, the desire of these things. Only just lay open the
soul of each, of him who despises wealth and of him who does not so; and you
will see that the one is like the distracted, choosing neither to hear nor see any
thing: the other, like a harbor free from waves: and he is the friend of all, as the
other is the enemy. For whether one take any thing of his, it gives him no
annoyance; or if whether, on the contrary, one give him anything, it puffs him
not up; but there is a certain freedom about him with entire security. The one is
forced to flatter and feign before all; the other, to no man.
If now to be fond of money is to be both poor and timid and a dissembler
and a hypocrite and to be full of fears and great penal anguish and chastisement:
while he that despises wealth has all the contrary enjoyments: is it not quite plain
that virtue is the more pleasant?
Now we might have gone through all the other evils also whereby it is
shown that there is no vice which has pleasure in it, had we not spoken before so
much at large.
Wherefore knowing these things, let us choose virtue; to the end that we
may both enjoy such pleasure as is here, and may attain unto the blessings which
are to come, through the grace and loving-kindness, etc. etc.

## Homily 15 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 5:1-2
It is actually reported that there is fornication among you, and such
fornication as is not even named among the Gentiles, that one of you has his
father's wife. And you are puffed up, and did not rather mourn, that he that had
done this deed might be taken away from among you.
When he was discoursing about their divisions, he did not indeed at once
address them vehemently, but more gently at first; and afterwards, he ended in
accusation, saying thus, [1 Corinthians 1:11] "For it has been signified unto me
concerning you, my brethren, by them which are of the household of Chloe, that
there are contentions among you." But in this place, not so; but he lays about
him immediately and makes the reproach of the accusation as general as
possible. For he said not, "Why did such an one commit fornication?" but, "It is
reported that there is fornication among you;" that they might as persons
altogether aloof from his charge take it easily; but might be filled with such
anxiety as was natural when the whole body was wounded, and the Church had
incurred reproach. "For no one," says he, "will state it thus, 'such an one has
committed fornication,' but, 'in the Church of Corinthians that sin has been
committed.'"
And he said not, "Fornication is perpetrated," but, "Is reported—such as is
not even named among the Gentiles." For so continually he makes the Gentiles a
topic of reproach to the believers. Thus writing to the Thessalonians, he said, [1
Thessalonians 4:4-5, καὶ τιμῆ] om. [τὰ λοιπὰ] inserted "Let every one possess
himself of his own vessel in sanctification, not in the passion of lust, even as the
rest of the Gentiles." And to the Colossians and Ephesians, [Ephesians 4:17. cf.
Colossians 3:6-7] "That you should no longer walk, as the other Gentiles walk."