FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.4.

reverence for the law."
Reply to Objection 1: The human reason cannot have a full
participation of the dictate of the Divine Reason, but according to its
own mode, and imperfectly. Consequently, as on the part of the
speculative reason, by a natural participation of Divine Wisdom,
there is in us the knowledge of certain general principles, but not
proper knowledge of each single truth, such as that contained in the
Divine Wisdom; so too, on the part of the practical reason, man has a
natural participation of the eternal law, according to certain general
principles, but not as regards the particular determinations of
individual cases, which are, however, contained in the eternal law.
Hence the need for human reason to proceed further to sanction
them by law.
Reply to Objection 2: Human reason is not, of itself, the rule of
things: but the principles impressed on it by nature, are general
rules and measures of all things relating to human conduct, whereof
the natural reason is the rule and measure, although it is not the
measure of things that are from nature.
Reply to Objection 3: The practical reason is concerned with
practical matters, which are singular and contingent: but not with
necessary things, with which the speculative reason is concerned.
Wherefore human laws cannot have that inerrancy that belongs to
the demonstrated conclusions of sciences. Nor is it necessary for
every measure to be altogether unerring and certain, but according
as it is possible in its own particular genus.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether there was any need for a Divine law?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was no need for a Divine law.
Because, as stated above (Article 2), the natural law is a participation
in us of the eternal law. But the eternal law is a Divine law, as stated
above (Article 1). Therefore there was no need for a Divine law in
addition to the natural law, and human laws derived therefrom.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 15:14) that "God left man in
the hand of his own counsel." Now counsel is an act of reason, as
stated above (Question 14, Article 1). Therefore man was left to the
direction of his reason. But a dictate of human reason is a human
law as stated above (Article 3). Therefore there is no need for man to
be governed also by a Divine law.
Objection 3: Further, human nature is more self-sufficing than
irrational creatures. But irrational creatures have no Divine law
besides the natural inclination impressed on them. Much less,
therefore, should the rational creature have a Divine law in addition
to the natural law.
On the contrary, David prayed God to set His law before him, saying
(Ps. 118:33): "Set before me for a law the way of Thy justifications, O
Lord."
I answer that, Besides the natural and the human law it was
necessary for the directing of human conduct to have a Divine law.
And this for four reasons. First, because it is by law that man is
directed how to perform his proper acts in view of his last end. And
indeed if man were ordained to no other end than that which is
proportionate to his natural faculty, there would be no need for man
to have any further direction of the part of his reason, besides the
natural law and human law which is derived from it. But since man is
ordained to an end of eternal happiness which is inproportionate to
man's natural faculty, as stated above (Question 5, Article 5),
therefore it was necessary that, besides the natural and the human
law, man should be directed to his end by a law given by God.
Secondly, because, on account of the uncertainty of human
judgment, especially on contingent and particular matters, different
people form different judgments on human acts; whence also