ordained and sent into Gothia, has been laid to rest, after achieving many great
exploits: and the deacon was the bearer of a letter from the king of the Goths
begging that a bishop might be sent to them. Since then I see no other means of
meeting the threatened catastrophe with a view to its correction save delay and
postponement (as it is impossible for them to sail into the Bosporus or into those
parts at the present time), take measures to put them off for a time on account of
the winter season: and do not by any means neglect this: for it is a matter of the
greatest importance. For there are two things which would specially distress me
if they were to happen, which God forbid: one is that a bishop should be
appointed by these men who have wrought such great wickedness, and who have
no right to appoint, and the other is that any one should be made without
consideration. For you know yourself that they are not anxious to create some
worthy man bishop, and if this should take place, which heaven forbid, you are
aware what will follow. Use all diligence therefore to prevent either of these
things happening: but if it were possible for Moduarius quietly and secretly to
hasten out to me it would be of the greatest advantage. But if this is not possible
let what is practicable under the circumstances be done. For that which takes
place in the case of money, and actually occurred in the case of the widow in the
gospel, also holds good in the case of practical affairs. For as that poor woman
when she had cast two mites into the treasury surpassed all those who had cast in
more, because she used up her whole substance: even so they who devote
themselves to the work in hand with all their might discharge it completely, so
far as they are concerned, even if nothing results from it, and they have their
reward perfected.
I am very grateful to Hilarius the bishop: for he wrote to me asking to be
allowed to depart to his own country, and to set things in order there, and then to
come back again. As his presence therefore is of great service (for he is a devout,
inflexible, and zealous man) I have urged him to depart and to return speedily.
Take care then that the letter is quickly and safely delivered to him and not cast
on one side: for he eagerly and earnestly begged for letters from me, and his

presence is a great benefit. By all means therefore have a care of the letters; and
if Helladius the presbyter be not on the spot see that they are delivered to my
friends by the hands of some discreet man who has a head on his shoulders.

To Olympias
Nothing strange or unnatural has befallen your Piety, but only what is quite
natural and consonant to reason, that by a constant succession of trials the sinews
of your soul should become more braced, and your zeal and energy for the
struggle increased, and that you should therefrom derive much joy. For such is
the nature of affliction—when it lays hold of a brave and noble soul, this is what
it is wont to effect. And as the fire makes the piece of gold, when it is applied to
it, of better proof: so also affliction when it visits golden characters renders them
purer and more proven. Wherefore also Paul said "affliction works patience, and
patience probation." [Romans 5:3-4] For these reasons I also rejoice and leap for
joy, and derive the greatest consolation of this my solitude from a consideration
of your fortitude. On this account, even though innumerable wolves encompass
you, and many crowds of wicked doers, I fear nothing; but I pray both that
existing temptations may be suppressed, and that others may not occur, thus
fulfilling the Lord's precept who bids us pray that we may not enter into
temptation; but if it should be permitted to happen again I have good confidence
concerning your golden soul, which acquires therefrom the greatest riches for
itself. For by what means will they be able to terrify you, who dare everything to
their own destruction? Will it be by loss of goods? But I know well that these are
counted by you as dust and cheaper than dirt. Or shall it be by expulsion from
country and home. But you know how to dwell in great and populous cities as if
they were uninhabited, spending the whole of your time in quietness and rest,
and treading worldly ambitions under foot. Or do they threaten death? This also
you have constantly practiced by anticipation, and if they should drag you to
slaughter, they will be dragging a body which is already dead. What need to
speak more at length? No one will be able to do anything to you of this kind
which he will not find you have already abundantly made yourself undergo. For