are arrayed, and signifying Him to be more powerful than all. "For Yours," says
He, "is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory."
Does it not then follow, that if His be the kingdom, we should fear no one,
since there can be none to withstand, and divide the empire with him. For when
He says, "Yours is the kingdom," He sets before us even him, who is warring
against us, brought into subjection, though he seem to oppose, God for a while
permitting it. For in truth he too is among God's servants, though of the degraded
class, and those guilty of offense; and he would not dare set upon any of his
fellow servants, had he not first received license from above. And why say I,
"his fellow servants?" Not even against swine did he venture any outrage, until
He Himself allowed him; [Luke 8:32] nor against flocks, nor herds, until he had
received permission from above. [Job 1:12]
"And the power," says He. Therefore, manifold as your weakness may be,
you may of right be confident, having such a one to reign over you, who is able
fully to accomplish all, and that with ease, even by you.
"And the glory, for ever. Amen." Thus He not only frees you from the
dangers that are approaching you, but can make you also glorious and illustrious.
For as His power is great, so also is His glory unspeakable, and they are all
boundless, and no end of them. Do you see how He has by every means anointed
His Champion, and has framed Him to be full of confidence?
11. Then, as I said before, meaning to signify, that of all things He most
loathes and hates bearing malice, and most of all accepts the virtue which is
opposite to that vice; He has after the prayer also again put us in mind of this
same point of goodness; both by the punishment set, and by the reward
appointed, urging the hearer to obey this command.
"For if you forgive men," says He, "your heavenly Father will also forgive
you. But if you forgive not, neither will He forgive you."
With this view He has again mentioned heaven also, and their Father; to
abash the hearer by this topic likewise; that he of all people, being of such a
Father, should be made a wild beast of; and summoned as he is to heaven, should

cherish an earthly and ordinary sort of mind. Since not by grace only, you see,
ought we to become His children, but also by our works. And nothing makes us
so like God, as being ready to forgive the wicked and wrong-doers; even as
indeed He had taught before, when He spoke of His "making the sun to shine on
the evil and on the good." [Matthew 5:45]
For this same cause again in every one of the clauses He commands us to
make our prayers common, saying, "Our Father," and "Your will be done in
earth as it is in heaven," and "Give us the bread, and forgive us our debts," and
"lead us not into temptation," and "deliver us;" everywhere commanding us to
use this plural word, that we may not retain so much as a vestige of anger against
our neighbor.
How great punishment then must they deserve, who after all this, so far
from themselves forgiving, do even entreat God for vengeance on their enemies,
and diametrically as it were transgress this law; and this while He is doing and
contriving all, to hinder our being at variance one with another? For since love is
the root of all that is good, He removing from all sides whatever mars it, brings
us together, and cements us to each other. For there is not, there is not one, be he
father, or mother, or friend, or what you will, who so loved us as the God who
created us. And this, above all things, both His daily benefits and His precepts
make manifest. But if you tell me of the pains, and of the sorrows, and of the
evils of life; consider in how many things you offend Him every day, and you
will no longer marvel, though more than these evils should come upon you, but
if you should enjoy any good, then you will marvel, and be amazed. But as it is,
we look upon the calamities that come upon us, but the offenses, whereby we
offend daily, we consider not: therefore we are perplexed. Since if we did but
reckon up with strictness our sins of one day only, in that case we should know
well how great evils we must be liable to.
And to let pass the other misdoings of which we have been guilty, each one
for himself, and to speak of what have been committed this day; although of
course I know not in what each of us may have sinned, yet such is the abundance