estimative and the imaginative, a fifth power, which combines and
divides imaginary forms: as when from the imaginary form of gold,
and imaginary form of a mountain, we compose the one form of a
golden mountain, which we have never seen. But this operation is
not to be found in animals other than man, in whom the imaginative
power suffices thereto. To man also does Averroes attribute this
action in his book De sensu et sensibilibus (viii). So there is no need
to assign more than four interior powers of the sensitive part--namely, the common sense, the imagination, and the estimative and
memorative powers.
Reply to Objection 1: The interior sense is called "common" not by
predication, as if it were a genus; but as the common root and
principle of the exterior senses.
Reply to Objection 2: The proper sense judges of the proper sensible
by discerning it from other things which come under the same
sense; for instance, by discerning white from black or green. But
neither sight nor taste can discern white from sweet: because what
discerns between two things must know both. Wherefore the
discerning judgment must be assigned to the common sense; to
which, as to a common term, all apprehensions of the senses must
be referred: and by which, again, all the intentions of the senses are
perceived; as when someone sees that he sees. For this cannot be
done by the proper sense, which only knows the form of the sensible
by which it is immuted, in which immutation the action of sight is
completed, and from immutation follows another in the common
sense which perceives the act of vision.
Reply to Objection 3: As one power arises from the soul by means of
another, as we have seen above (Question 77, Article 7), so also the
soul is the subject of one power through another. In this way the
imagination and the memory are called passions of the "first
sensitive."
Reply to Objection 4: Although the operation of the intellect has its
origin in the senses: yet, in the thing apprehended through the
senses, the intellect knows many things which the senses cannot
perceive. In like manner does the estimative power, though in a less
perfect manner.
Reply to Objection 5: The cogitative and memorative powers in man

owe their excellence not to that which is proper to the sensitive part;
but to a certain affinity and proximity to the universal reason, which,
so to speak, overflows into them. Therefore they are not distinct
powers, but the same, yet more perfect than in other animals.
Reply to Objection 6: Augustine calls that vision spiritual which is
effected by the images of bodies in the absence of bodies. Whence it
is clear that it is common to all interior apprehensions.

## QUESTION 79 — OF THE INTELLECTUAL POWERS

Prologue
The next question concerns the intellectual powers, under which
head there are thirteen points of inquiry:
(1) Whether the intellect is a power of the soul, or its essence?
(2) If it be a power, whether it is a passive power?
(3) If it is a passive power, whether there is an active intellect?
(4) Whether it is something in the soul?
(5) Whether the active intellect is one in all?
(6) Whether memory is in the intellect?
(7) Whether the memory be distinct from the intellect?
(8) Whether the reason is a distinct power from the intellect?
(9) Whether the superior and inferior reason are distinct powers?
(10) Whether the intelligence is distinct from the intellect?
(11) Whether the speculative and practical intellect are distinct
powers?
(12) Whether "synderesis" is a power of the intellectual part?
(13) Whether the conscience is a power of the intellectual part?