THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.28, C.4.

to Capharnaum, He"---that is, Christ---"and His Mother and His
brethren." But brethren are those who are begotten of the same
parent. Therefore it seems that the Blessed Virgin had other sons
after Christ.
Objection 6: Further, it is written (Mt. 27:55,56): "There were there"--that is, by the cross of Christ---"many women afar off, who had
followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto Him; among whom
was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and
the mother of the sons of Zebedee." Now this Mary who is called "the
mother of James and Joseph" seems to have been also the Mother
of Christ; for it is written (Jn. 19:25) that "there stood by the cross of
Jesus, Mary His Mother." Therefore it seems that Christ's Mother did
not remain a virgin after His Birth.
On the contrary, It is written (Ezech. 44:2): "This gate shall be shut, it
shall not be opened, and no man shall pass through it; because the
Lord the God of Israel hath entered in by it." Expounding these
words, Augustine says in a sermon (De Annunt. Dom. iii): "What
means this closed gate in the House of the Lord, except that Mary is
to be ever inviolate? What does it mean that 'no man shall pass
through it,' save that Joseph shall not know her? And what is
this---'The Lord alone enters in and goeth out by it'---except that the
Holy Ghost shall impregnate her, and that the Lord of angels shall be
born of her? And what means this---'it shall be shut for evermore'--but that Mary is a virgin before His Birth, a virgin in His Birth, and a
virgin after His Birth?"
I answer that, Without any hesitation we must abhor the error of
Helvidius, who dared to assert that Christ's Mother, after His Birth,
was carnally known by Joseph, and bore other children. For, in the
first place, this is derogatory to Christ's perfection: for as He is in
His Godhead the Only-Begotten of the Father, being thus His Son in
every respect perfect, so it was becoming that He should be the Onlybegotten son of His Mother, as being her perfect offspring.
Secondly, this error is an insult to the Holy Ghost, whose "shrine"
was the virginal womb ["Sacrarium Spiritus Sancti" (Office of B. M.
V., Ant. ad Benedictus, T. P.)], wherein He had formed the flesh of
Christ: wherefore it was unbecoming that it should be desecrated by
intercourse with man.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.28, C.4.

Thirdly, this is derogatory to the dignity and holiness of God's
Mother: for thus she would seem to be most ungrateful, were she not
content with such a Son; and were she, of her own accord, by carnal
intercourse to forfeit that virginity which had been miraculously
preserved in her.
Fourthly, it would be tantamount to an imputation of extreme
presumption in Joseph, to assume that he attempted to violate her
whom by the angel's revelation he knew to have conceived by the
Holy Ghost.
We must therefore simply assert that the Mother of God, as she was
a virgin in conceiving Him and a virgin in giving Him birth, did she
remain a virgin ever afterwards.
Reply to Objection 1: As Jerome says (Contra Helvid. i): "Although
this particle 'before' often indicates a subsequent event, yet we must
observe that it not infrequently points merely to some thing
previously in the mind: nor is there need that what was in the mind
take place eventually, since something may occur to prevent its
happening. Thus if a man say: 'Before I dined in the port, I set sail,'
we do not understand him to have dined in port after he set sail: but
that his mind was set on dining in port." In like manner the
evangelist says: "Before they came together" Mary "was found with
child, of the Holy Ghost," not that they came together afterwards: but
that, when it seemed that they would come together, this was
forestalled through her conceiving by the Holy Ghost, the result
being that afterwards they did not come together.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (De Nup. et Concup. i): "The
Mother of God is called (Joseph's) wife from the first promise of her
espousals, whom he had not known nor ever was to know by carnal
intercourse." For, as Ambrose says on Lk. 1:27: "The fact of her
marriage is declared, not to insinuate the loss of virginity, but to
witness to the reality of the union."
Reply to Objection 3: Some have said that this is not to be
understood of carnal knowledge, but of acquaintance. Thus
Chrysostom says [Opus Imperf. in Matth., Hom. 1] that "Joseph did
not know her, until she gave birth, being unaware of her dignity: but
after she had given birth, then did he know her. Because by reason
of her child she surpassed the whole world in beauty and dignity: