Homily 84 on the Gospel of John
John 18:37
"To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should
bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth hears My Voice."
1. A marvelous thing is longsuffering; it places the soul as in a quiet harbor,
fleeing it from tossings and evil spirits. And this everywhere Christ has taught
us, but especially now, when He is judged, and dragged, and led about. For when
He was brought to Annas, He answered with great gentleness, and, to the servant
who smote Him, said what had power to bring down all his insolence; thence
having gone to Caiaphas, then to Pilate, and having spent the whole night in
these scenes, He all through exhibits His own mildness; and when they said that
He was a malefactor, and were not able to prove it, He stood silent; but when He
was questioned concerning the Kingdom, then He spoke to Pilate, instructing
him, and leading him in to higher matters. But why was it that Pilate made the
enquiry not in their presence, but apart, having gone into the judgment hall? He
suspected something great respecting Him, and wished, without being troubled
by the Jews, to learn all accurately. Then when he said, "What have you done?"
on this point Jesus made no answer; but concerning that of which Pilate most
desired to hear, namely, His Kingdom, He answered, saying, "My Kingdom is not
of this world." That is, "I am indeed a King, yet not such an one as you suspect,
but far more glorious," declaring by these words and those which follow, that no
evil had been done by Him. For one who says, "To this end was I born, and for
this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth,"
shows, that no evil has been done by Him. Then when He says, "Every one that
is of the truth hears My voice," He draws him on by these means, and persuades
him to become a listener to the words. "For if," says He, "any one is true, and

desires these things, he will certainly hear Me." And, in fact, He so took him by
these short words, that he said,

John 18:38
"What is truth?"
But for the present he applies himself to what was pressing, for he knew
that this question needed time, and desired to rescue Him from the violence of
the Jews. Wherefore he went out, and what said he?
"I find no fault in him."
Consider how prudently he acted. He said not, "Since he has sinned, and is
deserving of death, forgive him on account of the Feast"; but having first
acquitted Him of all guilt, he asks them over and above, if they were not minded
to dismiss Him as innocent, yet as guilty to forgive Him on account of the time.
Wherefore he added,

John 18:39-40
"You have a custom that I should release unto you one at the Passover"; then in a
persuasory way, "Will ye therefore that I release the king of the Jews? Then cried
they all, Not this man, but Barabbas."
O accursed decision! They demand those like mannered with themselves,
and let the guilty go; but bid him punish the innocent. For this was their custom
from old time. But do thou all through observe the lovingkindness of the Lord in
these circumstances. Pilate scourged Him perhaps desiring to exhaust and to
soothe the fury of the Jews. For when he had not been able to deliver Him by his
former measures, being anxious to stay the evil at this point, he scourged Him,
and permitted to be done what was done, the robe and crown to be put on Him,
so as to relax their anger. Wherefore also he led Him forth to them crowned
[John 19:5], that, seeing the insult which had been done to Him, they might
recover a little from their passion, and vomit their venom. "And how would the
soldiers have done this, had it not been the command of their ruler?" To gratify
the Jews. Since it was not by his command that they at first went in by night, but
to please the Jews; they dared anything for money. But He, when so many and
such things were done, yet stood silent, as He had done during the enquiry, and
answered nothing. And do thou not merely hear these things, but keep them
continually in your mind, and when you behold the King of the world and of all
Angels, mocked of the soldiers, by words and by actions, and bearing all silently,
do thou imitate Him by deeds yourself. For when Pilate had called Him the King
of the Jews, and they now put about Him the ap parel of mockery, then Pilate
having led Him out, said,