many which have sinned already, and have not repented of the uncleanness and
fornication and lasciviousness which they have committed."
[2 Corinthians 12:21] Show your charity towards the sinner. Persuade him that it
is from care and anxiety for his welfare, and not from a wish to expose him, that
you put him in mind of his sin. Take hold of his feet; embrace him; be not
ashamed, if you truly desirest to cure him. Physicians too do things of this sort,
oftentimes, when their patients are hard to please; by embraces and entreaties
they at length persuade them to take a salutary medicine. Thus also do thou.
Show the wound to the priest; that is the part of one who cares for him, and
provides for him, and is anxious on his behalf.
14. But not only do I now admonish the evil speakers; but those besides,
who hear others ill spoken of, I exhort to stop up their ears, and to imitate the
prophet who says, "Whoso privily slanders his neighbour, him will I punish." Say
to your neighbour, "Have you any one to praise or highly to commend? I open
my ears, to receive the fragrant oil; but if you have any evil to say, I block up the
entrance to your words—for I am not to admit dung and dirt. What profit does it
afford me to learn that such a one is a bad man? The greatest injury indeed
results from this, and the worst loss!" Say to him, "Let us be anxious about our
own faults; how we may render up an account of our own transgressions; and
exhibit this sort of curiosity and meddlesome activity respecting our own lives.
What excuse or pardon shall we find; while we never even take into
consideration our own affairs, but thus inquisitively pry into those of others!"
And as it is mean and extremely disgraceful to peer into a house, and to observe
what is within as one passes, so also to make inquisition into another man's life
is the last degree of illiberality. But what is yet more ridiculous is, that those who
lead this sort of life, and are neglectful of their own affairs, when they have
mentioned any of these secret matters, beseech and adjure him who has heard it,
not to mention it more to any other person; thus making it plain that they have
done an action which deserves censure. For if you beseech him to tell this to no
other person, much more did it not become you to tell these things first to him.

The matter was safe while in your possession; now, after betraying it, you are
grown anxious for its safety. If you are desirous that it be not carried abroad to
another, do not yourself tell it. But when you have betrayed the custody of the
matter to another, you do what is superfluous and useless, in charging him, and
putting him on oath for the safety of what has been spoken.
15. "But it is sweet to slander." Nay, it is sweet not to speak evil. For he that
has spoken evil is henceforth contentious; he is suspicious and he fears, repents,
and gnaws his own tongue. Being timorous and trembling, lest at any time, what
he said should be carried to others, and bring great peril, and useless and
needless enmity, on the sayer. But he who keeps the matter to himself, will spend
his days in safety, with much pleasantness. "You have heard a word," we read,
"let it die with you; and be bold; it will not burst you." [Sirach 19:10] What is
the meaning of this? "let it die with you?" Extinguish it; bury it; neither permit it
to go forth, nor even to move at all; but, as the best course, be careful not to
tolerate others in the practice of evil speaking. And should you perchance, at any
time receive an impression from it, bury it, destroy what has been uttered,
deliver it over to oblivion; in order that you may become like those who have not
heard it; and spend the present life with much peace and security. Should the
slanderers learn that we abhor them more than those do whom they accuse, they
themselves will henceforth abandon this evil habit, and correct the sin; and will
afterwards applaud, and proclaim us as those who were their saviours and
benefactors. For, as to speak well, and to applaud, is the beginning of friendship,
so to speak ill and to calumniate, has been the beginning and foundation of
enmity, and hatred, and a thousand quarrels. From nothing else have our own
affairs been more neglected, than from the habit of prying into and meddling
with the concerns of others; for it is not possible for one who is given to evil
speaking, and busying himself with other men's lives, ever to look after his own
life. His whole study being expended upon meddling with other men's matters,
all those which belong to himself must of necessity be left at hazard and
neglected. For it is well if one who spends all his leisure on the anxious