fashioning was not the work of human art, but proceeded from the wisdom of
God, where the walls were on every side resplendent with much gold, and
where, in surpassing excellence, costliness of material and perfection of art met
together, and demonstrated that there was no other temple like this upon earth!
Yea rather, not only the perfection of art, but also the wisdom of God assisted in
that building. For Solomon had learned all, not intuitively and from himself, but
from God; and having received the design of it from the heavens, he then
marked it out and erected it. Nevertheless, this Temple, thus beautiful and
marvellous and sacred, when those who used it were corrupted, was so
dishonoured, despised, and profaned, that even before the captivity it was called
"a den of robbers, a cave of hyænas;" [Jeremiah 7:11] and afterwards it was
delivered over to hands that were barbarous, polluted, and profane!
12. Would you learn the same truth respecting cities? What could be more
illustrious than the cities of Sodom? For the houses and the buildings were
splendid, and so were their walls; and the country was fat and fertile, and "like
the Paradise of God." [Genesis 13:10] But the tent of Abraham was mean and
small, and had no fortification. Yet when a foreign war took place, the strangers
broke down and took the walled cities, and departed, carrying away their
inhabitants captives. Abraham, however, the citizen of the desert, they could not
resist when he attacked them! And so it was likely to be. For he had true piety: a
power much greater than numbers and the defence of walls. If you are a
Christian, no earthly city is yours. Of our City "the Builder and Maker is God."
[Hebrews 11:10] Though we may gain possession of the whole world, we are
withal but strangers and sojourners in it all! We are enrolled in heaven: our
citizenship is there! Let us not, after the manner of little children, despise things
that are great, and admire those which are little! Not our city's greatness, but
virtue of soul is our ornament and defence. If you suppose dignity to belong to a
city, think how many persons must partake in this dignity, who are
whoremongers, effeminate, depraved and full of ten thousand evil things, and at
last despise such honour! But that City above is not of this kind; for it is

impossible that he can be a partaker of it, who has not exhibited every virtue.
13. Let us not therefore be senseless; but then let us grieve when any one
deprives us of our dignity of soul, when we commit sin, when we have offended
the common Lord of all; since as regards the things that have now befallen us, so
far are they from injuring the city, that if we are watchful, they will greatly
benefit us. For even already our city seems to be like a decorous, noble, soberminded matron. Fear has made her gentler and more dignified, and has delivered
her from those miscreants who were concerned in the late audacious deeds. Let
us therefore not give way to womanish lamentations. For I have heard many
about the forum saying, "Alas! For you, Antioch! What has befallen you! How
are you dishonoured!" Truly when I heard, I smiled at the puerile mind which
could give vent to these words! Such words were not becoming now; but when
you see men dancing, drunken, singing, blaspheming, swearing, perjuring
themselves, and lying, then apply such a saying as this: "Alas! For you, O city,
what has befallen you!" But if you see the forum containing a few meek, modest,
and temperate persons, then pronounce the city, "Blessed!" For the fewness will
never be able to injure it in any respect, if there be virtue withal; as on the other
hand, numbers will never profit it at all, while iniquity is there. "If," says the
prophet, "the number of the sons of Israel be as the sand of the sea, the remnant
shall be saved;" that is to say, "Multitude will never prevail with Me." So also
Christ spoke. He called cities wretched; not because of their littleness, nor
because they were not of metropolitan rank. And Jerusalem itself again, He calls
wretched for the very same reason, speaking thus; "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem;
thou that killest the prophets, and stone them which are sent unto you!"
[Matthew 23:37] For what advantage, I ask, does a multitude bring, if their
system of living be vicious? Nay, on the contrary, even injury results from it.
What else, indeed, has wrought the evils which have lately sprung up? Was it not
the sloth, the recklessness, and the depravity of the inhabitants? Did the dignity
of the city, did the magnificence of its architecture, or the circumstance that it
was a metropolis, do it any service? If with the king who is on earth, nothing