1 Corinthians 1:25
6. All these things, therefore, Paul bearing in mind, and being struck with
astonishment, said that "the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the
weakness of God is stronger than men;" in relation to the Cross, speaking of a
folly and weakness, not real but apparent. For he is answering with respect unto
the other party's opinion. For that which philosophers were not able by means of
reasoning to accomplish, this, what seemed to be foolishness did excellently
well. Which then is the wiser, he that persuades the many, or he that persuades
few, or rather no one? He who persuades concerning the greatest points, or about
matters which are nothing? ([μηδὲν όντων] Reg. ms. [μη δεόντων] Bened.) What
great labors did Plato endure, and his followers, discoursing to us about a line,
and an angle, and a point, and about numbers even and odd, and equal unto one
another and unequal, and such-like spiderwebs; (for indeed those webs are not
more useless to man's life than were these subjects;) and without doing good to
any one great or small by their means, so he made an end of his life. How greatly
did he labor, endeavoring to show that the soul was immortal! And even as he
came he went away, having spoken nothing with certainty, nor persuaded any
hearer. But the Cross wrought persuasion by means of unlearned men; yea it
persuaded even the whole world: and not about common things, but in discourse
of God, and the godliness which is according to truth, and the evangelical way of
life, and the judgment of the things to come. And of all men it made
philosophers: the very rustics, the utterly unlearned. Behold how "the foolishness
of God is wiser than men," and "the weakness stronger?" How "stronger?"
Because it overran the whole world, and took all by main force, and while men
were endeavoring by ten thousands to extinguish the name of the Crucified, the
contrary came to pass: that flourished and increased more and more, but they
perished and wasted away; and the living at war with the dead, had no power. So

that when the Greek calls me foolish, he shows himself above measure foolish:
since I who am esteemed by him a fool, evidently appear wiser than the wise.
When he calls me weak, then he shows himself to be weaker. For the noble
things which publicans and fishermen were able to effect by the grace of God,
these, philosophers, and rhetoricians, and tyrants, and in short the whole world,
running ten thousand ways here and there, could not even form a notion of. For
what did not the Cross introduce? The doctrine concerning the Immortality of
the Soul; that concerning the Resurrection of the Body; that concerning the
contempt of things present; that concerning the desire of things future. Yea,
angels it has made of men, and all, every where, practice self-denial,
([φιλοσοφοῦσι]) and show forth all kinds of fortitude.
7. But among them also, it will be said, many have been found contemners
of death. Tell me who? Was it he who drank the hemlock? But if you will, I can
bring forward ten thousand such from within the Church. For had it been lawful
when prosecution befell them to drink hemlock and depart, all had become more
famous than he. And besides, he drank when he was not at liberty to drink or not
to drink; but willing or against his will he must have undergone it: no effect
surely of fortitude, but of necessity, and nothing more. For even robbers and
man-slayers, having fallen under the condemnation of their judges, have suffered
things more grievous. But with us it is all quite the contrary. For not against their
will did the martyrs endure, but of their will, and being at liberty not to suffer;
showing forth fortitude harder than all adamant. This then you see is no great
wonder, that he whom I was mentioning drank hemlock; it being no longer in his
power not to drink, and also when he had arrived at a very great age. For when
he despised life he stated himself to be seventy years old; if this can be called
despising. For I for my part could not affirm it: nor, what is more, can anyone
else. But show me some one enduring firm in torments for godliness' sake, as I
show you ten thousand every where in the world. Who, while his nails were
tearing out, nobly endured? Who, while his body joints were wrenching
([ἀνασκαπτομένων]) asunder? Who, while his body was cut in pieces, ([τοῦ