a bad place as God designed it. If any man's career ends in final woe, he must, by some
wilfulness of his own, have traversed and defeated God's special and particular purpose
on his behalf. The axiom, De minimis non curat praetor, does not hold of God's dealings
with His creatures (B. III, Chap. LXXVI), least of all with His rational creatures (B. III,
Chap. CXIII). The humblest place that God's special providence has prepared for any
spirit or human soul created by Him, is a good place, good with a twofold goodness,
good for the order and beauty of the universe, and good in view of the particular end of
that individual, which is happiness. Only in consequence of a man's own sin (B. III,
Chap. CLXIII) undoing the special providence that made for his peace (Luke xix, 42),
does the man fall under another order of providence, which still secures the general
good, but no longer his gain.

## CHAPTER XLV--The Real Prime Cause of the Variety of Creatures.
SINCE every agent intends to induce its own likeness in the effect, so far as the effect
can receive it, an agent will do this more perfectly the more perfect itself is. But God is
the most perfect of agents: therefore it will belong to Him to induce His likeness in
creation most perfectly, so far as befits created nature. But creatures cannot attain
to any perfect likeness of God so long as they are confined to one species of creature;
because, since the cause exceeds the effect, what is in the cause simply and as one
thing is found in the effect in a composite and manifold way, unless the effect be of the
same species as the cause; which is impossible in the case before us, for no creature
can be equal to God. Multiplicity therefore and variety was needful in creation, to the
end that the perfect likeness of God might be found in creatures according to their
measure.
2. As the things that are made of any material are contained in the potentiality of the
material, so the things done by any agent must be in the active power of the agent. But
the potentiality of the material would not be perfectly reduced to actuality, if out of the
material were made only one of those things to which the material is in potentiality.
Therefore if any agent whose power extends to various effects were to produce only
one of those effects, his power would not be so completely reduced to actuality as by
making many. But by the reduction of active power to actuality the effect attains to the
likeness of the agent. Therefore the likeness of God would not be perfect in the
universe, if there was only one grade of all beings.
3. A creature approaches more perfectly to the likeness of God by being not only good
itself, but able to act for the good of others. But no creature could do anything for the
good of another creature, unless there were plurality and inequality among creatures,
because the agent must be other than the patient and in a position of advantage
(honorabilius) over it.
5. The goodness of the species transcends the goodness of the individual.
Therefore the multiplication of species is a greater addition to the good of the universe
than the multiplication of individuals of one species.
7. To a work contrived by sovereign goodness there ought not to be lacking the height
of perfection proper to it. But the good of order in variety is better than the isolated good
of any one of the things that enter into the order: therefore the good of order ought not
to be wanting to the work of God; which good could not be, if there were no diversity
and inequality of creatures. There is then diversity and inequality between creatures, not
by chance, not from diversity of elements, not by the intervention of any (inferior) cause,
or consideration of merit, but by the special intention of God, wishing to give the
creature such perfection as it was capable of having.
Hence it is said, God saw all things that he had made, and they were very good (Gen. i,
31); and this after He had said of them singly, that they were good; because while
things are good singly in their several natures, all taken together they are very good,