For as they who judge here punish the wicked and honor the good publicly, so
too will it be there, that the one sort may have the greater shame, and the other
more conspicuous glory. Let us picture these things to ourselves every day. If we
are ever revolving them, no care for present things will be able to sting us. "For
the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal." [2 Corinthians 4:18] Continually let us say to ourselves and to others,
"There is a Resurrection, and a Judgment, and a scrutiny of our actions"; and let
as many as deem that there is such a thing as fate repeat this, and they shall
straightway be delivered from the rottenness of their malady; for if there is a
Resurrection, and a Judgment, there is no fate, though they bring ten thousand
arguments, and choke themselves to prove it. But I am ashamed to be teaching
Christians concerning the Resurrection: for he that needs to learn that there is a
Resurrection, and who has not firmly persuaded himself that the affairs of this
world go not on by fate, and without design, and as chance will have them, can
be no Christian. Wherefore, I exhort and beseech you, that we cleanse ourselves
from all wickedness, and do all in our power to obtain pardon and excuse in that
Day.
Perhaps some one will say, "When will be the consummation? When will be
the Resurrection? See how long a time has gone by, and nothing of the kind has
come to pass?" Yet it shall be, be sure. For those before the flood spoke after this
manner, and mocked at Noah, but the flood came and swept away all those
unbelievers, but preserved him who believed. And the men of Lot's time
expected not that stroke from God, until those lightnings and thunderbolts came
down and destroyed them all utterly. Neither in the case of these men, nor of
those who lived in the time of Noah, was there any preamble to what was about
to happen, but when they were all living daintily, and drinking, and mad with
wine, then came these intolerable calamities upon them. So also shall the
Resurrection be; not with any preamble, but while we are in the midst of good
times. Wherefore Paul says, "For when they shall say, Peace and safety; then
sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and

they shall not escape." [1 Thessalonians 5:3] God has so ordered this, that we
may be always struggling, and be not confident even in time of safety. What do
you say? Do you not expect that there will be a Resurrection and a Judgment?
The devils confess these, and are you shameless? "Have You come," they say, "to
torment us before the time?" [Matthew 8:29]; now they who say that there will
be "torment;" are aware of the Judgment, and the reckoning, and the vengeance.
Let us not then besides daring evil deeds, anger God by disbelieving the word of
the Resurrection. For as in other things Christ has been our beginning, so also
has He in this; wherefore He is called "the first-born from the dead." [Colossians
1:18] Now if there were no Resurrection, how could He be "the first-born,"
when no one of "the dead" was to follow Him? If there were no Resurrection,
how would the justice of God be preserved, when so many evil men prosper, and
so many good men are afflicted and die in their affliction? Where shall each of
these obtain his deserts, if so be that there is no Resurrection? No one of those
who have lived aright disbelieves the Resurrection, but every day they pray and
repeat that holy sentence, "Your Kingdom come." Who then are they that
disbelieve the Resurrection? They who have unholy ways and an unclean life: as
the Prophet says, "His ways are always polluted. Your judgments are far above
out of his sight." [Psalm 10:5] For a man cannot possibly live a pure life without
believing in the Resurrection; since they who are conscious of no iniquity both
speak of, and wish for, and believe in it, that they may receive their recompense.
Let us not then anger Him, but hear Him when He says, "Fear Him which is able
to destroy both body and soul in hell" [Matthew 10:28]; that by that fear we may
become better, and being delivered from that perdition, may be deemed worthy
of the Kingdom of Heaven. Which may we all attain to, through the grace and
loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom to the Father
and the Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever and to the endless ages of eternity.
Amen.