from this, that he can occupy a divisible place by applying his
power; as a body does by application of magnitude. Hence it follows
regarding a body which is movable according to place, that it is
divisible according to magnitude; but regarding an angel, that his
power can be applied to something which is divisible.
Reply to Objection 2: The movement of that which is in potentiality is
the act of an imperfect agent. But the movement which is by
application of energy is the act of one in act: because energy implies
actuality.
Reply to Objection 3: The movement of that which is in potentiality is
the act of an imperfect but the movement of what is in act is not for
any need of its own, but for another's need. In this way, because of
our need, the angel is moved locally, according to Heb. 1:14: "They
are all ministering spirits, sent to minister for them who receive the
inheritance of salvation."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether an angel passes through intermediate

space?
Objection 1: It would seem that an angel does not pass through
intermediate space. For everything that passes through a middle
space first travels along a place of its own dimensions, before
passing through a greater. But the place responding to an angel,
who is indivisible, is confined to a point. Therefore if the angel
passes through middle space, he must reckon infinite points in his
movement: which is not possible.
Objection 2: Further, an angel is of simpler substance than the soul.
But our soul by taking thought can pass from one extreme to another
without going through the middle: for I can think of France and
afterwards of Syria, without ever thinking of Italy, which stands
between them. Therefore much more can an angel pass from one
extreme to another without going through the middle.
On the contrary, If the angel be moved from one place to another,
then, when he is in the term "whither," he is no longer in motion, but
is changed. But a process of changing precedes every actual
change: consequently he was being moved while existing in some
place. But he was not moved so long as he was in the term
"whence." Therefore, he was moved while he was in mid-space: and
so it was necessary for him to pass through intervening space.
I answer that, As was observed above in the preceding article, the
local motion of an angel can be continuous, and non-continuous. If it
be continuous, the angel cannot pass from one extreme to another
without passing through the mid-space; because, as is said by the
Philosopher (Phys. v, text 22; vi, text 77), "The middle is that into
which a thing which is continually moved comes, before arriving at
the last into which it is moved"; because the order of first and last in
continuous movement, is according to the order of the first and last
in magnitude, as he says (Phys. iv, text 99).
But if an angel's movement be not continuous, it is possible for him
to pass from one extreme to another without going through the
middle: which is evident thus. Between the two extreme limits there
are infinite intermediate places; whether the places be taken as
divisible or as indivisible. This is clearly evident with regard to