another generation, which is a type of the Truth. I mean, ours by the Spirit. Of
this again the barren a type, the fact that it is not of blood [John 1:13]; this
pertains to the generation above. The one— as also the types— shows that the
generation is to be without passion; the other, that it could proceed from one
above.
Christ is above, ruling over all things: it was necessary this should be
believed. The same takes place in the earth with respect to man. "Let Us make
man after Our image and likeness" [Genesis 1:26], for dominion of all the
brutes. Thus He instructed us, not by words, but by actions. Paradise showed the
separateness of his nature, and that man was the best thing of all. Christ was to
rise again; see now how many sure signs there were; Enoch, Elias, Jonas, the
fiery furnace, the case of Noah, baptism, the seeds, the plants, our own
generation, that of all animals. For since on this everything was at stake, it, more
than any other, had abundance of types.
That the Universe is not without a Providence we may conjecture from
things among ourselves, for nothing will continue to exist, if not provided for;
but even herds, and all other things stand in need of governance. And that the
Universe was not made by chance, Hell is a proof, and so was the deluge in
Noah's day, the fire, the overwhelming of the Egyptians in the sea, the things
which happened in the wilderness.
It was necessary too that many things should prepare the way for Baptism;
yea, thousands of things; those, for instance, in the Old Testament, those in the
Pool, the cleansing of him that was not sound in health, the deluge itself, and all
the things that have been done in water, the baptism of John.
It was necessary to be believed that God gives up His Son; a man did this
by anticipation, Abraham the Patriarch. Types then of all these things, if we are
so inclined, we shall find by searching in the Scriptures. But let us not be weary,
but attune ourselves by these things. Let us hold the faith steadfastly, and show
forth strictness of life: that having through all things returned thanks to God, we
may be counted worthy of the good things promised to them that love Him,

through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 6 on Colossians

[Colossians 2:6, 7]
"As therefore ye received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in Him, rooted and
built up in Him, and established in your faith, even as you were taught,
abounding in thanksgiving."
Again, he takes hold on them beforehand with their own testimony, saying,
"As therefore ye received." We introduce no strange addition, he says, neither do
ye. "Walk ye in Him," for He is the Way that leads to the Father: not in the
Angels; this way leads not there. "Rooted," that is, fixed; not one while going
this way, another that, but "rooted": now that which is rooted, never can remove.
Observe how appropriate are the expressions he employs. "And built up," that is,
in thought attaining unto Him. "And established" in Him, that is, holding Him,
built as on a foundation. He shows that they had fallen down, for the word
"built" has this force. For the faith is in truth a building; and needs both a strong
foundation, and secure construction. For both if any one build not upon a secure
foundation it will shake; and even though he do, if it be not firm, it will not
stand. "As you were taught." Again, the word "As." "Abounding," he says, "in
thanksgiving"; for this is the part of well-disposed persons, I say not simply to
give thanks, but with great abundance, more than ye learned, if possible, with
much ambition.
Ver. 8. "Take heed lest there shall be any one that makes spoil of you."
Do you see how he shows him to be a thief, and an alien, and one that
enters in softly? For he has already represented him to be entering in. "Beware."
And he well said "makes spoil." As one digging away a mound from underneath,
may give no perceptible sign, yet it gradually settles, so do you also beware; for
this is his main point, not even to let himself be perceived. As if some one were
robbing every day, and he (the owner of the house) were told, "Beware lest there