shines forth the more. And therefore, in truth, they who bear this rule have a
greater honor committed to their hands, not only than viceroys but even than
those themselves who wear diadems, seeing that they mould men in greater, and
for greater, things. But neither he that pursues political rule nor he that pursues
spiritual, will be able well to administer it, unless they have first ruled
themselves as they ought, and have observed with all strictness the respective
laws of their polity. For as the rule over the many is in a manner twofold, so also
is that which each one exerts over himself. And again, in this point also the
spiritual rule transcends the political, as what we have said proved. But one may
observe certain also of the arts imitating rule; and in particular, that of
agriculture. For just as the tiller of the soil is in a sort a ruler over the plants,
clipping and keeping back some, making others grow and fostering them: just so
also the best rulers punish and cut off such as are wicked and injure the many;
while they advance the good and orderly. For this cause also the Scripture likens
rulers to vine-dressers. For what though plants utter no cry, as in states the
injured do? Nevertheless they still show the wrong by their appearance,
withering, straitened for room by the worthless weeds. And like as wickedness is
punished by laws, so truly here also by this art both badness of soil and
degeneracy and wildness in plants, are corrected. For all the varieties of human
dispositions we shall find here also, roughness, weakness, timidity, forwardness ,
steadiness : and some of them through wealth luxuriating unseasonably, and to
the damage of their neighbors, and others impoverished and injured; as, for
instance, when hedges are raised to luxuriance at the cost of the neighboring
plants; when other barren and wild trees, running up to a great height, hinder the
growth of those beneath them. And like as rulers and kings have those that vex
their rule with outrage and war; so also has the tiller of the soil attacks of wild
beasts, irregularity of weather, hail, mildew, great rain, drought, and all such
things. But these things happen in order that you may constantly look unto the
hope of God's aid. For the other arts indeed hold their way through the diligence
of men as well; but this gets the better as God determines the balance, and is

throughout almost wholly dependent thereupon; and it needs rains from above,
and the admixture of weathers, and, above all, His Providence. "For neither is he
that plants any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the increase." [1
Corinthians 3:7]
Here also there is death and life, and throes and procreation, just as with
men. For here happen instances both of being cut off, and of bearing fruit, and of
dying, and of being born (the same that was dead) over again, wherein the earth
discourses to us both variously and clearly of a resurrection. For when the root
bears fruit, when the seed shoots, is not the thing a resurrection? And one might
perceive a large measure of God's providence and wisdom involved in this rule,
if one go over it point by point. But what I wished to say is that this [rule] is
concerned with earth and plants; but ours with care of souls. And great as is the
difference between plants and a soul; so great is the superiority of this to that.
And the rulers of the present life again are as much inferior to that [rule], as it is
better to have mastery over the willing than the unwilling. For this is also a
natural rule; for truly in that case every thing is done through fear and by
constraint; but here, what is done aright is of choice and purpose. And not in this
point alone does this excel the other, but in that it is not only a rule, but a
fatherhood so to speak; for it has the gentleness of a father; and while enjoining
greater things, [still] persuades. For the temporal ruler indeed says, 'If you
commit adultery, you have forfeited your life,' but this, should you look with
unchaste eyes, threatens the highest punishments. For awful is this judgment
court, and for the correction of soul, not of body only. As great then as the
difference between soul and body, is that which separates this rule again from
that. And the one indeed sits as judge of things that are open; yea, rather, not of
all these even, but of such as can be fully proved; and ofttimes moreover, even in
these deals treacherously , but this court instructs those that enter it that He that
judges in our case, will bring forward "all things naked and laid open,"
[Hebrews 4:13] before the common theatre of the world, and that to be hidden
will be impossible. So that Christianity keeps together this our life far more than