mischiefs? You see, it is thou who art subverting our life, by drawing men to
these things, while I am recruiting it by putting them down.
"Let us then pull down the stage," say they. Would that it were possible to
pull it down; or rather, if you be willing, as far as regards us, it is pulled down,
and dug up. Nevertheless, I enjoin no such thing. Standing as these places are, I
bid you make them of no effect; which thing were a greater praise than pulling
them down.
9. Imitate at least the barbarians, if no one else; for they verily are
altogether clean from seeking such sights. What excuse then can we have after
all this, we, the citizens of Heaven, and partners in the choirs of the cherubim,
and in fellowship with the angels, making ourselves in this respect worse even
than the barbarians, and this, when innumerable other pleasures, better than
these, are within our reach?
Why, if you desire that your soul may find delight, go to pleasure grounds,
to a river flowing by, and to lakes, take notice of gardens, listen to grasshoppers
as they sing, be continually by the coffins of martyrs, where is health of body
and benefit of soul, and no hurt, no remorse after the pleasure, as there is here.
You have a wife, you have children; what is equal to this pleasure? You
have a house, you have friends, these are the true delights: besides their purity,
great is the advantage they bestow. For what, I pray you, is sweeter than
children? What sweeter than a wife, to him that will be chaste in mind?
To this purpose, we are told, that the barbarians uttered on some occasion a
saying full of wise severity. I mean, that having heard of these wicked
spectacles, and the unseasonable delight of them; "why the Romans," say they,
"have devised these pleasures, as though they had not wives and children;"
implying that nothing is sweeter than children and wife, if you are willing to live
honestly.
"What then," one may say, "if I point to some, who are nothing hurt by their
pastime in that place?" In the first place, even this is a hurt, to spend one's time
without object or fruit, and to become an offense to others. For even if you

should not be hurt, you make some other more eager herein. And how can you
but be yourself hurt, giving occasion to what goes on? Yea, both the fortuneteller, and the prostitute boy, and the harlot woman, and all those choirs of the
devil, cast upon your head the blame of their proceedings. For as surely as, if
there were no spectators, there would be none to follow these employments; so,
since there are, they too have their share of the fire due to such deeds. So that
even if in chastity thou were quite unhurt (a thing impossible), yet for others'
ruin you will render a grievous account; both the spectators', and that of those
who assemble them.
And in chastity too you would profit more, did you refrain from going
there. For if even now you are chaste, you would have become chaster by
avoiding such sights. Let us not then delight in useless argument, nor devise
unprofitable apologies: there being but one apology, to flee from the Babylonian
furnace, to keep far from the Egyptian harlot, though one must escape her hands
naked. [Genesis 39:12]
For so shall we both enjoy much delight, our conscience not accusing us,
and we shall live this present life with chastity, and attain unto the good things to
come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be
glory and might, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.