more longed for by us than the light.
For, in good truth, a friend is more to be longed for than the light; I speak of
a genuine one. And wonder not: for it were better for us that the sun should be
extinguished, than that we should be deprived of friends; better to live in
darkness, than to be without friends. And I will tell you why. Because many who
see the sun are in darkness, but they can never be even in tribulation, who
abound in friends. I speak of spiritual friends, who prefer nothing to friendship.
Such was Paul, who would willingly have given his own soul, even though not
asked, nay would have plunged into hell for them. With so ardent a disposition
ought we to love.
I wish to give you an example of friendship. Friends, that is, friends
according to Christ, surpass fathers and sons. For tell me not of friends of the
present day, since this good thing also has past away with others. But consider,
in the time of the Apostles, I speak not of the chief men, but of the believers
themselves generally; "all," he says, "were of one heart and soul: and not one of
them said that anything of the things which he possessed was his own...and
distribution was made unto each, according as any one had need." [Acts 4:3235] There were then no such words as "mine" and "yours." This is friendship,
that a man should not consider his goods his own, but his neighbor's, that his
possessions belong to another; that he should be as careful of his friend's soul, as
of his own; and the friend likewise.
And where is it possible, somebody says, that such an one should be found?
Because we have not the will; for it is possible. If it were not possible, neither
would Christ have commanded it; he would not have discoursed so much
concerning love. A great thing is friendship, and how great, no one can learn,
and no discourse represent, but experience itself. It is this that has caused the
heresies. This makes the Greeks to be Greeks. He who loves does not wish to
command, nor to rule, but is rather obliged when he is ruled and commanded. He
wishes rather to bestow a favor than to receive one, for he loves, and is so
affected, as not having satisfied his desire. He is not so much gratified when

good is done to him, as when he is doing good. For he wishes to oblige, rather
than to be indebted to him; or rather he wishes both to be beholden to him, and
to have him his debtor. And he wishes both to bestow favors, and not to seem to
bestow them, but himself to be the debtor. I think that perhaps many of you do
not understand what has been said. He wishes to be the first in bestowing
benefits, and not to seem to be the first, but to be returning a kindness. Which
God also has done in the case of men. He purposed to give His own Son for us;
but that He might not seem to bestow a favor, but to be indebted to us, He
commanded Abraham to offer his son, that while doing a great kindness, He
might seem to do nothing great.
For when indeed there is no love, we both upbraid men with our kindnesses
and we exaggerate little ones; but when there is love, we both conceal them and
wish to make the great appear small, that we may not seem to have our friend for
a debtor, but ourselves to be debtors to him, in having him our debtor. I know
that the greater part do not understand what is said, and the cause is, that I am
speaking of a thing which now dwells in heaven. As therefore if I were speaking
of any plant growing in India, of which no one had ever had any experience, no
speech would avail to represent it, though I should utter ten thousand words: so
also now whatever things I say, I say in vain, for no one will be able to
understand me. This is a plant that is planted in heaven, having for its branches
not heavy-clustered pearls, but a virtuous life, much more acceptable than they.
What pleasure would you speak of, the foul and the honorable? But that of
friendship excels them all, though you should speak of the sweetness of honey.
For that satiates, but a friend never does, so long as he is a friend; nay, the desire
of him rather increases, and such pleasure never admits of satiety. And a friend is
sweeter than the present life. Many therefore after the death of their friends have
not wished to live any longer. With a friend one would bear even banishment;
but without a friend would not choose to inhabit even his own country. With a
friend even poverty is tolerable, but without him both health and riches are
intolerable. He has another self: I am straitened, because I cannot instance by an