conferred on women, and consequently no impediment to marriage
can arise therefrom. Hence this kind of relationship does not count.
Reply to Objection 3: In catechism one makes a profession of future
Baptism, just as in betrothal one enters an engagement of future
marriage. Wherefore just as in betrothal a certain kind of propinquity
is contracted, so is there in catechism, whereby marriage is rendered
at least unlawful, as some say; but not in the other sacraments.
Reply to Objection 4: There is not made a profession of faith in the
other sacramentals of Baptism, as in catechism: wherefore the
comparison fails.
The same answer applies to the Fifth and Sixth Objections.
Reply to Objection 7: The Apostle had instructed them in the faith by
a kind of catechism; and consequently his instruction was directed
to their spiritual birth.
Reply to Objection 8: Properly speaking a spiritual relationship is not
contracted through the sacrament of Penance. Wherefore a priest's
son can marry a woman whose confession the priest has heard, else
in the whole parish he could not find a woman whom he could marry.
Nor does it matter that by Penance actual sin is taken away, for this
is not a kind of birth, but a kind of healing. Nevertheless Penance
occasions a kind of bond between the woman penitent and the
priest, that has a resemblance to spiritual relationship, so that if he
have carnal intercourse with her, he sins as grievously as if she were
his spiritual daughter. The reason of this is that the relations
between priest and penitent are most intimate, and consequently in
order to remove the occasion of sin this prohibition [Can. Omnes
quos, and seqq., Caus. xxx] was made.
Reply to Objection 9: A spiritual father is so called from his likeness
to a carnal father. Now as the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 2) a
carnal father gives his child three things, being nourishment and
instruction: and consequently a person's spiritual father is so called
from one of these three things. Nevertheless he has not, through
being his spiritual father, a spiritual relationship with him, unless he
is like a (carnal) father as to generation which is the way to being.
This solution may also be applied to the foregoing Eighth Objection.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether spiritual relationship is contracted

between the person baptized and the person who raises him
from the sacred font?
Objection 1: It would seem that spiritual relationship is not
contracted between the person baptized and the person who raises
him from the sacred font. For in carnal generation carnal relationship
is contracted only on the part of the person of whose seed the child
is born; and not on the part of the person who receives the child
after birth. Therefore neither is spiritual relationship contracted
between the receiver and the received at the sacred font.
Objection 2: Further, he who raises a person from the sacred font is
called anadochos by Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. ii): and it is part of his
office to instruct the child. But instruction is not a sufficient cause of
spiritual relationship, as stated above (Article 2). Therefore no
relationship is contracted between him and the person whom he
raises from the sacred font.
Objection 3: Further, it may happen that someone raises a person
from the sacred font before he himself is baptized. Now spiritual
relationship is not contracted in such a case, since one who is not
baptized is not capable of spirituality. Therefore raising a person
from the sacred font is not sufficient to contract a spiritual
relationship.
On the contrary, There is the definition of spiritual relationship
quoted above (Article 1), as also the authorities mentioned in the text
(Sent. iv, D, 42).
I answer that, Just as in carnal generation a person is born of a
father and mother, so in spiritual generation a person is born again a
son of God as Father, and of the Church as Mother. Now while he
who confers the sacrament stands in the place of God, whose
instrument and minister he is, he who raises a baptized person from
the sacred font, or holds the candidate for Confirmation, stands in
the place of the Church. Therefore spiritual relationship is contracted
with both.
Reply to Objection 1: Not only the father, of whose seed the child is
born, is related carnally to the child, but also the mother who