For if she sacrificed not with her own hand, yet was she pleased with the
sacrifice, which is the same; she felt no indignation when the gift was taken
away.
Again, is her child sick? She has made no amulets. It is counted to her as
martyrdom, for she sacrificed her son in her resolve. For what, even though
those things are unavailing, and a mere cheat and mockery, still there were
nevertheless those who persuaded her that they do avail: and she chose rather to
see her child dead, than to put up with idolatry. As then she is a martyr, whether
it be in her own case, or in her son's, that she has thus acted; or in her husband's,
or in any other's of her dearest; so is that other one an idolatress. For it is evident
that she would have done sacrifice, had it been allowed her to do sacrifice; yea,
rather, she has even now performed the act of sacrifice. For these amulets,
though they who make money by them are forever rationalizing about them, and
saying, "we call upon God, and do nothing extraordinary," and the like; and "the
old woman is a Christian," says he, "and one of the faithful"; the thing is
idolatry. Are you one of the faithful? Sign the Cross; say, this I have for my only
weapon; this for my remedy; and other I know none. Tell me, if a physician
should come to one, and, neglecting the remedies belonging to his art, should use
incantation, should we call that man a physician? By no means: for we see not
the medicines of the healing art; so neither, in this case, do we see those of
Christianity.
Other women again tie about them the names of rivers, and venture
numberless things of like nature. Lo, I say, and forewarn you all, that if any be
detected, I will not spare them again, whether they have made amulet, or
incantation, or any other thing of such an art as this. What then, says one, is the
child to die? If he have lived through this means, he did then die, but if he have
died without this, he then lived. But now, if you see him attaching himself to
harlots, you wish him buried, and sayest, "why, what good is it for him to live?"
but when you see him in peril of his salvation, do you wish to see him live?
Heardest thou not Christ saying, "He that loses his life, shall find it; and he that

finds it, shall lose it"? [Matthew 16:25] Believest thou these sayings, or do they
seem to you fables? Tell me now, should one say, "Take him away to an idol
temple, and he will live"; would you endure it? No! she replies. Why?
"Because," she says, "he urges me to commit idolatry; but here, there is no
idolatry, but simple incantation:" this is the device of Satan, this is that wiliness
of the devil to cloak over the deceit, and to give the deleterious drug in honey.
After he found that he could not prevail with you in the other way, he has gone
this way about, to stitched charms, and old wives' fables; and the Cross indeed is
dishonored, and these charms preferred before it. Christ is cast out, and a
drunken and silly old woman is brought in. That mystery of ours is trodden
under foot, and the imposture of the devil dances.
Wherefore then, says one, does not God reprove the aid from such sources?
He has many times reproved, and yet has not persuaded you; He now leaves you
to your error, for It says, "God gave them up unto a reprobate mind." [Romans
1:28] These things, moreover, not even a Greek who has understanding could
endure. A certain demagogue in Athens is reported once to have hung these
things about him: when a philosopher who was his instructor, on beholding
them, rebuked him, expostulated, satirized, made sport of him. For in so
wretched a plight are we, as even to believe in these things!
Why, says one, are there not now those who raise the dead, and perform
cures? Yes, then, why, I say: why are there not now those who have a contempt
for this present life? Do we serve God for hire? When man's nature was weaker,
when the Faith had to be planted, there were even many such; but now he would
not have us to hang upon these signs, but to be ready for death. Why then do you
cling to the present life? Why do you not look on the future? And for the sake of
this indeed canst bear even to commit idolatry, but for the other not so much as
to restrain sadness? For this cause it is that there are none such now; because that
(future) life has seemed to us honorless, seeing that for its sake we do nothing,
while for this there is nothing we refuse to undergo. And why too that other
farce, ashes, and soot, and salt? And the old woman again brought in? A farce