THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.11.

words of Cain were reprehensible, when he said (Gn. 4:13): "My
iniquity is greater than that I may deserve pardon." And so God's
mercy, through Penance, grants pardon to sinners without any end,
wherefore it is written (2 Paral 37 [Prayer of Manasses]): "Thy
merciful promise is unmeasurable and unsearchable . . . (and Thou
repentest) for the evil brought upon man." It is therefore evident that
Penance can be repeated many times.
Reply to Objection 1: Some of the Jews thought that a man could be
washed several times in the laver of Baptism, because among them
the Law prescribed certain washing-places where they were wont to
cleanse themselves repeatedly from their uncleannesses. In order to
disprove this the Apostle wrote to the Hebrews that "it is impossible
for those who were once illuminated," viz. through Baptism, "to be
renewed again to penance," viz. through Baptism, which is "the laver
of regeneration, and renovation of the Holy Ghost," as stated in Titus
3:5: and he declares the reason to be that by Baptism man dies with
Christ, wherefore he adds (Heb. 6:6): "Crucifying again to
themselves the Son of God."
Reply to Objection 2: Ambrose is speaking of solemn Penance,
which is not repeated in the Church, as we shall state further on (XP,
Question 28, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says [De vera et falsa Poenitentia
the authorship of which is unknown], "Our Lord gave sight to many
blind men at various times, and strength to many infirm, thereby
showing, in these different men, that the same sins are repeatedly
forgiven, at one time healing a man from leprosy and afterwards
from blindness. For this reason He healed so many stricken with
fever, so many feeble in body, so many lame, blind, and withered,
that the sinner might not despair; for this reason He is not described
as healing anyone but once, that every one might fear to link himself
with sin; for this reason He declares Himself to be the physician
welcomed not of the hale, but of the unhealthy. What sort of a
physician is he who knows not how to heal a recurring disease? For
if a man ail a hundred times it is for the physician to heal him a
hundred times: and if he failed where others succeed, he would be a
poor physician in comparison with them."
Reply to Objection 4: Penance is to deplore past sins, and, "while
deploring them," not to commit again, either by act or by intention,
those which we have to deplore. Because a man is a mocker and not

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.11.

a penitent, who, "while doing penance," does what he repents having
done, or intends to do again what he did before, or even commits
actually the same or another kind of sin. But if a man sin afterwards
either by act or intention, this does not destroy the fact that his
former penance was real, because the reality of a former act is never
destroyed by a subsequent contrary act: for even as he truly ran who
afterwards sits, so he truly repented who subsequently sins.
Reply to Objection 5: Baptism derives its power from Christ's
Passion, as a spiritual regeneration, with a spiritual death, of a
previous life. Now "it is appointed unto man once to die" (Heb. 9:27),
and to be born once, wherefore man should be baptized but once.
On the other hand, Penance derives its power from Christ's Passion,
as a spiritual medicine, which can be repeated frequently.
Reply to Objection 6: According to Augustine (De vera et falsa
Poenitentia, the authorship of which is unknown), "it is evident that
sins displease God exceedingly, for He is always ready to destroy
them, lest what He created should perish, and what He loved be
lost," viz. by despair.