reflect that it is wont to kindle it even more, you will not only not seek, but will
turn from it and reject it.
Let us not avoid discourses concerning hell, that we may avoid hell. Let us
not banish the remembrance of punishment, that we may escape punishment. If
the rich man had reflected upon that fire, he would not have sinned; but because
he never was mindful of it, therefore he fell into it. Tell me, O man, being about
to stand before the Judgment-seat of Christ, do you speak of all things rather
than of that? And when you have a matter before a judge, often only relating to
words, neither day nor night, at no time or season do you talk of anything else,
but always of that business, and when you are about to give an account of your
whole life, and to submit to a trial, can you not bear even with others reminding
you of that Judgment? For this reason therefore all things are ruined and undone,
because when we are about to stand before a human tribunal concerning matters
of this life, we move everything, we solicit all men, we are constantly anxious
about it, we do everything for the sake of it: but when we are about, after no long
time, to come before the Judgment-seat of Christ, we do nothing either by
ourselves, or by others; we do not entreat the Judge. And yet He grants to us a
long season of forbearance, and does not snatch us away in the midst of our sins,
but permits us to put them off, and that Goodness and Lovingkindness leaves
nothing undone of all that belongs to Himself. But all is of no avail; on this
account the punishment will be the heavier. But God forbid it should be so!
Wherefore, I beseech you, let us even if but now become watchful. Let us keep
hell before our eyes. Let us consider that inexorable Account, that, thinking of
those things, we may both avoid vice, and choose virtue, and may be able to
obtain the blessings promised to those who love Him, by the grace and
lovingkindness, etc.

## Homily 3 on Second Thessalonians

2 Thessalonians 1:9-10
"Who shall suffer punishment, even eternal destruction from the face of the
Lord, and from the glory of His might, when He shall come to be glorified in His
Saints, and to be marveled at in all them that believed."
There are many men, who form good hopes not by abstaining from their
sins, but by thinking that hell is not so terrible as it is said to be, but milder than
what is threatened, and temporary, not eternal; and about this they philosophize
much. But I could show from many reasons, and conclude from the very
expressions concerning hell, that it is not only not milder, but much more terrible
than is threatened. But I do not now intend to discourse concerning these things.
For the fear even from bare words is sufficient, though we do not fully unfold
their meaning. But that it is not temporary, hear Paul now saying, concerning
those who know not God, and who do not believe in the Gospel, that "they shall
suffer punishment, even eternal destruction." How then is that temporary which
is everlasting? "From the face of the Lord," he says. What is this? He here
wishes to say how easily it might be. For since they were then much puffed up,
there is no need, he says, of much trouble; it is enough that God comes and is
seen, and all are involved in punishment and vengeance. His coming only to
some indeed will be Light, but to others vengeance.
"And from the glory of His might," he says, "when He shall come to be
glorified in His Saints, and to be marveled at in all them that believed."
Is God glorified? Yea, he says, in all the Saints. How? For when they that
puff so greatly see those who were scourged by them, who were despised, who
were derided, even those now near to Him, it is His glory, or rather it is their
glory, both theirs and His; His indeed, because He did not forsake them; theirs,
because they were thought worthy of so great honor. For as it is His riches, that