rank of the nature or of the essence of a thing. I know that this consideration
about essence and accident is hard to be grasped by many. But there are they
who are able to lend a finer ear, wherefore also we have spoken these things. Do
you wish that I should come to another name? You shall see that that also is not a
name which belongs to his essence or nature. He is called wicked. But his
wickedness is not from his nature, but from his choice. For even this at one time
is present, at another time is absent. Do not thou then say this to me that it
always remains with him. For it was not indeed with him at the beginning, but
afterwards came upon him; wherefore he is called apostate. Although many men
are wicked, he alone is called wicked by pre-eminence. Why then is he thus
called? Because though in no way wronged by us, having no grudge whether
small or great, when he saw mankind had in honour, he straightway envied him
his good. What therefore could be worse than this wickedness, except when
hatred and war exist, without having any reasonable cause. Let the Devil then be
let alone, and let us bring forward the creation, in order that you may learn that
the Devil is not the cause of ills to us, if we would only take heed: in order that
you may learn that the weak in choice, and the unprepared, and slothful, even
were there no Devil, falls, and casts himself into many a depth of evil. The Devil
is evil. I know it myself and it is acknowledged by all, yet give heed strictly to
the things which are now about to be said. For they are not ordinary matters, but
those about which many words, many times, and in many places arise, about
which there is many a fight and battle not only on the part of the faithful against
unbelievers but also on the part of the faithful against the faithful. For this is that
which is full of pain.
3. The Devil then is acknowledged, as I said, to be evil by all. What shall
we say about this beautiful and wondrous creation? Pray is the creation too,
wicked? And who is so corrupt, who so dull, and demented as to accuse the
creation? What then shall we say about this? For it is not wicked, but is both
beautiful and a token of the wisdom and power and lovingkindness of God. Hear
at least how the prophet marvels at it, saying, "How are your works magnified O

Lord! In wisdom You have made them all." He did go through them one by one,
but withdrew before the incomprehensible wisdom of God. And that he has
made it thus beautiful and vast hear a certain one saying, "From the vastness and
beauty of the creatures, the originator of them is proportionably seen." Hear too
Paul saying, "For the invisible things of Him, since the creation of the world, are
clearly seen, being perceived through the things that are made." For each of
these by which he spoke declared that the creation leads us to the knowledge of
God, because it causes us to know the Master fully. What then? If we see this
beautiful and wondrous creation itself becoming a cause of impiety to many,
shall we blame it? In no wise, but them who were unable to use the medicine
rightly. Whence then is this which leads us to the knowledge of God, a cause of
impiety? "The wise" says he "were darkened in their understandings, and
worshipped and served the creature more than the creator." The Devil is
nowhere here, a Demon is nowhere here, but the creation alone is set before us,
as the teacher of the knowledge of God. How then has it become the cause of
impiety? Not owing to its own nature, but owing to the carelessness of those
who do not take heed. What then? Shall we take away even the creation? Tell
me.
And why do I speak about the creation? Let us come to our own members.
For even these we shall find to be a cause of destruction if we do not take heed,
not because of their own nature, but because of our sloth. And look; an eye was
given, in order that you may behold the creation and glorify the Master. But if
you dost not use the eye well, it becomes to you the minister of adultery. A
tongue has been given, in order that you may speak well, in order that you may
praise the Creator. But if you givest not excellent heed, it becomes a cause of
blasphemy to you. And hands were given you that you may stretch them forth
unto prayer. But if you are not wary, you stretch them out unto covetousness.
Feet were given in order that you may run unto good works, but if you art
careless you will cause wicked works by means of them: Do you see that all
things hurt the weak man? Do you see that even the medicines of salvation