SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.5.

pit on the Sabbath day, will he not take hold on it and lift it up?"
Reply to Objection 4: In the New Law the observance of the Lord's
day took the place of the observance of the Sabbath, not by virtue of
the precept but by the institution of the Church and the custom of
Christian people. For this observance is not figurative, as was the
observance of the Sabbath in the Old Law. Hence the prohibition to
work on the Lord' day is not so strict as on the Sabbath: and certain
works are permitted on the Lord's day which were forbidden on the
Sabbath, such as the cooking of food and so forth. And again in the
New Law, dispensation is more easily granted than in the Old, in the
matter of certain forbidden works, on account of their necessity,
because the figure pertains to the protestation of truth, which it is
unlawful to omit even in small things; while works, considered in
themselves, are changeable in point of place and time.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the fourth precept, about honoring one's

parents, is fittingly expressed?
Objection 1: It seems that the fourth precept, about honoring one's
parents, is unfittingly expressed. For this is the precept pertaining to
piety. Now, just as piety is a part of justice, so are observance,
gratitude, and others of which we have spoken (Questions 101,102,
seq.). Therefore it seems that there should not have been given a
special precept of piety, as none is given regarding the others.
Objection 2: Further, piety pays worship not only to one's parents,
but also to one's country, and also to other blood kindred, and to the
well-wishers of our country, as stated above (Question 101, Articles
1,2). Therefore it was unfitting for this precept to mention only the
honoring of one's father and mother.
Objection 3: Further, we owe our parents not merely honor but also
support. Therefore the mere honoring of one's parents is unfittingly
prescribed.
Objection 4: Further, sometimes those who honor their parents die
young, and on the contrary those who honor them not live a long
time. Therefore it was unfitting to supplement this precept with the
promise, "That thou mayest be long-lived upon earth."
On the contrary, stands the authority of Scripture.
I answer that, The precepts of the decalogue are directed to the love
of God and of our neighbor. Now to our parents, of all our neighbors,
we are under the greatest obligation. Hence, immediately after the
precepts directing us to God, a place is given to the precept
directing us to our parents, who are the particular principle of our
being, just as God is the universal principle: so that this precept has
a certain affinity to the precepts of the First Table.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 101, Article 2), piety
directs us to pay the debt due to our parents, a debt which is
common to all. Hence, since the precepts of the decalogue are
general precepts, they ought to contain some reference to piety
rather than to the other parts of justice, which regard some special
debt.