SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether scandal is a sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that scandal is not a sin. For sins do not
occur from necessity, since all sin is voluntary, as stated above (FS,
Question 74, Articles 1,2). Now it is written (Mt. 18:7): "It must needs
be that scandals come." Therefore scandal is not a sin.
Objection 2: Further, no sin arises from a sense of dutifulness,
because "a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit" (Mt. 7:18). But
scandal may come from a sense of dutifulness, for Our Lord said to
Peter (Mt. 16:23): "Thou art a scandal unto Me," in reference to which
words Jerome says that "the Apostle's error was due to his sense of
dutifulness, and such is never inspired by the devil." Therefore
scandal is not always a sin.
Objection 3: Further, scandal denotes a stumbling. But he that
stumbles does not always fall. Therefore scandal, which is a spiritual
fall, can be without sin.
On the contrary, Scandal is "something less rightly said or done."
Now anything that lacks rectitude is a sin. Therefore scandal is
always with sin.
I answer that, As already said (Article 1, ad 4), scandal is of two
kinds, passive scandal in the person scandalized, and active scandal
in the person who gives scandal, and so occasions a spiritual
downfall. Accordingly passive scandal is always a sin in the person
scandalized; for he is not scandalized except in so far as he
succumbs to a spiritual downfall, and that is a sin.
Yet there can be passive scandal, without sin on the part of the
person whose action has occasioned the scandal, as for instance,
when a person is scandalized at another's good deed. In like manner
active scandal is always a sin in the person who gives scandal, since
either what he does is a sin, or if it only have the appearance of sin,
it should always be left undone out of that love for our neighbor
which binds each one to be solicitous for his neighbor's spiritual
welfare; so that if he persist in doing it he acts against charity.
Yet there can be active scandal without sin on the part of the person
scandalized, as stated above (Article 1, ad 4).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: These words, "It must needs be that scandals
come," are to be understood to convey, not the absolute, but the
conditional necessity of scandal; in which sense it is necessary that
whatever God foresees or foretells must happen, provided it be
taken conjointly with such foreknowledge, as explained in the FP,
Question 14, Article 13, ad 3; FP, Question 23, Article 6, ad 2.
Or we may say that the necessity of scandals occurring is a
necessity of end, because they are useful in order that "they . . . who
are reproved may be made manifest" (1 Cor. 11:19).
Or scandals must needs occur, seeing the condition of man who
fails to shield himself from sin. Thus a physician on seeing a man
partaking of unsuitable food might say that such a man must needs
injure his health, which is to be understood on the condition that he
does not change his diet. In like manner it must needs be that
scandals come, so long as men fail to change their evil mode of
living.
Reply to Objection 2: In that passage scandal denotes any kind of
hindrance: for Peter wished to hinder Our Lord's Passion out of a
sense of dutifulness towards Christ.
Reply to Objection 3: No man stumbles spiritually, without being
kept back somewhat from advancing in God's way, and that is at
least a venial sin.