state, no one concerns himself about it, but we all are indolent, all careless, all
negligent, and overlook our wives, our children, and ourselves, when attacked by
this dangerous disease. But when it is too late, we become sensible of it.
Consider how disgraceful and absurd it is to say afterwards, "we never looked
for it, we never expected that this would be the event." And it is no less
dangerous than disgraceful. For if in the present life it is the part of foolish men
to make no provision for the future, much more must it be so with respect to the
next life, when we hear many counseling us, and informing us what is to be
done, and what not to be done. Let us then hold fast that hope. Let us be careful
of our salvation, let us in all things call upon God, that He may stretch forth His
hand to us. How long will you be slothful? How long negligent? How long shall
we be careless of ourselves and of our fellow-servants? He has shed richly upon
us the grace of His Spirit. Let us therefore consider how great is the grace he has
bestowed upon us, and let us show as great earnestness ourselves, or, since this is
not possible, some, although it be less. For if after this grace we are insensible,
the heavier will be our punishment. "For if I," He says, "had not come and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their
sin." [John 15:22] But God forbid that this should be said of us, and grant that
we may all be thought worthy of the blessings promised to those who have loved
Him, in Jesus Christ our Lord, etc.

## Homily 6 on Titus

[Titus 3:8-11]
"These things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have
believed in God might be careful to maintain good works. These things are good
and profitable unto men. But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and
contentions, and strivings about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain. A
man that is an heretic after the first and second admonition reject. Knowing that
he that is such is subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself."
Having spoken of the love of God to man, of His ineffable regard for us, of
what we were and what He has done for us, he has added, "These things I will
that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might be
careful to maintain good works"; that is, Discourse of these things, and from a
consideration of them exhort to almsgiving. For what has been said will not only
apply to humility, to the not being puffed up, and not reviling others, but to every
other virtue. So also in arguing with the Corinthians, he says, "You know that our
Lord being rich became poor, that we through His poverty might be rich." [2
Corinthians 8:9] Having considered the care and exceeding love of God for man,
he thence exhorts them to almsgiving, and that not in a common and slight
manner, but "that they may be careful," he says, "to maintain good works," that
is, both to succor the injured, not only by money, but by patronage and
protection, and to defend the widows and orphans, and to afford a refuge to all
that are afflicted. For this is to maintain good works. For these things, he says,
are good and profitable unto men. "But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies,
and contentions, and strivings about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain."
What do these "genealogies" mean? For in his Epistle to Timothy he mentions
"fables and endless genealogies." [1 Timothy 1:4] [Perhaps both here and there
glancing at the Jews, who, priding themselves on having Abraham for their