yet so that some higher part of hell be called the limbo of the
Fathers. For those who are in hell receive diverse punishments
according to the diversity of their guilt, so that those who are
condemned are consigned to darker and deeper parts of hell
according as they have been guilty of graver sins, and consequently
the holy Fathers in whom there was the least amount of sin were
consigned to a higher and less darksome part than all those who
were condemned to punishment.
Reply to Objection 1: When Christ, by His descent, delivered the
Fathers from limbo, He is said to have "bitten" hell and to have
descended into hell, in so far as hell and limbo are the same as to
situation.
This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: Job descended, not to the hell of the damned,
but to the limbo of the Fathers. The latter is called the deepest place
not in reference to the places of punishment, but in comparison with
other places, as including all penal places under one head. Again we
may reply with Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii): who says of Jacob: "When
Jacob said to his sons, 'You will bring down my grey hairs with
sorrow to hell,' he seems to have feared most, lest he should be
troubled with so great a sorrow as to obtain, not the rest of good
men, but the hell of sinners." The saying of Job may be expounded
in the same way, as being the utterance of one in fear, rather than an
assertion.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the limbo of children is the same as the

limbo of the Fathers?
Objection 1: It would seem that the limbo of children is the same as
the limbo of the Fathers. For punishment should correspond to sin.
Now the Fathers were detained in limbo for the same sin as children,
namely for original sin. Therefore the place of punishment should be
the same for both.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Enchir. xciii): "The punishment
of children who die in none but original sin is most lenient." But no
punishment is more lenient than that of the holy Fathers. Therefore
the place of punishment is the same for both.
On the contrary, Even as temporal punishment in purgatory and
eternal punishment in hell are due to actual sin, so temporal
punishment in the limbo of the Fathers and eternal punishment in the
limbo of the children were due to original sin. If, therefore, hell and
purgatory be not the same it would seem that neither are the limbo of
children and the limbo of the Fathers the same.
I answer that, The limbo of the Fathers and the limbo of children,
without any doubt, differ as to the quality of punishment or reward.
For children have no hope of the blessed life, as the Fathers in limbo
had, in whom, moreover, shone forth the light of faith and grace. But
as regards their situation, there is reason to believe that the place of
both is the same; except that the limbo of the Fathers is placed
higher than the limbo of children, just as we have stated in reference
to limbo and hell (Article 5).
Reply to Objection 1: The Fathers did not stand in the same relation
to original sin as children. For in the Fathers original sin was
expiated in so far as it infected the person, while there remained an
obstacle on the part of nature, on account of which their satisfaction
was not yet complete. On the other hand, in children there is an
obstacle both on the part of the person and on the part of nature:
and for this reason different abodes are appointed to the Fathers and
to children.
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine is speaking of punishments due to
some one by reason of his person. Of these the most lenient are due