in a unified way."

It is clear, then, that rational thinking ends in intellectual thinking, Following the process of
analysis, in which reason gathers one simple truth from many things. And again, intellectual
thinking is the beginning of rational thinking, following the process of synthesis, in which the
intellect comprehends a multiplicity in unity. So the thinking that is the terminus of all human
reasoning is supremely intellectual.

Now all rational thinking in all the sciences, following the way of analysis, terminates in the
knowledge of divine science. For, as we have said, reason sometimes advances from one thing to
another in the order of reality; for example, when a demonstration is made through external
causes or effects, by synthesis when we go from causes to effects, by analysis when we proceed
from effects to causes, for causes are more simple, unchangeable, and uniformly constant than
their effects. Consequently, the ultimate end of analysis in this process is attainment d the highest
and most simple causes, which are the separate substances. At other times, however, reason
advances from one item to another distinct in the mental order, as when we proceed according to
intrinsic causes, by synthesis when we go from the most universal forms to the more particular
ones, by analysis when we proceed conversely, because what is more universal is more simple.
Now that which is most universal is common to all beings; and so the ultimate end of analysis in
this process is the consideration of being and the properties of being as being. And, as we said
above, these are the objects of divine science; namely, the separate substances and that which is
common to all beings. It is evident, therefore, that its thinking is supremely intellectual.

It also follows that divine science gives principles to all the other sciences, because intellectual
thinking is the starting point of rational thinking; and for this reason it is called first philosophy.
Nevertheless it is learned after physics and the other sciences, because intellectual thinking is the
terminus of rational thinking. For this reason it is called metaphysics, as if to say beyond physics,
for in the process of analysis it comes after physics.

#### Replies to Opposing Arguments:

Reply to 1. We say that divine science proceeds intellectually not as though it makes no use of
reason, moving forward from principles to conclusions, but because its reasoning most closely
approaches intellectual consideration and its conclusions are closest to its principles.

Reply to 2. God is beyond the comprehension of every created intellect, but he is not beyond the
uncreated intellect, since in knowing himself he comprehends himself. However, he is above the
intellect of everyone here on earth as regards knowing what he is, but not as regards knowing
that he is, The blessed in heaven, however, also know what he is, because they see his essence.
Nevertheless divine science is not only about God. It is concerned with other things as well,
which are not beyond the human intellect even in its present state as regards knowing what they
are.