will they who repent of their course of life then.
Wherefore let us, while it is time, practise what is good. For like as they
henceforth derived no advantage from their knowledge, even so neither shall we
ourselves from our repentance for our wickedness. For neither to the pilot, when
the bark is sunk in the sea from his remissness, will there remain anything more;
nor to the physician, when the sick man is gone; but each of these must before
the end devise, and execute all things, so as to be involved in no danger, nor
shame; but after this, all is unprofitable.
Let us also then, while in sickness, send for physicians, and lay out money,
and exert unceasing diligence, that having risen up from our affliction, we may
depart hence in health.
And as much care as we exert about our servants, when their bodies are
sick, so much let us show forth upon ourselves, when our soul is diseased. And
indeed we are nearer to ourselves than our servants, and our souls are more
necessary than those bodies, but nevertheless it were well if we exert at least an
equal diligence. For if we do not this now, when gone, thenceforth we may
obtain nothing more in the way of plea.
4. Who is so wretched, one may say, as not to show even as much thought
as this? Why this is the marvellous thing, that we are held in so little esteem with
our ownselves, that we despise ourselves more than our servants. For when our
servants are sick of a fever, we send for physicians, and make a separation in the
house, and compel them to obey the laws of that art; and if these are neglected,
we are displeased with them, and set persons to watch them, who will not, even
should they wish them, suffer them to satiate their desire; and if they who have
the care of these persons should say, that medicines must be procured at great
cost, we yield; and whatsoever they may enjoin, we obey, and we pay them hire
for these injunctions.
But when we are sick (or rather there is no time when we are not sick), we
do not so much as call in the physician, we do not lay out money, but as though
some ruffian, and enemy, and foes were concerned, so do we disregard our soul.

And these things I say, not finding fault with our attention towards our servants,
but thinking it meet to take at least as much care of our souls. And how should
we do? One may say. Show it to Paul when ill; call in Matthew; let John sit by it.
Hear from them, what we ought to do that is thus ill, they will surely tell, and
will not conceal. For they are not dead, but live and speak. But does the soul take
no heed to them, being weighed down by the fever? Do thou compel it, and
awaken its reasoning power. Call in the prophets. There is no need to pay money
to these physicians, for neither do they themselves demand hire for themselves,
nor for the medicines which they prepare do they drive you to the necessity of
expense, except for almsgiving; but in everything else they even add to your
possessions; as, for instance, when they require you to be temperate, they deliver
you from unseasonable and wrong expenses; when they tell you to abstain from
drunkenness, they make you wealthier. Do you see the skill of physicians, who
besides health, are supplying you also with riches? Sit down therefore by them,
and learn of them the nature of your disease. For instance, do you love wealth,
and greedy gain, like as the fevered love water? Listen at any rate to their
admonitions. For like as the physician says to you, If you will gratify your
desire, you will perish, and undergo this or that; even so also Paul: "They that
will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare of the devil, and into foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition." [1 Timothy 6:9]
But are you impatient? Hear him saying, "Yet a little while, and He that
comes will come, and will not tarry. [Hebrews 10:37] The Lord is at hand, be
careful for nothing;" [Philippians 4:5-6] and again, "The fashion of this world
passes away." [1 Corinthians 7:31]
For neither does he command only, but also soothes, as a physician should.
And like as they devise some other things in the place of cold things, so does this
man draw off the desire another way. Do you wish to be rich, says he; let it be
"in good works." Do you desire to lay up treasure? I forbid it not at all; only let it
be in Heaven.
And like as the physician says, that what is cold is hurtful to teeth, to