For what do his lines mean, and the turns and bends of the lines? But when he
puts on the colors, then the beauty of the art will become conspicuous. Yet still,
not even then will you be able to attain to any accurate understanding of it. But
why do I speak of carpenters, and painters, our fellow-servants? Tell me, how
does the bee frame her comb, and then shall you speak about God also. Master
the handiwork of the ant, the spider, and the swallow, and then shall you speak
about God also. Tell me these things. But no, thou never canst. Will you not
cease then, O man, your vain enquiries? For vain indeed they are. Will you not
cease busying yourself in vain about many things? Nothing so wise as this
ignorance, where they that profess they know nothing are wisest of all, and they
that spend overmuch labor on these questions, the most foolish of all. So that to
profess knowledge is not everywhere a sign of wisdom, but sometimes of folly
also. For tell me, suppose there were two men, and one of them should profess to
stretch out his lines, and to measure the expanse that intervenes between the
earth and heaven, and the other were to laugh at him, and declare that he did not
understand it, tell me, I pray, which should we laugh at, him that said he knew, or
him that knew not? Evidently, the man that said that he knew. He that is
ignorant, therefore, is wiser than he that professes to know. And what again? If
any one were to profess to tell us how many cups of water the sea contains, and
another should profess his ignorance, is not the ignorance here again wiser than
the knowledge? Surely, vastly so. And why so? Because that knowledge itself is
but intense ignorance. For he indeed who says that he is ignorant, knows
something. And what is that? That it is incomprehensible to man. Yes, and this is
no small portion of knowledge. Whereas he that says he knows, he of all others
knows not what he says he knows, and is for this very reason utterly ridiculous.
Moral. Alas! How many things are there to teach us to bridle this
unseasonable impertinence and idle curiosity; and yet we refrain not, but are
curious about the lives of others; as, why one is a cripple, and why another is
poor. And so by this way of reasoning we shall fall into another sort of trifling
which is endless, as, why such an one is a woman? And, why all are not men?

Why there is such a thing as an ass? Why an ox? Why a dog? Why a wolf? Why
a stone? Why wood? And thus the argument will run out to an interminable
length. This in truth is the reason, why God has marked out limits to our
knowledge, and has laid them deep in nature. And mark, now, the excess of this
busy curiosity. For though we look up to so great a height as from earth to
heaven, and are not at all affected by it; yet as soon as ever we go up to the top
of a lofty tower, and have a mind to stoop over a little, and look down, a sort of
giddiness and dizziness immediately seizes us. Now, tell me the reason of this.
No, you could never find out a reason for it. Why is it that the eye possesses
greater power than other senses, and is caught by more distant objects? And one
might see it by comparison with the case of hearing. For no one will ever be able
to shout so loudly, as to fill the air as far as the eye can reach, nor to hear at so
great a distance. Why are not all the members of equal honor? Why have not all
received one function and one place? Paul also searched into these questions; or
rather he did not search into them, for he was wise; but where he comes by
chance upon this topic, he says, "Each one of them, has God set even as it has
pleased Him." [1 Corinthians 12:18] He assigns the whole to His will. And so
then let us only "give thanks for all things." "Wherefore," says he, "give thanks
for all things." This is the part of a well-disposed, of a wise, of an intelligent
servant; the opposite is that of a tattler, and an idler, and a busy-body. Do we not
see among servants, that those among them who are worthless and good for
nothing, are both tattlers, and triflers and that they pry into the concerns of their
masters, which they are desirous to conceal: whereas the intelligent and welldisposed look to one thing only, how they may fulfill their service. He that says
much, does nothing: as he that does much, never says a word out of season.
Hence Paul said, where he wrote concerning widows, "And they learn not only to
be idle, but tattlers also." [1 Timothy 5:13] Tell me, now, which is the widest
difference, between our age and that of children, or between God and men?
Between ourselves compared with gnats, or God compared with us? Plainly
between God and us. Why then do you busy yourself to such an extent in all