that by any means, when he had preached to others, he himself should be a
castaway" [1 Corinthians 9:27]; and he who had been so approved is afraid lest
he should become disapproved: what pardon shall we have who are already
disapproved, if we have no fear, but fulfill our Christianity as a custom, and for
form's sake. Let us then fear, beloved: "For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven." [Romans 1:18] Let us fear, for it "is revealed" not "against impiety"
only, but "against all unrighteousness." What is "against all unrighteousness"?
[Against all] both small and great.
2. In this passage he intimates the lovingkindness of God towards man: and
the teaching [of the Gospel] he calls "rain": and what he said above, "when for
the time ye ought to be teachers" [Hebrews 5:12], this he says here also. Indeed
in many places the Scripture calls the teaching "rain." For (it says) "I will
command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it" [Isaiah 5:6], speaking of "the
vineyard." The same which in another place it calls "a famine of bread, and a
thirst of water." [Amos 8:11] And again, "The river of God is full of waters."
[Psalm 65:9]
"For land," he says, "which drinks in the rain that comes oft upon it." Here
he shows that they received and drank in the word, yea and often enjoyed this,
and yet even so they were not profited. For if (he means) you had not been tilled,
if you had enjoyed no rains, the evil would not have been so great. For (it is
said) "If I had not come and spoken unto them they had not had sin." [John
15:22] But if you have often drunk and received [nourishment], wherefore have
you brought forth other things instead of fruits? For (it is said) "I waited that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth thorns." [Isaiah 5:2]
You see that everywhere the Scripture calls sins "thorns." For David also
says, "I was turned into mourning when a thorn was fixed in me." [Psalm 32:4,
so Septuagint] For it does not simply come on us, but is fixed in; and even if but
a little of it remain in, even if we take it not out entirely, that little of itself in like
manner causes pain, as in the case of a thorn. And why do I say, 'that little of
itself'? Even after it has been taken out, it leaves therein for a long time the pain

of the wound. And much care and treatment is necessary, that we may be
perfectly freed from it. For it is not enough merely to take away the sin, it is
necessary also to heal the wounded place.
But I fear however lest the things said apply to us more than to others.
"For," he says, "the earth which drinks in the rain that comes oft upon it." We
are ever drinking, ever hearing, but "when the sun is risen" [Matthew 13:6] we
straightway lose our moisture, and therefore bring forth thorns. What then are
the thorns? Let us hear Christ saying, that "the care of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful." [Matthew
13:22]
3. "For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes oft upon it," he says,
"and brings forth meet herbs." Because nothing is so meet as purity of life,
nothing so suitable as the best life, nothing so meet as virtue.
"And brings forth" (says he) "herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God." Here he says that God is the cause of all things,
giving the heathen a blow, who ascribed the production of fruits to the power of
the earth. For (he says) it is not the hands of the husbandman which stir up the
earth to bear fruits, but the command from God. Therefore he says, "receives
blessing from God."
And see how in speaking of the thorns, he said not, "bringing forth thorns,"
nor did he use this word expressive of what is useful; but what? "Bearing"
[literally "putting out"] "thorns," as if one should say, "forcing out," "throwing
out."
"Rejected" (he says) "and near unto cursing." Oh! How great consolation in
this word! For he said "near unto cursing," not "a curse." Now he that has not
yet fallen into a curse, but has come to be near [thereto], may also come to be far
off [therefrom].
And not by this only did he encourage them, but also by what follows. For
he did not say "rejected and near unto cursing," "which shall be burned," but
what? "Whose end is to be burned," if he continue [such] (he means) unto the