them, from whom we do not expect to receive.
4. "You have heard that it has been said, You shall love your neighbor, and
hate your enemy. But I say unto you, love your enemies, and pray for them which
despitefully use you: bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you.
That ye may become like your Father which is in Heaven; for He makes His sun
to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust."
See how He has set the highest pinnacle on our good deeds. For this is why
He teaches not only to endure a blow, but to offer the right cheek also; not only
to add the cloak to the coat, but to travel also two miles with him who compels
you to go one; in order that you might receive with all facility that which is
much more than these. "But what," one may say, "is more than these?" Not even
to count as an enemy him who is doing these things: or rather even somewhat
else more than this. For He said not, "do not hate," but "love;" He said not, "do
not injure," but "do good."
And if any one should examine accurately, he will see that even to these
things somewhat is added, much greater than they are. For neither did He simply
command to love, but to pray.
Do you see how many steps He has ascended, and how He has set us on the
very summit of virtue? Nay, mark it, numbering from the beginning. A first step
is, not to begin with injustice: a second, after he has begun, to vindicate one's
self by equal retaliation; a third, not to do unto him that is vexing us the same
that one has suffered, but to be quiet; a fourth, even to give one's self up to suffer
wrongfully; a fifth, to give up yet more than the other, who did the wrong,
wishes; a sixth, not to hate him who has done so; a seventh, even to love him; an
eighth, to do him good also; a ninth, to entreat God Himself on his behalf. Do
you see, what height of self-command? Wherefore glorious too, as we see, is the
reward which it has. That is, because the thing enjoined was great, and needed a
fervent soul, and much earnestness, He appoints for it also such a reward, as for
none of the former. For He makes not mention here of earth, as with respect to
the meek; nor of comfort and mercy, as with regard to the mourners and the

merciful; nor of the kingdom of Heaven; but of that which was more thrilling
than all; our becoming like God, in such wise as men might become so. For He
says, "That ye may become like your Father which is in Heaven."
And observe, I pray you, how neither in this place, nor in the preceding
parts, does He call Him His own Father, but in that instance, "God," and "a great
King," when He was discoursing about oaths, and here, "their Father." And this
He does, as reserving for the proper season what He had to say touching these
points.
5. Then, bringing the likeness yet closer, He says,
"Because He makes His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends
rain upon just and unjust." [Matthew 5:45]
"For He too, so far from hating," so He speaks, "even pours benefits on
those that insult Him." Yet surely in no respect is the case parallel, not only
because of the surpassing nature of His benefits, but also by reason of the
excellence of His dignity. For thou indeed art despised by your fellow-slave, but
He by His slave, who has also received ten thousand benefits from Him: and
thou indeed givest words, in praying for him, but He, deeds, very great and
marvellous, kindling the sun, and giving the annual showers. "Nevertheless, even
so I grant you to be mine equal, in such wise as it is possible for a man so to be."
Hate not then the man that does you wrong, who is procuring you such
good things, and bringing you to so great honor. Curse not him that uses you
despitefully; for so have you undergone the labor, but art deprived of the fruit;
you will bear the loss, but lose the reward; which is of the utmost folly, having
borne the more grievous, not to bear what is less than it. "But how," says one, "is
it possible for this to take place?" Having seen God become man, and descend
so far, and suffer so much for your sake, do you still inquire and doubt, how it is
possible to forgive your fellow-servants their injuriousness? Do you not hear
Him on the cross, saying, "Forgive them, for they know not what they do?"
[Luke 23:34] Do you not hear Paul, when he says, "He who is gone up on high,
and is sitting on the right hand intercedes for us?" [Romans 8:34] Do you see