man a proper principle of both operations, to wit, both an active and a potential intellect,
and neither of them must be separate in being (or physically distinct), from the soul of
man.
10. If the active intellect is an intelligence subsisting apart, it is clearly above the nature
of man. But any activity which a man exercises by mere virtue of a supernatural cause
is a supernatural activity, as the working of miracles, prophecy, and the like effects,
which are wrought by men in virtue of a divine endowment. Since then man cannot
understand except by means of the active intellect, it follows, supposing that intellect a
separately subsistent being, that to understand is not an operation proper and natural to
man; and thus man cannot be defined as intellectual or rational.
11. No agent works except by some power which is formally in the agent as a
constituent of its being. But the working both of potential and of active intellect is proper
to man: for man produces ideas by abstraction from phantasms, and receives in his
mind those ideas; operations which it would never occur to us to think of, did we not
experience them in ourselves. The principles therefore to which these operations are
attributable, namely, the potential and the active intellect, must be faculties formally
existing in us.
12. A being that cannot proceed to its own proper business without being moved thereto
by an external principle, is rather driven to act than acts of itself. This is the case with
irrational creatures. Sense, moved by an exterior sensible object, makes an impression
on the phantasy; and so in order the impression proceeds through all the faculties till it
reaches those which move the rest. Now the proper business of man is to understand;
and the prime mover in understanding is the active intellect, which makes intellectual
impressions whereby the potential intellect is impressed; which potential intellect, when
actualised, moves the will. If then the active intellect has a separate subsistence outside
man, the whole of man's activity depends on an extrinsic principle. Man then will not be
his own leader, but will be led by another; and thus will not be master of his own acts,
nor deserve praise nor blame; and the whole of moral science and political society will
perish: an awkward conclusion. Therefore the active intellect has no subsistence apart
from man.

Philosophy, I, p. 413: "Avicenna distinguishes a twofold development of our potential
understanding into actuality, the one common, depending on instruction, the other rare,
and dependent on immediate divine illumination."

## CHAPTER LXXVII--That it is not impossible for the Potential and the Active Intellect to
be united in the one Substance of the Soul
SOME one perhaps may think it impossible for one and the same substance, that of our
soul, to be in potentiality to receive all intellectual impressions (which is the function of
the potential intellect), and to actualise those impressions (which is the function of the
active intellect); since nothing acts as it is in potentiality to receive, but only as it is in
actual readiness to act. But, looking at the matter rightly, no inconvenience or difficulty
will be found in this view of the union of the active and potential intellect in the one
substance of the soul. For a thing may well be in potentiality in one respect and in
actuality in another; and this we find to be the condition of the intellectual soul in its
relation to phantasms, or impressions in phantasy. For the intellectual soul has
something in actuality, to which the phantasm is in potentiality; and on the other
hand the intellectual soul potentiality that which is actually found in the phantasms.
For the substance of the human soul has the attribute of immateriality: but it is not
thereby assimilated to this or that definite thing; and yet such assimilation is requisite for
our soul to know this or that thing definitely, since all cognition takes place by some
likeness of the object known being stamped on the knowing mind. Thus then the
intellectual soul remains in potentiality, open to the reception of definite impressions in
the likeness of things that come within our observation and knowledge, which are the
natures of sensible things. These definite natures of sensible things are represented to
us by phantasms, which however have not yet reached the stage of being objects of
intellect, seeing that they are likenesses of sensible things under material conditions,
which are individualising properties, -- and besides they are in bodily organs. They are
therefore not actual objects of understanding; and yet since in the case of this man [or
other sensible object], whose likeness is represented by phantasms, it is possible to fix
upon a universal nature stripped of all individualising conditions, these phantasms are
potentially intelligible. Thus then they have a potentially intelligible being, but an actually
definite likeness to things, whereas in the intellectual soul, as we saw, the situation was
the other way about. There is then in the intellectual soul a power exercising its activity
upon phantasms, making them actual objects of understanding; and this power of the
soul is called the active intellect. There is also in the soul a power that is potentially
open to definite impressions of sensible things; and this power is the potential intellect.
But the intellectual soul does not lie open to receive impressions of the likenesses of
things that are in phantasms in the way that the likeness exists in the phantasm, but
according as those likenesses are raised to a higher stage, by being abstracted from
individualising material conditions and rendered actual objects, or terms, of
understanding. And therefore the action of the active intellect upon the phantasms
precedes their being received into the potential intellect; and thus the prime agency is
not attributable to the phantasms, but to the active intellect.
There are some animals that see better by night than by day, because they have weak
eyes, which are stimulated by a little light, but dazzled by much. And the case is similar
with our understanding, which is "to the clearest truths as the bat's eye to the sun"
(Aristotle, Metaph. I, Appendix): hence the little intellectual light that is connatural to us