SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.95, C.3.

demons" [Augustine, De Doctr. Christ.; see above Question 92,
Article 2]. Wherefore Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 6): "The
demons are allured by means of creatures, which were made, not by
them, but by God. They are enticed by various objects differing
according to the various things in which they delight, not as animals
by meat, but as spirits by signs, such as are to each one's liking, by
means of various kinds of stones, herbs, trees, animals, songs and
rites."
Reply to Objection 1: There is nothing superstitious or unlawful in
employing natural things simply for the purpose of causing certain
effects such as they are thought to have the natural power of
producing. But if in addition there be employed certain characters,
words, or any other vain observances which clearly have no efficacy
by nature, it will be superstitious and unlawful.
Reply to Objection 2: The natural forces of natural bodies result from
their substantial forms which they acquire through the influence of
heavenly bodies; wherefore through this same influence they
acquire certain active forces. On the other hand the forms of artificial
bodies result from the conception of the craftsman; and since they
are nothing else but composition, order and shape, as stated in
Phys. i, 5, they cannot have a natural active force. Consequently, no
force accrues to them from the influence of heavenly bodies, in so
far as they are artificial, but only in respect of their natural matter.
Hence it is false, what Porphyry held, according to Augustine (De
Civ. Dei x, 11), that "by herbs, stones, animals, certain particular
sounds, words, shapes and devices, or again by certain movements
of the stars observed in the course of the heavens it is possible for
men to fashion on earth forces capable of carrying into effect the
various dispositions of the stars," as though the results of the magic
arts were to be ascribed to the power of the heavenly bodies. In fact
as Augustine adds (De Civ. Dei x, 11), "all these things are to be
ascribed to the demons, who delude the souls that are subject to
them."
Wherefore those images called astronomical also derive their
efficacy from the actions of the demons: a sign of this is that it is
requisite to inscribe certain characters on them which do not
conduce to any effect naturally, since shape is not a principle of
natural action. Yet astronomical images differ from necromantic
images in this, that the latter include certain explicit invocations and
trickery, wherefore they come under the head of explicit agreements

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.95, C.3.

made with the demons: whereas in the other images there are tacit
agreements by means of tokens in certain shapes or characters.
Reply to Objection 3: It belongs to the domain of the divine majesty,
to Whom the demons are subject, that God should employ them to
whatever purpose He will. But man has not been entrusted with
power over the demons, to employ them to whatsoever purpose he
will; on the contrary, it is appointed that he should wage war against
the demons. Hence in no way is it lawful for man to make use of the
demons' help by compacts either tacit or express.