Since therefore God has nothing in Him of potentiality, but is pure
act, His intellect and its object are altogether the same; so that He
neither is without the intelligible species, as is the case with our
intellect when it understands potentially; nor does the intelligible
species differ from the substance of the divine intellect, as it differs
in our intellect when it understands actually; but the intelligible
species itself is the divine intellect itself, and thus God understands
Himself through Himself.
Reply to Objection 1: Return to its own essence means only that a
thing subsists in itself. Inasmuch as the form perfects the matter by
giving it existence, it is in a certain way diffused in it; and it returns
to itself inasmuch as it has existence in itself. Therefore those
cognitive faculties which are not subsisting, but are the acts of
organs, do not know themselves, as in the case of each of the
senses; whereas those cognitive faculties which are subsisting,
know themselves; hence it is said in De Causis that, "whoever knows
his essence returns to it." Now it supremely belongs to God to be
self-subsisting. Hence according to this mode of speaking, He
supremely returns to His own essence, and knows Himself.
Reply to Objection 2: Movement and passion are taken equivocally,
according as to understand is described as a kind of movement or
passion, as stated in De Anima iii. For to understand is not a
movement that is an act of something imperfect passing from one to
another, but it is an act, existing in the agent itself, of something
perfect. Likewise that the intellect is perfected by the intelligible
object, i.e. is assimilated to it, this belongs to an intellect which is
sometimes in potentiality; because the fact of its being in a state of
potentiality makes it differ from the intelligible object and assimilates
it thereto through the intelligible species, which is the likeness of the
thing understood, and makes it to be perfected thereby, as
potentiality is perfected by act. On the other hand, the divine
intellect, which is no way in potentiality, is not perfected by the
intelligible object, nor is it assimilated thereto, but is its own
perfection, and its own intelligible object.
Reply to Objection 3: Existence in nature does not belong to primary
matter, which is a potentiality, unless it is reduced to act by a form.
Now our passive intellect has the same relation to intelligible objects
as primary matter has to natural things; for it is in potentiality as
regards intelligible objects, just as primary matter is to natural
things. Hence our passive intellect can be exercised concerning

intelligible objects only so far as it is perfected by the intelligible
species of something; and in that way it understands itself by an
intelligible species, as it understands other things: for it is manifest
that by knowing the intelligible object it understands also its own act
of understanding, and by this act knows the intellectual faculty. But
God is a pure act in the order of existence, as also in the order of
intelligible objects; therefore He understands Himself through
Himself.