thing is alone sufficient to attract you."
Now, thus saying, He drew them unto Him the more. For he indeed that
uses compulsion oftens turns men away, but he that leaves the hearer to choose
attracts him more. For soothing is a mightier thing than force. Wherefore even
He Himself said, "If any man will." "For great," says He, "are the good things
which I give you, and such as for men even to run to them of their own accord.
For neither if one were giving gold, and offering a treasure, would he invite with
force. And if that invitation be without compulsion, much more this, to the good
things in the Heavens. Since if the nature of the thing persuade you not to run,
you are not worthy to receive it at all, nor if you should receive it, will you well
know what you have received."
Wherefore Christ compels not, but urges, sparing us. For since they seemed
to be murmuring much, being secretly disturbed at the saying, He says, "No need
of disturbance or of trouble. If you do not account what I have mentioned to be a
cause of innumerable blessings, even when befalling yourselves, I use no force,
nor do I compel, but if any be willing to follow, him I call."
"For do not by any means imagine that this is your following of me; I mean,
what ye now do attending upon me. You have need of many toils, many dangers,
if you are to come after me. For you ought not, O Peter, because you have
confessed me Son of God, therefore only to expect crowns, and to suppose this
enough for your salvation, and for the future to enjoy security, as having done
all. For although it be in my power, as Son of God, to hinder you from having
any trial at all of those hardships; yet such is not my will, for your sake, that you
may yourself too contribute something, and be more approved."
For so, if one were a judge at the games, and had a friend in the lists, he
would not wish to crown him by favor only, but also for his own toils; and for
this reason especially, because he loves him. Even so Christ also; whom He most
loves, those He most of all will have to approve themselves by their own means
also, and not from His help alone.
But see how at the same time He makes His saying not a grievous one. For

He does by no means compass them only with His terror, but He also puts forth
the doctrine generally to the world, saying, "If any one will," be it woman or
man, ruler or subject, let him come this way.
2. And though he seem to have spoken but one single thing, yet His sayings
are three, "Let him renounce himself," and "Let him bear his cross," and "Let him
follow me;" and two of them are joined together, but the one is put by itself.
But let us see first what it can be to deny one's self. Let us learn first what it
is to deny another, and then we shall know what it may be to deny one's self.
What then is it to deny another? He that is denying another—for example, either
brother, or servant, or whom you will,— should he see him either beaten, or
bound, or led to execution, or whatever he may suffer, stands not by him, does
not help him, is not moved, feels nothing for him, as being once for all alienated
from him. Thus then He will have us disregard our own body, so that whether
men scourge, or banish, or burn, or whatever they do, we may not spare it. For
this is to spare it. Since fathers too then spare their offspring, when committing
them to teachers, they command not to spare them.
So also Christ; He said not, "Let him not spare himself," but very strictly,
"Let him renounce himself;" that is, let him have nothing to do with himself, but
give himself up to all dangers and conflicts; and let him so feel, as though
another were suffering it all.
And He said not, "Let him deny," but "Let him renounce;" even by this
small addition intimating again, how very far it goes. For this latter is more than
the former.
"And let him take up his cross." This arises out of the other. For to hinder
your supposing that words, and insults, and reproaches are to be the limits of our
self-renunciation, He says also how far one ought to renounce one's self; that is,
unto death, and that a reproachful death. Therefore He said not, "Let him
renounce himself unto death," but, "Let him take up his cross;" setting forth the
reproachful death; and that not once, nor twice, but throughout all life one ought
so to do. "Yea," says He, "bear about this death continually, and day by day be