1 Corinthians 9:21
"To them that are without law, as without law." These were neither Jews,
nor Christians, nor Greeks; but 'outside of the Law,' as was Cornelius, and if
there were any others like him. For among these also making his appearance, he
used to assume many of their ways. But some say that he hints at his discourse
with the Athenians from the inscription on the altar, and that so he says, "to them
that are without law, as without law."
Then, lest any should think that the matter was a change of mind, he added,
"not being without law to God, but under law to Christ;" i.e., "so far from being
without law, I am not simply under the Law, but I have that law which is much
more exalted than the older one, viz. that of the Spirit and of grace." Wherefore
also he adds, "to Christ." Then again, having made them confident of his
judgment, he states also the gain of such condescension, saying, "that I might
gain them that are without law." And every where he brings forward the cause of
his condescension, and stops not even here, but says,

1 Corinthians 9:22
"To the weak became I weak, that I might gain the weak:" in this part
coming to their case, with a view to which also all these things have been
spoken. However, those were much greater things, but this more to the purpose;
whence also he has placed it after them. Indeed he did the same thing likewise in
his Epistle to the Romans, when he was finding fault about meats; and so in
many other places.
Next, not to waste time by naming all severally, he says, "I have become all
things to all men, that I may by all means save some."
Do you see how far it is carried? "I have become all things to all men," not
expecting, however, to save all, but that I may save though it be but a few. And
so great care and service have I undergone, as one naturally would who was
about saving all, far however from hoping to gain all: which was truly
magnanimous and a proof of burning zeal. Since likewise the sower sowed every
where, and saved not all the seed, notwithstanding he did his part. And having
mentioned the fewness of those who are saved, again, adding, "by all means," he
consoled those to whom this was a grief. For though it be not possible that all the
seed should be saved, nevertheless it cannot be that all should perish. Wherefore
he said, "by all means," because one so ardently zealous must certainly have
some success.

1 Corinthians 9:23
"And I do all things for the Gospel's sake, that I may be a joint partaker
thereof."
That is, that I may seem also myself to have added some contribution of my
own, and may partake of the crowns laid up for the faithful. For as he spoke of
"living of the Gospel," i.e., of the believers; so also here, "that I may be a joint
partaker in the Gospel, that I may be able to partake with them that have
believed in the Gospel." Do you perceive his humility, how in the recompense of
rewards he places himself as one of the many, though he had exceeded all in his
labors? Whence it is evident that he would in his reward also. Nevertheless, he
claims not to enjoy the first prize, but is content if so be he may partake with the
others in the crowns laid up for them. But these things he said, not because he
did this for any reward, but that hereby at least he might draw them on, and by
these hopes might induce them to do all things for their brethren's sake. Do you
see his wisdom! Do you see the excellency of his perfection? How he wrought
beyond the things commanded, not receiving when it was lawful to receive. Do
you see the exceeding greatness of his condescension? How he that was "under
law to Christ," and kept that highest law, "to them that were without law," was
"as one without law," to the Jews, as a Jew, in either kind showing himself
preeminent, and surpassing all.
6. This also do thou, and think not being eminent, that you lower yourself,
when for your brother's sake you submit to some abasement. For this is not to
fall, but to descend. For he who falls, lies prostrate, hardly to be raised up again;
but he who descends shall also rise again with much advantage. As also Paul
descended indeed alone, but ascended with the whole world: not acting a part,
for he would not have sought the gain of them that are saved had he been acting.
Since the hypocrite seeks men's perdition, and feigns, that he may receive, not