97. Those who have fallen into this worldliness look on from above and afar, they reject the
prophecy of their brothers and sisters, they discredit those who raise questions, they constantly
point out the mistakes of others and they are obsessed by appearances. Their hearts are open
only to the limited horizon of their own immanence and interests, and as a consequence they
neither learn from their sins nor are they genuinely open to forgiveness. This is a tremendous
corruption disguised as a good. We need to avoid it by making the Church constantly go out from
herself, keeping her mission focused on Jesus Christ, and her commitment to the poor. God save
us from a worldly Church with superficial spiritual and pastoral trappings! This stifling worldliness
can only be healed by breathing in the pure air of the Holy Spirit who frees us from self-
centredness cloaked in an outward religiosity bereft of God. Let us not allow ourselves to be
robbed of the Gospel!

No to warring among ourselves

98. How many wars take place within the people of God and in our different communities! In our
neighbourhoods and in the workplace, how many wars are caused by envy and jealousy, even
among Christians! Spiritual worldliness leads some Christians to war with other Christians who
stand in the way of their quest for power, prestige, pleasure and economic security. Some are
even no longer content to live as part of the greater Church community but stoke a spirit of
exclusivity, creating an “inner circle”. Instead of belonging to the whole Church in all its rich variety,
they belong to this or that group which thinks itself different or special.

99. Our world is being torn apart by wars and violence, and wounded by a widespread
individualism which divides human beings, setting them against one another as they pursue their
own well-being. In various countries, conflicts and old divisions from the past are re-emerging. I

especially ask Christians in communities throughout the world to offer a radiant and attractive
witness of fraternal communion. Let everyone admire how you care for one another, and how you
encourage and accompany one another: “By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if
you have love for one another” (Jn 13:35). This was Jesus’ heartfelt prayer to the Father: “That
they may all be one... in us... so that the world may believe” (Jn 17:21). Beware of the temptation
of jealousy! We are all in the same boat and headed to the same port! Let us ask for the grace to
rejoice in the gifts of each, which belong to all.

100. Those wounded by historical divisions find it difficult to accept our invitation to forgiveness
and reconciliation, since they think that we are ignoring their pain or are asking them to give up
their memory and ideals. But if they see the witness of authentically fraternal and reconciled
communities, they will find that witness luminous and attractive. It always pains me greatly to
discover how some Christian communities, and even consecrated persons, can tolerate different
forms of enmity, division, calumny, defamation, vendetta, jealousy and the desire to impose
certain ideas at all costs, even to persecutions which appear as veritable witch hunts. Whom are
we going to evangelize if this is the way we act?