shown above (Question 19, Article 4), acts by an intellectual form.
Since, therefore, it is not against God's unity and simplicity to
understand many things, as was shown above (Question 15, Article
2), it follows that, although He is one, He can make many things.
Reply to Objection 2: This reason would apply to the representation
which reflects the exemplar perfectly, and which is multiplied by
reason of matter only; hence the uncreated image, which is perfect,
is only one. But no creature represents the first exemplar perfectly,
which is the divine essence; and, therefore, it can be represented by
many things. Still, according as ideas are called exemplars, the
plurality of ideas corresponds in the divine mind to the plurality of
things.
Reply to Objection 3: In speculative things the medium of
demonstration, which demonstrates the conclusion perfectly, is one
only; whereas probable means of proof are many. Likewise when
operation is concerned, if the means be equal, so to speak, to the
end, one only is sufficient. But the creature is not such a means to
its end, which is God; and hence the multiplication of creatures is
necessary.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the inequality of things is from God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the inequality of things is not from
God. For it belongs to the best to produce the best. But among
things that are best, one is not greater than another. Therefore, it
belongs to God, Who is the Best, to make all things equal.
Objection 2: Further, equality is the effect of unity (Metaph. v, text
20). But God is one. Therefore, He has made all things equal.
Objection 3: Further, it is the part of justice to give unequal to
unequal things. But God is just in all His works. Since, therefore, no
inequality of things is presupposed to the operation whereby He
gives being to things, it seems that He has made all things equal.
On the contrary, It is said (Ecclus. 33:7): "Why does one day excel
another, and one light another, and one year another year, one sun
another sun? By the knowledge of the Lord they were
distinguished."
I answer that, When Origen wished to refute those who said that the
distinction of things arose from the contrary principles of good and
evil, he said that in the beginning all things were created equal by
God. For he asserted that God first created only the rational
creatures and all equal; and that inequality arose in them from freewill, some being turned to God more and some less, and others
turned more and others less away from God. And so those rational
creatures which were turned to God by free-will, were promoted to
the order of angels according to the diversity of merits. And those
who were turned away from God were bound down to bodies
according to the diversity of their sin; and he said this was the cause
of the creation and diversity of bodies. But according to this opinion,
it would follow that the universality of bodily creatures would not be
the effect of the goodness of God as communicated to creatures, but
it would be for the sake of the punishment of sin, which is contrary
to what is said: "God saw all the things that He had made, and they
were very good" (Gn. 1:31). And, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ii,
3): "What can be more foolish than to say that the divine Architect
provided this one sun for the one world, not to be an ornament to its
beauty, nor for the benefit of corporeal things, but that it happened
through the sin of one soul; so that, if a hundred souls had sinned,