own, being so affected towards all, as really towards members? Who now would
be able to break forth into such speech? Or rather, who will ever be able to have
such a thought? He did not require them to be thankful to him for the trials
which he suffered for them, but he was thankful to them that they were not
moved on account of his trials. As if he had said, that to you rather than to us
was injury done by those trials; you were tempted rather than we, you who
suffered nothing, rather than we who suffered. Because, he says, Timothy
brought us these good tidings, we feel nothing of our sorrows, but were
comforted in all our affliction; not in this affliction only. For nothing besides can
touch a good teacher, as long as the affairs of his disciples go on to his mind.
Through you, he says, we were comforted; you confirmed us. And yet the
reverse was the case. For that when suffering they did not yield, but stood
manfully, was sufficient to confirm the disciples. But he reverses the whole
matter, and turns the encomium over to them. You have anointed us, he says, you
have caused us to breathe again; you have not suffered us to feel our trials. And
he has not said, we breathe again, nor we are comforted, but what? "Now we
live," showing that he thinks nothing is either trial or death, but their stumbling,
whereas their advancement was even life. How else could any one have set forth
either the sorrow for the weakness of one's disciples, or the joy? He has not said
we rejoice, but "we live," the life to come.
So that without this we do not even think it life to live. So ought teachers to
be affected, so disciples; and there will be nothing at any time amiss. Then
further softening the expression, see what he says,
Ver. 9, 10. "For what thanksgiving can we render again unto God for you,
for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God; night and day
praying exceedingly that we may see your face, and may perfect that which is
lacking in your faith?"
Not only, he says, are you the causes of life to us, but also of much joy, and
so much that we cannot worthily give thanks to God. Your good behavior, he
says, we consider to be the gift of God. Such kindnesses have you shown to us,

that we think it to be of God; yea, rather, and it is of God. For such a disposition
of mind comes not of a human soul or carefulness.
"Night and day," he says, "praying exceedingly." This too is a sign of joy.
For as any husbandman, hearing concerning his land that has been tilled by
himself, that it is burdened with ears of grain, longs with his own eyes to see so
pleasant a sight, so Paul to see Macedonia. "Praying exceedingly." Observe the
excess; "that we may see your face, and may perfect that which is lacking in
your faith."
Here there is a great question. For if now you live, because they stand fast,
and Timothy brought you "glad tidings of their faith and love," and you are full
of so much joy as not to be able worthily to give thanks to God, how do you say
here that there are deficiencies in their faith? Were those then the words of
flattery? By no means, far be it. For previously he testified that they endured
many conflicts, and were no worse affected than the Churches in Judæa. What
then is it? They had not enjoyed the full benefit of his teaching, nor learned all
that it behooved them to learn. And this he shows toward the end. Perhaps there
had been questionings among them concerning the Resurrection, and there were
many who troubled them, not by temptations, nor by dangers, but by acting the
part of teachers. This is what he says is lacking in their faith, and for this reason,
he has so explained himself, and has not said, that you should be confirmed,
where indeed he feared concerning the faith itself, "I have sent," he says,
"Timothy 'to confirm you,'" but here, "to perfect that which is lacking," which is
rather a matter of teaching than of confirming. As also he says elsewhere, "that
you may be perfected unto every good work." [From 1 Corinthians 1:10, or 2
Timothy 3:17] Now the perfected thing is one in which there is some little
deficiency: for it is that which is brought to perfection.
Ver. 11, 12. "Now may our God and Father Himself, and our Lord Jesus
Christ direct our way unto you: and the Lord make you to increase and abound
in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we also do toward you."
This is a proof of excessive love, that he not only prays for them by