John 15:17
"These things I command you, that you love one another."
That is, "It is not to upbraid, that I tell you that I lay down My life for you,
or that I ran to meet you, but in order to lead you into friendship." Then, since
the being persecuted and insulted by the many, was a grievous and intolerable
thing, and enough to humble even a lofty soul, therefore, after having said ten
thousand things first, Christ entered upon this matter. Having first smoothed
their minds, He thus proceeds to these points, showing that these things too were
for their exceeding advantage, as He had also shown that the others were. For as
He had told them that they ought not to grieve, but rather to rejoice, "because I
go to the Father," (since He did this not as deserting but as greatly loving them,)
so here also He shows that they ought to rejoice, not grieve. And observe how
He effects this. He said not, "I know that the action is grievous, but bear for My
sake, since for My sake also ye suffer," for this reason was not yet sufficient to
console them; wherefore letting this pass, He puts forward another. And what is
that? It is that this thing would be a sure proof of their former virtue. "And, on
the contrary, you ought to grieve, not because you are hated now but if you were
likely to be loved"; for this He implies by saying,

John 15:19
"If you were of the world, the world would love its own."
So that had ye been loved it would be very clear that you had shown forth
signs of wickedness. Then, when by saying this first, He did not effect his
purpose, He goes on again with the discourse.

John 15:20
"The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted Me, they will
also persecute you."
He showed that in this point they would be most His imitators. For while
Christ was in the flesh, men had war with Him, but when He was translated, the
battle came in the next place upon them. Then because owing to their fewness
they were terrified at being about to encounter the attack of so great a multitude,
He raises their souls by telling them that it was a special subject of joy that they
were hated by them; "For so you shall share My sufferings. You should not
therefore be troubled, for you are not better than I," as I before told you, "The
servant is not greater than his lord." Then there is also a third source of
consolation, that the Father also is insulted together with them.

John 15:21
"But all these things will they do unto you for My Name's sake, because they
know not Him that sent Me."
That is, "they insult Him also." Besides this, depriving those others of
excuse, and putting also another source of comfort, He says,

John 15:22
"If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin."
Showing that they shall do unjustly both what they do against Him and
against them. "Why then did You bring us into such calamities? Did You not
foreknow the wars, the hatred?" Therefore again He says,