The old Latin translation is: "Sed non relictis ipsis patribus." Grabe would cancel non, while Massuet pleads for retaining
it. Harvey conjectures that the translator perhaps mistook !"# $%&'()**+%,% for !"# $%-(&(&'*+%,%. We have followed Massuet,
though we should prefer deleting non, were it not found in all the mss.

Gen. iv. 7, after LXX. version.

in practice: he tyrannized over and slew him; God subjecting the just to the unjust, that the former
might be proved as the just one by the things which he suffered, and the latter detected as the unjust
by those which he perpetrated. And he was not softened even by this, nor did he stop short with
that evil deed; but being asked where his brother was, he said, "I know not; am I my brother's
keeper?" extending and aggravating [his] wickedness by his answer. For if it is wicked to slay a
brother, much worse is it thus insolently and irreverently to reply to the omniscient God as if he
could battle Him. And for this he did himself bear a curse about with him, because he gratuitously
brought an offering of sin, having had no reverence for God, nor being put to confusion by the act
of fratricide.
5. The case of Adam, however, had no analogy with this, but was altogether different. For,
having been beguiled by another under the pretext of immortality, he is immediately seized with
terror, and hides himself; not as if he were able to escape from God; but, in a state of confusion at
having transgressed His command, he feels unworthy to appear before and to hold converse with
God. Now, "the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom;" the sense of sin leads to repentance,
and God bestows His compassion upon those who are penitent. For [Adam] showed his repentance
by his conduct, through means of the girdle [which he used], covering himself with fig-leaves,
while there were many other leaves, which would have irritated his body in a less degree. He,
however, adopted a dress conformable to his disobedience, being awed by the fear of God; and
resisting the erring, the lustful propensity of his flesh (since he had lost his natural disposition and
child-like mind, and had come to the knowledge of evil things), he girded a bridle of continence
upon himself and his wife, fearing God, and waiting for His coming, and indicating, as it were,
some such thing [as follows]: Inasmuch as, he says, I have by disobedience lost that robe of sanctity
which I had from the Spirit, I do now also acknowledge that I am deserving of a covering of this
nature, which affords no gratification, but which gnaws and frets the body. And he would no doubt
have retained this clothing for ever, thus humbling himself, if God, who is merciful, had not clothed
them with tunics of skins instead of fig-leaves. For this purpose, too, He interrogates them, that the
blame might light upon the woman; and again, He interrogates her, that she might convey the blame
to the serpent. For she related what had occurred. "The serpent," says she, "beguiled me, and I did
eat." But He put no question to the serpent; for He knew that he had been the prime mover in
the guilty deed; but He pronounced the curse upon him in the first instance, that it might fall upon
man with a mitigated rebuke. For God detested him who had led man astray, but by degrees, and
little by little, He showed compassion to him who had been beguiled.
including the murder of all near relations. All the editors have supposed that the original word was !"#$%&'(&)*+, which has
here been adopted.