covered with ornaments, while the (husband's) heart is pressed by anxiety, what
profit, what kind of advantage is there? The one being grieved allows not the
marvelous beauty of the other to be seen. For you know, you know that though a
man see the most beautiful of all women, he cannot feel pleasure at the sight
while his soul is sorrowful, because in order to feel pleasure a man must first
rejoice and be glad. And when all his gold is heaped together to adorn a woman's
body, while there is distress in his dwelling, her partner can have no pleasure. So
that if we desire to be agreeable to our husbands, let us give them pleasure; and
we shall give them pleasure, if we remove our ornaments and fineries. For all
these things at the actual time of marriage appear to afford some delight, but this
afterwards fades by time. Since if when the heaven is so beautiful, and the sun,
to which you can not name any body that is equal, so bright, we admire them
less from habitually seeing them, how shall we admire a body tricked out with
gewgaws? These things I say, desiring that you should be adorned with that
wholesome adornment which Paul enjoined; "Not with gold, or pearls, or costly
array; but (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works." [1
Timothy 2:9-10] But do you wish to please strangers, and to be praised by them?
Then assuredly this is not the desire of a modest woman. However, if you wish
it, by doing as I have said, you will have strangers also to love you much, and to
praise your modesty. For the woman who adorns her person no virtuous and
sober person will praise, but the intemperate and lascivious; nay, rather neither
will these praise her, but will even speak vilely of her, having their eyes inflamed
by the wantonness displayed about her; but the other all will approve, both the
one sort and the other, because they receive no harm from her, but even
instruction in heavenly wisdom. And great shall be her praise from men, and
great her reward with God. After such adornment then let us strive, that we may
live here without fear, and may obtain the blessings which are to come; which
may we all obtain through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 62 on the Gospel of John
John 11:1-2
"Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany, of the town of Mary
and her sister Martha. It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment."
1. Many men, when they see any of those who are pleasing to God suffering
anything terrible, as, for instance, having fallen into sickness, or poverty, and any
other the like, are offended, not knowing that to those especially dear to God it
belongs to endure these things; since Lazarus also was one of the friends of
Christ, and was sick. This at least they who sent said, "Behold, he whom You
love is sick." But let us consider the passage from the beginning. "A certain
man," It says, "was sick, Lazarus of Bethany." Not without a cause nor by chance
has the writer mentioned whence Lazarus was, but for a reason which he will
afterwards tell us. At present let us keep to the passage before us. He also for our
advantage informs us who were Lazarus' sisters; and, moreover, what Mary had
more (than the other), going on to say, "It was that Mary which anointed the
Lord with ointment." Here some doubting say, "How did the Lord endure that a
woman should do this?" In the first place then it is necessary to understand, that
this is not the harlot mentioned in Matthew [Matthew 26:7], or the one in Luke
[Luke 7:37], but a different person; they were harlots full of many vices, but she
was both grave and earnest; for she showed her earnestness about the
entertainment of Christ. The Evangelist also means to show, that the sisters too
loved Him, yet He allowed Lazarus to die. But why did they not, like the
centurion and the nobleman, leave their sick brother, and come to Christ, instead
of sending? They were very confident in Christ, and had towards Him a strong
familiar feeling. Besides, they were weak women, and oppressed with grief; for
that they acted not in this way as thinking slightly of Him, they afterwards