But they do not sit here only on this account, but that they may also make
you compassionate, and you may be inclined to pity; that you may admire the
lovingkindness of God; for if God is not ashamed of them, but has set them in
His vestibules, much less be thou ashamed; that you may not be highminded on
account of palaces upon earth. Be not ashamed, when called upon by a poor
man; and if he should draw near, if he should catch your knees, shake him not
off. For these are certain admirable dogs of the Royal Courts. For I do not call
them dogs as dishonoring them— far be it— but even highly commending them.
They guard the King's court. Therefore feed them. For the honor passes on to the
King. There all is pride—I speak of the palaces on earth— here all is humility.
You learn especially from the very vestibules that human beings are nothing.
From the very persons who sit before them, you are taught that God delights not
in riches. For their sitting and assembling there is all but an admonition, sending
forth a clear voice regarding the nature of all men, and saying that human things
are nothing, that they are shadow and smoke. If riches were a good, God would
not have seated the poor before His own vestibule. And if He admits rich people
also, wonder not for He admits them not on this account, that they may continue
rich, but that they may be delivered from their encumbrance. For hear what
Christ says to them, "You cannot serve God and Mammon" [Matthew 6:24]; and
again, "It is hard for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven"; and again,
"It is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heaven." [Matthew 19:23-24] On this account He receives
the rich, that they may hear these words, that they may long for the eternal
riches, that they may covet things in heaven. And why do you wonder that He
does not disdain to seat such at His vestibules? For He does not disdain to call
them to His spiritual Table, and make them partakers of that Feast. But the
maimed and the lame, the old man that is clothed in rags and filth, and has
catarrh, comes to partake of that Table with the young and the beautiful, and
with him even who is clothed in purple, and whose head is encircled with a
diadem— and is thought worthy of the spiritual Feast, and both enjoy the same

benefits, and there is no difference.
Does then Christ not disdain to call them to His Table with the king
(Emperor)— for both are called together— and you perhaps disdain even to be
seen giving to the poor, or even conversing with them? Fie upon your
haughtiness and pride! See that we suffer not the same with the rich man
formerly. He disdained even to look upon Lazarus, and did not allow him to
share his roof or shelter, but he was without, cast away at his gate, nor was he
even vouchsafed a word from him. But see how, when fallen into straits, and in
want of his help, he failed to obtain it. For if we are ashamed of those of whom
Christ is not ashamed, we are ashamed of Christ, being ashamed of His friends.
Let your table be filled with the maimed and the lame. Through them Christ
comes, not through the rich. Perhaps you laugh at hearing this; therefore, that
you may not think it is my word, hear Christ Himself speaking, that you may not
laugh, but shudder: "When you make a dinner or a supper, call not your friends
nor your brethren, nor your kinsmen, nor rich neighbors; lest haply they also bid
you again, and a recompense be made you. But when you make a feast, bid the
poor, the maimed, the halt, the blind; and you shall be blessed; because they
have not wherewith to recompense you: for you shall be recompensed in the
Resurrection of the just." [Luke 14:12-14] And greater is your glory even here, if
you love that. For from the former class of guests arise envy, and malice, and
slanders, and revilings, and much fear lest anything unbecoming should occur.
And you stand like a servant before his master, if those who are invited are your
superiors, fearing their criticism and their lips. But in the case of these there is
nothing of this sort, but whatever you bring them, they receive all with pleasure;
and ample is the applause, brighter the glory, higher the admiration. All they that
hear do not so much applaud the former, as the latter. But if you disbelieve, you
who are rich, make the trial, you who invite generals and governors. Invite the
poor, and fill your table from them, and see if you are not applauded by all, if
you are not loved by all, if all do not hold you as a father. For of those feasts
there is no advantage, but for these heaven is in store, and the good things of