FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.3.

not, to gain that end. But imperfect knowledge of the end leads to the
imperfect voluntary; inasmuch as the agent apprehends the end, but
does not deliberate, and is moved to the end at once. Wherefore the
voluntary in its perfection belongs to none but the rational nature:
whereas the imperfect voluntary is within the competency of even
irrational animals.
Reply to Objection 1: The will is the name of the rational appetite;
and consequently it cannot be in things devoid of reason. But the
word "voluntary" is derived from "voluntas" [will], and can be
extended to those things in which there is some participation of will,
by way of likeness thereto. It is thus that voluntary action is
attributed to irrational animals, in so far as they are moved to an end,
through some kind of knowledge.
Reply to Objection 2: The fact that man is master of his actions, is
due to his being able to deliberate about them: for since the
deliberating reason is indifferently disposed to opposite things, the
will can be inclined to either. But it is not thus that voluntariness is
in irrational animals, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Praise and blame are the result of the voluntary
act, wherein is the perfect voluntary; such as is not to be found in
irrational animals.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there can be voluntariness without any

act?
Objection 1: It would seem that voluntariness cannot be without any
act. For that is voluntary which proceeds from the will. But nothing
can proceed from the will, except through some act, at least an act of
the will. Therefore there cannot be voluntariness without act.
Objection 2: Further, just as one is said to wish by an act of the will,
so when the act of the will ceases, one is said not to wish. But not to
wish implies involuntariness, which is contrary to voluntariness.
Therefore there can be nothing voluntary when the act of the will
ceases.
Objection 3: Further, knowledge is essential to the voluntary, as
stated above (Articles 1,2). But knowledge involves an act. Therefore
voluntariness cannot be without some act.
On the contrary, The word "voluntary" is applied to that of which we
are masters. Now we are masters in respect of to act and not to act,
to will and not to will. Therefore just as to act and to will are
voluntary, so also are not to act and not to will.
I answer that, Voluntary is what proceeds from the will. Now one
thing proceeds from another in two ways. First, directly; in which
sense something proceeds from another inasmuch as this other
acts; for instance, heating from heat. Secondly, indirectly; in which
sense something proceeds from another through this other not
acting; thus the sinking of a ship is set down to the helmsman, from
his having ceased to steer. But we must take note that the cause of
what follows from want of action is not always the agent as not
acting; but only then when the agent can and ought to act. For if the
helmsman were unable to steer the ship or if the ship's helm be not
entrusted to him, the sinking of the ship would not be set down to
him, although it might be due to his absence from the helm.
Since, then, the will by willing and acting, is able, and sometimes
ought, to hinder not-willing and not-acting; this not-willing and notacting is imputed to, as though proceeding from, the will. And thus it
is that we can have the voluntary without an act; sometimes without
outward act, but with an interior act; for instance, when one wills not