accusation and remembrance of sins contributes not a little to lessen their
magnitude. But there is another more prevailing way than this; to bear malice
against none of those who have offended against us, to forgive their trespasses to
all those who have trespassed against us. Will you learn a third? Hear Daniel,
saying, "Redeem your sins by almsdeeds, and your iniquities by showing mercy
to the poor." [Daniel 4:27, Septuagint] And there is another besides this;
constancy in prayer, and persevering attendance on the intercessions made with
God. In like manner fasting brings to us some, and that not small comfort and
release from sins committed, provided it be attended with kindness to others, and
quenches the vehemence of the wrath of God. [1 Timothy 2:1] For "water will
quench a blazing fire, and by almsdeeds sins are purged away." [Sirach 3:30,
Septuagint]
Let us then travel along all these ways; for if we give ourselves wholly to
these employments, if on them we spend our time, not only shall we wash off
our bygone transgressions, but shall gain very great profit for the future. For we
shall not allow the devil to assault us with leisure either for slothful living, or for
pernicious curiosity, since by these among other means, and in consequence of
these, he leads us to foolish questions and hurtful disputations, from seeing us at
leisure, and idle, and taking no forethought for excellency of living. But let us
block up this approach against him, let us watch, let us be sober, that having in
this short time toiled a little, we may obtain eternal goods in endless ages, by the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ; by whom and with whom to
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 8 on the Gospel of John
John 1:9
"That was the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the world."
1. Nothing hinders us from handling today also the same words, since
before we were prevented by the setting forth of doctrines, from considering all
that was read. Where now are those who deny that He is true God? For here He
is called "the true Light" [John 14:6], and elsewhere very "Truth" and very
"Life." That saying we will discuss more clearly when we come to the place; but
at present we must for a while be speaking to your Charity of that other matter.
If He "lights every man that comes into the world," how is it that so many
continue unenlightened? For not all have known the majesty of Christ. How then
does He "light every man"? He lights all as far as in Him lies. But if some,
wilfully closing the eyes of their mind, would not receive the rays of that Light,
their darkness arises not from the nature of the Light, but from their own
wickedness, who willfully deprive themselves of the gift. For the grace is shed
forth upon all, turning itself back neither from Jew, nor Greek, nor Barbarian,
nor Scythian, nor free, nor bond, nor male, nor female, nor old, nor young, but
admitting all alike, and inviting with an equal regard. And those who are not
willing to enjoy this gift, ought in justice to impute their blindness to themselves;
for if when the gate is opened to all, and there is none to hinder, any being
willfully evil remain without, they perish through none other, but only through
their own wickedness.