THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.6.

made at the words, "Thou dost sanctify, quicken, bless."
Seventhly, the three hours during which He hung upon the cross,
that is, from the sixth to the ninth hour, are represented; in
signification of which we make once more a triple sign of the cross
at the words, "Through Him, and with Him, and in Him."
Eighthly, the separation of His soul from the body is signified by the
two subsequent crosses made over the chalice.
Ninthly, the resurrection on the third day is represented by the three
crosses made at the words---"May the peace of the Lord be ever with
you."
In short, we may say that the consecration of this sacrament, and the
acceptance of this sacrifice, and its fruits, proceed from the virtue of
the cross of Christ, and therefore wherever mention is made of
these, the priest makes use of the sign of the cross.
Reply to Objection 4: After the consecration, the priest makes the
sign of the cross, not for the purpose of blessing and consecrating,
but only for calling to mind the virtue of the cross, and the manner of
Christ's suffering, as is evident from what has been said (ad 3).
Reply to Objection 5: The actions performed by the priest in mass
are not ridiculous gestures, since they are done so as to represent
something else. The priest in extending his arms signifies the
outstretching of Christ's arms upon the cross. He also lifts up his
hands as he prays, to point out that his prayer is directed to God for
the people, according to Lam. 3:41: "Let us lift up our hearts with our
hands to the Lord in the heavens": and Ex. 17:11: "And when Moses
lifted up his hands Israel overcame." That at times he joins his
hands, and bows down, praying earnestly and humbly, denotes the
humility and obedience of Christ, out of which He suffered. He
closes his fingers, i.e. the thumb and first finger, after the
consecration, because, with them, he had touched the consecrated
body of Christ; so that if any particle cling to the fingers, it may not
be scattered: and this belongs to the reverence for this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 6: Five times does the priest turn round towards
the people, to denote that our Lord manifested Himself five times on
the day of His Resurrection, as stated above in the treatise on

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.6.

Christ's Resurrection (Question 55, Article 3, Objection 3). But the
priest greets the people seven times, namely, five times, by turning
round to the people, and twice without turning round, namely, when
he says, "The Lord be with you" before the "Preface," and again
when he says, "May the peace of the Lord be ever with you": and this
is to denote the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost. But a bishop,
when he celebrates on festival days, in his first greeting says,
"Peace be to you," which was our Lord's greeting after Resurrection,
Whose person the bishop chiefly represents.
Reply to Objection 7: The breaking of the host denotes three things:
first, the rending of Christ's body, which took place in the Passion;
secondly, the distinction of His mystical body according to its
various states; and thirdly, the distribution of the graces which flow
from Christ's Passion, as Dionysius observes (Eccl. Hier. iii). Hence
this breaking does not imply severance in Christ.
Reply to Objection 8: As Pope Sergius says, and it is to be found in
the Decretals (De Consecr., dist. ii), "the Lord's body is threefold; the
part offered and put into the chalice signifies Christ's risen body,"
namely, Christ Himself, and the Blessed Virgin, and the other saints,
if there be any, who are already in glory with their bodies. "The part
consumed denotes those still walking upon earth," because while
living upon earth they are united together by this sacrament; and are
bruised by the passions, just as the bread eaten is bruised by the
teeth. "The part reserved on the altar till the close of the mass, is His
body hidden in the sepulchre, because the bodies of the saints will
be in their graves until the end of the world": though their souls are
either in purgatory, or in heaven. However, this rite of reserving one
part on the altar till the close of the mass is no longer observed, on
account of the danger; nevertheless, the same meaning of the parts
continues, which some persons have expressed in verse, thus:
"The host being rent--What is dipped, means the blest;
What is dry, means the living;
What is kept, those at rest."
Others, however, say that the part put into the chalice denotes those