honor, nor dishonor, nor on sickness, nor on health, nor on weakness, but on our
own soul. If it is solid, and well-instructed in the science of virtue, all things will
be easy to it. Even hence it will already behold its rest, and that quiet harbor,
and, on its departure, will there attain innumerable good things, the which may
we all attain, by the grace and love of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, to the
Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever,
and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 13 on Philippians

[Philippians 3:18-21]
"For many walk, of whom I told you often, and now tell you even weeping,
that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: whose end is perdition, whose
god is the belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things. For
our citizenship is in heaven; from whence also we wait for a Saviour, the Lord
Jesus Christ: who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it may be
conformed to the body of his glory, according to the working whereby He is able
even to subject all things unto Himself."
Nothing is so incongruous in a Christian, and foreign to his character, as to
seek ease and rest; and to be engrossed with the present life is foreign to our
profession and enlistment. Your Master was crucified, and do you seek ease?
Your Master was pierced with nails, and do you live delicately? Do these things
become a noble soldier? Wherefore Paul says, "Many walk, of whom I told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of
Christ." Since there were some who made a pretense of Christianity, yet lived in
ease and luxury, and this is contrary to the Cross: therefore he thus spoke. For
the cross belongs to a soul at its post for the fight, longing to die, seeking
nothing like ease, while their conduct is of the contrary sort. So that even if they
say, they are Christ's, still they are as it were enemies of the Cross. For did they
love the Cross, they would strive to live the crucified life. Was not your Master
hung upon the tree? Do thou otherwise imitate Him. Crucify yourself, though no
one crucify you. Crucify yourself, not that you may slay yourself, God forbid,
for that is a wicked thing, but as Paul said, "The world has been crucified unto
me and I unto the world." [Galatians 6:14] If you love your Master, die His
death. Learn how great is the power of the Cross; how many good things it has
achieved, and does still: how it is the safety of our life. Through it all things are

done. Baptism is through the Cross, for we must receive that seal. The laying on
of hands is through the Cross. If we are on journeys, if we are at home, wherever
we are, the Cross is a great good, the armor of salvation, a shield which cannot
be beaten down, a weapon to oppose the devil; you bear the Cross when you are
at enmity with him, not simply when you seal yourself by it, but when you suffer
the things belonging to the Cross. Christ thought fit to call our sufferings by the
name of the Cross. As when he says, "Except a man take up his cross and follow
Me" [Matthew 16:24], i.e. except he be prepared to die.
But these being base, and lovers of life, and lovers of their bodies, are
enemies of the Cross. And every one, who is a friend of luxury, and of present
safety, is an enemy of that Cross in which Paul makes his boast: which he
embraces, with which he desires to be incorporated. As when he says, "I am
crucified unto the world, and the world unto me." But here he says, "I now tell
you weeping." Wherefore? Because the evil was urgent, because such deserve
tears. Of a truth the luxurious are worthy of tears, who make fat that which is
thrown about them, I mean the body, and take no thought of that soul which
must give account. Behold you live delicately, behold you are drunken, today
and tomorrow, ten years, twenty, thirty, fifty, a hundred, which is impossible; but
if you will, let us suppose it. What is the end? What is the gain? Nought at all.
Does it not then deserve tears, and lamentations, to lead such a life; God has
brought us into this course, that He may crown us, and we take our departure
without doing any noble action. Wherefore Paul weeps, where others laugh, and
live in pleasure. So sympathetic is he: such thought takes he for all men. "Whose
god," says he, "is the belly." For this have they a God! That is, "let us eat and
drink!" Do you see, how great an evil luxury is? To some their wealth, and to
others their belly is a god. Are not these too idolaters, and worse than the
common? And their "glory is in their shame." [1 Corinthians 15:32] Some say it
is circumcision. I think not so, but this is its meaning, they make a boast of those
things, of which they ought to be ashamed. It is a fearful thing to do shameful
actions; yet to do them, and be ashamed, is only half so dreadful. But where a