is, but if we please, it may be heavenly. See how highly God has honored us, in
committing to us so excellent a frame. I made heaven and earth, He says, and to
you I give the power of creation. Make your earth heaven. For it is in your
power. "I am He that makes and transforms all things" [Amos 5:8, Septuagint],
says God of Himself. And He has given to men a similar power; as a painter,
being an affectionate father, teaches his own art to his son. I formed your body
beautiful, he says, but I give you the power of forming something better. Make
your soul beautiful. I said, "Let the earth bring forth grass, and every fruitful
tree." [Genesis 1:11] Do thou also say, Let this earth bring forth its proper fruit,
and what you will to produce will be produced. "I make the summer and the
cloud. I create the lightning and the wind." [Amos 4:13; Psalm 74:17] I formed
the dragon, that is, the devil, to make sport with him. [Psalm 104:26] Nor have I
grudged you the like power. You, if you will, canst sport with him, and bind him
as you would a sparrow. I make the sun to rise upon the evil and the good: do
thou imitate Me, by imparting of that is yours to the good and the evil. When
mocked I bear with it, and do good to those who mock Me: imitate Me, as you
can. I do good, not to be requited; imitate Me, and do good, not to be repaid. I
have lighted luminaries in the heavens. Do thou light others brighter than these,
for you can, by enlightening those that are in error. For to know Me is a greater
benefit than to behold the sun. You can not create a man, but you can make him
just and acceptable to God. I formed his substance, do thou beautify his will. See
how I love you, and have given you the power in the greater things.
Beloved, see how we are honored! Yet some are so unreasonable and so
ungrateful as to say, "Why are we endowed with free will?" But how in all the
particulars which we have mentioned could we have imitated God, if there had
been no free will? I rule Angels, He says, and so do you, through Him who is the
First-fruits. [1 Corinthians 15:23] I sit on a royal throne, and you are seated with
Me in Him who is the First-fruits. As it is said, "He has raised us up together
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus." [Ephesians 2:6]
Through Him who is the First-fruits, Cherubim and Seraphim adore you, with all

the heavenly host, principalities and powers, thrones and dominions. Disparage
not your body, to which such high honors appertain, that the unbodied Powers
tremble at it.
But what shall I say? It is not in this way only that I have shown My love to
you, but by what I have suffered. For you I was spit upon, I was scourged. I
emptied myself of glory, I left My Father and came to you, who dost hate Me,
and turn from Me, and art loath to hear My Name. I pursued you, I ran after you,
that I might overtake you. I united and joined you to myself, "eat Me, drink Me,"
I said. Above I hold you, and below I embrace you. Is it not enough for you that
I have your First-fruits above? Does not this satisfy your affection? I descended
below: I not only am mingled with you, I am entwined in you. I am masticated,
broken into minute particles, that the interspersion, and commixture, and union
may be more complete. Things united remain yet in their own limits, but I am
interwoven with you. I would have no more any division between us. I will that
we both be one.
Therefore knowing these things and remembering His abundant care for us,
let us do all things which may prove us not unworthy of His great gift, which
God grant that we may all obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness of Christ
Jesus our Lord, with whom, etc.