things without approving of them, then He gave the permission on account of some necessity, being
either able to prevent [such procedure], or not able. But if indeed He could not [hinder it], then He
is weak and powerless; while, if He could, He is a seducer, a hypocrite, and a slave of necessity,
inasmuch as He does not consent [to such a course], and yet allows it as if He did consent. And
allowing error to arise at the first, and to go on increasing, He endeavours in later times to destroy
it, when already many have miserably perished on account of the [original] defect.
4. It is not seemly, however, to say of Him who is God over all, since He is free and independent,
that He was a slave to necessity, or that anything takes place with His permission, yet against His
desire; otherwise they will make necessity greater and more kingly than God, since that which has
the most power is superior to all [others]. And He ought at the very beginning to have cut off
the causes of [the fancied] necessity, and not to have allowed Himself to be shut up to yielding to
that necessity, by permitting anything besides that which became Him. For it would have been
much better, more consistent, and more God-like, to cut off at the beginning the principle of this
kind of necessity, than afterwards, as if moved by repentance, to endeavour to extirpate the results
of necessity when they had reached such a development. And if the Father of all be a slave to
necessity, and must yield to fate, while He unwillingly tolerates the things which are done, but is
at the same time powerless to do anything in opposition to necessity and fate (like the Homeric
Jupiter, who says of necessity, "I have willingly given thee, yet with unwilling mind"), then,
according to this reasoning, the Bythus of whom they speak will be found to be the slave of necessity
and fate.

### Chapter VI.—The angels and the Creator of the world could not have been ignorant of the
Supreme God.
1. How, again, could either the angels, or the Creator of the world, have been ignorant of the
Supreme God, seeing they were His property, and His creatures, and were contained by Him? He
might indeed have been invisible to them on account of His superiority, but He could by no means
have been unknown to them on account of His providence. For though it is true, as they declare,
that they were very far separated from Him through their inferiority [of nature], yet, as His dominion
extended over all of them, it behoved them to know their Ruler, and to be aware of this in particular,
that He who created them is Lord of all. For since His invisible essence is mighty, it confers on all
a profound mental intuition and perception of His most powerful, yea, omnipotent greatness.
Wherefore, although "no one knows the Father, except the Son, nor the Son except the Father, and
those to whom the Son will reveal Him," yet all [beings] do know this one fact at least, because