obtaining it he may pursue after him that holds it, and accordingly so it takes
place: thus also here, each man's own profit has he given to his neighbor, that
hence we may run after one another, and not be torn asunder.
And if you will, see this also in our case who address you. For my profit
depends on you, and your advantage on me. Thus, on the one hand it profits you
to be taught the things that please God, but with this have I been entrusted, that
you might receive it from me, and therefore might be compelled to run unto me;
and on the other hand it profits me that you should be made better: for the
reward which I shall receive for this will be great; but this again lies in you; and
therefore am I compelled to follow after you that you may be better, and that I
may receive my profit from you. Wherefore also Paul says, "For what is my
hope? Are not even ye?" And again, "My hope, and my joy, and the crown of my
rejoicing." [1 Thessalonians 2:19] So that the joy of Paul was the disciples, and
his joy they had. Therefore he even wept when he saw them perishing.
Again their profit depended on Paul: wherefore he said, For the hope of
Israel I am bound with this chain. [Acts 28:20] And again, These things I endure
for the elect's sakes that they may obtain eternal life. [2 Timothy 2:10] And this
one may see in worldly things. "For the wife," says he, "has not power over her
own body, nor yet the husband; but the wife over the husband's, and the husband
over the wife's." [1 Corinthians 7:4] So likewise we, when we wish to bind any
together, do this. We leave neither of them in his own power, but extending a
chain between them, we cause the one to be holden of the other, and the other of
the one. Will you also see this in the case of governors? He that judges sits not in
judgment for himself, but seeking the profit of his neighbor. The governed on the
other hand, seek the profit of the governor by their attendance, by their ministry,
by all the other things. Soldiers take up their arms for us, for on our account they
peril themselves. We for them are in straits; for from us are their supplies.
But if you say, "each one does this seeking his own," this also say I, but I
add, that by the good of another one's own is won. Thus both the soldier, unless
he fight for them that support him, has none that ministers to him for this end:

and this same on the other hand, unless he nourish the soldier, has none to arm
himself in his behalf.
4. Do you see love, how it is everywhere extended and manages all things?
But be not weary, until thou have thoroughly acquainted yourself with this
golden chain. For having said, "seeks not her own," he mentions again the good
things produced by this. And what are these?
"Is not easily provoked, thinks no evil. " See love again not only subduing
vice, but not even suffering it to arise at all. For he said not, "though provoked,
she overcomes," but, "is not provoked." And he said not, "works no evil," but,
"not even thinks;" i.e., so far from contriving any evil, she does not even suspect
it of the beloved. How then could she work any, or how be provoked? Who does
not even endure to admit an evil surmise; whence is the fountain of wrath.