things are said. Were I to say this as a reason for finding fault with you, you
would need to have recourse to quite a different excuse, instead of this which is
the very thing you find fault with.— Do not you exhort your son? Now if he
should say, "Always the same things!" would not you count it an insult? It would
be time enough to talk of "the same things," when we both knew the things, and
exhibited them in our practice. Or rather, even then, the reading of them would
not be superfluous. What equal to Timothy? Tell me that: and yet to him says
Paul, Give attention to reading, to exhortation. [1 Timothy 4:13] For it is not
possible, I say not possible, ever to exhaust the mind of the Scriptures. It is a
well which has no bottom. "I said," says the Preacher, "I have become wise: and
then it departed from me."— [Ecclesiastes 7:24] Shall I show you that the things
are not "the same?" How many persons, do you suppose, have spoken upon the
Gospels? And yet all have spoken in a way which was new and fresh. For the
more one dwells on them, the more insight does he get, the more does he behold
the pure light. Look, what a number of things I am going to speak of:— say,
what is narrative? What is prophecy? What is parable? What is type? What is
allegory? What is symbol? What are Gospels? Answer me only to this one point,
which is plain: why are they called Gospels, "good tidings?" And yet you have
often heard that good news ought to have nothing sad in it: yet this "good news"
has abundance of sadness in it. "Their fire," it says, "shall never be quenched:
their worm shall not die:" [Mark 9:44] "Shall appoint his portion," it says, "with
the hypocrites," with them that are "cut asunder: then shall He say, I know you
not: Depart from Me, you that work iniquity." [Matthew 24:51; 7:23] Surely, we
do not deceive ourselves, when we imagine that we tell you in your own mothertongue ([good tidings? You look downcast; you are stunned; you are struck all of
a heap, unable to hold up your heads. "Good news" should have nothing in it of a
duty to be done, but rather should counsel what is good: whereas these
"Gospels" have endless duties to be done. And again, to mention other things, as
for instance, Except a man hate father and mother, he is not worthy of Me Luke
14:26]: and "I am not come to bring peace upon earth, but a sword" [Matthew

10:34; Luke 12:51]: and In the world you shall have tribulation— [John 16:33]
excellent good tidings these, are they not! For good news is such as this— "You
shall have this and that good thing:" as in common life men say one to another,
"What shall I have for my good news? Your father is coming, or, your mother:"
he does not say, "You must do this or that."— Again, tell me, how do the
Gospels differ from the Prophets? Why are not the Prophecies also called
Gospels, good tidings? For they tell the same things: for instance, "The lame
shall leap as an hart." [Isaiah 35:6] "The Lord shall give the word to them that
preach the Gospel" [Psalm 68:11]: and, "A new heaven and a new earth." [Isaiah
65:17] Why are not those also called Gospels? But if, while you do not so much
as know what "Gospels" mean, you so despise the reading of the Scriptures,
what shall I say to you?— Let me speak of something else. Why four Gospels?
Why not, ten? Why not twenty? If "many have taken in hand to set forth a
narrative" [Luke 1:1], why not one person? Why they that were disciples (i.e.
Apostles)? Why they that were not disciples? But why any Scriptures at all? And
yet, on the contrary, the Old Testament says, "I will give you a New Testament."
[Jeremiah 31:31] Where are they that say, "Always the same things?" If you
knew these, that, though a man should live thousands of years, they are not "the
same things," ye would not say this. Believe me, I will not tell you the answers
to any of these questions; not in private, not in public: only, if any find them out,
I will nod assent. For this is the way we have made you good-for-nothing, by
always telling you the things ready to your hands, and not refusing when we
ought. Look, you have questions enough: consider them, tell me the reasons.
Why Gospels? Why not Prophecies? Why duties, to be done, in the Gospels? If
one is at a loss, let another seek the answer, and contribute each to the others
from what he has: but now we will hold our peace. For if what has been spoken
has done you no good, much less would it, should we add more. We only pour
water into a vessel full of holes. And the punishment too is all the greater for
you. Therefore, we will hold our peace. Which that we may not have to do, it
rests with yourselves. For if we shall see your diligence, perhaps we will again