THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.7.

likewise it is signified by the water which flowed from the rock in the
desert, according to 1 Cor. 10:4: "But they drank of the spiritual rock
which came after them."
Reply to Objection 2: In Baptism water is used for the purpose of
ablution: but in this sacrament it is used by way of refreshment,
according to Ps. 22:3: "He hath brought me up on the water of
refreshment."
Reply to Objection 3: Bread is made of water and flour; and
therefore, since water is mixed with the wine, neither is without
water.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the mixing with water is essential to this

sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that the mixing with water is essential to this
sacrament. Because Cyprian says to Cecilius (Ep. lxiii): "Thus the
Lord's chalice is not water only and wine only, but both must be
mixed together: in the same way as neither the Lord's body be of
flour only, except both," i.e. the flour and the water "be united as
one." But the admixture of water with the flour is necessary for this
sacrament. Consequently, for the like reason, so is the mixing of
water with the wine.
Objection 2: Further, at our Lord's Passion, of which this is the
memorial, water as well as blood flowed from His side. But wine,
which is the sacrament of the blood, is necessary for this sacrament.
For the same reason, therefore, so is water.
Objection 3: Further, if water were not essential to this sacrament, it
would not matter in the least what kind of water was used; and so
water distilled from roses, or any other kind might be employed;
which is contrary to the usage of the Church. Consequently water is
essential to this sacrament.
On the contrary, Cyprian says (Ep. lxiii): "If any of our predecessors,
out of ignorance or simplicity, has not kept this usage," i.e. of mixing
water with the wine, "one may pardon his simplicity"; which would
not be the case if water were essential to the sacrament, as the wine
or the bread. Therefore the mingling of water with the wine is not
essential to the sacrament.
I answer that, Judgment concerning a sign is to be drawn from the
thing signified. Now the adding of water to the wine is for the
purpose of signifying the sharing of this sacrament by the faithful, in
this respect that by the mixing of the water with the wine is signified
the union of the people with Christ, as stated (Article 6). Moreover,
the flowing of water from the side of Christ hanging on the cross
refers to the same, because by the water is denoted the cleansing
from sins, which was the effect of Christ's Passion. Now it was
observed above (Question 73, Article 1, ad 3), that this sacrament is
completed in the consecration of the matter: while the usage of the
faithful is not essential to the sacrament, but only a consequence