Andrew, after having tarried with Jesus and learned what He did, kept not
the treasure to himself, but hastens and runs quickly to his brother, to impart to
him of the good things which he had received. But wherefore has not John said
on what matters Christ conversed with them? Whence is it clear that it was for
this that they "abode with Him"? It was proved by us the other day; but we may
learn it from what has been read today as well. Observe what Andrew says to his
brother; "We have found the Messias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ."
You see how, as far as he had learned in a short time, he showed the wisdom of
the teacher who persuaded them, and their own zeal, who cared for these things
long ago, and from the beginning. For this word, "we have found," is the
expression of a soul which travails for His presence, and looks for His coming
from above, and is made overjoyed when the looked-for thing has happened, and
hastens to impart to others the good tidings. This is the part of brotherly
affection, of natural friendship, of a sincere disposition, to be eager to stretch out
the hand to each other in spiritual things. Hear him besides speak with the
addition of the article; for he does not say "Messias," but "the Messias"; thus
they were expecting some one Christ, having nothing in common with the
others. And behold, I beg of you, the mind of Peter obedient and tractable from
the very beginning; he ran to Him without any delay; "He brought him," says St.
John, "to Jesus." Yet let no one blame his easy temper if he received the word
without much questioning, because it is probable that his brother had told him
these things more exactly and at length; but the Evangelists from their care for
conciseness constantly cut many things short. Besides, it is not said absolutely
that "he believed," but that "he brought him to Jesus," to give him up for the
future to Him, so that from Him he might learn all; for the other disciple also
was with him, and contributed to this. And if John the Baptist, when he had said
that He was "the Lamb," and that He "baptized with the Spirit," gave them over
to learn the clearer doctrine concerning this thing from Him, much more would
Andrew have done this, not deeming him self sufficient to declare the whole, but
drawing him to the very fount of light with so much zeal and joy, that the other

neither deferred nor delayed at all.

John 1:42
"And when Jesus beheld him, He said, 'You are Simon, the son of Jonas; you
shall be called Cephas, which is, by interpretation, a stone.'"
2. He begins from this time forth to reveal the things belonging to His
Divinity, and to open It out little by little by predictions. So He did in the case of
Nathaniel and the Samaritan woman. For prophecies bring men over not less
than miracles; and are free from the appearance of boasting. Miracles may
possibly be slandered among foolish men, ["He casts out devils," said they, "by
Beelzebub" Matthew 12:24], but nothing of the kind has ever been said of
prophecy. Now in the case of Nathaniel and Simon He used this method of
teaching, but with Andrew and Philip He did not so. Why was this? Because
those (two) had the testimony of John, no small preparation, and Philip received
a credible evidence of faith, when he saw those who had been present.
"You are Simon, the son of Jonas." By the present, the future is guaranteed;
for it is clear that He who named Peter's father foreknew the future also. And the
prediction is attended with praise; but the object was not to flatter, but to foretell
something future. Hear at least in the case of the Samaritan woman, how He
utters a prediction with severe reproofs; "You have had," he says, "five husbands,
and he whom thou now hast is not your husband." [John 4:18] So also His Father
makes great account of prophecy, when He sets Himself against the honor paid
to idols: "Let them declare to you," says He, "what shall come upon you" [Isaiah
47:13]; and again, "I have declared, and have saved, and there was no foreign
God among you" [Isaiah 43:12, Septuagint]; and He brings this forward through
all prophecy. Because prophecy is especially the work of God, which devils
cannot even imitate, though they strive exceedingly. For in the case of miracles
there may be delusion; but exactly to foretell the future belongs to that pure
Nature alone. Or if devils ever have done so, it was by deceiving the simpler
sort; whence their oracles are always easily detected.