are not satisfied with those we have alleged?
36. Certainly they must be warned, since they now see that the Holy
Spirit is called the gift of God, that when they hear of "the gift of the Holy
Spirit," they should recognize therein that mode of speech which is found
in the words, "In the spoiling of the body of the flesh." For as the body of
the flesh is nothing else but the flesh, so the gift of the Holy Spirit is
nothing else but the Holy Spirit. He is then the gift of God, so far as He is
given to those to whom He is given. But in Himself He is God, although
He were given to no one, because He was God co-eternal with the Father
and the Son before He was given to any one. Nor is He less than they,
because they give, and He is given. For He is given as a gift of God in such
way that He Himself also gives Himself as being God. For He cannot be
said not to be in His own power, of whom it is said, "The Spirit bloweth
where it listeth;" and the apostle says, as I have already mentioned
above, "All these things worketh that selfsame Spirit, dividing to every
man severally as He will." We have not here the creating of Him that is
given, and the rule of them that give, but the concord of the given and the
givers.
37. Wherefore, if Holy Scripture proclaims that God is love, and that love
is of God, and works this in us that we abide in God and He in us, and
that hereby we know this, because He has given us of His Spirit, then the
Spirit Himself is God, who is love. Next, if there be among the gifts of God
none greater than love, and there is no greater gift of God than the Holy
Spirit, what follows more naturally than that He is Himself love, who is
called both God and of God? And if the love by which the Father loves the
Son, and the Son loves the Father, ineffably demonstrates the
communion of both, what is more suitable than that He should be
specially called love, who is the Spirit common to both? For this is the
sounder thing both to believe and to understand, that the Holy Spirit is
not alone love in that Trinity, yet is not specially called love to no
purpose, for the reasons we have alleged; just as He is not alone in that
Trinity either a Spirit or holy, since both the Father is a Spirit, and the
Son is a Spirit; and both the Father is holy, and the Son is holy,—as piety
doubts not. And yet it is not to no purpose that He is specially called the
Holy Spirit; for because He is common to both, He is specially called that

which both are in common. Otherwise, if in that Trinity the Holy Spirit
alone is love, then doubtless the Son too turns out to be the Son, not of
the Father only, but also of the Holy Spirit. For He is both said and read
in countless places to be so,—the only-begotten Son of God the Father; as
that what the apostle says of God the Father is true too: "Who hath
delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the
kingdom of the Son of His own love." He did not say, "of His own Son." If
He had so said, He would have said it most truly, just as He did say it
most truly, because He has often said it; but He says, "the Son of His own
love." Therefore He is the Son also of the Holy Spirit, if there is in that
Trinity no love in God except the Holy Spirit. And if this is most absurd, it
remains that the Holy Spirit is not alone therein love, but is specially so
called for the reasons I have sufficiently set forth; and that the words,
"Son of His own love," mean nothing else than His own beloved Son,—the
Son, in short, of His own substance. For the love in the Father, which is in
His ineffably simple nature, is nothing else than His very nature and
substance itself,—as we have already often said, and are not ashamed of
often repeating. And hence the "Son of His love," is none other than He
who is born of His substance.