44. Moreover, pastors and the lay faithful who accompany their brothers and sisters in faith or on a
journey of openness to God must always remember what the Catechism of the Catholic Church
teaches quite clearly: “Imputability and responsibility for an action can be diminished or even
nullified by ignorance, inadvertence, duress, fear, habit, inordinate attachments, and other
psychological or social factors”. Consequently, without detracting from the evangelical ideal,
they need to accompany with mercy and patience the eventual stages of personal growth as these
progressively occur. I want to remind priests that the confessional must not be a torture
chamber but rather an encounter with the Lord’s mercy which spurs us on to do our best. A small
step, in the midst of great human limitations, can be more pleasing to God than a life which
appears outwardly in order but moves through the day without confronting great difficulties.
Everyone needs to be touched by the comfort and attraction of God’s saving love, which is
mysteriously at work in each person, above and beyond their faults and failings.

45. We see then that the task of evangelization operates within the limits of language and of
circumstances. It constantly seeks to communicate more effectively the truth of the Gospel in a
specific context, without renouncing the truth, the goodness and the light which it can bring
whenever perfection is not possible. A missionary heart is aware of these limits and makes itself
“weak with the weak... everything for everyone” (1 Cor 9:22). It never closes itself off, never
retreats into its own security, never opts for rigidity and defensiveness. It realizes that it has to
grow in its own understanding of the Gospel and in discerning the paths of the Spirit, and so it
always does what good it can, even if in the process, its shoes get soiled by the mud of the street.

### V. A mother with an open heart

46. A Church which “goes forth” is a Church whose doors are open. Going out to others in order to
reach the fringes of humanity does not mean rushing out aimlessly into the world. Often it is better
simply to slow down, to put aside our eagerness in order to see and listen to others, to stop
rushing from one thing to another and to remain with someone who has faltered along the way. At
times we have to be like the father of the prodigal son, who always keeps his door open so that
when the son returns, he can readily pass through it.

47. The Church is called to be the house of the Father, with doors always wide open. One

concrete sign of such openness is that our church doors should always be open, so that if
someone, moved by the Spirit, comes there looking for God, he or she will not find a closed door.
There are other doors that should not be closed either. Everyone can share in some way in the life
of the Church; everyone can be part of the community, nor should the doors of the sacraments be
closed for simply any reason. This is especially true of the sacrament which is itself “the door”:
baptism. The Eucharist, although it is the fullness of sacramental life, is not a prize for the perfect
but a powerful medicine and nourishment for the weak. These convictions have pastoral
consequences that we are called to consider with prudence and boldness. Frequently, we act as
arbiters of grace rather than its facilitators. But the Church is not a tollhouse; it is the house of the
Father, where there is a place for everyone, with all their problems.