Do you see how He made them honorable by this also, and those that
received them careful; by signifying that they rather are the gainers, both in
honor, and in respect of advantage?
Then pursuing again the same subject, He says,
"And when you come into an house, salute it. And if the house be worthy, let
your peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you."
[Matthew 10:12-13]
Do you see how far He declines not to carry His injunctions? And very
fitly. For as champions of godliness, and preachers to the whole world, was He
training them. And in that regard disposing them to practise moderation, and
making them objects of love, He says,
"And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when you
depart out of that house or city, shake off the dust of your feet. Verily I say unto
you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of
judgment, than for that city." [Matthew 10:14-15]
That is, "do not," says He, "because you are teachers, therefore wait to be
saluted by others, but be first in showing that respect." Then, implying that this
is not a mere salutation, but a blessing, He says, "If the house be worthy, it shall
come upon it," but if it deal insolently, its first punishment will be, not to have
the benefit of your peace; and the second, that it shall suffer the doom of Sodom.
"And what," it will be said, "is their punishment to us?" You will have the houses
of such as are worthy.
But what means, "Shake off the dust of your feet?" It is either to signify
their having received nothing of them, or to be a witness to them of the long
journey, which they had travelled for their sake.
But mark, I pray you, how He does not even yet give the whole to them.
For neither does He as yet bestow upon them foreknowledge, so as to learn who
is worthy, and who is not so; but He bids them inquire, and await the trial. How
then did He Himself abide with a publican? Because he was become worthy by
his conversion.

And mark, I pray you, how when He had stripped them of all, He gave them
all, by suffering them to abide in the houses of those who became disciples, and
to enter therein, having nothing. For thus both themselves were freed from
anxiety, and they would convince the others, that for their salvation only are they
come; first by bringing in nothing with them, then by requiring no more of them
than necessaries, lastly, by not entering all their houses without distinction.
Since not by the signs only did He desire them to appear illustrious, but
even before the signs, by their own virtue. For nothing so much characterizes
strictness of life, as to be free from superfluities, and so far as may be, from
wants. This even the false apostles knew. Wherefore Paul also said, "That
wherein they glory, they may be found even as we." [2 Corinthians 11:12]
But if when we are in a strange country, and are going unto persons
unknown to us, we must seek nothing more than our food for the day, much
more when abiding at home.
9. These things let us not hear only, but also imitate. For not of the apostles
alone are they said, but also of the saints afterwards. Let us therefore become
worthy to entertain them. For according to the disposition of the entertainers this
peace both comes and flies away again. For not only on the courageous speaking
of them that teach, but also on the worthiness of them that receive, does this
effect follow.
Neither let us account it a small loss, not to enjoy such peace. For this peace
the prophet also from of old proclaims, saying, "How beautiful are the feet of
them that bring good tidings of peace." Then to explain the value thereof he
added, "That bring good tidings of good things."
This peace Christ also declared to be great, when He said, "Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you." [John 14:27] And we should do all things,
so as to enjoy it, both at home and in church. For in the very church too the
presiding minister gives peace. And this which we speak of is a type of that. And
you should receive it with all alacrity, in heart before the actual communion. For
if not to impart it after the communion be disgusting, how much more disgusting