yet the sun, nor the whole world. For these are for us, and not we for them. Let
us show that we are worthy of having had these made for us. For if we be found
unworthy of these, how shall we be worthy a kingdom? For indeed all that live
so as to blaspheme God are unworthy to see the sun. They who blaspheme Him
are unworthy to enjoy the creatures who glorify Him: since even a son who
insults his father is unworthy to be waited upon by the approved servants. Hence
these will enjoy glory, and that great glory; but we shall have to undergo
punishment and vengeance.
How miserable then will it be for the creation which was made for you to
be fashioned "according to the glorious liberty of the children of God," [Romans
8:21] but for us who were made children of God, through our much listlessness,
to be sent away to destruction and hell, for whose sake the creation shall enjoy
that great festal time? Now to keep this from coming to pass, let such of us as
have a pure soul keep it still such, or rather let us make its brightness more
intense. And let those of us that have a soiled one, not despair. For "if" (he says)
"your sins be as purple, I will make them white as snow. And if they be as
scarlet, I will make them white as wool." [Isaiah 1:18] But when it is God that
promises, doubt not, but do those things whereby you may draw to you these
promises. Are they unnumbered, the fearful and outrageous acts done by you?
And what of this? For hitherto you are not gone away into the grave where no
man shall confess. (ib. 38:18; Psalm 6:5.) Hitherto the arena ([θέατρον]) is not
broken up for you, but you are standing within the line, and you are able even by
a struggle at the last to recover all your defeats. You are not yet come to where
the rich man was, for you to hear it said, "there is a gulf between you and us."
[Luke 16:26] The Bridegroom is not yet at hand, that one should fear to give you
of his oil. Still can you buy and store up. And there is not one yet to say, "Not so;
lest there be not enough for us and and you" [Matthew 25:9]; but there are many
that sell, the naked, the hungry, the sick, the imprisoned. Give food to these,
clothing to those, visit the sick, and the oil will come more than from fountains.
The day of account is not here. Use the time as need be, and make deductions

from the debts, and to him that owes "an hundred measures of oil, say, Take your
bill and write fifty." [Luke 16:6] And with money, and with words, and with
every other thing do in like manner, imitating that steward. And advise this to
yourself, and also to your relatives, for you have still the power of saying so.
You are not yet come to the necessity of calling in another in their behalf, but
you have power to give advice at once to yourself and to others. [Luke 16:28]
But when you are gone away there, neither of these things will you have it in
your power to do at need. And with good reason. For thou who hast had so long
a period fixed you, and neither done yourself good, nor any else, how when you
are under the Judge's hands shall you be able to obtain this grace? Putting all
these things together then, let us cling fast to our own salvation, and not lose the
opportunity of this life present. For it is possible, it is, even at our last breath to
please God. It is possible to gain approval by your last will, not indeed in such
way as in our lifetime, still it is possible. How, and in what way? If you leave
Him among your heirs, and givest Him also ([καὶ αὐτᾥ]) a portion of your whole
estate. Have you not fed Him in your lifetime? At all events when departed,
when you are no longer owner, give Him a share of your goods. He is loving
unto man, He does not deal niggardly by you. It is a mark to be sure of a greater
desire, and so it will be more rewarded, to feed Him in your lifetime. But if you
have not done this, at all events do the next best thing. Leave Him joint-heir (see
p. 384) with your children, and if you are dilatory over this, bethink yourself that
His Father made you joint-heir with Him, and break down your inhuman spirit.
For what excuse will you have if you dost not even make Him a sharer with your
children, who made you share the Heaven, and was slain for you? And yet all
that ever He did, He did not in repayment of a debt, but as bestowing a favor.
But you after so great benefits, have been made a debtor as well. And yet,
though things are so, it is as if receiving a favor, not as demanding payment of a
debt, that He crowns you; and this too when what He is to receive is His own.
Give then your money, which is now no longer of any use to you, and of which
you are no longer owner; and He will give you a Kingdom which shall be of