after that on which (Cornelius) had been praying. "And, behold, a man stood
before me in bright clothing:" he does not say, an Angel, so unassuming is he:
"and said, Cornelius, your prayer is heard, and your alms are had in
remembrance in the sight of God. Send therefore to Joppa, and call hither
Simon, whose surname is Peter: he is lodged in the house of one Simon a tanner
by the seaside: who, when he comes, shall speak unto you. Immediately therefore
I sent to you; and you have well done that you have come. Now therefore are we
all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded you of God."
[Acts 10:31-33] (b) See what faith, what piety! He knew that it was no word of
man that Peter spoke, when he said, "God has shown me." Then says the man,
We are present to hear all things that are commanded you of the Lord. (a)
Therefore it was that Peter asked, "For what intent have ye sent for me?" on
purpose that he might so speak these very words. (d) "Then Peter opened his
mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respector of persons: but in
every nation he that fears Him, and works righteousness, is acceptable to him."
(v. 34, 35.) That is, be he uncircumcised or circumcised. (c) This also Paul
declaring, says, "For there is no respect of persons with God." [Romans 2:11] (e)
What then? (it may be asked) is the man yonder in Persia acceptable to Him? If
he be worthy, in this regard he is acceptable, that it should be granted him to be
brought unto faith ([τᾥ καταξιωθἥναι τῆς πίστεως]). The Eunuch from Ethiopia
He overlooked not. "What shall one say then of the religious men who have been
overlooked?" It is not the case, that any (such) ever was overlooked. But what he
says is to this effect, that God rejects no man. "In every nation, he that fears God
and works righteousness:" (by righteousness) he means, all virtue. Mark, how he
subdues all elation of mind in him. That (the Jews) may not seem to be in the
condition of persons cast off (he adds), The word which He sent unto the
children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ: He is Lord of all [Acts
10:36]: this he says also for the sake of those present (of the Jews), that He may
persuade them also: this is why he forces Cornelius to speak. "He," says he, "is
Lord of all." But observe at the very outset, "The word," says he, "which He sent

unto the children of Israel;" he gives them the preëminence. Then he adduces
(these Gentiles) themselves as witnesses: "ye know," says he, "the matter which
came to pass throughout all Judea, beginning at Galilee"— then he confirms it
from this also— "after the baptism which John preached" [Acts 10:37]— "even
Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed Him with the Holy Ghost and with power."
[Acts 10:38] He does not mean, You know Jesus, for they did not know Him, but
he speaks of the things done by Him: Who went about doing good, and healing
all that were oppressed of the devil: by this he shows that many cases of lost
senses or paralyzed limbs are the devil's work, and a wrench given to the body
by him: as also Christ said. "For God was with Him." Again, lowly terms. "And
we are witnesses of all things which He did, both in the country of the Jews, and
in Jerusalem" [Acts 10:39]: both "we," says he, and you. Then the Passion, and
the reason why they do not believe: "Whom also they slew, and hanged on a tree.
Him God raised up the third day, and showed Him openly; not to all the people,
but unto witnesses chosen before of God, even to us, who ate and drank with
Him after He rose from the dead." (v. 40, 41.) This is a proof of the Resurrection.
"And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is He
which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead." [Acts 10:42]
This is great. Then he adduces the testimony from the Prophets: "To Him give all
the prophets witness, that through His name, whosoever believes in Him shall
receive remission of sins." [Acts 10:43] This is a proof of that which was about
to be: this is the reason why he here cites the Prophets.
But let us look over again what relates to Cornelius. (Recapitulation.) He
sent, it says, to Joppa to fetch Peter. "He was waiting for him," etc; see how fully
he believed that Peter would certainly come: (b) "and fell down at his feet, and
worshipped him." (v. 24, 25.) (a) Mark how on every side it is shown how
worthy he is! (So) the Eunuch there desired Philip to come up and sit in the
chariot [Acts 8:31], although not knowing who he was, upon no other
introduction ([ἐ] [παγγελίας]) than that given by the Prophet. But here Cornelius
fell at his feet. (c) "Stand up, I myself also am a man." [Acts 10:26] Observe