hearken," [Exodus 19:8] in their works were disobedient. And for this reason, let
me add, that they might not think the law would benefit them, He shows that this
self-same thing condemns them, like as Paul also says, "Not the hearers of the
law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified." For this
intent, that He might make them even self-condemned, He causes the judgment
to be delivered by themselves, like as He does also in the ensuing parable of the
vineyard.
3. And that this might be done, He makes trial of the accusation in the
person of an other. For since they were not willing to confess directly, He by a
parable drives them on to what He desired.
But when, not understanding His sayings, they had delivered the judgment,
He unfolds His concealed meaning after this, and says, "Publicans and harlots
go into the kingdom of Heaven before you. For John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and you believed him not; but the publicans believed him; and
you, when you had seen it, repented not afterwards, that you might believe him."
[Matthew 21:31-32]
For if He had said simply, harlots go before you, the word would have
seemed to them to be offensive; but now, being uttered after their own judgment
it appears to be not too hard.
Therefore He adds also the accusation. What then is this? "John came," He
says, "unto you," not unto them, and not this only, but; also "in the way of
righteousness." "For neither with this can you find fault, that he was some
careless one, and of no profit; but both his life was irreprehensible, and his care
for you great, and you gave no heed to him."
And with this there is another charge also, that publicans gave heed; and
with this, again another, that "not even after them did ye. For you should have
done so even before them, but not to do it even after them was to be deprived of
all excuse;" and unspeakable was both the praise of the one, and the charge
against the other. "To you he came, and you accepted him not; he came not to
them, and they receive him, and not even them did ye take for instructors."

See by how many things is shown the commendation of those, and the
charge against these. To you he came, not to them. You believed not, this
offended not them. They believed, this profited not you.
But the word, "go before you," is not as though these were following, but as
having a hope, if they were willing. For nothing, so much as jealousy, rouses the
grosser sort. Therefore He is ever saying, "The first shall be last, and the last
first." Therefore He brought in both harlots and publicans, that they might
provoke them to jealousy.
For these two indeed are chief sins, engendered of violent lust, the one of
sexual desire, the other of the desire of money. And He indicates that this
especially was hearing the law of God, to believe John. For it was not of grace
only, that harlots entered in, but also of righteousness. For not, as continuing
harlots, did they enter in, but having obeyed and believed, and having been
purified and converted, so did they enter in.
Do you see how He rendered His discourse less offensive, and more
penetrating, by the parable, by His bringing in the harlots? For neither did He
say at once, wherefore believed ye not John? But what was much more pricking,
when, He had put forward the publicans and the harlots, then He added this, by
the order of their actions convicting their unpardonable conduct, and showing
that for fear of men they do all things, and for vainglory. For they did not confess
Christ for fear, lest they should be put out of the synagogue; and again, of John
they dared not speak evil, and not even this from reverence, but for fear. All
which things He convicted by His sayings, and with more severity afterwards
did He go on to inflict the blow, saying, "But you, when you knew it, repented
not afterwards, that you might believe him."
For an evil thing it is not at the first to choose the good, but it is a heavier
charge not even to be brought round. For this above all makes many wicked,
which I see to be the case with some now from extreme insensibility.
But let no one be like this; but though he be sunk down to the extremity of
wickedness, let him not despair of the change for the better. For it is an easy