SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.8.

condemns a man to death. For this reason a cleric, though he kill a
man in self-defense, is irregular, albeit he intends not to kill him, but
to defend himself.
Reply to Objection 4: The act of fornication or adultery is not
necessarily directed to the preservation of one's own life, as is the
act whence sometimes results the taking of a man's life.
Reply to Objection 5: The defense forbidden in this passage is that
which comes from revengeful spite. Hence a gloss says: "Not
defending yourselves---that is, not striking your enemy back."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether one is guilty of murder through killing

someone by chance?
Objection 1: It would seem that one is guilty of murder through
killing someone by chance. For we read (Gn. 4:23,24) that Lamech
slew a man in mistake for a wild beast, and that he was accounted
guilty of murder. Therefore one incurs the guilt of murder through
killing a man by chance.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Ex. 21:22): "If . . . one strike a
woman with child, and she miscarry indeed . . . if her death ensue
thereupon, he shall render life for life." Yet this may happen without
any intention of causing her death. Therefore one is guilty of murder
through killing someone by chance.
Objection 3: Further, the Decretals [Dist. 1] contain several canons
prescribing penalties for unintentional homicide. Now penalty is not
due save for guilt. Therefore he who kills a man by chance, incurs
the guilt of murder.
On the contrary, Augustine says to Publicola (Ep. xlvii): "When we
do a thing for a good and lawful purpose, if thereby we
unintentionally cause harm to anyone, it should by no means be
imputed to us." Now it sometimes happens by chance that a person
is killed as a result of something done for a good purpose. Therefore
the person who did it is not accounted guilty.
I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Phys. ii, 6) "chance is a
cause that acts beside one's intention." Hence chance happenings,
strictly speaking, are neither intended nor voluntary. And since every
sin is voluntary, according to Augustine (De Vera Relig. xiv) it
follows that chance happenings, as such, are not sins.
Nevertheless it happens that what is not actually and directly
voluntary and intended, is voluntary and intended accidentally,
according as that which removes an obstacle is called an accidental
cause. Wherefore he who does not remove something whence
homicide results whereas he ought to remove it, is in a sense guilty
of voluntary homicide. This happens in two ways: first when a man
causes another's death through occupying himself with unlawful
things which he ought to avoid: secondly, when he does not take

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.9.