For each nature in union with the other performs the actions which are proper to it. The Word those which are proper to the Word, the flesh those which are proper to the flesh. The one is resplendent with miracles, the other succumbs to injuries. And as the Word recedes not from equality with the Father's glory, so the flesh parts not with the nature of our race. For (and it must be said again and again), one and the same person is truly the Son of God, and truly the Son of man: — God, for "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" (Jn 1:1), man, for "the Word was made flesh and dwelt in us" (Jn 1:14); God, for "all things were made by Him, and without Him was not any thing made" (Jn 1:3), man, for "He was made of a woman, made under the law" (Gal 4:4). The nativity of the flesh is a manifestation of human nature, the birth of a virgin a token of divine power. The infancy of the little Child is exhibited in the lowliness of swaddling clothes, the majesty of the most High is declared by the voices of angels. He whom wicked Herod seeks to kill is like a human infant; but He whom the Magi rejoice suppliantly to adore is Lord of all.

When He came to the baptism of John His forerunner, lest the Godhead which was covered by the veil of flesh should be concealed, the Father's voice thundered from heaven, "This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (Mt 3:17). He whom as man the devil tempts with his subtlety, the same, as God, is ministered to by angels. To hunger, to thirst, to be weary, to sleep, is manifestly human; but with five loaves to satisfy five thousand men, and to bestow on the Samaritan woman that living water, which whosoever drinks shall never thirst, to walk upon the surface of the sea without sinking, and to rebuke the tempest, and lay the surging waves, is without question divine.

As, therefore, to be brief, it belongs not to the same nature to weep with pity for a dead friend, and with a command to raise the same restored to life, on the removal of the stone which covered the grave wherein he had lain four days; or to hang upon the cross, and, changing light into darkness, to make all the elements tremble; or to be pierced with nails, and to open the gates of Paradise to the believing malefactor — so it does not belong to the same nature to say, "I and My Father are one" (Jn 10:30), and to say, "The Father is greater than I" (Jn 14:28). For although in the Lord Jesus Christ there is one Person of God and Man, that from which there is in both a common contumely is one, that from which a common glory another. From ours He has the human nature inferior to the Father, from the Father the Divine nature equal to the Father.

---

## CHAPTER V

On account, therefore, of this unity of Person to be understood in both natures, both the Son of man is said to have descended from heaven, when the Son of God took flesh of His Virgin Mother, and again the Son of God is said to have been crucified and buried, when He suffered these things, not in the Divine nature in which He is the only-begotten of the Father, co-eternal and consubstantial with Him, but in the weakness of human nature. Whence also we all confess in the Creed that "THE ONLY-BEGOTTEN SON OF GOD WAS CRUCIFIED AND BURIED," according to the saying of the Apostle, "For if they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory" (1 Cor 2:8).