THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.65, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: Guilt and punishment are diversified both
according to species, inasmuch as there are various species of guilt
and punishment, and according to men's various states and
habitudes. And in this respect it was necessary to have a number of
sacraments, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: In hierarchical actions we must consider the
agents, the recipients and the actions. The agents are the ministers
of the Church; and to these the sacrament of order belongs. The
recipients are those who approach the sacraments: and these are
brought into being by Matrimony. The actions are "cleansing,"
"enlightening," and "perfecting." Mere cleansing, however, cannot
be a sacrament of the New Law, which confers grace: yet it belongs
to certain sacramentals, i.e. catechism and exorcism. But cleansing
coupled with enlightening, according to Dionysius, belongs to
Baptism; and, for him who falls back into sin, they belong
secondarily to Penance and Extreme Unction. And perfecting, as
regards power, which is, as it were, a formal perfection, belongs to
Confirmation: while, as regards the attainment of the end, it belongs
to the Eucharist.
Reply to Objection 4: In the sacrament of Confirmation we receive
the fulness of the Holy Ghost in order to be strengthened; while in
Extreme Unction man is prepared for the immediate attainment of
glory; and neither of these two purposes was becoming to the Old
Testament. Consequently, nothing in the old Law could correspond
to these sacraments. Nevertheless, the sacraments of the old Law
were more numerous, on account of the various kinds of sacrifices
and ceremonies.
Reply to Objection 5: There was need for a special sacrament to be
applied as a remedy against venereal concupiscence: first because
by this concupiscence, not only the person but also the nature is
defiled: secondly, by reason of its vehemence whereby it clouds the
reason.
Reply to Objection 6: Holy Water and other consecrated things are
not called sacraments, because they do not produce the sacramental
effect, which is the receiving of grace. They are, however, a kind of
disposition to the sacraments: either by removing obstacles. thus
holy water is ordained against the snares of the demons, and against

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.65, C.2.

venial sins: or by making things suitable for the conferring of a
sacrament; thus the altar and vessels are consecrated through
reverence for the Eucharist.
Reply to Objection 7: Oblations and tithes, both the Law of nature
and in the Law of Moses, ere ordained not only for the sustenance of
the ministers and the poor, but also figuratively; and consequently
they were sacraments. But now they remain no longer as figures,
and therefore they are not sacraments.
Reply to Objection 8: The infusion of grace is not necessary for the
blotting out of venial sin. Wherefore, since grace is infused in each
of the sacraments of the New Law, none of them was instituted
directly against venial sin. This is taken away by certain
sacramentals, for instance, Holy Water and such like. Some,
however, hold that Extreme Unction is ordained against venial sin.
But of this we shall speak in its proper place (XP, Question 30,
Article 1).