SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.5.

and officious lies are not mortal sins.
I answer that, A mortal sin is, properly speaking, one that is contrary
to charity whereby the soul lives in union with God, as stated above
(Question 24, Article 12; Question 35, Article 3). Now a lie may be
contrary to charity in three ways: first, in itself; secondly, in respect
of the evil intended; thirdly, accidentally.
A lie may be in itself contrary to charity by reason of its false
signification. For if this be about divine things, it is contrary to the
charity of God, whose truth one hides or corrupts by such a lie; so
that a lie of this kind is opposed not only to the virtue of charity, but
also to the virtues of faith and religion: wherefore it is a most
grievous and a mortal sin. If, however, the false signification be
about something the knowledge of which affects a man's good, for
instance if it pertain to the perfection of science or to moral conduct,
a lie of this description inflicts an injury on one's neighbor, since it
causes him to have a false opinion, wherefore it is contrary to
charity, as regards the love of our neighbor, and consequently is a
mortal sin. On the other hand, if the false opinion engendered by the
lie be about some matter the knowledge of which is of no
consequence, then the lie in question does no harm to one's
neighbor; for instance, if a person be deceived as to some
contingent particulars that do not concern him. Wherefore a lie of
this kind, considered in itself, is not a mortal sin.
As regards the end in view, a lie may be contrary to charity, through
being told with the purpose of injuring God, and this is always a
mortal sin, for it is opposed to religion; or in order to injure one's
neighbor, in his person, his possessions or his good name, and this
also is a mortal sin, since it is a mortal sin to injure one's neighbor,
and one sins mortally if one has merely the intention of committing a
mortal sin. But if the end intended be not contrary to charity, neither
will the lie, considered under this aspect, be a mortal sin, as in the
case of a jocose lie, where some little pleasure is intended, or in an
officious lie, where the good also of one's neighbor is intended.
Accidentally a lie may be contrary to charity by reason of scandal or
any other injury resulting therefrom: and thus again it will be a
mortal sin, for instance if a man were not deterred through scandal
from lying publicly.
Reply to Objection 1: The passages quoted refer to the mischievous
lie, as a gloss explains the words of Ps. 5:7, "Thou wilt destroy all

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.5.

that speak a lie."
Reply to Objection 2: Since all the precepts of the decalogue are
directed to the love of God and our neighbor, as stated above
(Question 44, Article 1, ad 3; FS, Question 100, Article 5, ad 1), a lie is
contrary to a precept of the decalogue, in so far as it is contrary to
the love of God and our neighbor. Hence it is expressly forbidden to
bear false witness against our neighbor.
Reply to Objection 3: Even a venial sin can be called "iniquity" in a
broad sense, in so far as it is beside the equity of justice; wherefore
it is written (1 Jn. 3:4): "Every sin is iniquity." It is in this sense that
Augustine is speaking.
Reply to Objection 4: The lie of the midwives may be considered in
two ways. First as regards their feeling of kindliness towards the
Jews, and their reverence and fear of God, for which their virtuous
disposition is commended. For this an eternal reward is due.
Wherefore Jerome (in his exposition of Is. 65:21, 'And they shall
build houses') explains that God "built them spiritual houses."
Secondly, it may be considered with regard to the external act of
lying. For thereby they could merit, not indeed eternal reward, but
perhaps some temporal meed, the deserving of which was not
inconsistent with the deformity of their lie, though this was
inconsistent with their meriting an eternal reward. It is in this sense
that we must understand the words of Gregory, and not that they
merited by that lie to lose the eternal reward as though they had
already merited it by their preceding kindliness, as the objection
understands the words to mean.
Reply to Objection 5: Some say that for the perfect every lie is a
mortal sin. But this assertion is unreasonable. For no circumstance
causes a sin to be infinitely more grievous unless it transfers it to
another species. Now a circumstance of person does not transfer a
sin to another species, except perhaps by reason of something
annexed to that person, for instance if it be against his vow: and this
cannot apply to an officious or jocose lie. Wherefore an officious or a
jocose lie is not a mortal sin in perfect men, except perhaps
accidentally on account of scandal. We may take in this sense the
saying of Augustine that "it is a precept of perfection not only not to
lie at all, but not even to wish to lie": although Augustine says this
not positively but dubiously, for he begins by saying: "Unless
perhaps it is a precept," etc. Nor does it matter that they are placed