a riddle. Or rather, if you will, let us learn what the curse is, and then we will
question him upon these points, and shall understand this unspeakable and
extraordinary love. What then is the curse? Hear his own words, "If any man
love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed." [ anathema, 1 Corinthians
16:22] That is, let him be set apart from all, removed from all. For as in the case
of a thing dedicated ([ἀ] [νάθημα]), which is set apart for God, no one would
venture so much as to touch it with his hand or even to come near it; so too with
a man who is put apart from the Church, in cutting him off from all, and
removing him as far off as possible, he calls him by this name ([ἀ] [νάθεμα]) in a
contrary sense, thus with much fear denouncing to all men to keep apart from
him, and to spring away from him. For the thing set apart, no one, from respect
of it, ventures to come near to. But from him who is cut off, all men separate
themselves from a very opposite feeling. And so the separation is the same, and
both the one and the other are equally removed from the generality. Still, the
mode of separation is not the same, but in this case it is the opposite to what it is
in that. For from the one they keep back as being dedicated to God; from the
other as being estranged from God, and broken off from the Church. This then is
what Paul means when he says, "I could wish that myself were accursed from
Christ." And he does not say merely that I could be willing, but using a stronger
term, he says even, "I could wish" (or pray [ηὐχόμην]). But if what he says
trouble you in your ([ἀ] [σθενέστερον]) feebleness, consider the real state of the
case, not only that he wished to be separated, but also the cause for which he
wished it, and then you will see the greatness of his love. For he even
circumcised [Timothy, Acts 16:3], and we pay no attention to what was done, but
to the intention of it, and the cause of it, and hence we wonder at him the more.
And he not only circumcised a person, but he even shaved himself and sacrificed
[Acts 18:18; Acts 21:24], and yet surely we do not therefore assert him to be a
Jew, but upon this very score to be perfectly free from Judaizing, and clear of it,
and a genuine worshipper of Christ. As then when you see him circumcising and
sacrificing, you do not therefore condemn him as Judaizing, but upon this very

score have the best reason for crowning him as quite an alien to Judaism; thus
when you see him to have become desirous of being accursed, do not therefore
be troubled, but upon this very ground give him the loudest praise, when you
know the cause why he wishes this. For if we do not look narrowly into the
causes, we shall call Elijah a manslayer, and Abraham not a manslayer only, but
a murderer of his son. And Phinees and Peter we shall implead for murder
likewise. Nor is it in the case of the saints alone, but also of the God of the
universe, that he who does not keep to this rule, will be suspecting sundry
unbecoming things. Now to prevent this happening in all cases of the kind, let us
bring together both the cause, and the intention, and the time, and all that makes
in behalf of what is so done, and in this way let us investigate the actions. And
this we must do now also in the case of this blessed soul. Now what is the cause?
It is Jesus Himself Who is so beloved. And yet he does not say for Him; for what
he says is, I would wish that I were accursed from Him for my brethren. And this
comes of his humbleness of mind. For he has no wish to make himself
conspicuous, as if he were saying something great, and doing Christ a favor in
this. Wherefore also he said "my kinsmen," that he may conceal his high aim
([πλεονέκτημα] [)] . Since to see that he wished it all for Christ's sake, just hear
what comes next. After speaking of kinsmen then, he proceeds,
Ver. 4, 5. "To whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,and the promises; whose are
the father's, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Who is over all,
God blessed for ever. Amen."
And what is this? One asks. For if with a view to the belief of others he was
willing to become accursed, he ought to have also wished for this in the Gentiles'
behalf. But if he wishes it in the Jews' behalf only, it is a proof that he did not
wish it for Christ's sake, but for his own relationship to them. But in fact if he
had prayed for the Gentiles only, this would not have been equally clear. But
since it is for the Jews only, it is a clear proof that it is only for Christ's glory that
he is thus earnest. And I am aware that what I am saying will seem a paradox to