2 Corinthians 10:17
"He that glories, let him glory in the Lord." This also, he says, accrues to us
from God.

2 Corinthians 10:18
"For not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends."
He did not say, we are so, "but whom the Lord commends." Do you see how
modestly he speaks? But if as he proceeds he stirs up loftier words, wonder not,
for this also comes of Paul's prudence. For if he had gone on in every part to
speak lowly words, he would not have hit these men so effectually, nor have
extricated the disciples from their error. For it is possible both by modesty illtimed to do harm, and by saying something admirable of one's self at a proper
time to do good. As therefore he also did. For there was no little danger in the
disciples being persuaded into any mean opinion of Paul. Not that Paul sought
the glory that comes of men. For had he sought this, he would not have kept
silence so long on those great and marvellous matters of "fourteen years ago;" [2
Corinthians 12:20] nor would he, when necessity was laid upon him, have so
shrunk back and hesitated to speak of them; very evidently he would not even
then have spoken, had he not been compelled. Certainly then it was not from a
desire after the glory which comes from men that he said these things, but out of
tender care for the disciples. For since they cast reproaches at him as a braggart,
and as boastful in words but able to show nothing in deeds, he is compelled
subsequently to come to those revelations. Although he had it in his power to
convince them by his deeds, at the time when he said these things: yet he still
persists, nevertheless, in using menaces in words. For he was most especially
free from vain-glory; and this his whole life proves, both before and after this.
For instance, it was because of this that he changed all at once; and having
changed, confounded the Jews and cast away all that honor he had from them,
although he was himself their head and their champion. But he considered none
of those things when he had found the truth; but took instead their insults and

contumely; for he looked to the salvation of the many, thinking this everything.
For he that thinks nothing of hell nor of heaven nor of ten thousand worlds in
regard of his longing after Christ, how should he hunt after the glory which
comes from the many? By no means; but he is even very lowly when he may be
so, and brands his former life with infamy when he calls himself, "a blasphemer,
and a persecutor, and injurious." [1 Timothy 1:13] And his disciple Luke too
says many things of him, evidently having learned them from himself, himself
displaying fully his former life no less than that after his conversion.
4. Now I say these things, not that we may hear merely, but that we may
learn also. For if he remembered those transgressions before the Laver, although
they were all effaced, what forgiveness can we have who are unmindful of those
after the Laver ourselves? What do you say, O man? You have offended God,
and do you forget? This is a second offense, a second enmity. Of what sins then
do you ask forgiveness? Of those which thou even know not yourself? Surely,
(for is it not so?) you are deeply anxious and thoughtful how you may give
account of them, thou who dost not so much as care to remember them, but
sportest with what is no sporting matter. But there will come a time when our
sport can go on no longer. For we must needs die: (for the great insensibility of
the many obliges me to speak even of things that are evident:) and must needs
rise again, and be judged, and be punished; nay rather this needs not, if we
choose. For those other things are not at our own disposal; neither our end, nor
our resurrection, nor our judgment, but at our Lord's; but our suffering
punishment or not is at our own disposal; for this is of those things that may or
may not happen. But if we choose, we shall make it of the number of impossible
things; just as Paul, as Peter, as all the saints did; for it is even impossible for
them to be punished. If therefore we have a mind, it is in like manner impossible
also that we should suffer ought. For even if we have offended in ten thousand
things, it is possible to recover ourselves so long as we are here. Let us then
recover ourselves: and let the old man consider that in a little while hence he will
depart, since he took his pleasure long enough in his lifetime; (although what