disease was great, he immediately adopts the remedy of amputation with open
front and with all boldness; but in this case, as they had done nothing of the sort,
he vouchsafes them the gratification of the title, he casts out the others, and says,
"Beware of the concision; for we are the circumcision"— how?— "who worship
God in spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh." He said not that "we test the
one circumcision and the other, which is the better of the two"; but he would not
even allow it a share in the name; but what does he say? That that circumcision
is "concision." Why? Because they do nothing but cut the flesh up. For when
what is done is not of the law, it is nothing else than a concision and cutting up
of the flesh; it was then either for this reason that he called it so, or because they
were trying to cut the Church in two; and we call the thing "cutting up" in those
who do this at random, without aim and without skill. Now if you must seek
circumcision, he says, you will find it among us, "who worship God in spirit,"
i.e. who worship spiritually.
For answer me, which is superior, the soul or the body? Evidently the
former. Therefore that circumcision is also superior, or rather, no longer superior,
but this is the only circumcision; for while the type stood, He rightly brought it
forward in conjunction, writing, "For you shall circumcise the foreskins of your
hearts." [Jeremiah 4:4] In the same way in the Epistle to the Romans he does
away with it, saying, "for he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, not in the letter."
[Romans 2:28-29] And lastly, he takes from it the very name, "neither is it
circumcision," he maintains; for the type while the reality is yet to come, is
called this, but when the reality has come, it no longer retains the title. As in
delineation, a man has drawn a king in outline; so long as the colors are not put
on we say, Lo, there is the king, but when they are added, the type is lost in the
reality, and ceases to show. And he said not, "for the circumcision is in us," but
"we are the circumcision," and justly; for this is the Man, the circumcision in
virtue, this is really the Man. And he did not say, "For among them is the

concision"; for they themselves are henceforth in a condition of ruin and of
wickedness. But no longer, says he, is circumcision performed in the body, but in
the heart. "And have no confidence," says he, "in the flesh; though I myself might
have confidence even in the flesh." [Philippians 3:4] What does he call
"confidence" here, and "in the flesh"? Boasting, boldness, a high tone. And he
did well to add this; for if he had been of the Gentiles, and had condemned
circumcision, and not only circumcision, but all those that adopted it out of
place, it would have seemed that he was running it down, because he lacked the
high ancestry of Judaism, as being a stranger to its solemn rites, and having no
part therein. But as it is, he, who, though a sharer, yet blames them, will not
therefore blame them as having no share in them, but as disowning them; not
from ignorance, but most especially from acquaintance with them. Accordingly
observe what he says in his Epistle to the Galatians also; having been brought
into a necessity of saying great things about himself, how even in these
circumstances does he manifest nought but humility. "For you have heard, of my
manner of life in time past," he says, "in the Jews' religion" [Galatians 1:13]; and
again here; "if any other man thinks to have confidence in the flesh, I more."
[Philippians 3:4]. And he immediately added, "a Hebrew of Hebrews." But "if
any other man," says he, showing the necessity, showing that it was on their
account that he spoke. "If you have confidence," he says, I also say so, since I am
silent. And observe the absence of all ungraciousness in the reproofs; by
forbearing to do it by name, he gave even them the opportunity of retracing their
steps. "If any one thinks to have confidence"; and it was well to say "thinks,"
either inasmuch as they really had no such confidence, or as that confidence was
no real confidence, for all was by necessity, and not of choice. "Circumcised on
the eighth day"; and he sets down the first that wherein they chiefly boasted, viz.
the ordinance of circumcision. "Of the stock of Israel." He pointed out both these
circumstances, that he was neither a proselyte, nor born of proselytes; for from
his being circumcised on the eighth day, it follows that he was not a proselyte,
and from his being of the stock of Israel, that he was not of proselyte parents.