FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

their faith in the Redeemer, while taking part in the figurative
sacrifices.
The impediments to external worship consisted in certain bodily
uncleannesses; which were considered in the first place as existing
in man, and consequently in other animals also, and in man's
clothes, dwelling-place, and vessels. In man himself uncleanness
was considered as arising partly from himself and partly from
contact with unclean things. Anything proceeding from man was
reputed unclean that was already subject to corruption, or exposed
thereto: and consequently since death is a kind of corruption, the
human corpse was considered unclean. In like manner, since leprosy
arises from corruption of the humors, which break out externally and
infect other persons, therefore were lepers also considered unclean;
and, again, women suffering from a flow of blood, whether from
weakness, or from nature (either at the monthly course or at the time
of conception); and, for the same reason, men were reputed unclean
if they suffered from a flow of seed, whether due to weakness, to
nocturnal pollution, or to sexual intercourse. Because every humor
issuing from man in the aforesaid ways involves some unclean
infection. Again, man contracted uncleanness by touching any
unclean thing whatever.
Now there was both a literal and a figurative reason for these
uncleannesses. The literal reason was taken from the reverence due
to those things that belong to the divine worship: both because men
are not wont, when unclean, to touch precious things: and in order
that by rarely approaching sacred things they might have greater
respect for them. For since man could seldom avoid all the aforesaid
uncleannesses, the result was that men could seldom approach to
touch things belonging to the worship of God, so that when they did
approach, they did so with greater reverence and humility. Moreover,
in some of these the literal reason was that men should not be kept
away from worshipping God through fear of coming in contact with
lepers and others similarly afflicted with loathsome and contagious
diseases. In others, again, the reason was to avoid idolatrous
worship: because in their sacrificial rites the Gentiles sometimes
employed human blood and seed. All these bodily uncleannesses
were purified either by the mere sprinkling of water, or, in the case of
those which were more grievous, by some sacrifice of expiation for
the sin which was the occasion of the uncleanness in question.
The figurative reason for these uncleannesses was that they were

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

figures of various sins. For the uncleanness of any corpse signifies
the uncleanness of sin, which is the death of the soul. The
uncleanness of leprosy betokened the uncleanness of heretical
doctrine: both because heretical doctrine is contagious just as
leprosy is, and because no doctrine is so false as not to have some
truth mingled with error, just as on the surface of a leprous body one
may distinguish the healthy parts from those that are infected. The
uncleanness of a woman suffering from a flow of blood denotes the
uncleanness of idolatry, on account of the blood which is offered up.
The uncleanness of the man who has suffered seminal loss signifies
the uncleanness of empty words, for "the seed is the word of God."
The uncleanness of sexual intercourse and of the woman in childbirth signifies the uncleanness of original sin. The uncleanness of
the woman in her periods signifies the uncleanness of a mind that is
sensualized by pleasure. Speaking generally, the uncleanness
contracted by touching an unclean thing denotes the uncleanness
arising from consent in another's sin, according to 2 Cor. 6:17: "Go
out from among them, and be ye separate . . . and touch not the
unclean thing."
Moreover, this uncleanness arising from the touch was contracted
even by inanimate objects; for whatever was touched in any way by
an unclean man, became itself unclean. Wherein the Law attenuated
the superstition of the Gentiles, who held that uncleanness was
contracted not only by touch, but also by speech or looks, as Rabbi
Moses states (Doct. Perplex. iii) of a woman in her periods. The
mystical sense of this was that "to God the wicked and his
wickedness are hateful alike" (Wis. 14:9).
There was also an uncleanness of inanimate things considered in
themselves, such as the uncleanness of leprosy in a house or in
clothes. For just as leprosy occurs in men through a corrupt humor
causing putrefaction and corruption in the flesh; so, too, through
some corruption and excess of humidity or dryness, there arises
sometimes a kind of corruption in the stones with which a house is
built, or in clothes. Hence the Law called this corruption by the name
of leprosy, whereby a house or a garment was deemed to be
unclean: both because all corruption savored of uncleanness, as
stated above, and because the Gentiles worshipped their household
gods as a preservative against this corruption. Hence the Law
prescribed such houses, where this kind of corruption was of a
lasting nature, to be destroyed; and such garments to be burnt, in
order to avoid all occasion of idolatry. There was also an