since it seems to deliver from temptations, he attributes to it the contrary of that
which the rich supposed. Others again held fast by the wisdom that is without, as
though by it establishing Christ's doctrine; he signifies that not only it gives no
aid to the cross, but even makes it void. They held to going to law before
strangers, thinking it unmeet to be judged by their own, as if those without were
wiser: he points out that going to law before them that are without is shameful.
They clave to things offered in sacrifice to idols, as displaying perfect
knowledge: he intimates that this is a mark of imperfect knowledge, not to know
how to manage in the things which concern our neighbors. So also here, because
they were wild about this gift of tongues, through their love of glory, he signifies
that this on the other hand more than any thing brings shame upon them, not
only depriving them of glory, but also involving them in a suspicion of madness.
But he did not at once say this, but having spoken very many things before,
when he had made his discourse acceptable, then he brings in that topic so very
contrary to their opinion. And this in fact is no more than the common rule; that
he who intends thoroughly to shake a deep-rooted opinion and to turn men round
to its contrary, must not at once state the opposites: otherwise he will be
ridiculous in the eyes of them that are preoccupied by the contrary conviction.
Since that which is very much beside expectation cannot be from the beginning
easily received, but you must first well undermine by other arguments, and then
give it the contrary turn.
Thus for example he did when discoursing of marriage: I mean, since many
regarded it as a thing which brings ease, and he wished to intimate that the
abstaining from marriage was ease; if he had said this at once he would not so
easily have made it acceptable: whereas now, having stated it after much other
matter and timing its introduction exactly, he strongly touched the hearers. This
also he did in respect of virginity. For before this having said much, and after
this again, at last he says, "I spare you," and, "I would have you to be free from
cares." [1 Corinthians 7:28-32]
This then he does in respect of the tongues, showing that they not only

deprive of glory, but also bring shame upon those who have them in the eyes of
the unbelievers. But prophecy, on the contrary, is both free from reproach among
the unbelievers, and has very great credit and usefulness. For none will say in
regard to prophesying, "they are mad;" nor will any one deride them that
prophesy; but, on the contrary, will be astonished at and admire them. For "he is
reproved by all," i.e., the things which he has in his heart, are brought forward
and shown unto all: now it is not the same thing for any one to come in and see
one speaking in Persian and another in Syriac, and to come in and hear the
secrets of his own mind; as whether he comes in as a tempter and with evil mind,
or sincerely; or that such and such a thing has been done by him, and such
another designed. For this is much more awful and more profitable than the
other. For this cause therefore, whereas of the tongues he says, "you are mad;"
not however affirming this of himself, but of their judgment: i.e., "they will say,"
says he, "that you are mad;" here, on the contrary, he makes use both of the
verdict of the facts , and that of those who are the objects of the benefit. "For he
is reproved by all," says he, he is judged by all; and thus are the secrets of his
heart made manifest; and so he will fall down on his face and worship God,
declaring that God is around you indeed. Do you see that this is not capable of
two interpretations: how in the former case what is done may be doubted of, and
here and there an unbeliever might ascribe it to madness? Whereas here there
will be no such thing, but he will both wonder and worship, first making a
confession by his deeds, and then by his words also. Thus also Nebuchadnezzar
worshipped God, saying, "Of a truth, your God, He is the God that reveals
secrets, seeing you could reveal this secret." [Daniel 2:47] Do you see the might
of prophecy, how it changed that savage one and brought him under instruction
and introduced him to faith?