conjecture, he means, it is my persuasion; I am fully assured of it. If therefore
from no human motive you have embraced it, nothing will be able to shake your
faith.
Ver. 6. "Wherefore I put you in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of
God, which is in you by the putting on of my hands."
You see how greatly dispirited and dejected he considers him to be. He
almost says, "Think not that I despise you, but be assured that I do not condemn
you, nor have I forgotten you. Consider, at any rate, your mother and your
grandmother. It is because I know that you have unfeigned faith that I put you in
remembrance." For it requires much zeal to stir up the gift of God. As fire
requires fuel, so grace requires our alacrity, that it may be ever fervent. "I put
you in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, that is in you by the putting
on of my hands," that is, the grace of the Spirit, which you have received, for
presiding over the Church, for the working of miracles, and for every service.
For this grace it is in our power to kindle or to extinguish; wherefore he
elsewhere says, "Quench not the Spirit." [1 Thessalonians 5:19] For by sloth and
carelessness it is quenched, and by watchfulness and diligence it is kept alive.
For it is in you indeed, but do thou render it more vehement, that is, fill it with
confidence, with joy and delight. Stand manfully.
Ver. 7. "For God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of
love, and of a sound mind."
That is, we did not receive the Spirit, that we should shrink from exertion,
but that we may speak with boldness. For to many He gives a spirit of fear, as we
read in the wars of the Kings. "A spirit of fear fell upon them." [Exodus 15:16?]
That is, he infused terror into them. But to you He has given, on the contrary, a
spirit of power, and of love toward Himself. This, then, is of grace, and yet not
merely of grace, but when we have first performed our own parts. For the Spirit
that makes us cry, "Abba, Father," inspires us with love both towards Him, and
towards our neighbor, that we may love one another. For love arises from power,
and from not fearing. For nothing is so apt to dissolve love as fear, and a

suspicion of treachery.
"For God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and
of a sound mind": he calls a healthy state of the soul a sound mind, or it may
mean sobriety of mind, or else a sobering of the mind, that we may be soberminded, and that if any evil befall us, it may sober us, and cut off superfluities.
Moral. Let us then not be distressed at the evils that happen to us. This is
sobriety of mind. "In the season of temptation," he says, "make not haste."
[Sirach 2:2] Many have their several griefs at home, and we share in each other's
sorrows, though not in their sources. For one is unhappy on account of his wife,
another on account of his child, or his domestic, another of his friend, another of
his enemy, another of his neighbor, another from some loss. And various are the
causes of sorrow, so that we can find no one free from trouble and unhappiness
of some kind or other, but some have greater sorrows and some less. Let us not
therefore be impatient, nor think ourselves only to be unhappy.
For there is no such thing in this mortal life as being exempt from sorrow. If
not today, yet tomorrow; if not tomorrow, yet some later day trouble comes. For
as one cannot sail, I mean, over a long sea, and not feel disquietude, so it is not
possible to pass through this life, without experience of sorrow, yea though you
name a rich man; for in that he is rich, he has many occasions of inordinate
desires, yea, though the king himself, since he too is ruled by many, and cannot
do all that he would. Many favors he grants contrary to his wishes, and more
than all men is obliged to do what he would not. How so? Because he has many
about him who wish to receive his gifts. And just think how great is his chagrin,
when he is desirous to effect something, but is unable, either from fear or
suspicion, or hindered by enemies or by friends. Often when he has succeeded in
achieving some end, he loses all the pleasure of it, from many becoming at
enmity with him. Again, do you think that they are free from grief, who live a
life of ease? It is impossible. As a man cannot escape death, so neither can he
escape sorrow. How many troubles must they endure, which we cannot express
in words, and which they only can know by experience! How many have prayed