take away these things. Who then will grieve the most? He that has lost the ten
thousand. But he would not have grieved more, unless he had loved it more; but
if he loves more, he desires more; but if he desires more, he is more in poverty.
For this do we most desire, of which we are most in want, for desire is from
want. For where there is satiety, there cannot be desire. For then are we most
thirsty, when we have most need of drink.
And all these things have I said, to show that if we be vigilant, no one shall
harm us; and that the harm arises not from poverty but from ourselves.
Wherefore I beseech you with all diligence to put away the pest of covetousness,
that we may both be wealthy here, and enjoy the good things eternal, unto which
God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world without end. Amen.

## Homily 81 on Matthew

Matthew 26:17-18.
"Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to
Jesus, saying, Where will You that we prepare for You to eat the Passover? And
He said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master says, My
time is at hand; I will keep the Passover at your house with My disciples."
By the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, he means the day before
that feast; for they are accustomed always to reckon the day from the evening,
and he makes mention of this in which in the evening the passover must be
killed; [John 13:1] for on the fifth day of the week they came unto Him. And this
one calls the day before the feast of unleavened bread, [Luke 22:7] speaking of
the time when they came to Him, and another says on this wise, "Then came the
day of unleavened bread, when the passover must be killed;" by the word
"came," meaning this, it was near, it was at the doors, making mention plainly of
that evening. For they began with the evening, wherefore also each adds, when
the passover was killed.
And they say, "Where will You that we prepare for You to eat the passover?"
So even from this it is manifest, that He had no house, no place of sojourning;
and I suppose neither had they. For surely they would have entreated him to
come there. But neither had they any, having now parted with all things.
But wherefore did He keep the passover? To indicate by all things unto the
last day, that He is not opposed to the law.
And for what possible reason does He send them to an unknown person? To
show by this also that He might have avoided suffering. For He who prevailed
over this man's mind, so that he received them, and that by words; what would
He not have done with them that crucified Him, if it had been His will not to
suffer? And what He did about the ass, this He did here also. For there too He

says, "If any man say anything unto you, you shall say, that the Lord has need of
them;" [Matthew 21:3] and so likewise here, "The Master says, I will keep the
passover at your house." But I marvel not at this only, that he received Him,
being unknown, but that expecting to bring upon himself such enmity and
implacable hostility, he despised the enmity of the multitude.
After this, because they knew him not, He gave them a sign, like as the
prophet touching Saul, saying, "You shall find one going up and carrying a
bottle;" [1 Samuel 10:3] and here, "carrying a pitcher." And see again the
display of his power. For He did not only say, "I will keep the passover," but He
adds another thing also, "My time is at hand." And this He did, at once
continually reminding His disciples of the passion, so that exercised by the
frequency of the prediction, they should be prepared for what was to take place;
and at the same time to show to themselves, and to him that was receiving Him,
and to all the Jews, which I have often mentioned, that not involuntarily does He
come to His passion. And He adds, "with my disciples," in order that both the
preparation should be sufficient, and that the man should not suppose that He
was concealing Himself.
"Now when the evening had come, He sat down with the twelve disciples."
Oh the shamelessness of Judas! For he too was present there, and came to
partake both of the mysteries, and of the meal, and is convicted at the very table,
when although he had been a wild beast, he would have become tame.
For this cause the evangelist also signifies, that while they are eating, Christ
speaks of His betrayal, that both by the time and by the table he might show the
wickedness of the traitor.
For when the disciples had done, as Jesus had appointed them, "when the
evening had come, He sat down with the twelve. And as they did eat, He said,"
we are told, "Verily, I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me." And before
the supper, He had even washed his feet. And see how He spares the traitor. For
He said not, such a one shall betray me; but, "one of you," so as again to give
him power of repentance by concealment. And He chooses to alarm all, for the