doing the whole for them. For the souls of the Saints are very gentle and, loving
unto man, both in regard to their own, and to strangers. And even to the
unreasoning creatures they extend their gentleness. Wherefore also a certain
wise man said, "The righteous pities the souls of his cattle." But if he does those
of cattle, how much more those of men. But since I have mentioned cattle, let us
just consider the shepherds of the sheep who are in the Cappadocian land, and
what they suffer in kind and degree in their guardianship of unreasoning
creatures. They often stay for three days together buried down under the snows.
And those in Libya are said to undergo no less hardships than these, ranging
about for whole months through that wilderness, dreary as it is, and filled with
the direst wild beasts ([θηρία] may include serpents). Now if for unreasonable
things there be so much zeal, what defense are we to set up, who are entrusted
with reasonable souls, and yet slumber on in this deep sleep? For is it right to be
at rest, and in quiet, and not to be running about everywhere, and giving one's
self up to endless deaths in behalf of these sheep? Or know ye not the dignity of
this flock? Was it not for this that your Master took endless pains, and afterwards
poured forth His blood? And do you seek for rest? Now what can be worse than
these Shepherds? Do you not perceive, that there stand round about these sheep
wolves much more fierce and savage than those of this world? Do you not think
with yourself, what a soul he ought to have who is to take in hand this office?
Now men that lead the populace, if they have but common matters to deliberate
on, add days to nights in watching. And we that are struggling in heaven's behalf
sleep even in the daytime. And who is now to deliver us from the punishment for
these things? For if the body were to be cut in pieces, if to undergo ten thousand
deaths, ought one not to run to it as to a feast? And let not the shepherds only,
but the sheep also hear this; that they may make the shepherds the more active
minded, that they may the more encourage their good-will: I do not mean by
anything else but by yielding all compliance and obedience. Thus Paul also bade
them, saying, "Obey them which have the rule over you, and submit yourselves:
for they watch for your souls as they that must give account." [Hebrews 13:17]

And when he says, "watch," he means thousands of labors, cares and dangers.
For the good Shepherd, who is such as Christ wishes for, is contending, before
countless witnesses. For He died once for him; but this man ten thousand times
for the flock, if, that is, he be such a shepherd as he ought to be; for such an one
can die every day. [See on Romans 8:36] And therefore do ye, as being
acquainted with what the labor is, coöperate with them, with prayers, with zeal,
with readiness, with affection, that both we may have to boast of you, and you of
us. For on this ground He entrusted this to the chief of the Apostles, who also
loved Him more than the rest; after first asking him if He was loved by him, that
you may learn that this before other things, is held as a proof of love to Him. For
this requires a vigorous soul. This I have said of the best shepherds; not of
myself and those of our days, but of any one that may be such as Paul was, such
as Peter, such as Moses. These then let us imitate, both the rulers of us and the
ruled. For the ruled may be in the place of a shepherd to his family, to his
friends, to his servants, to his wife, to his children: and if we so order our affairs
we shall attain to all manner of good things. Which God grant that we may all
attain unto, by the grace and love toward man, etc.