Likewise, because they found two contrary particular causes of two
contrary particular effects, they did not know how to reduce these
contrary particular causes to the universal common cause; and
therefore they extended the contrariety of causes even to the first
principles. But since all contraries agree in something common, it is
necessary to search for one common cause for them above their
own contrary proper causes; as above the contrary qualities of the
elements exists the power of a heavenly body; and above all things
that exist, no matter how, there exists one first principle of being, as
was shown above (Question 2, Article 3).
Reply to Objection 1: Contraries agree in one genus, and they also
agree in the nature of being; and therefore, although they have
contrary particular cause, nevertheless we must come at last to one
first common cause.
Reply to Objection 2: Privation and habit belong naturally to the
same subject. Now the subject of privation is a being in potentiality,
as was said above (Question 48, Article 3). Hence, since evil is
privation of good, as appears from what was said above (Question
48, Articles 1, 2,3), it is opposed to that good which has some
potentiality, but not to the supreme good, who is pure act.
Reply to Objection 3: Increase in intensity is in proportion to the
nature of a thing. And as the form is a perfection, so privation
removes a perfection. Hence every form, perfection, and good is
intensified by approach to the perfect term; but privation and evil by
receding from that term. Hence a thing is not said to be evil and
worse, by reason of access to the supreme evil, in the same way as it
is said to be good and better, by reason of access to the supreme
good.
Reply to Objection 4: No being is called evil by participation, but by
privation of participation. Hence it is not necessary to reduce it to
any essential evil.
Reply to Objection 5: Evil can only have an accidental cause, as was
shown above (Article 1). Hence reduction to any 'per se' cause of evil
is impossible. And to say that evil is in the greater number is simply
false. For things which are generated and corrupted, in which alone
can there be natural evil, are the smaller part of the whole universe.
And again, in every species the defect of nature is in the smaller

number. In man alone does evil appear as in the greater number;
because the good of man as regards the senses is not the good of
man as man---that is, in regard to reason; and more men seek good
in regard to the senses than good according to reason.
Reply to Objection 6: In the causes of evil we do not proceed to
infinity, but reduce all evils to some good cause, whence evil follows
accidentally.

## QUESTION 50 — OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE ANGELS ABSOLUTELY

CONSIDERED

Prologue
Now we consider the distinction of corporeal and spiritual creatures:
firstly, the purely spiritual creature which in Holy Scripture is called
angel; secondly, the creature wholly corporeal; thirdly, the
composite creature, corporeal and spiritual, which is man.
Concerning the angels, we consider first what belongs to their
substance; secondly, what belongs to their intellect; thirdly, what
belongs to their will; fourthly, what belongs to their creation.
Their substance we consider absolutely and in relation to corporeal
things.
Concerning their substance absolutely considered, there are five
points of inquiry:
(1) Whether there is any entirely spiritual creature, altogether
incorporeal?
(2) Supposing that an angel is such, we ask whether it is composed
of matter and form?
(3) We ask concerning their number.
(4) Of their difference from each other.
(5) Of their immortality or incorruptibility.