period, by the will of God, handed down to us in the Scriptures, to be the ground and pillar of our
faith. For it is unlawful to assert that they preached before they possessed "perfect knowledge,"
as some do even venture to say, boasting themselves as improvers of the apostles. For, after our
Lord rose from the dead, [the apostles] were invested with power from on high when the Holy
Spirit came down [upon them], were filled from all [His gifts], and had perfect knowledge: they
departed to the ends of the earth, preaching the glad tidings of the good things [sent] from God to
us, and proclaiming the peace of heaven to men, who indeed do all equally and individually possess
the Gospel of God. Matthew also issued a written Gospel among the Hebrews in their own
dialect, while Peter and Paul were preaching at Rome, and laying the foundations of the Church.
After their departure, Mark, the disciple and interpreter of Peter, did also hand down to us in writing
what had been preached by Peter. Luke also, the companion of Paul, recorded in a book the Gospel
preached by him. Afterwards, John, the disciple of the Lord, who also had leaned upon His breast,
did himself publish a Gospel during his residence at Ephesus in Asia.
2. These have all declared to us that there is one God, Creator of heaven and earth, announced
by the law and the prophets; and one Christ the Son of God. If any one do not agree to these truths,
he despises the companions of the Lord; nay more, he despises Christ Himself the Lord; yea, he
despises the Father also, and stands self-condemned, resisting and opposing his own salvation, as
is the case with all heretics.

### Chapter II.—The heretics follow neither Scripture nor tradition.
1. When, however, they are confuted from the Scriptures, they turn round and accuse these
same Scriptures, as if they were not correct, nor of authority, and [assert] that they are ambiguous,
and that the truth cannot be extracted from them by those who are ignorant of tradition. For [they
allege] that the truth was not delivered by means of written documents, but viv‰ voce: wherefore
also Paul declared, "But we speak wisdom among those that are perfect, but not the wisdom of this
world." And this wisdom each one of them alleges to be the fiction of his own inventing, forsooth;
so that, according to their idea, the truth properly resides at one time in Valentinus, at another in
Marcion, at another in Cerinthus, then afterwards in Basilides, or has even been indifferently in
any other opponent, who could speak nothing pertaining to salvation. For every one of these

This is Harvey's rendering of the old Latin, in illo qui contra disputat.

men, being altogether of a perverse disposition, depraving the system of truth, is not ashamed to
preach himself.
2. But, again, when we refer them to that tradition which originates from the apostles, [and]
which is preserved by means of the succession of presbyters in the Churches, they object to tradition,
saying that they themselves are wiser not merely than the presbyters, but even than the apostles,
because they have discovered the unadulterated truth. For [they maintain] that the apostles
intermingled the things of the law with the words of the Saviour; and that not the apostles alone,
but even the Lord Himself, spoke as at one time from the Demiurge, at another from the intermediate
place, and yet again from the Pleroma, but that they themselves, indubitably, unsulliedly, and purely,
have knowledge of the hidden mystery: this is, indeed, to blaspheme their Creator after a most
impudent manner! It comes to this, therefore, that these men do now consent neither to Scripture
nor to tradition.
3. Such are the adversaries with whom we have to deal, my very dear friend, endeavouring like
slippery serpents to escape at all points. Where-fore they must be opposed at all points, if per-chance,
by cutting off their retreat, we may succeed in turning them back to the truth. For, though it is not
an easy thing for a soul under the influence of error to repent, yet, on the other hand, it is not
altogether impossible to escape from error when the truth is brought alongside it.