recompense.
Yea, the patriarch himself we admire for this, that in his own person he ran
to the herd, and snatched up the calf, [Genesis 18:7] and that, when he had three
hundred and eighteen servants born in his house. But now some are filled with
so much pride, as to do these things by servants, and not to be ashamed. "But do
you require me to do these things myself?" one may say. "How then shall I not
seem to be vainglorious?" Nay, but as it is, you are led by another kind of
vainglory to do this, being ashamed to be seen talking with a poor man.
But I am in no respect strict about this; only give, whether by yourself or by
another you are minded to do so; and do not accuse, do not smite, do not revile.
For medicines, not wounds, does he need who comes unto you; mercy, not a
sword. For tell me, if any one who had been smitten with a stone, and had
received a wound in his head, were to let go all others, and run unto your knees,
drenched in his blood; would you indeed smite him with another stone, and add
unto him another wound? I, for my part, think not; but even as it was, you would
endeavor to cure it. Why then doest thou the contrary with respect to the poor?
Do you not know how much power a word has, both to raise up, and to cast
down? "For a word," it is said, "is better than a gift." [Sirach 18:16]
Do you not consider that you are thrusting the sword into yourself, and art
receiving a more grievous wound, when he, being reviled, silently withdraws,
with groans and many tears? Since indeed of God he is sent unto you. Consider
then, in insulting him, upon whom you are causing the insult to pass; when God
indeed sends him unto you, and commands you to give, but thou, so far from
giving, dost even insult him on his coming.
And if you are not aware how exceedingly amiss this is, look at it as among
men, and then you will fully know the greatness of the sin. As thus: if a servant
of yours had been commanded by you to go to another servant, who had money
of yours, to receive it, and were to come back not only with empty hands, but
also with despiteful usage; what would you not do to him that had wrought the
insult? What penalty would you not exact, as though, after this, it were yourself

that had been ill used?
This reckoning do thou make in regard of God also; for truly it is He that
sends the poor to us, and of His we give, if indeed we do give. But if, besides not
giving, we also send them away insulted, consider how many bolts, how many
thunders, that which we are doing deserves.
Duly considering then all these things, let us both bridle our tongue, and put
away inhumanity, and let us stretch forth the hand to give alms, and not with
money only, but with words also, let us relieve such as are in need; that we may
both escape the punishment for reviling, and may inherit the kingdom which is
for blessing and almsgiving, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.