John 21:12
"Come," He says, "dine." "And none of them dared ask Him."
For they no longer had the same boldness, nor were they so confident, nor
did they now approach Him with speech, but with silence and great fear and
reverence, sat down giving heed to Him.
"For they knew that it was the Lord."
And therefore they did not ask Him, "Who are You?" But seeing that His
form was altered, and full of much awfulness, they were greatly amazed, and
desired to ask somewhat concerning it; but fear, and their knowledge that He was
not some other, but the Same, checked the enquiry, and they only ate what He
created for them with a greater exertion of power than before. For here He no
more looks to heaven, nor performs those human acts, showing that those also
which He did were done by way of condescension. And to show that He
remained not with them continually, nor in like manner as before, It says that,

John 21:14
"This was the third time that Jesus appeared to them, after that He arose from
the dead."
And He bids them "to bring of the fish," to show that what they saw was no
appearance. But here indeed it says not that He ate with them, but Luke, in
another place, says that He did; for "He was eating together with them." [Acts
1:4] But the, "how," it is not ours to say; for these things came to pass in too
strange a manner, not as though His nature now needed food, but from an act of
condescension, in proof of the Resurrection.
3. Perhaps when you heard these things, you glowed, and called those
happy who were then with Him, and those who shall be with Him at the day of
the general Resurrection. Let us then use every exertion that we may see that
admirable Face. For if when now we hear we so burn, and desire to have been in
those days which He spent upon earth, and to have heard His Voice, and seen His
face, and to have approached, and touched, and ministered unto Him; consider
how great a thing it is to see Him no longer in a mortal body, nor doing human
actions, but with a body guard of Angels, being ourselves also in a form of
unmixed purity, and beholding Him, and enjoying the rest of that bliss which
passes all language. Wherefore, I entreat, let us use every means, so as not to
miss such glory. For nothing is difficult if we be willing, nothing burdensome if
we give heed. "If we endure, we shall also reign with Him." [2 Timothy 2:12]
What then is, "If we endure"? If we bear tribulations, if persecutions, if we walk
in the strait way. For the strait way is by its nature laborious, but by our will it is
rendered light, from the hope of things to come. "For our present light affliction
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while we look not
at the things which are seen, but at those which are not seen." [2 Corinthians
4:17-18] Let us then transfer our eyes to heaven, and continually imagine
"those" things, and behold them. For if we always spend our time with them, we