morose, as though I were curtailing life of some of its pleasure. Why, this is the
very cause of my mourning that things so displeasing are esteemed a sort of
pleasure. For how, I ask, can it be other than displeasing to be insulted and
reviled? To be reproached by all, together with your bride? If any one in the
market place speak ill of your wife, you make ado without end and countest life
not worth living: and can it be that disgracing yourself with your future consort
in the presence of the whole city, you are pleased and lookest gay on the matter?
Why, what strange madness is this!
"But," says one, "the thing is customary." Nay, for this very reason we
ought most to bewail it, because the devil has hedged in the thing with custom.
In fact, since marriage is a solemn thing and that which recruits our race and the
cause of numerous blessings; that evil one, inwardly pining and knowing that it
was ordained as a barrier against uncleanness, by a new device introduces into it
all kinds of uncleanness. At any rate, in such assemblages many virgins have
been even corrupted. And if not so in every case, it is because for the time the
devil is content with those words and those songs, so flagitious; with making a
show of the bride openly, and leading the bridegroom in triumph through the
market-place.
Moreover, because all this takes place in the evening, that not even the
darkness may be a veil to these evils, many torches are brought in, suffering not
the disgraceful scene to be concealed. For what means the vast throng, and what
the wassail, and what the pipes? Most clearly to prevent even those who are in
their houses and plunged [[βαπτιζόμενοι]] in deep sleep from remaining ignorant
of these proceedings; that being wakened by the pipe and leaning to look out of
the lattices, they may be witnesses of the comedy such as it is.
What can one say of the songs themselves, crammed as they are with all
uncleanness, introducing monstrous amours, and unlawful connections, and
subversions of houses, and tragic scenes without end; and making continual
mention of the titles of "friend and lover," "mistress and beloved?" And, what is
still more grievous, that young women are present at these things, having

divested themselves of all modesty; in honor of the bride, rather I should say to
insult her, exposing even their own salvation , and in the midst of wanton young
men acting a shameless part with their disorderly songs, with their foul words,
with their devilish harmony. Tell me then: do you still enquire, "Whence come
adulteries? Whence fornications? Whence violations of marriage?"
12. "But they are not noble nor decent women," you will say, "who do these
things." Why then laugh me to scorn for this remonstrance, having been yourself
aware of this law, before I said any thing. I say, if the proceedings are right,
allow those well-born women also to enact them. For what if these others live in
poverty? Are not they also virgins? Ought not they also to be careful of chastity?
But now here is a virgin dancing in a public theatre of licentious youths; and, I
ask, seems she not unto you more dishonored than a harlot?
But if you say, "Female servants do these things;" neither so do I acquit
you of my charge: for neither to these ought such things to have been permitted.
For hence all these evils have their origin, that of our household we make no
account. But it is enough in the way of contempt to say, "He is a slave," and,
"They are handmaids." And yet, day after day we hear, [Galatians 3:28] "In
Christ Jesus there is neither bond nor free." Again, were it a horse or an ass,
thou dost not overlook it but takest all pains not to have it of an inferior kind;
and your slaves who have souls like your own do you neglect? And why do I say
slaves, when I might say sons and daughters? What then must follow? It cannot
be but grief ([λύπην], qu. [λύμην], "mischief.") must immediately enter in, when
all these are going to ruin. And often also very great losses must ensue, valuable
golden ornaments being lost in the crowd and the confusion.
13. Then after the marriage if perchance a child is born, in this case again
we shall see the same folly and many practices [[σύμβολα]] full of absurdity. For
when the time has come for giving the infant a name, caring not to call it after
the saints as the ancients at first did, they light lamps and give them names, and
name the child after that one which continues burning the longest; from thence
conjecturing that he will live a long time. After all, should there be many