22. We can therefore say that in this passage of John's Gospel we find as it were a first
manifestation of the truth concerning Mary's maternal care. This truth has also found
expression in the teaching of the Second Vatican Council. It is important to note how the
Council illustrates Mary's maternal role as it relates to the mediation of Christ. Thus we
read: "Mary's maternal function towards mankind in no way obscures or diminishes the
unique mediation of Christ, but rather shows its efficacy," because "there is one mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus" (1 Tim. 2:5). This maternal role of Mary
flows, according to God's good pleasure, "from the superabundance of the merits of
Christ; it is founded on his mediation, absolutely depends on it, and draws all its efficacy
from it." It is precisely in this sense that the episode at Cana in Galilee offers us a sort
of first announcement of Mary's mediation, wholly oriented towards Christ and tending to
the revelation of his salvific power.

From the text of John it is evident that it is a mediation which is maternal. As the Council
proclaims: Mary became "a mother to us in the order of grace." This motherhood in the
order of grace flows from her divine motherhood. Because she was, by the design of
divine Providence, the mother who nourished the divine Redeemer, Mary became "an
associate of unique nobility, and the Lord's humble handmaid," who "cooperated by her
obedience, faith, hope and burning charity in the Savior's work of restoring supernatural
life to souls." And "this maternity of Mary in the order of grace. . .will last without
interruption until the eternal fulfillment of all the elect." 46

23. If John's description of the event at Cana presents Mary's caring motherhood at the
beginning of Christ's messianic activity, another passage from the same Gospel confirms
this motherhood in the salvific economy of grace at its crowning moment, namely when
Christ's sacrifice on the Cross, his Paschal Mystery, is accomplished. John's description is
concise: "Standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary
the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple
whom he loved standing near, he said to his mother: 'Woman, behold your son!' Then he
said to the disciple, 'Behold, your mother!' And from that hour the disciple took her to his
own home" (Jn. 19:25-27).

Undoubtedly, we find here an expression of the Son's particular solicitude for his Mother,
whom he is leaving in such great sorrow. And yet the "testament of Christ's Cross" says
more. Jesus highlights a new relationship between Mother and Son, the whole truth and
reality of which he solemnly confirms. One can say that if Mary's motherhood of the
human race had already been outlined, now it is clearly stated and established. It emerges
from the definitive accomplishment of the Redeemer's Paschal Mystery. The Mother of
Christ, who stands at the very center of this mystery-a mystery which embraces each
individual and all humanity-is given as mother to every single individual and all
mankind. The man at the foot of the Cross is John, "the disciple whom he loved." But it
is not he alone. Following tradition, the Council does not hesitate to call Mary "the
Mother of Christ and mother of mankind": since she "belongs to the offspring of Adam
she is one with all human beings.... Indeed she is 'clearly the mother of the members of
Christ...since she cooperated out of love so that there might be born in the Church the
faithful.'"