puffed up, hostile to everybody, passionate, while the power is with them: but if
it be taken away, they are gentle, lowly (and as) human beings, are brought to a
consciousness of their own natural condition. Therefore the Scripture says,
"Pride has holden them unto the end: their iniquity shall go forth as from
fatness." [Psalm 73:6, Septuagint]
Now these things I have spoken, that we should not make enjoyment every
way our object. How then does Paul say, "Rejoice always?" He does not say
simply, "Rejoice," but he adds, "in the Lord." [Philippians 4:4] This is the
greatest joy, such as the Apostles rejoiced withal; the joy of which prisons, and
scourges, and persecutions, and evil report, and all painful things, are the source,
and the root, and the occasion; whence also it comes to a happy issue. But that of
the world, on the contrary, begins with sweets and ends in bitters. Neither do I
forbid to rejoice in the Lord, nay, I earnestly exhort to this. The Apostles were
scourged, and they rejoiced: were bound, and they gave thanks: were stoned, and
they preached. This is the joy I also would have: from nothing bodily has it its
origin, but from spiritual things. It is not possible for him who joys after the
fashion of the world, to rejoice also after a godly sort: for every one who joys
after the world's fashion, has his joy in riches, in luxury, in honor, in power, in
arrogance: but he who rejoices after the mind of God, has his joy in dishonor for
God's sake, in poverty, in want, in fasting, in humbleness of mind. Do you see,
how opposite are the grounds (of joy)? To go without joy here, is to be without
grief also: and to be without grief here, is to go without pleasure too. And in
truth these are the things which produce real joy, since the others have the name
only of joy, but they altogether consist of pain. What misery the arrogant man
endures! How is he cut short ([διακόπτεται]) in the midst of his arrogance,
bespeaking for himself numberless insults, much hatred, great enmity, exceeding
spite, and many an evil eye! Whether it be that he is insulted by greater men, he
grieves: or that he cannot make his stand against everybody, he is mortified.
Whereas the humble man lives in much enjoyment: expecting honor from none,
if he receive honor, he is pleased, but if not, he is not grieved. He takes it

contentedly that he is honored; but above all, none dishonors him. Now not to
seek honor, and yet to be honored— great must be the enjoyment of this. But in
the other, it is just the reverse: he seeks honor, and is not honored. And the
pleasure that the honor gives is not the same to him who seeks it, as it is to him
who seeks it not. The one, however much he receives, thinks he has received
nothing: the other, though you give him ever so little, takes it as though he had
received all. Then again, he who lives in affluence and luxury has numberless
affairs of business, and let his revenues flow in to him ever so easily, and, as it
were, from full fountains, yet he fears the evils arising from luxurious living, and
the uncertainty of the future: but the other is always in a state of security and
enjoyment, having accustomed himself to scantiness of diet. For he does not so
bemoan himself at not partaking of a sumptuous board, as he luxuriates in not
fearing the uncertainty of the future. But the evils arising from luxurious living,
how many and great they are, none can be ignorant: it is necessary, however, to
mention them now. Twofold the war, in the body, and in the soul: twofold the
storm: twofold the diseases; not only in this respect, but because they are both
incurable, and bring with them great calamities. Not so, frugality: but here is
twofold health, twofold the benefits. "Sleep of health," we read, "is in moderate
eating." [Sirach 31:20] For everywhere, that which keeps measure is pleasant,
that which is beyond measure, ceases to please. For say now: on a little spark put
a great pile of fagots, and you will no longer see the fire shining, but much
disagreeable smoke. On a very strong and large man lay a burden which exceeds
his strength, and you will see him with his burden lying prostrate on the ground.
Embark too large a freight in your vessel, and you have ensured a grievous
shipwreck. Just so it is here. For just as in overladen ships, great is the tumult of
the sailors, the pilot, the man at the prow, and the passengers, while they cast
into the sea the things above deck, and things below; so here too, with their
vomitings upwards, and their purgings downwards, they mar their constitutions,
and destroy themselves. And what is the most shameful of all, the mouth is made
to do the office of the nether parts, and that becomes the more shameful member.