naturally so, but of their own will. Now the reason why Porphyry held
that they are naturally deceitful was that, as he contended, demons
are animals with a sensitive nature. Now the sensitive nature is
inclined towards some particular good, with which evil may be
connected. In this way, then, it can have a natural inclination to evil;
yet only accidentally, inasmuch as evil is connected with good.
Reply to Objection 2: The malice of some men can be called natural,
either because of custom which is a second nature; or on account of
the natural proclivity on the part of the sensitive nature to some
inordinate passion, as some people are said to be naturally wrathful
or lustful; but not on the part of the intellectual nature.
Reply to Objection 3: Brute beasts have a natural inclination in their
sensitive nature towards certain particular goods, with which certain
evils are connected; thus the fox in seeking its food has a natural
inclination to do so with a certain skill coupled with deceit.
Wherefore it is not evil in the fox to be sly, since it is natural to him;
as it is not evil in the dog to be fierce, as Dionysius observes (De
Div. Nom. iv).

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the devil was wicked by the fault of his

own will in the first instant of his creation?
Objection 1: It would seem that the devil was wicked by the fault of
his own will in the first instant of his creation. For it is said of the
devil (Jn. 8:44): "He was a murderer from the beginning."
Objection 2: Further, according to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. i, 15), the
lack of form in the creature did not precede its formation in order of
time, but merely in order of nature. Now according to him (Gen. ad
lit. ii, 8), the "heaven," which is said to have been created in the
beginning, signifies the angelic nature while as yet not fully formed:
and when it is said that God said: "Be light made: and light was
made," we are to understand the full formation of the angel by
turning to the Word. Consequently, the nature of the angel was
created, and light was made, in the one instant. But at the same
moment that light was made, it was made distinct from "darkness,"
whereby the angels who sinned are denoted. Therefore in the first
instant of their creation some of the angels were made blessed, and
some sinned.
Objection 3: Further, sin is opposed to merit. But some intellectual
nature can merit in the first instant of its creation; as the soul of
Christ, or also the good angels. Therefore the demons likewise could
sin in the first instant of their creation.
Objection 4: Further, the angelic nature is more powerful than the
corporeal nature. But a corporeal thing begins to have its operation
in the first instant of its creation; as fire begins to move upwards in
the first instant it is produced. Therefore the angel could also have
his operation in the first instant of his creation. Now this operation
was either ordinate or inordinate. It ordinate, then, since he had
grace, he thereby merited beatitude. But with the angels the reward
follows immediately upon merit; as was said above (Question 62,
Article 5). Consequently they would have become blessed at once;
and so would never have sinned, which is false. It remains, then, that
they sinned by inordinate action in their first instant.
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 1:31): "God saw all the things that
He had made, and they were very good." But among them were also
the demons. Therefore the demons were at some time good.