Many reviled, because a certain beautiful virgin stayed, and they railed upon
those who catechised (her). What then? Was it their duty to desist for that? By no
means. For let us not look to this only, whether some be offended, but whether
they are justly offended, and so that it is no hurt to ourselves (to give way). "If
meat," says (Paul), "offend my brother, I will eat no meat as long as the world
lasts." [1 Corinthians 8:13] With reason: for the not eating did (him) no harm. If
however it offend him, that I wish to renounce ([ἀ] [ποτάξασθαι]) (the world), it
is not right to mind him. And whom, you will ask, does this offend? Many, to my
knowledge. When therefore the hindrance is a thing indifferent, let (the thing) be
done. Else, if we were to look only to this, many are the things we have to desist
from: just as, on the other hand, if we should despise (all objections), we have to
destroy many (brethren). As in fact Paul also took thought beforehand
concerning offense: "Lest," he says, "in this liberality which is administered by
us:" for it was attended with no loss (to him) to obviate an ill surmise. But when
we fall into such a necessity as that great evils should ensue through the other's
taking offense let us pay no heed to that person. He has to thank himself for it,
and we are not now accountable, for it was not possible to spare him without
hurt (to ourselves). Some were offended, because certain believers sat down to
meat in (heathen) temples. It was not right to sit down: for no harm came of this
(their not doing it). They were offended, because Peter ate with the Gentiles. But
he indeed spared them, but (Paul) not so. On all occasions it behooves us in
following the laws of God to take great pains that we give no matter of offense;
that both ourselves may not have to answer for it, and may have mercy
vouchsafed us from God, by the grace and loving-kindness of His only-begotten
Son, with Whom to the Father and Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion,
honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 47 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXI. 39, 40
"But Paul said, I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, a
citizen of no mean city: and I beseech you, suffer me to speak unto the people.
And when he had given him license, Paul stood on the stairs, and beckoned with
the hand unto the people. And when there was made a great silence, he spoke
unto them in the Hebrew tongue, saying."
Observe how, when he discourses to those that are without, he does not
decline availing himself of the aids afforded by the laws. Here he awes the
tribune by the name of his city. And again, elsewhere he said, "Openly,
uncondemned, Romans as we are, they have cast us into prison." [Acts 19:37]
For since the tribune said, "Are you that Egyptian?" he immediately drew him
off from that surmise: then, that he may not be thought to deny his nation, he
says at once, "I am a Jew:" he means his religion. (b) What then? He did not
deny (that he was a Christian): God forbid: for he was both a Jew and a
Christian, observing what things he ought: since indeed he, most of all men, did
obey the law: (a) as in fact he elsewhere calls himself, "Under the law to
Christ." [1 Corinthians 9:21] What is this, I pray? (c) The man that believes in
Christ. And when discoursing with Peter, he says: "We, Jews by nature.— But I
beseech you, suffer me to speak unto the people." [Galatians 2:15] And this is a
proof, that he does not speak lies, seeing he takes all as his witnesses. Observe
again how mildly he speaks. This again is a very strong argument that he is
chargeable with no crime, his being so ready to make his defence, and his
wishing to come to discourse with the people of the Jews. See a man wellprepared ([τεταγμένον ἄνδρα])!— Mark the providential ordering of the thing:
unless the tribune had come, unless he had bound him, he would not have
desired to speak for his defence, he would not have obtained the silence he did.