THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.4.

On the contrary, Augustine says in De Poenitentia [De vera et falsa
Poenitentia]: "There are many who repent having sinned, but not
completely; for they except certain things which give them pleasure,
forgetting that our Lord delivered from the devil the man who was
both dumb and deaf, whereby He shows us that we are never healed
unless it be from all sins."
I answer that, It is impossible for Penance to take one sin away
without another. First because sin is taken away by grace removing
the offense against God. Wherefore it was stated in the FS, Question
109, Article 7; FS, Question 113, Article 2. that without grace no sin
can be forgiven. Now every mortal sin is opposed to grace and
excludes it. Therefore it is impossible for one sin to be pardoned
without another. Secondly, because, as shown above (Article 2)
mortal sin cannot be forgiven without true Penance, to which it
belongs to renounce sin, by reason of its being against God, which
is common to all mortal sins: and where the same reason applies,
the result will be the same. Consequently a man cannot be truly
penitent, if he repent of one sin and not of another. For if one
particular sin were displeasing to him, because it is against the love
of God above all things (which motive is necessary for true
repentance), it follows that he would repent of all. Whence it follows
that it is impossible for one sin to be pardoned through Penance,
without another. Thirdly, because this would be contrary to the
perfection of God's mercy, since His works are perfect, as stated in
Dt. 32:4; wherefore whomsoever He pardons, He pardons altogether.
Hence Augustine says [De vera et falsa Poenitentia], that "it is
irreverent and heretical to expect half a pardon from Him Who is just
and justice itself."
Reply to Objection 1: These words of Gregory do not refer to the
forgiveness of the guilt, but to the cessation from act, because
sometimes a man who has been wont to commit several kinds of sin,
renounces one and not the other; which is indeed due to God's
assistance, but does not reach to the pardon of the sin.
Reply to Objection 2: In this saying of Ambrose "faith" cannot
denote the faith whereby we believe in Christ, because, as Augustine
says on Jn. 15:22, "If I had not come, and spoken to them, they
would not have sin" (viz. unbelief): "for this is the sin which contains
all others": but it stands for consciousness, because sometimes a
man receives pardon for a sin of which he is not conscious, through
the punishment which he bears patiently.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: Although sins are not connected in so far as
they turn towards a mutable good, yet they are connected in so far
as they turn away from the immutable Good, which applies to all
mortal sins in common. and it is thus that they have the character of
an offense which needs to be removed by Penance.
Reply to Objection 4: Debt as regards external things, e.g. money, is
not opposed to friendship through which the debt is pardoned.
hence one debt can be condoned without another. On the other
hand, the debt of sin is opposed to friendship, and so one sin or
offense is not pardoned without another; for it would seem absurd
for anyone to ask even a man to forgive him one offense and not
another.
Reply to Objection 5: The love whereby God loves man's nature,
does not ordain man to the good of glory from which man is
excluded by any mortal sin. but the love of grace, whereby mortal sin
is forgiven, ordains man to eternal life, according to Rm. 6:23: "The
grace of God (is) life everlasting." Hence there is no comparison.