and has no limit. [Sirach 23:17] Again, they who delight in fornication, they too
cannot desist. "To a fornicator," it is said, "all bread is sweet." He will not cease,
till he is devoured. For it is a passion.
But they are indeed passions, not however incurable, but admitting of cure,
and much more than bodily affections. For if we will, we can extinguish them.
How then can a man extinguish pride? By knowing God. For if it arises from not
knowing God, if we know Him, all pride is banished. Think of Hell. Think of
those who are much better than yourself. Think of your sins. Think for how
many things you deserve punishment from God. If you think of these, you will
soon bring down your proud mind, you will soon bend it. But can you not do
these things? Are you too weak? Consider things present, human nature itself,
the nothingness of man! When you see a dead body carried through the marketplace, orphan children following it, a widow beating her breast, servants
bewailing, friends looking dejected, reflect upon the nothingness of things
present, and that they differ not from a shadow, or a dream.
Does this not suit you? Think of those who are very rich, who perish
anyhow in war; look round on the houses, that belonged to the great and
illustrious, and are now leveled to the ground. Consider how mighty they were,
and now not even a memorial of them is left. For, if you will, every day you may
find examples of these things— the successions of rulers—the confiscations of
rich men's goods. "Many tyrants have sat upon the ground— and he who was
never thought on, has worn a diadem." [Sirach 11:15] Do not these things
happen every day? Do not our affairs resemble a kind of wheel? Read, if you
will, both our own (books), and those without: for they also abound in such
examples. If you despise ours, and this from pride; if you admire the works of
philosophers, go even to them. They will instruct you, relating ancient
calamities, as will poets, and orators, and sophists, and all historians. From every
side, if you will, you may find examples.
But if you will none of these things, reflect upon our very nature, of what it
consists, and wherein it ends. Consider, when you sleep, of what worth are you?

Will not even a little beast be able to destroy you? For often a little animal
falling from the roof has deprived many persons of sight, or has been the cause
of some other danger. But what? Are you not less than all beasts? But what do
you say? That you excel in reason? But behold, you have not reason: for pride is
a sign of the want of reason. And for what, tell me, are you high-minded after
all? Is it upon the good constitution of your body? But the prize of victory here is
with the irrational creatures; this is possessed also by robbers and murderers, and
violators of the tombs. But are you proud of your understanding? It is no proof
of understanding to be proud. By this then first you deprive yourself of
becoming intelligent. Let us bring down our high thoughts. Let us be moderate,
and lowly, and gentle. For such even Christ has pronounced blessed above all,
saying, "Blessed are the poor in spirit." [Matthew 5:3] And again, He cried,
saying, "Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart." [Matthew 11:29] For
this reason He washed the feet of His disciples, affording us an example of
humility. From all these things let us gain profit, that we may be able to obtain
the blessings promised to those who love Him, by the grace and lovingkindness,
etc.