SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.3.

in which case he does not place the end of his whole life in carnal
pleasure. To apply oneself to obtain this pleasure is a venial sin and
pertains to prudence of the flesh. But if a man actually refers the
care of the flesh to a good end, as when one is careful about one's
food in order to sustain one's body, this is no longer prudence of the
flesh, because then one uses the care of the flesh as a means to an
end.
Reply to Objection 1: The Apostle is speaking of that carnal
prudence whereby a man places the end of his whole life in the
goods of the flesh, and this is a mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Prudence of the flesh does not imply a sin
against the Holy Ghost. For when it is stated that "it cannot be
subject to the law of God," this does not mean that he who has
prudence of the flesh, cannot be converted and submit to the law of
God, but that carnal prudence itself cannot be subject to God's law,
even as neither can injustice be just, nor heat cold, although that
which is hot may become cold.
Reply to Objection 3: Every sin is opposed to prudence, just as
prudence is shared by every virtue. But it does not follow that every
sin opposed to prudence is most grave, but only when it is opposed
to prudence in some very grave matter.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether craftiness is a special sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that craftiness is not a special sin. For the
words of Holy Writ do not induce anyone to sin; and yet they induce
us to be crafty, according to Prov. 1:4, "To give craftiness to little
ones." Therefore craftiness is not a sin.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 13:16): "The crafty man doth
all things with counsel." Therefore, he does so either for a good or
for an evil end. If for a good end, there is no sin seemingly, and if for
an evil end, it would seem to pertain to carnal or worldly prudence.
Therefore craftiness is not a special sin distinct from prudence of the
flesh.
Objection 3: Further, Gregory expounding the words of Job 12, "The
simplicity of the just man is laughed to scorn," says (Moral. x, 29):
"The wisdom of this world is to hide one's thoughts by artifice, to
conceal one's meaning by words, to represent error as truth, to make
out the truth to be false," and further on he adds: "This prudence is
acquired by the young, it is learnt at a price by children." Now the
above things seem to belong to craftiness. Therefore craftiness is
not distinct from carnal or worldly prudence, and consequently it
seems not to be a special sin.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (2 Cor. 4:2): "We renounce the
hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor
adulterating the word of God." Therefore craftiness is a sin.
I answer that, Prudence is "right reason applied to action," just as
science is "right reason applied to knowledge." In speculative
matters one may sin against rectitude of knowledge in two ways: in
one way when the reason is led to a false conclusion that appears to
be true; in another way when the reason proceeds from false
premises, that appear to be true, either to a true or to a false
conclusion. Even so a sin may be against prudence, through having
some resemblance thereto, in two ways. First, when the purpose of
the reason is directed to an end which is good not in truth but in
appearance, and this pertains to prudence of the flesh; secondly,
when, in order to obtain a certain end, whether good or evil, a man
uses means that are not true but fictitious and counterfeit, and this
belongs to the sin of craftiness. This is consequently a sin opposed