dead" [Colossians 1:18], he says, the first-fruits. Therefore there must also be
others left. And see how here he introduces nothing from reasonings, because
they were docile. For in writing to the Corinthians, he started many things also
from reasonings, and then he added, "You fool, that which you sow is not
quickened." [1 Corinthians 15:36] For this is more authoritative, but it is when
he converses with the believer. But with him who is without, what authority
would this have? "Even so," he says, "them also that are fallen asleep in Jesus
will God bring with Him." Again, "fallen asleep": he nowhere says, the dead.
But with respect to Christ, his words are, "He died," because there followed
mention of the Resurrection, but here "them that are fallen asleep." How
"through Jesus"? Either that they fell asleep through Jesus, or that through Jesus
will He bring them. The phrase "that fell asleep through Jesus" means the
faithful. Here the heretics say, that he is speaking of the baptized. What place
then is there for "even so"? For Jesus did not fall asleep through Baptism. But on
what account does he say, "them that are fallen asleep"? So that he is
discoursing not of a general Resurrection, but of a partial one. Them that are
fallen asleep through Jesus, he says, and thus he speaks in many places.
Ver. 15. "For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we that are
alive, that are left unto the coming of the Lord, shall in nowise precede them that
are fallen asleep."
Speaking concerning the faithful, and them "which are fallen asleep in
Christ" [1 Corinthians 15:18]; and again, "the dead shall rise in Christ." Since
his discourse is not concerning the Resurrection only, but both concerning the
Resurrection and concerning the honor in glory; all then shall partake of a
Resurrection, he says, but not all shall be in glory, only those in Christ. Since
therefore he wishes to comfort them, he comforts them not with this only, but
also with the abundant honor, and with its speedy arrival, since they knew that.
For in proof that he wishes to comfort them with the honor, as he goes on, he
says, "And we shall be ever with the Lord": and "we shall be caught up in the
clouds."

But how do the faithful fall asleep in Jesus? It means having Christ within
themselves. But the expression, "He shall bring with Him," shows that they are
brought from many places. "This." Something strange he was about to tell them.
On this account he also adds what makes it worthy of credit; "From the word of
the Lord," he says, that is, we speak not of ourselves, but having learned from
Christ, "That we that are alive, that are left unto the coming of the Lord, shall in
nowise precede them that are fallen asleep." Which also he says in his Epistle to
the Corinthians; "In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye." [1 Corinthians 15:52]
Here he gives a credibility to the Resurrection by the manner also [in which it
will occur].
For because the matter seems to be difficult he says that as it is easy for the
living to be taken up, so also for the departed. But in saying "we," he does not
speak of himself, for he was not about to remain until the Resurrection, but he
speaks of the faithful. On this account he has added, "We that are left unto the
coming of the Lord shall in nowise precede them that are fallen asleep." As if he
had said, Think not that there is any difficulty. It is God that does it. They who
are then alive shall not anticipate those who are dissolved, who are rotted, who
have been dead ten thousand years. But as it is easy to bring those who are
entire, so is it also those who are dissolved.
But there are some who disbelieve the matter, because they know not God.
For, tell me, which is the more easy, to bring one into being out of nothing, or to
raise up again him that was dissolved? But what say they? A certain one suffered
shipwreck and was drowned in the sea, and having fallen many fishes caught
him, and each of the fish devoured some member. Then of these very fishes, one
was caught in this gulf, and one in that, and this was eaten by one man, and that
by another, while having in it the devoured pieces of flesh. And again, those who
ate the fishes, that had eaten up the man, died in different places, and were
themselves perhaps devoured by wild beasts. And— when there has been so
great a confusion and dispersion— how shall the man rise again? Who shall
gather up the dust? But wherefore do you say this, O man, and weavest strings of