From Rome, June 24, 1556.

1 Marín was born in Valencia, Spain, probably in 1529, and was commonly known among his Jesuit brethren as Valentino. He entered the Society in his native city in 1553 and then came to Italy for studies. He was ordained in Palermo in 1556 and unexpectedly died at Bivona on September 16 of that year. 2 Jerónimo Doménech was provincial in Sicily. 3 The rector at Bivona was Eleuthère Dupont, known in the correspondence as Pontanus. He was born in Lille, France, on October 27, 1527, and became a Jesuit in Paris on April 6, 1550. He was ordained in Rome in September 1555, and was then appointed rector of the community in Bivona, Sicily. He died in Brussels on January 31, 1611.

# 48. TO FATHER ALFONSO ROMÁN

On the Spiritual Value of Contradictions

Rome, July 14, 1556

The first Jesuits arrived in Saragossa, Spain, in September 1547, with a view to opening a college. A benefactor had willed them a house and chapel as the nucleus of the college, but because of squabbles within the benefactor's family the will was contested and, thus, the Society renounced its claim on the buildings. Nevertheless, great animosity arose against the Jesuits, led by Archbishop Hernando de Aragón (a relative of Francisco de Borja) and his vicar general, the Abbot of Veruela, both of whom were vehemently opposed to their coming to the city. When Fr. Román, 1 rector of the community in Saragossa, wrote to Ignatius on February 15, 1554 ( Ep. Mixtae 4:73), he mentioned that they had to endure: "opposition and whispering campaigns, false reports, jealousy, jeering, and mockery." Despite this overt hostility the Society canonically established its college with the public reading of the papal bull on April 17, 1555, but when the ceremony was over and the Jesuits left the chapel they found posters affixed to the chapel wall, by order of the vicar general, threatening excommunication on all who attend the Jesuit church and hear their sermons. There followed antiJesuit demonstrations in the city: the windows of their residence were broken and the clergy and people sometimes gathered in front of the residence to sing penitential psalms. The Jesuits left Saragossa on August 1 but, in the meantime, the Regent Juana, having heard of these disturbances, wrote stern letters to the archbishop, abbot, and city magistrates. The abbot revoked his edict of excommunication on September 8, 1555, and the Jesuits returned to the city. Ignatius was kept abreast of all these happenings, and now that the persecution had come to an end, he was looking forward to a prosperous new college there. Hence, two weeks before his death, he wrote, in his own hand, this brief but encouraging note to Román: since the solidity of a buidling's foundation is in proportion to the contradictions endured in its construction, then that in Saragossa has deep foundations to support a magnificent and impressive spiritual edifice. Ignatius had learned this to be true from the contradictions that he himself had to endure in life. Ignatius' note is in Spanish [ Ep . 12:119].