up, then imagine that the Heavens are let down from above, and that the Angels
are descending!
As then it is not meet that any one of the uninitiated be present, so neither is
it that one of them that are initiated, and yet at the same time defiled. Tell me,
suppose any one were invited to a feast, and were to wash his hands, and sit
down, and be all ready at the table, and after all refuse to partake; is he not
insulting the man who invited him? Were it not better for such an one never to
have come at all? Now it is just in the same way that you have come here. You
have sung the Hymn with the rest: you have declared yourself to be of the
number of them that are Worthy, by not departing with them that are unworthy.
Why stay, and yet not partake of the table? I am unworthy, you will say. Then are
you also unworthy of that communion you have had in prayers. For it is not by
means of the offerings only, but also by means of those canticles that the Spirit
descends all around. Do we not see our own servants, first scouring the table
with a sponge, and cleaning the house, and then setting out the entertainment?
This is what is done by the prayers, by the cry of the herald. We scour the
Church, as it were, with a sponge, that all things may be set out in a pure church,
that there may be "neither spot nor wrinkle." [Ephesians 5:27] Unworthy,
indeed, both our eyes of these sights, and unworthy are our ears! "And if even a
beast," it is said, "touch the mountain, it shall be stoned." [Exodus 19:13] Thus
then they were not worthy so much as to set foot on it, and yet afterwards they
both came near, and beheld where God had stood. And you may, afterwards,
come near, and behold: when, however, He is present, depart. You are no more
allowed to be here than the Catechumen is. For it is not at all the same thing
never to have reached the mysteries, and when you have reached them, to
stumble at them and despise them, and to make yourself unworthy of this thing.
One might enter upon more points, and those more awful still; not however to
burden your understanding, these will suffice. They who are not brought to their
right senses with these, certainly will not be with more.
That I may not then be the means of increasing your condemnation, I

entreat you, not to forbear coming, but to render yourselves worthy both of being
present, and of approaching. Tell me, were any king to give command and to say,
"If any man does this, let him partake of my table;" say, would ye not do all you
could to be admitted? He has invited us to heaven, to the table of the great and
wonderful King, and do we shrink and hesitate, instead of hastening and running
to it? And what then is our hope of salvation? We cannot lay the blame on our
weakness; we cannot on our nature. It is indolence and nothing else that renders
us unworthy.
So far have I spoken of myself. But may He that pricks the heart, He that
gives the Spirit of compunction, pierce your hearts, and plant the seeds in the
depth of them, that so through His fear ye may conceive, and bring forth the
spirit of salvation, and come near with boldness. For, "your children," it is said,
"are like olive plants round about your table." [Psalm 128:3] O, then, let there be
nothing old, nothing wild, nothing harsh. For of such sort are the young plants
that are fit for fruit, for the beautiful fruit, fruit I mean of the olive-tree. And
thriving they are, so as all to be round about the table, and come together here,
not in vain or by chance, but with fear and reverence. For thus shall you behold
with boldness even Christ Himself in heaven, and shall be counted worthy of
that heavenly kingdom, which may God grant we may all attain, in Jesus Christ,
our Lord with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might,
honor, now and ever, and for ages of ages. Amen.