1 Corinthians 6:5
"But this I say to move you to shame." These are the words of one exposing
their objection as being an idle pretext: and therefore he adds, "Is it so that there
is not a wise man among you, no not even one?" Is the scarcity, says he, so
great? So great the want of sensible persons among you? And what he subjoins
strikes even still harder. For having said, "Is it so, that there is not a wise man
among you, not even one?" he adds, "who shall be able to judge in the case of
his brother." For when brother goes to law with brother, there is never any need
of understanding and talent in the person who is mediating in the cause, the
feeling and relationship contributing greatly to the settlement of such a quarrel.
"But brother goes to law with brother, and that before unbelievers." Do you
observe with what effect he disparaged the judges at first by calling them
unrighteous; whereas here, to move shame, he calls them Unbelievers? For
surely it is extremely disgraceful if the priest could not be the author of
reconciliation even among brethren, but recourse must be had to those without.
So that when he said, "those who are of no account," his chief meaning was not
([οὐ τοῦτο εἰπε προηγουμένως]) that the Church's outcasts should be appointed
as judges, but to find fault with them. For that it was proper to make reference to
those who were able to decide, he has shown by saying, "Is it so, that there is not
a wise man among you, not even one?" And with great impressiveness he stops
their mouths, and says, "Even though there were not a single wise man, the
hearing ought to have been left to you who are unwise rather than that those
without should judge." For what else can it be than absurd, that whereas on a
quarrel arising in a house we call in no one from without and feel ashamed if
news get abroad among strangers of what is going on within doors; where the
Church is, the treasure of the unutterable Mysteries, there all things should be
published without?

1 Corinthians 6:6
"But brother goes to law with brother, and that before unbelievers."
The charge is twofold; both that he "goes to law," and "before the
unbelievers." For if even the thing by itself, To go to law with a brother, be a
fault, to do it also before aliens, what pardon does it admit of?

1 Corinthians 6:7
7. "Nay, already it is altogether a defect in you, that you have lawsuits one
with another."
Do you see for what place he reserved this point? And how he has cleared
the discussion of it in good time? For "I talk not yet," says he, "which injures, or
which is injured." Thus far, the act itself of going to law brings each party under
his censure, and in that respect one is not at all better than another. But whether
one go to law justly or unjustly, that is quite another subject. Say not then,
"which did the wrong?" For on this ground I at once condemn you, even for the
act of going to law.
Now if being unable to bear a wrong-doer be a fault, what accusation can
come up to the actual wrong? "Why not rather take wrong? Why not rather be
defrauded?"