nature and the Divine, be entirely set aside. Wherefore just as the
Divine illuminations are conveyed to men by the good angels, so too
the demons execute the Divine justice on the wicked. Nor does this
in any way diminish the punishment of the demons, since even in
torturing others they are themselves tortured, because then the
fellowship of the unhappy will not lessen but will increase
unhappiness.
Reply to Objection 1: The supremacy which, it is declared, will be
brought to nought by Christ in the time to come must be taken in the
sense of the supremacy which is in keeping with the state of this
world: wherein men are placed over men, angels over men, angels
over angels, demons over demons, and demons over men; in every
case so as either to lead towards the end or to lead astray from the
end. But then when all things will have attained to that end there will
be no supremacy to lead astray from the end or to lead to it, but only
that which maintains in the end, good or evil.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the demerit of the demons does not
require that they be placed over men, since they made men subject
to them unjustly, yet this is required by the order of their nature in
relation to human nature: since "natural goods remain in them
unimpaired" as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv).
Reply to Objection 3: The good angels are not the cause of the
principal reward in the elect, because all receive this immediately
from God. Nevertheless the angels are the cause of certain
accidental rewards in men, in so far as the higher angels enlighten
those beneath them, both angels and men, concerning certain
hidden things of God, which do not belong to the essence of
beatitude. In like manner the damned will receive their principal
punishment immediately from God, namely the everlasting
banishment from the Divine vision: but there is no reason why the
demons should not torture men with other sensible punishments.
There is, however, this difference: that merit exalts, whereas sin
debases. Wherefore since the angelic nature is higher than the
human, some on account of the excellence of their merit will be so
far exalted as to be raised above the angels both in nature and
rewards [FP, Question 108, Article 8], so that some angels will be
enlightened by some men. On the other hand, no human sinners will,
on account of a certain degree of virtue, attain to the eminence that
attaches to the nature of the demons.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether all men will be present at the judgment?

Objection 1: It would seem that men will not all be present at the
judgment. For it is written (Mt. 19:28): "You . . . shall sit on twelve
seats, judging the twelve tribes of Israel." But all men do not belong
to those twelve tribes. Therefore it would seem that men will not all
be present at the judgment.
Objection 2: Further, the same apparently is to be gathered from Ps.
1:5, "The wicked shall not rise again in judgment."
Objection 3: Further, a man is brought to judgment that his merits
may be discussed. But some there are who have acquired no merits,
such as children who died before reaching the perfect age. Therefore
they need not be present at the judgment. Now there are many such.
Therefore it would seem that not all will be present.
On the contrary, It is written (Acts 10:42) that Christ "was appointed
by God to be judge of the living and of the dead." Now this division
comprises all men, no matter how the living be distinct from the
dead. Therefore all men will be present at the judgment.
Further, it is written (Apoc. 1:7): "Behold He cometh with the clouds,
and every eye shall see Him." Now this would not be so unless all
were present at the judgment. Therefore, etc.
I answer that, The judicial power was bestowed on Christ as man, in
reward for the humility which He showed forth in His passion. Now in
His passion He shed His blood for all in point of sufficiency,
although through meeting with an obstacle in some, it had not its
effect in all. Therefore it is fitting that all men should assemble at the
judgment, to see His exaltation in His human nature, in respect of
which "He was appointed by God to be judge of the living and of the
dead."
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx, 5), "it does
not follow from the saying, 'Judging the twelve tribes of Israel,' that
the tribe of Levi, which is the thirteenth, is not to be judged, or that
they will judge that people alone, and not other nations." The reason
why all other nations are denoted by the twelve tribes is because
they were called by Christ to take the place of the twelve tribes.