you, but the Spirit did not forsake you, even in those circumstances. As the
Three Children in the fire were refreshed with dew, so also were you refreshed in
afflictions. But as there it was not of the nature of the fire to sprinkle dew, but of
the "whistling wind," so also here it was not of the nature of affliction to produce
joy, but of the suffering for Christ's sake, and of the Spirit bedewing them, and in
the furnace of temptation setting them at ease. Not merely with joy, he says, but
"with much joy." For this is of the Holy Spirit.
Ver. 7. "So that you became ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia and
Achaia."
And yet it was later that he went to them. But ye so shone, he says, that you
became teachers of those who received (the word) before you. And this is like
the Apostle. For he did not say, so that you became ensamples in regard to
believing, but you became an ensample to those who already believed; how one
ought to believe in God, you taught, who from the very beginning entered into
your conflict.
"And in Achaia," he says; that is, in Greece.
Do you see how great a thing is zeal? That it does not require time, nor
delay, nor procrastination, but it is sufficient only to venture one's self, and all is
fulfilled. Thus then though coming in later to the Preaching, they became
teachers of those who were before them.
Moral . Let no one therefore despair, even though he has lost much time,
and has done nothing. It is possible for him even in a little while to do so much,
as he never has done in all his former time. For if he who before did not believe,
shone so much at the beginning, how much more those who have already
believed! Let no one, again, upon this consideration be remiss, because he
perceives that it is possible in a short time to recover everything. For the future is
uncertain, and the Day of the Lord is a thief, setting upon us suddenly when we
are sleeping. But if we do not sleep, it will not set upon us as a thief, nor carry us
off unprepared. For if we watch and be sober, it will not set upon us as a thief,
but as a royal messenger, summoning us to the good things prepared for us. But

if we sleep, it comes upon us as a thief. Let no one therefore sleep, nor be
inactive in virtue, for that is sleep. Do you not know how, when we sleep, our
goods are not in safety, how easy they are to be plotted against? But when we are
awake, there needs not so much guarding. When we sleep, even with much
guarding we often perish. There are doors, and bolts, and guards, and outer
guards, and the thief has come upon us.
Why then do I say this? Because, if we wake we shall not need the help of
others; but if we sleep, the help of others will profit us nothing, but even with
this we perish. It is a good thing to enjoy the prayer of the Saints, but it is when
we ourselves also are on the alert. And what need, you say, have I of another's
prayer, if I am on the alert myself. And in truth, do not place yourself in a
situation to need it; I do not wish that you should; but we are always in need of
it, if we think rightly. Paul did not say, what need have I of prayer? And yet
those who prayed were not worthy of him, or rather not equal to him; and you
say, what need have I of prayer? Peter did not say, What need have I of prayer,
for "prayer," it says, "was made earnestly of the Church unto God for him."
[Acts 12:5] And you say, What need have I of prayer? On this account you need
it, because you think that you have no need. Yea, though thou become as Paul,
you have need of prayer. Do not exalt yourself, lest you be humbled.
But, as I said, if we be active also ourselves, the prayers for us avail too.
Hear Paul saying, "For I know that this shall turn to my salvation, through your
supplication, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ." [Philippians 1:19]
And again, "That for the gift bestowed upon us by means of many, thanks may be
given by many persons on our behalf." [2 Corinthians 1:11] And you say, what
need have I of prayer? But if we be idle, no one will be able to profit us. What
did Jeremiah profit the Jews? Did he not thrice draw near to God, and the third
time hear, "Pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer, for I will
not hear you"? [Jeremiah 7:16] What did Samuel profit Saul? Did he not mourn
for him even to his last day, and not merely pray for him only? What did he
profit the Israelites? Did he not say, "God forbid that I should sin in ceasing to