though the nous is unaffected by death (apathes), yet the passive intellect [ho
pathetikos nous, the cogitative faculty with the phantasy, see St Thomas, Chap.

## CHAPTER LXXIX--That the Human Soul does not Perish with the Body
EVERY intelligent subsisting being is imperishable (Chap.LV): but the human soul
is an intelligent subsisting being.
2. Nothing is destroyed by that which makes its perfection. But the perfection of the
human soul consists in a certain withdrawal from the body: for the soul is perfected by
knowledge and virtue: now in knowledge there is greater perfection, the more the view
is fixed on high generalisations, or immaterial things; while the perfection of virtue
consists in a man's not following his bodily passions, but tempering and restraining them
by reason. -- Nor is it of any avail to reply that the perfection of the soul consists in its
separation from the body in point of activity, but to be separated from the body in point
of being is its destruction. For the activity of a thing shows its substance and being, and
follows upon its nature: thus the activity of a thing can only be perfected inasmuch as its
substance is perfected. If then the soul is perfected in activity by relinquishing the body
and bodily things, its substance cannot fail in being by separation from the body.
4. A natural craving cannot be in vain. But man naturally craves after permanent
continuance: as is shown by this, that while existence is desired by all, man by his
understanding apprehends existence, not in the present moment only, as dumb animals
do, but existence absolutely. Therefore man attains to permanence on the part of his
soul, whereby he apprehends existence absolute and for all time.
6. Intelligible being is more permanent than sensible being. But the substratum of
material bodies (materia prima) is indestructible, much more the potential intellect, the
recipient of intelligible forms. Therefore the human soul, of which the potential intellect is
a part, is indestructible.
8. No form is destroyed except either by the action of the contrary, or by the destruction
of the subject wherein it resides, or by the failure of its cause. Thus heat is destroyed by
the action of cold: by the destruction of the eye the power of sight is destroyed; and the
light of the atmosphere fails by the failure of the sun's presence, which was its cause.
But the human soul cannot be destroyed by the action of its contrary, for it has no
contrary, since by the potential intellect the soul is cognitive and receptive of all
contraries. Nor again by the destruction of the subject in which it resides, for it has been
shown above that the human soul is a form not dependent on the body for its being.

restoration of the organ; but now we see that however much the faculty of sight seems
weakened, it is restored, if only the organ is restored. Since then the soul's faculty
of understanding needs no bodily organ, the understanding itself is not weakened,
neither essentially nor incidentally, either by old age or by any other weakness of body.
But if in the working of the understanding there happens fatigue or hindrance through
bodily weakness, this is not due to weakness of the understanding itself, but to
weakness of other faculties that the understanding has need of, to wit, the phantasy, the
memory, and the cogitative faculty.
10. The same is evidenced by the very words of Aristotle: "Moving causes pre-exist, but
formal causes are along with the things whereof they are causes: for when a man is
well, then there is health. But whether anything remains afterwards, is a point to
consider: in some cases there may well be something remaining: the soul is an
instance, not the whole soul, but the intelligence: as for the whole soul remaining, that is
perhaps an impossibility." Clearly then, in speaking of forms, he wishes to speak
of the intellect, which is the form of man, as remaining after its matter, that is, after the
body. It is clear also that though Aristotle makes the soul a form, yet he does not
represent it as non- subsistent and consequently perishable, as Gregory of Nyssa
imputes to him: for he excludes the intellectual soul from the general category of
other forms, saying that it remains after the body and is a subsistent being (substantiam
quandam).
Hereby is banished the error of the impious in whose person it is said: We were born
out of nothingness, and hereafter we shall be as though we had never been (Wisd. ii, 2);
in whose person again Solomon says: One is the perishing of man and beast, and even
is the lot of both: as man dies, so do beasts die: all breathe alike, and man hath no
advantage over beasts (Eccles iii, 19): that he does not say this in his own person, but
in the person of the ungodly, is clear from what he says at the end, as it were drawing a
conclusion: Till the dust return to the earth, from whence it came; and the spirit go back
to the God who gave it (Eccles xii, 7).