SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.47, C.2.

lion are parts of animal; and "potential," as the nutritive and
sensitive powers are parts of the soul. Accordingly, parts can be
assigned to a virtue in three ways. First, in likeness to integral parts,
so that the things which need to concur for the perfect act of a
virtue, are called the parts of that virtue. In this way, out of all the
things mentioned above, eight may be taken as parts of prudence,
namely, the six assigned by Macrobius; with the addition of a
seventh, viz. "memory" mentioned by Tully; and eustochia or
"shrewdness" mentioned by Aristotle. For the "sense" of prudence
is also called "understanding": wherefore the Philosopher says
(Ethic. vi, 11): "Of such things one needs to have the sense, and this
is understanding." Of these eight, five belong to prudence as a
cognitive virtue, namely, "memory," "reasoning," "understanding,"
"docility" and "shrewdness": while the three others belong thereto,
as commanding and applying knowledge to action, namely,
"foresight," "circumspection" and "caution." The reason of their
difference is seen from the fact that three things may be observed in
reference to knowledge. In the first place, knowledge itself, which, if
it be of the past, is called "memory," if of the present, whether
contingent or necessary, is called "understanding" or "intelligence."
Secondly, the acquiring of knowledge, which is caused either by
teaching, to which pertains "docility," or by "discovery," and to this
belongs to eustochia, i.e. "a happy conjecture," of which
"shrewdness" is a part, which is a "quick conjecture of the middle
term," as stated in Poster. i, 9. Thirdly, the use of knowledge, in as
much as we proceed from things known to knowledge or judgment
of other things, and this belongs to "reasoning." And the reason, in
order to command aright, requires to have three conditions. First, to
order that which is befitting the end, and this belongs to "foresight";
secondly, to attend to the circumstances of the matter in hand, and
this belongs to "circumspection"; thirdly, to avoid obstacles, and
this belongs to "caution."
The subjective parts of a virtue are its various species. In this way
the parts of prudence, if we take them properly, are the prudence
whereby a man rules himself, and the prudence whereby a man
governs a multitude, which differ specifically as stated above
(Question 47, Article 11). Again, the prudence whereby a multitude is
governed, is divided into various species according to the various
kinds of multitude. There is the multitude which is united together for
some particular purpose; thus an army is gathered together to fight,
and the prudence that governs this is called "military." There is also
the multitude that is united together for the whole of life; such is the