qualified, even if all should conspire in his favor, and to keep one aim only in
view, the building up of the Church, in nothing actuated either by enmity or
favor. Well, do you now think that I acted reasonably in declining the ministry of
this office? But I have not even yet gone through all my reasons with you; for I
have some others still to mention. And do not grow impatient of listening to a
friendly and sincere man, who wishes to clear himself from your accusations; for
these statements are not only serviceable for the defence which you have to
make on my behalf, but they will also prove of no small help for the due
administration of the office. For it is necessary for one who is going to enter
upon this path of life to investigate all matters thoroughly well, before he sets his
hand to the ministry. Do you ask why? Because one who knows all things clearly
will have this advantage, if no other, that he will not feel strange when these
things befall him. Would you like me then to approach the question of
superintending widows, first of all, or of the care of virgins, or the difficulty of
the judicial function. For in each of these cases there is a different kind of
anxiety, and the fear is greater than the anxiety.
Now in the first place, to start from that subject which seems to be simpler
than the others, the charge of widows appears to cause anxiety to those who take
care of them only so far as the expenditure of money is concerned; but the case
is otherwise, and here also a careful scrutiny is needed, when they have to be
enrolled, for infinite mischief has been caused by putting them on the list
without due discrimination. For they have ruined households, and severed
marriages, and have often been detected in thieving and pilfering and unseemly
deeds of that kind. Now that such women should be supported out of the
Church's revenues provokes punishment from God, and extreme condemnation
among men, and abates the zeal of those who wish to do good. For who would
ever choose to expend the wealth which he was commanded to give to Christ
upon those who defame the name of Christ? For these reasons a strict and
accurate scrutiny ought to be made so as to prevent the supply of the indigent
being wasted, not only by the women already mentioned, but also by those who

are able to provide for themselves. And this scrutiny is succeeded by no small
anxiety of another kind, to ensure an abundant and unfailing stream of supply as
from a fountain; for compulsory poverty is an insatiable kind of evil, querulous
and ungrateful. And great discretion and great zeal is required so as to stop the
mouths of complainers, depriving them of every excuse. Now most men, when
they see any one superior to the love of money, immediately represent him as
well qualified for this stewardship. But I do not think that this greatness of soul
is ever sufficient of itself, although it ought to be possessed prior to all other
qualities; for without this a man would be a destroyer rather than a protector, a
wolf instead of a shepherd; nevertheless, combined with this, the possession of
another quality also should be demanded. And this quality is forbearance, the
cause of all good things in men, impelling as it were and conducting the soul into
a serene haven. For widows are a class who, both on account of their poverty,
their age and natural disposition, indulge in unlimited freedom of speech (so I
had best call it); and they make an unseasonable clamor and idle complaints and
lamentations about matters for which they ought to be grateful, and bring
accusations concerning things which they ought contentedly to accept. Now the
superintendent should endure all these things in a generous spirit, and not be
provoked either by their unreasonable annoyance or their unreasonable
complaints. For this class of persons deserve to be pitied for their misfortunes,
not to be insulted; and to trample upon their calamities, and add the pain of insult
to that which poverty brings, would be an act of extreme brutality. On this
account one of the wisest of men, having regard to the avarice and pride of
human nature, and considering the nature of poverty and its terrible power to
depress even the noblest character, and induce it often to act in these same
respects without shame, in order that a man should not be irritated when
accused, nor be provoked by continual importunity to become an enemy where
he ought to bring aid, he instructs him to be affable and accessible to the
suppliant, saying, "Incline your ear to a poor man and give him a friendly
answer with meekness." [Sirach 4:8] And passing by the case of one who