properly framed?
Objection 1: It seems that the words spoken in this sacrament are
not properly framed. For, as Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv), this
sacrament is consecrated with Christ's own words. Therefore no
other words besides Christ's should be spoken in this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, Christ's words and deeds are made known to
us through the Gospel. But in consecrating this sacrament words are
used which are not set down in the Gospels: for we do not read in
the Gospel, of Christ lifting up His eyes to heaven while consecrating
this sacrament: and similarly it is said in the Gospel: "Take ye and
eat" [comedite] without the addition of the word "all," whereas in
celebrating this sacrament we say: "Lifting up His eyes to heaven,"
and again, "Take ye and eat [manducate] of this." Therefore such
words as these are out of place when spoken in the celebration of
this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, all the other sacraments are ordained for the
salvation of all the faithful. But in the celebration of the other
sacraments there is no common prayer put up for the salvation of all
the faithful and of the departed. Consequently it is unbecoming in
this sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, Baptism especially is called the sacrament of
faith. Consequently, the truths which belong to instruction in the
faith ought rather to be given regarding Baptism than regarding this
sacrament, such as the doctrine of the apostles and of the Gospels.
Objection 5: Further, devotion on the part of the faithful is required in
every sacrament. Consequently, the devotion of the faithful ought
not to be stirred up in this sacrament more than in the others by
Divine praises and by admonitions, such as, "Lift up your hearts."
Objection 6: Further, the minister of this sacrament is the priest, as
stated above (Question 82, Article 1). Consequently, all the words
spoken in this sacrament ought to be uttered by the priest, and not
some by the ministers, and some by the choir.
Objection 7: Further, the Divine power works this sacrament

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.5.

unfailingly. Therefore it is to no purpose that the priest asks for the
perfecting of this sacrament, saying: "Which oblation do thou, O
God, in all," etc.
Objection 8: Further, the sacrifice of the New Law is much more
excellent than the sacrifice of the fathers of old. Therefore, it is
unfitting for the priest to pray that this sacrifice may be as
acceptable as the sacrifice of Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedech.
Objection 9: Further, just as Christ's body does not begin to be in
this sacrament by change of place, as stated above (Question 75,
Article 2), so likewise neither does it cease to be there.
Consequently, it is improper for the priest to ask: "Bid these things
be borne by the hands of thy holy angel unto Thine altar on high."
On the contrary, We find it stated in De Consecr., dist. 1, that
"James, the brother of the Lord according to the flesh, and Basil,
bishop of Caesarea, edited the rite of celebrating the mass": and
from their authority it is manifest that whatever words are employed
in this matter, are chosen becomingly.
I answer that, Since the whole mystery of our salvation is comprised
in this sacrament, therefore is it performed with greater solemnity
than the other sacraments. And since it is written (Eccles. 4:17):
"Keep thy foot when thou goest into the house of God"; and (Ecclus.
18:23): "Before prayer prepare thy soul," therefore the celebration of
this mystery is preceded by a certain preparation in order that we
may perform worthily that which follows after. The first part of this
preparation is Divine praise, and consists in the "Introit": according
to Ps. 49:23: "The sacrifice of praise shall glorify me; and there is the
way by which I will show him the salvation of God": and this is taken
for the most part from the Psalms, or, at least, is sung with a Psalm,
because, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii): "The Psalms comprise by
way of praise whatever is contained in Sacred Scripture."
The second part contains a reference to our present misery, by
reason of which we pray for mercy, saying: "Lord, have mercy on
us," thrice for the Person of the Father, and "Christ, have mercy on
us," thrice for the Person of the Son, and "Lord, have mercy on us,"
thrice for the Person of the Holy Ghost; against the threefold misery
of ignorance, sin, and punishment; or else to express the
"circuminsession" of all the Divine Persons.