long after cool drink is not upon calculation that the momentary luxury is
pleasanter than being burned up from beginning to end, but because they cannot
restrain their inordinate desire; so also these. Since if one brought them to their
punishment at the very moment of their pleasure, assuredly they never would
have chosen it. Thus you see in what sense vice is not an easy thing.
8. But if you will, let us try this same point over again by an example in the
proper subject matter. Tell me, for instance, which is pleasanter and easier? (only
let us not take again the desire of the many for our rule in the matter; since one
ought to decide, not by the sick, but by the whole; just as you might show me ten
thousand men in a fever, seeking things unwholesome upon choice to suffer for
it afterwards; but I should not allow such choice;) which, I repeat, brings more
ease, tell me; to desire much wealth, or to be above that desire? For I, for my
part, think the latter. If you disbelieve it, let the argument be brought to the facts
themselves.
Let us then suppose one man desiring much, another nothing. Which now is
the better state, tell me, and which the more respectable? However, let that pass.
For this is agreed upon, that the latter is a finer character than the former. And
we are making no enquiry about this at present, but which lives the easier and
pleasanter life? Well then: the lover of money will not enjoy even what he has:
for that which he loves he cannot choose to spend; but would gladly even carve
([κατακόψειε]) himself out, and part with his flesh rather than with his gold. But
he that despises wealth, gains this the while, that he enjoys what he has quietly
and with great security, and that he values himself more than it. Which then is
the pleasanter; to enjoy what one has with freedom, or to live under a master,
namely wealth, and not dare to touch a single thing even of one's own? Why, it
seems to me to be much the same as if any two men, having wives and loving
them exceedingly, were not upon the same terms with them; but the one were
allowed the presence and intercourse of his wife, the other not even permitted to
come near his.
There is another thing which I wish to mention, indicating the pleasure of

the one and the discomfort of the other. He that is greedy of gain will never be
stayed in that desire, not only because it is impossible, for him to obtain all
men's goods, but also because whatever he may have compassed, he counts
himself to have nothing. But the despiser of riches will deem it all superfluous,
and will not have to punish his soul with endless desires. I say, punish; for
nothing so completely answers the definition of punishment as desire deprived
of gratification; a thing too which especially marks his perverse mind. Look at it
in this way. He that lusts after riches and has increased his store, he is the sort of
person to feel as if he had nothing. I ask then, what more complicated than this
disease? And the strange thing is not this only, but that although having, he
thinks he has not the very things which are in his hold, and as though he had
them not he bewails himself. If he even get all men's goods, his pain is but
greater. And should he gain an hundred talents, he is vexed that he has not
received a thousand: and if he received a thousand; he is stung to the quick that it
is not ten thousand: and if he receive ten thousand, he utterly bemoans himself
([κατακόπτεται]) because it is not ten times as much. And the acquisition of
more to him becomes so much more poverty; for the more he receives so much
the more he desires. So then, the more he receives, the more he becomes poor:
since whoso desires more, is more truly poor. When then he has an hundred
talents, is he not very poor? for he desires a thousand. When he has got a
thousand, then he becomes yet poorer. For it is no longer a thousand as before,
but ten thousand that he professes himself to want. Now if you say that to wish
and not to obtain is pleasure, you seem to me to be very ignorant of the nature of
pleasure.
9. To show that this sort of thing is not pleasure but punishment, take
another case, and so let us search it out. When we are thirsty, do we not therefore
feel pleasure in drinking because we quench our thirst; and is it not therefore a
pleasure to drink because it relieves us from a great torment, the desire, I mean,
of drinking? Every one, I suppose, can tell. But were we always to remain in
such a state of desire, we should be as badly off as the rich man in the parable of