THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.4.

the Gentiles, who would not believe in the preaching of the apostles
unless He prepared the way for them in men's hearts: and this is
signified by the words 'He shall go before you into Galilee.' But if by
Galilee we understand 'revelation,' we are to understand this as
applying to Him not in the form of a servant, but in that form wherein
He is equal to the Father, and which He has promised to them that
love Him. Although He has gone before us in this sense, He has not
abandoned us."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ should have appeared to the

disciples "in another shape"?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ ought not to have appeared to
the disciples "in another shape." For a thing cannot appear in very
truth other than it is. But there was only one shape in Christ.
Therefore if He appeared under another, it was not a true but a false
apparition. Now this is not at all fitting, because as Augustine says
(Questions. lxxxiii, qu. 14): "If He deceives He is not the Truth; yet
Christ is the Truth." Consequently, it seems that Christ ought not to
have appeared to the disciples "in another shape."
Objection 2: Further, nothing can appear in another shape than the
one it has, except the beholder's eyes be captivated by some
illusions. But since such illusions are brought about by magical arts,
they are unbecoming in Christ, according to what is written (2 Cor.
6:15): "What concord hath Christ with Belial?" Therefore it seems
that Christ ought not to have appeared in another shape.
Objection 3: Further, just as our faith receives its surety from
Scripture, so were the disciples assured of their faith in the
Resurrection by Christ appearing to them. But, as Augustine says in
an Epistle to Jerome (xxviii), if but one untruth be admitted into the
Sacred Scripture, the whole authority of the Scriptures is weakened.
Consequently, if Christ appeared to the disciples, in but one
apparition, otherwise than He was, then whatever they saw in Christ
after the Resurrection will be of less import, which is not fitting.
Therefore He ought not to have appeared in another shape.
On the contrary, It is written (Mk. 16:12): "After that He appeared in
another shape to two of them walking, as they were going into the
country."
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 1,2), Christ's Resurrection
was to be manifested to men in the same way as Divine things are
revealed. But Divine things are revealed to men in various ways,
according as they are variously disposed. For, those who have
minds well disposed, perceive Divine things rightly, whereas those
not so disposed perceive them with a certain confusion of doubt or
error: "for, the sensual men perceiveth not those things that are of
the Spirit of God," as is said in 1 Cor. 2:14. Consequently, after His