SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.6.

yet it is not subject thereto in every respect. Thus, a humor is
sometimes subject to the action of heat, as regards being heated,
but not as regards being dried up or consumed. In like manner there
are two reasons, for which a subject may not be bound to obey his
superior in all things. First on account of the command of a higher
power. For as a gloss says on Rm. 13:2, "They that resist the power,
resist the ordinance of God" (cf. St. Augustine, De Verb. Dom. viii).
"If a commissioner issue an order, are you to comply, if it is contrary
to the bidding of the proconsul? Again if the proconsul command
one thing, and the emperor another, will you hesitate, to disregard
the former and serve the latter? Therefore if the emperor commands
one thing and God another, you must disregard the former and obey
God." Secondly, a subject is not bound to obey his superior if the
latter command him to do something wherein he is not subject to
him. For Seneca says (De Beneficiis iii): "It is wrong to suppose that
slavery falls upon the whole man: for the better part of him is
excepted." His body is subjected and assigned to his master but his
soul is his own. Consequently in matters touching the internal
movement of the will man is not bound to obey his fellow-man, but
God alone.
Nevertheless man is bound to obey his fellow-man in things that
have to be done externally by means of the body: and yet, since by
nature all men are equal, he is not bound to obey another man in
matters touching the nature of the body, for instance in those
relating to the support of his body or the begetting of his children.
Wherefore servants are not bound to obey their masters, nor
children their parents, in the question of contracting marriage or of
remaining in the state of virginity or the like. But in matters
concerning the disposal of actions and human affairs, a subject is
bound to obey his superior within the sphere of his authority; for
instance a soldier must obey his general in matters relating to war, a
servant his master in matters touching the execution of the duties of
his service, a son his father in matters relating to the conduct of his
life and the care of the household; and so forth.
Reply to Objection 1: When the Apostle says "in all things," he refers
to matters within the sphere of a father's or master's authority.
Reply to Objection 2: Man is subject to God simply as regards all
things, both internal and external, wherefore he is bound to obey
Him in all things. On the other hand, inferiors are not subject to their
superiors in all things, but only in certain things and in a particular

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.6.

way, in respect of which the superior stands between God and his
subjects, whereas in respect of other matters the subject is
immediately under God, by Whom he is taught either by the natural
or by the written law.
Reply to Objection 3: Religious profess obedience as to the regular
mode of life, in respect of which they are subject to their superiors:
wherefore they are bound to obey in those matters only which may
belong to the regular mode of life, and this obedience suffices for
salvation. If they be willing to obey even in other matters, this will
belong to the superabundance of perfection; provided, however,
such things be not contrary to God or to the rule they profess, for
obedience in this case would be unlawful.
Accordingly we may distinguish a threefold obedience; one,
sufficient for salvation, and consisting in obeying when one is bound
to obey: secondly, perfect obedience, which obeys in all things
lawful: thirdly, indiscreet obedience, which obeys even in matters
unlawful.