as some of them committed, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand."
And wherefore names he not likewise the punishment for their idolatry?
Either because it was clear and more notorious, or because the plague was not so
great at that time, as in the matter of Balaam, when they joined themselves to
Baalpeor, the Midianitish women appearing in the camp and alluring them to
wantonness according to the counsel of Balaam. For that this evil counsel was
Balaam's Moses shows after this, in the following statement at the end of the
Book of Numbers. [Numbers 31:8-16 in our translation] "Balaam also the son of
Beor they slew in the war of Midian with the sword and they brought the
spoils.... And Moses was angry, and said, Wherefore have ye saved all the
women alive? For these were to the children of Israel for a stumbling-block,
according to the word of Balaam, to cause them to depart from and despise the
word of the Lord for Peor's sake."

1 Corinthians 10:9
"Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and perished by
serpents."
By this he again hints at another charge which he likewise states at the end,
blaming them because they contended about signs. And indeed they were
destroyed on account of trials, saying, "when will the good things come? When
the rewards?" Wherefore also he adds, on this account correcting and alarming
them,

1 Corinthians 10:10
"Neither murmur ye, as some of them murmured, and perished by the
destroyer."
For what is required is not only to suffer for Christ, but also nobly to bear
the things that come on us, and with all gladness: since this is the nature of every
crown. Yea, and unless this be so, punishment rather will attend men who take
calamity with a bad grace. Wherefore, both the Apostles when they were beaten
rejoiced, and Paul gloried in his sufferings.

1 Corinthians 10:11
5. "Now all these things happened unto them by way of example; and they
were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the ages have come."
Again he terrifies them speaking of the "ends," and prepares them to expect
things greater than had already taken place. "For that we shall suffer punishment
is manifest," says he, "from what has been said, even to those who disbelieve the
statements concerning hell-fire; but that the punishment also will be most severe,
is evident, from the more numerous blessings which we have enjoyed, and from
the things of which those were but figures. Since, if in the gifts one go beyond the
other, it is most evident that so it will be in the punishment likewise." For this
cause he both called them types, and said that they were "written for us" and
made mention of an "end" that he might remind them of the consummation of all
things. For not such will be the penalties then as to admit of a termination and be
done away, but the punishment will be eternal; for even as the punishments in
this world are ended with the present life, so those in the next continually
remain. But when he said, "the ends of the ages," he means nothing else than that
the fearful judgment is henceforth near at hand.