everywhere persuaded (as, in fact, here), "some were persuaded, and some
believed not. And when they had appointed him a day," etc. [Acts 28:23-25] See
again how not by miracles but by Law and Prophets he puts them to silence, and
how we always find him doing this. And yet he might also have wrought signs;
but then it would no longer have been matter of faith. In fact, this (itself) was a
great sign, his discoursing from the Law and the Prophets. Then that you may
not deem it strange (that they believed not), he introduces the prophecy which
says, "Hearing you shall hear and not understand," more now than then: "and
you shall see and not perceive" [Acts 28:26] more now than then. This is not
spoken for the former sort, but for the unbelievers. How then? Was it contrary to
the prophecy, that those believed? ("Go,") it says, "unto this people" (that is), to
the unbelieving people. He did not say this to insult them, but to remove the
offense. "Be it known then," he says, "unto you, that unto the Gentiles is sent the
salvation of God. They," says he, "will hear it too." [Acts 28:28] Then why do
you discourse to us? Did you not know this? Yes, but that you might be
persuaded, and that I might exculpate myself, and give none a handle (against
me). (c) The unbelieving were they that withdrew. But see how they do not now
form plots against him. For in Judea they had a sort of tyranny. Then wherefore
did the Providence of God order that he should go there, and yet the Lord had
said, "Get you out quickly from Jerusalem?" [Acts 22:18] That both their
wickedness might be shown and Christ's prophecy made good, that they would
not endure to hear him: and so that all might learn that he was ready to suffer all
things, and that the event might be for the consolation of those in Judea: for there
also (the brethren) were suffering many grievous evils. But if while preaching
the Jewish doctrines, he suffered thus, had he preached the doctrines of the glory
of Christ, how would they have endured him? While "purifying himself" [Acts
21:26] he was intolerable, and how should he have been tolerable while
preaching? What lay ye to his charge? What have ye heard? He spoke nothing of
the kind. He was simply seen, and he exasperated all against him. Well might he
then be set apart for the Gentiles: well might he be sent afar off: there also

destined to discourse to the Gentiles. First he calls the Jews, then having shown
them the facts he comes to the Gentiles. [Acts 24:18] "Well spoke the Holy
Ghost," etc. But this saying, "The Spirit said," is nothing wonderful: for an angel
also is said to say what the Lord says: but He (the Spirit) not so. When one is
speaking of the things said by the angel, one does not say, Well said the angel,
but, Well said the Lord. "Well said the Spirit:" as much as to say, It is not me that
you disbelieve. But God foreknew this from the first. "He discoursed," it says,
"with boldness, unhindered" [Acts 28:31]: for it is possible to speak with
boldness, yet hindered. His boldness nothing checked: but in fact he also spoke
unhindered. (c) "Discoursed, " it says, "the things concerning the kingdom of
God:" mark, nothing of the things of sense, nothing of the things present. (f) But
of his affairs after the two years, what say we? (b) (The writer) leaves the hearer
thirsty for more: the heathen authors do the same (in their writings), for to know
everything makes the reader dull and jaded. Or else he does this, (e) not having it
in his power to exhibit it from his own personal knowledge. (a) Mark the order
of God's Providence, "I have been much hindered from coming unto you...having
a great desire these many years to come unto you." [Romans 15:22-23] (d) But
he fed them with hopes. (g) I am in haste to go to Spain, and "I hope," says he,
"to see you in my journey, and to be brought thitherward on my journey by you,
if first I be filled with your company in some measure." [Romans 15:24] (i) Of
this he says, I will come and rest together with you "in the fullness of the
blessing of the Gospel" [Romans 15:29]: and again "I am going to Jerusalem to
minister to the saints" [Romans 15:25]: this is the same that he has said here, "To
do alms to my nation I came." [Acts 24:17] (h) Do you mark how he did not
foresee everything— that sacred and divine head, the man higher than the
heavens, that had a soul able to grasp all at once, the holder of the first place—
Paul? The man whose very name, to them that know him, suffices for rousing of
the soul, for vigilance, for shaking off all sleep! Rome received him bound,
coming up from the sea, saved from a ship-wreck— and was saved from the
shipwreck of error. Like an emperor that has fought a naval battle and overcome,