the night no less than the day brings along with it its advantage, being a rest
from labours, and a medicine for disease. Often, indeed, physicians, though
exerting themselves in many ways, and preparing an endless variety of remedies,
are not able to deliver the man who is labouring under infirmity. But sleep
coming upon him of its own accord has entirely removed the disease, and freed
them from an infinite deal of trouble. Night, again, is not only a medicine for
bodily labours, but also for mental diseases, in giving rest to anguished souls.
Ofttimes it happens that some one has lost a son; and comforters without number
have been of no avail to withdraw him from tears and groans. But on the
approach of night, conquered by the despotic power of sleep, he has closed his
eyelids in slumber, and received some small relief from the miseries of the day
time.
2. And now, I pray you, let us proceed to the subject which has given rise to
these observations. For well I know, that you are all eagerly awaiting this matter;
and that each one of you is in pain till he learn on what account this Book was
not given from the beginning. But even now I do not see that the time is fit for a
discourse on this subject. And why so? Because the week has nearly arrived at
its close with us, and I fear to touch upon a subject, the exposition of which I
should presently afterwards be obliged to cut short. For the subject requires of us
several days in succession, and a continuous effort of memory: wherefore we
must again defer it. But take it not amiss! We will assuredly pay you the debt
with interest; for thus it is expedient both for you, and for us who are to
discharge it. Meanwhile, however, let us now speak on that subject which we left
out yesterday. And what was it we left out yesterday? "God was walking," it
says, "in Paradise in the cool of the day." [Genesis 3:8] What is here meant, I
ask? "God was walking!" God was not walking; for how should He do this who
is everywhere present and fills all things? But He caused a perception of this sort
in Adam, in order that he might collect himself; that he might not be careless;
that in flying and in hiding himself, he might present beforehand some portion of
the excuse, even before any words had passed. For even as those who are about

to be led to the tribunal, to sustain the charges respecting the crimes they have
committed, present themselves before those who are to try them with a squalid,
begrimed, sad, and subdued visage, in order that from their appearance, they
may incline them to loving-kindness, mercy, and forgiveness, so also did it
happen in the case of Adam. For it was necessary that he should be led to this
Tribunal in a subdued state. Therefore God took him beforehand, and humbled
him. But that some one was walking there, he perceived; but whence came he to
suppose that God was walking there? Such is the habitual custom of those who
have committed sin. They are suspicious of all things; they tremble at shadows;
they are in terror at every sound, and they imagine that every one is approaching
them in a hostile manner. Often therefore the guilty, when they observe people
running on another business, suppose that they have come against them; and
when others are conversing one with another on quite a different subject, they
that are conscious of sin suppose they are conversing about them.
3. For such is the nature of sin, that it betrays while no one finds fault; it
condemns while no one accuses; it makes the sinner a timid being; one that
trembles at a sound; even as righteousness has the contrary effect. Hear, at least,
how the Scripture describes this cowardice of the former, and this boldness of
the latter. "The wicked flee when no man pursues." [Proverbs 28:1] How does he
flee when no man pursues? He has that within which drives him on— an accuser
in his conscience; and this he carries about everywhere; and just as it would be
impossible to flee from himself, so neither can he escape the persecutor within;
but wherever he goes, he is scourged, and has an incurable wound! But not such
is the righteous man. Of what nature then is he? Hear: "The righteous is bold as
a lion!" Such a man was Elias. He saw, for instance, the king coming towards
him, and when he said, "Why is it that you pervert Israel?" he answered, "I
pervert not Israel, but you and your father's house." [1 Kings 18:17-18] Truly,
the just man is bold as a lion; for he stood up against the king just as a lion does
against some vile cur. Although the one had the purple, the other had the
sheepskin, which was the more venerable garment of the two; for that purple