intended by the word King, when he said, "In the heart of the king's
enemies." Things of this kind are found more rarely in the New
Testament. But yet the apostle says to the Romans, "Concerning His Son
who was made to Him of the seed of David according to the flesh, and
declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of
holiness, by the resurrection of the dead of Jesus Christ our Lord;" as
though he were speaking above of some one else. For what is meant by
the Son of God declared by the resurrection of the dead of Jesus Christ,
except of the same Jesus Christ who was declared to be Son of God with
power? And as then in this passage, when we are told, "the Son of God
with power of Jesus Christ," or "the Son of God according to the spirit of
holiness of Jesus Christ," or "the Son of God by the resurrection of the
dead of Jesus Christ," whereas it might have been expressed in the
ordinary way, In His own power, or according to the spirit of His own
holiness, or by the resurrection of His dead, or of their dead: as, I says we
are not compelled to understand another person, but one and the same,
that is, the person of the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ; so, when we
are told that "God made man in the image of God," although it might
have been more usual to say, after His own image, yet we are not
compelled to understand any other person in the Trinity, but the one and
selfsame Trinity itself, who is one God, and after whose image man is
made.
8. And since the case stands thus, if we are to accept the same image of
the Trinity, as not in one, but in three human beings, father and mother
and son, then the man was not made after the image of God before a wife
was made for him, and before they procreated a son; because there was
not yet a trinity. Will any one say there was already a trinity, because,
although not yet in their proper form, yet in their original nature, both
the woman was already in the side of the man, and the son in the loins of
his father? Why then, when Scripture had said, "God made man after the
image of God," did it go on to say, "God created him; male and female
created He them: and God blessed them"? (Or if it is to be so divided,
"And God created man," so that thereupon is to be added, "in the image
of God created He him," and then subjoined in the third place, "male and
female created He them;" for some have feared to say, He made him male
and female, lest something monstrous, as it were, should be understood,

as are those whom they call hermaphrodites, although even so both might
be understood not falsely in the singular number, on account of that
which is said, "Two in one flesh.") Why then, as I began by saying, in
regard to the nature of man made after the image of God, does Scripture
specify nothing except male and female? Certainly, in order to complete
the image of the Trinity, it ought to have added also son, although still
placed in the loins of his father, as the woman was in his side. Or was it
perhaps that the woman also had been already made, and that Scripture
had combined in a short and comprehensive statement, that of which it
was going to explain afterwards more carefully, how it was done; and that
therefore a son could not be mentioned, because no son was yet born? As
if the Holy Spirit could not have comprehended this, too, in that brief
statement, while about to narrate the birth of the son afterwards in its
own place; as it narrated afterwards in its own place, that the woman was
taken from the side of the man,2 and yet has not omitted here to name
her.