live, nor as a soul lives which does not understand, but in some proper
and more excellent manner. Further, they know that they will, and they
equally know that no one can will who is not and who does not live; and
they also refer that will itself to something which they will with that will.
They know also that they remember; and they know at the same time that
nobody could remember, unless he both was and lived; but we refer
memory itself also to something, in that we remember those things.
Therefore the knowledge and science of many things are contained in two
of these three, memory and understanding; but will must be present, that
we may enjoy or use them. For we enjoy things known, in which things
themselves the will finds delight for their own sake, and so reposes; but
we use those things, which we refer to some other thing which we are to
enjoy. Neither is the life of man vicious and culpable in any other way,
than as wrongly using and wrongly enjoying. But it is no place here to
discuss this.
14. But since we treat of the nature of the mind, let us remove from our
consideration all knowledge which is received from without, through the
senses of the body; and attend more carefully to the position which we
have laid down, that all minds know and are certain concerning
themselves. For men certainly have doubted whether the power of living,
of remembering, of understanding, of willing, of thinking, of knowing, of
judging, be of air, or of fire, or of the brain, or of the blood, or of atoms, or
besides the usual four elements of a fifth kind of body, I know not what;
or, whether the combining or tempering together of this our flesh itself
has power to accomplish these things. And one has attempted to establish
this, and another to establish that. Yet who ever doubts that he himself
lives, and remembers, and understands, and wills, and thinks, and
knows, and judges? Seeing that even if he doubts, he lives; if he doubts,
he remembers why he doubts; if he doubts, he understands that he
doubts; if he doubts, he wishes to be certain; if he doubts, he thinks; if he
doubts, he knows that he does not know; if he doubts, he judges that he
ought not to assent rashly. Whosoever therefore doubts about anything
else, ought not to doubt of all these things; which if they were not, he
would not be able to doubt of anything.
15. They who think the mind to be either a body or the combination or

tempering of the body, will have all these things to seem to be in a
subject, so that the substance is air, or fire, or some other corporeal thing,
which they think to be the mind; but that the understanding
(intelligentia) is in this corporeal thing as its quality, so that this
corporeal thing is the subject, but the understanding is in the subject: viz.
that the mind is the subject, which they judge to be a corporeal thing, but
the understanding , or any other of those things which we
have mentioned as certain to us, is in that subject. They also hold nearly
the same opinion who deny the mind itself to be body, but think it to be
the combination or tempering together of the body; for there is this
difference, that the former say that the mind itself is the substance, in
which the understanding  is, as in a subject; but the latter
say that the mind itself is in a subject, viz. in the body, of which it is the
combination or tempering together. And hence, by consequence, what
else can they think, except that the understanding also is in the same
body as in a subject?
16. And all these do not perceive that the mind knows itself, even when it
seeks for itself, as we have already shown. But nothing is at all rightly said
to be known while its substance is not known. And therefore, when the
mind knows itself, it knows its own substance; and when it is certain
about itself, it as certain about its own substance. But it is certain about
itself, as those things which are said above prove convincingly; although
it is not at all certain whether itself is air, or fire, or some body, or some
function of body. Therefore it is not any of these. And to that whole which
is bidden to know itself, belongs this, that it is certain that it is not any of
those things of which it is uncertain, and is certain that it is that only,
which only it is certain that it is. For it thinks in this way of fire, or air,
and whatever else of the body it thinks of. Neither can it in any way be
brought to pass that it should so think that which itself is, as it thinks that
which itself is not. Since it thinks all these things through an imaginary
phantasy, whether fire, or air, or this or that body, or that part or
combination and tempering together of the body: nor assuredly is it said
to be all those things, but some one of them. But if it were any one of
them, it would think this one in a different manner from the rest, viz. not
through an imaginary phantasy, as absent things are thought, which
either themselves or some of like kind have been touched by the bodily