precepts, and decrees of the highest form of spiritual wisdom. We have been
filled, it is said, with contempt, and have undergone countless distresses;
nevertheless we shall not desist from looking up to God, neither shall we cease
praying to him until He has received our petition. For this is the mark of a noble
soul, not to be cast down, nor be dismayed at the multitude of the calamities
which oppress it, nor to withdraw, after praying many times without success, but
to persevere, until He have mercy upon us, even as the blessed David says.
2. For the reason why the devil plunges us into thoughts of despair is that he
may cut off the hope which is towards God, the safe anchor, the foundation of
our life, the guide of the way which leads to heaven, the salvation of perishing
souls. "For by hope" it is said, "we are saved." [Romans 8:24] For this assuredly
it is which, like some strong cord suspended from the heavens, supports our
souls, gradually drawing towards that world on high those who cling firmly to it,
and lifting them above the tempest of the evils of this life. If any one then
becomes enervated, and lets go this sacred anchor, straightway he falls down,
and is suffocated, having entered into the abyss of wickedness. And the Evil One
knowing this, when he perceives that we are ourselves oppressed by the
consciousness of evil deeds, steps in himself and lays upon us the additional
burden, heavier than lead, of anxiety arising from despair; and if we accept it, it
follows of necessity that we are immediately dragged down by the weight, and
having been parted from that cord, descend into the depth of misery where you
yourself art now, having forsaken the commandments of the meek and lowly
Master and executing all the injunctions of the cruel tyrant, and implacable
enemy of our salvation; having broken in pieces the easy yoke, and cast away
the light burden, and having put on the iron collar instead of these things, yea,
having hung the ponderous millstone from your neck. Where then can you find a
footing henceforth when you are submerging your unhappy soul, imposing on
yourself this necessity of continually sinking downwards? Now the woman who
had found the one coin called her neighbors to share her joy; saying, "Rejoice
with me;" but I shall now invoke all friends, both mine and yours, for the

contrary purpose, saying not "Rejoice with me" but "Mourn with me," and take
up the same strain of mourning, and utter the same cry of distress with me. For
the worst possible loss has befallen me, not that some given number of talents of
gold, or some large quantity of precious stones have dropped out of my hand, but
that he who was more precious than all these things, who was sailing over this
same sea, this great and broad sea with me, has, I know not how, slipped
overboard, and fallen into the very pit of destruction.
3. Now if any should attempt to divert me from mourning, I shall reply to
them in the words of the prophet, saying "Let me alone, I will weep bitterly;
labour not to comfort me." [Isaiah 22:4] For the mourning with which I mourn
now is not of a kind to subject me to condemnation for excess in lamentation,
but the cause is one for which even Paul, or Peter, had they been here, would not
have been ashamed to weep and mourn, and reject all kinds of consolation. For
those who bewail that death which is common to all one might reasonably
accuse of much feebleness of spirit; but when in place of a corpse a dead soul
lies before us, pierced with innumerable wounds, and yet even in its death
manifesting its former natural comeliness, and health, and beauty now
extinguished, who can be so harsh and unsympathetic as to utter words of
encouragement in place of wailing and lamentation? For as in the other world
the absence of mourning is a mark of divine wisdom, so in this world the act of
mourning is a mark of the same. He who had already mounted to the sky, who
was laughing to scorn the vanity of this life, who regarded bodily beauty no
more than if it had been in forms of stone, who despised gold as it had been
mud, and every kind of luxury as mire, even he, having been suddenly
overwhelmed with the feverish longing of a preposterous passion, has ruined his
health, and manly strength, and the bloom of his youth, and become a slave of
pleasure. Shall we not weep then, I pray you, for such a man and bewail him,
until we have got him back again? And where do these things concern the human
soul? It is not possible indeed to discover in this world the means of release from
the death of the body, and yet even this does not stay the mourners from