of the Indians, and another unto that of the Moors, and this to one part of the
world, that to another. Whereas we have not the courage to depart even out of
our own country; but seek for luxurious living and splendid houses and all other
superfluities. For which of us ever was famished for the word of God's sake?
Which ever abode in a wilderness? Which ever set out on a distant
peregrination? Which of our teachers lived by the labor of his hands to assist
others? Which endured death daily? Hence it is that they also who are with us
have become slothful. For suppose that one saw soldiers and generals struggling
with hunger, and thirst, and death, and with all dreadful things, and bearing cold
and dangers and all like lions, and so prospering; then afterwards, relaxing that
strictness, and becoming enervated, and fond of wealth, and addicted to business
and bargains, and then overcome by their enemies, it were extreme folly to seek
for the cause of all this. Now let us reason thus in our own case and that of our
ancestors; for we too have become weaker than all, and are nailed down unto
this present life.
And if one be found having a vestige of the ancient wisdom, leaving the
cities and the market-places, and the society of the world, and the ordering of
others, he betakes himself to the mountains: and if one ask the reason of that
retirement, he invents a plea which cannot meet with allowance. For, says he,
"lest I perish too, and the edge of my goodness be taken off, I start aside." Now
how much better were it for you to become less keen, and to gain others, than
abiding on high to neglect your perishing brethren?
When, however, the one sort are careless about virtue, and those who do
regard it withdraw themselves far from our ranks, how are we to subdue our
enemies? For even if miracles were wrought now, who would be persuaded? Or
who of those without would give heed unto us, our iniquity being thus prevalent?
For so it is, that our upright living seems unto the many the more trustworthy
argument of the two: miracles admitting of a bad construction on the part of
obstinate bad men: whereas a pure life will have abundant power to stop the
mouth of the devil himself.

9. These things I say, both to governors and governed; and, before all
others, unto myself; to the end that the way of life shown forth in us may be truly
admirable, that taking our appropriate stations, we may look down on all things
present; may despise wealth, and not despise hell; overlook glory, and not
overlook salvation; endure toil and labor here, lest we fall into punishment there.
Thus let us wage war with the Greeks; thus let us take them captive with a
captivity better than liberty.
But while we say these things without intermission, over and over, they
occur very seldom. Howbeit, be they done or not, it is right to remind you of
them continually. For if some are engaged in deceiving by their fair speech, so
much more is it the duty of those who allure back unto the truth, not to grow
weary of speaking what is profitable. Again: if the deceivers make use of so
many contrivances— spending as they do money, and applying arguments, and
undergoing dangers, and making a parade of their patronage— much more
should we, who are winning men from deceit, endure both dangers and deaths,
and all things; that we may both gain ourselves and others, and become to our
enemies irresistible, and so obtain the promised blessings, through the grace and
loving-kindness, etc.