How far shall our folly extend? Does it not suffice to our punishment that
we do no good deed, but must we add to it the punishment of evil speaking? For
if what he has were your gifts, you lose your reward by upbraiding him for what
you gave. In a word, if you gave it, why do you upbraid him? You have already
borne witness to his poverty, by saying that what he has are your gifts. Why then
do you upbraid? You should not have given, did you intend so to do. But do you
speak thus, when another gives? It is then more grievous, in that when you
yourself hast not given, you upbraid for another man's good deeds. How great
reward do you think those who are thus spoken of will receive? It is for God's
sake they thus suffer. How and wherefore? Had they so willed, they might have
taken up a trader's life, even though they received it not from their ancestors. For
I hear many speaking thus at random, when we say that a certain man is poor.
Had he willed, they say, he might have been rich, and then tauntingly add, His
father, his grandfather, and I know not who was so; but now see what a robe he
wears! But what? Tell me, ought he to go about naked? You then start nice
questionings on these points, but see lest you thus speakest against yourself.
Listen to that exhortation of Christ, which says, "Judge not that you be not
judged." [Matthew 7:1] He might, it is true, if he had willed, have led a trader's
or a merchant's life, and would surely not have lacked. But he would not. What
then, says one, is he here profited? Tell me, what is he profited? Does he wear
silken robes? Does he proudly clear his way through the forum with a troop of
followers? Is he borne along on horseback? Does he build houses, having where
to dwell? If he act so, I too accuse him, and spare him not, but declare that he is
unworthy of the priesthood. For how can he exhort others not to spend their time
on these superfluities, who cannot advise himself? But if he has sufficient for
support, is he therefore doing wrong? Would you have him lead a vagabond life,
and beg? Would you, his disciple, not also be put to shame? But if your father in
the flesh did this, you would think shame of the thing. If your spiritual father be
compelled so to do, will you not veil your head, and even think you are sinking
into the earth? It is written, "A father's dishonor is a reproach to the children."

[Sirach 3:11] But what? Should he perish with famine? This were not like a
pious man; for God wills it not. But what do they straightway philosophize? It is
written, say they, "Get you no gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, neither
two coats, nor yet staves" [Matthew 10:9-10], while these men have three or four
garments, and beds well spread. I am forced now to heave a bitter sigh, and, but
that it had been indecorous, I had wept too! How so? Because we are such
curious searchers into the motes of others, while we feel not the beams in our
own eyes. Tell me, why do you not say this to yourself? The answer is, Because
the command is laid only on our Teachers. When then Paul says, "having food
and covering we shall be therewith content" [1 Timothy 6:8], says he this only to
Teachers? By no means, but to all men; and this is clear, if we will begin farther
back. For what does he say? "Godliness with contentment is great gain [1
Timothy 6:6]; for we brought nothing into this world, it is certain that neither
can we carry anything out" [1 Timothy 6:7]; he then straightway adds, "And
having food and covering, we shall be therewith content; but they that desire to
be rich, fall into a temptation and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts."
[1 Timothy 6:8-9] You see that this is spoken to all; and how is it when he says
again, "Make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof" [Romans
13:14], is not this said absolutely to all? And what when he says, "Meats for the
belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall bring to nought both it and them" [1
Corinthians 6:13]; or what when he says, "But she that gives herself to pleasure,
is dead while she lives" [1 Timothy 5:6], speaking of a widow. Is then the widow
a Teacher? Has not he said himself, "But I permit not a woman to teach, nor to
have dominion over a man"? [1 Timothy 2:12] But if a widow, in old age, (and
age has need of great attendance,) and a woman's nature too, (for the woman's
sex, being weak, has need of more refreshment,) if then, where there is both the
age and the nature, he suffers her not to live in luxury, but even says that she is
dead, (for he did not simply forbid a life of luxury, but said, "she who gives
herself to luxury is dead while she lives,") and thus has cut her off, (for she that
is dead is cut off,) what indulgence then will any man have, who does those