instance, when any one comes to the table hungry, the food will taste sweeter
than any delicacy, or condiment, or a thousand exquisite preparations for the
palate, although it may be the most common article of diet. But he who without
tarrying for necessity, or first waiting till he is hungry, (as the custom is with the
wealthy), when he comes to the table, notwithstanding he finds the most refined
dainties spread before him, has no sensation of pleasure, his appetite not being
previously excited. And that you may learn that this is the actual state of the
case, besides that you are all witnesses to it, let us hear the Scripture telling us
the same truth; "The full soul," it is said, "loaths the honey comb, but to the
hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet." [Proverbs 27:7] Yet what can be sweeter
than honey, and the honey comb? Still he says it is not sweet to the man that is
not hungry. And what can be more disagreeable than bitter things? And yet to
those who are poverty stricken they are sweet. But that the poor come to the
meal with need and hunger, and that the rich do not wait for this is manifest, I
suppose, to every one. Hence they do not reap the fruit of a genuine and
unmixed pleasure. Nor is it only in the article of food, but any one may perceive
that the same thing occurs with respect to drinks; and as in the one case hunger is
the cause of pleasure, far more than the quality of the viands, so also in the other,
thirst usually makes the draught sweetest, although what is drunk is only water.
And this is that which the prophet intimated, when he said, "He satisfied them
with honey out of the rock." But we do not read in any part of Scripture that
Moses brought honey out of the rock, but throughout the history we read of
rivers, and waters, and cool streams. What then is it that was meant? For the
Scripture by no means speaks falsely. Inasmuch, then, as they were thirsty and
wearied with drought, and found these streams of water so cooling, in order to
show the pleasure of such a draught, he calls the water honey, not as though its
nature were changed into honey, but because the condition of the drinkers made
these streams sweeter than honey. You see how the condition of the thirsty is
wont to make the draught sweet? Yea oftentimes have many of the poor, when
wearied, and distressed, and parched with thirst, partaken of such streams even

with such pleasure as I have said. But the rich, while drinking wine that is sweet,
and has the fragrance of flowers, and every perfection that wine can have,
experience no such enjoyment.
23. The same thing happens as every one may perceive with regard to sleep.
For not a soft couch, nor a bedstead overlaid with silver, nor the quietness that
exists throughout the house, nor anything else of this kind, are so generally wont
to make sleep sweet and pleasant, as labour and fatigue, and the need of sleep,
and drowsiness when one lies down. And to this particular the experience of
facts, nay, before actual experience, the assertion of the Scriptures bears witness.
For Solomon, who had passed his life in luxury, when he wished to make this
matter evident, said, "The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little
or much?" [Ecclesiastes 5:12] Why does he add, "whether he eat little or
much?" Both these things usually bring sleeplessness, viz. indigence, and excess
of food; the one drying up the body, stiffening the eyelids and not suffering them
to be closed; the other straitening and oppressing the breath, and inducing many
pains. But at the same time so powerful a persuasive is labour, that though both
these things should befall him, the servant is able to sleep. For since throughout
the whole day, they are running about everywhere, ministering to their masters,
being knocked about and hard pressed, and having but little time to take breath,
they receive a sufficient recompense for their toils and labours in the pleasure of
sleeping. And thus it has happened through the goodness of God toward man,
that these pleasures are not to be purchased with gold and silver, but with labour,
with hard toil, with necessity, and every kind of discipline. Not so the rich. On
the contrary, while lying on their beds, they are frequently without sleep through
the whole night; and though they devise many schemes, they do not obtain such
pleasure. But the poor man when released from his daily labours, having his
limbs completely tired, falls almost before he can lie down into a slumber that is
sound, and sweet, and genuine, enjoying this reward, which is not a small one, of
his fair day's toils. Since therefore the poor man sleeps, and drinks, and eats with
more pleasure than the rich man, what further value is left to riches, now