regard to oneself---as for instance, a man is said to be prudent, who
orders well his acts towards the end of life--or in regard to others
subject to him, in a family, city or kingdom; in which sense it is said
(Mt. 24:45), "a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath
appointed over his family." In this way prudence or providence may
suitably be attributed to God. For in God Himself there can be
nothing ordered towards an end, since He is the last end. This type
of order in things towards an end is therefore in God called
providence. Whence Boethius says (De Consol. iv, 6) that
"Providence is the divine type itself, seated in the Supreme Ruler;
which disposeth all things": which disposition may refer either to the
type of the order of things towards an end, or to the type of the order
of parts in the whole.
Reply to Objection 1: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 9,10),
"Prudence is what, strictly speaking, commands all that 'ebulia' has
rightly counselled and 'synesis' rightly judged" [FS, Question 57,
Article 6]. Whence, though to take counsel may not be fitting to God,
from the fact that counsel is an inquiry into matters that are doubtful,
nevertheless to give a command as to the ordering of things towards
an end, the right reason of which He possesses, does belong to God,
according to Ps. 148:6: "He hath made a decree, and it shall not pass
away." In this manner both prudence and providence belong to God.
Although at the same time it may be said that the very reason of
things to be done is called counsel in God; not because of any
inquiry necessitated, but from the certitude of the knowledge, to
which those who take counsel come by inquiry. Whence it is said:
"Who worketh all things according to the counsel of His will" (Eph.
1:11).
Reply to Objection 2: Two things pertain to the care of providence--namely, the "reason of order," which is called providence and
disposition; and the execution of order, which is termed government.
Of these, the first is eternal, and the second is temporal.
Reply to Objection 3: Providence resides in the intellect; but
presupposes the act of willing the end. Nobody gives a precept
about things done for an end; unless he will that end. Hence
prudence presupposes the moral virtues, by means of which the
appetitive faculty is directed towards good, as the Philosopher says.
Even if Providence has to do with the divine will and intellect equally,
this would not affect the divine simplicity, since in God both the will
and intellect are one and the same thing, as we have said above

(Question 19).

### ARTICLE 2. Whether everything is subject to the providence

of God?
Objection 1: It seems that everything is not subject to divine
providence. For nothing foreseen can happen by chance. If then
everything was foreseen by God, nothing would happen by chance.
And thus hazard and luck would disappear; which is against
common opinion.
Objection 2: Further, a wise provider excludes any defect or evil, as
far as he can, from those over whom he has a care. But we see many
evils existing. Either, then, God cannot hinder these, and thus is not
omnipotent; or else He does not have care for everything.
Objection 3: Further, whatever happens of necessity does not
require providence or prudence. Hence, according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 5,9, 10,11): "Prudence is the right reason of
things contingent concerning which there is counsel and choice."
Since, then, many things happen from necessity, everything cannot
be subject to providence.
Objection 4: Further, whatsoever is left to itself cannot be subject to
the providence of a governor. But men are left to themselves by God
in accordance with the words: "God made man from the beginning,
and left him in the hand of his own counsel" (Ecclus. 15:14). And
particularly in reference to the wicked: "I let them go according to
the desires of their heart" (Ps. 80:13). Everything, therefore, cannot
be subject to divine providence.
Objection 5: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 9:9): "God doth not
care for oxen": and we may say the same of other irrational
creatures. Thus everything cannot be under the care of divine
providence.
On the contrary, It is said of Divine Wisdom: "She reacheth from end
to end mightily, and ordereth all things sweetly" (Wis. 8:1).
I answer that, Certain persons totally denied the existence of
providence, as Democritus and the Epicureans, maintaining that the
world was made by chance. Others taught that incorruptible things
only were subject to providence and corruptible things not in their