John 13:9
"Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head."
Vehement in deprecation, he becomes yet more vehement in acquiescence;
but both from love. For why said He not wherefore He did this, instead of adding
a threat? Because Peter would not have been persuaded. For had He said, "Suffer
it, for by this I persuade you to be humbleminded," Peter would have promised it
ten thousand times, in order that his Master might not do this thing. But now
what says He? He speaks of that which Peter most feared and dreaded, the being
separated from Him; for it is he who continually asks, "Where are You going?"
[John 13:36] Wherefore also he said, "I will give even my life for You." [John
13:37] And if, after hearing, "What I do you know not now, but you shall know
hereafter," he still persisted, much more would he have done so had he learned
(the meaning of the action). Therefore said He, "but you shall know hereafter,"
as being aware, that should he learn it immediately he would still resist. And
Peter said not, "Tell me, that I may suffer You," but (which was much more
vehement) he did not even endure to learn, but withstands Him, saying, "You
shall never wash my feet." But as soon as He threatened, he straightway relaxed
his tone. But what means, "You shall know after this"? "After this?" When?
"When in My Name you shall have cast out devils; when you shall have seen Me
taken up into Heaven, when you shall have learned from the Spirit that I sit on
His right hand, then shall you understand what is being done now." What then
says Christ? When Peter said, "not my feet only, but also my hands and my
head," He replies,

John 13:10-11
"He that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit; and
you are clean, but not all. For He knew who should betray Him."
"And if they are clean, why washes He their feet?" That we may learn to be
modest. On which account He came not to any other part of the body, but to that
which is considered more dishonorable than the rest. But what is, "He that is
washed"? It is instead of, "he that is clean." Were they then clean, who had not
yet been delivered from their sins, nor deemed worthy of the Spirit, since sin still
had the mastery, the handwriting of the curse still remaining, the victim not
having yet been offered? How then calls He them "clean"? That you may not
deem them clean, as delivered from their sins, He adds, Behold, "you are clean
through the word that I have spoken unto you." That is, "In this way you are so
far clean; you have received the light, you have been freed from Jewish error.
For the Prophet also says, 'Wash you, make you clean, put away the wickedness
from your souls' [Isaiah 1:16, Septuagint]; so that such a one is washed and is
clean." Since then these men had cast away all wickedness from their souls, and
had companied with Him with a pure mind, therefore He says according to the
word of the Prophet, "he that is washed is clean already." For in that place also
It means not the "washing" of water, practiced by the Jews; but the cleansing of
the conscience.
3. Be we then also clean; learn we to do well. But what is "well"? "Judge
for the fatherless, plead for the widow; and come, let us reason together, says the
Lord." [Isaiah 1:7] There is frequent mention in the Scriptures of widows and
orphans, but we make no account of this. Yet consider how great is the reward.
"Though," it says, "your sins be as scarlet, I will whiten them as snow; though
they be red like crimson, I will whiten them as wool." For a widow is an
unprotected being, therefore He takes much care for her. For they, when it is
even in their power to contract a second marriage, endure the hardships of