I answer that, "Person" signifies what is most perfect in all nature--that is, a subsistent individual of a rational nature. Hence, since
everything that is perfect must be attributed to God, forasmuch as
His essence contains every perfection, this name "person" is
fittingly applied to God; not, however, as it is applied to creatures,
but in a more excellent way; as other names also, which, while giving
them to creatures, we attribute to God; as we showed above when
treating of the names of God (Question 13, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 1: Although the word "person" is not found
applied to God in Scripture, either in the Old or New Testament,
nevertheless what the word signifies is found to be affirmed of God
in many places of Scripture; as that He is the supreme selfsubsisting being, and the most perfectly intelligent being. If we could
speak of God only in the very terms themselves of Scripture, it would
follow that no one could speak about God in any but the original
language of the Old or New Testament. The urgency of confuting
heretics made it necessary to find new words to express the ancient
faith about God. Nor is such a kind of novelty to be shunned; since it
is by no means profane, for it does not lead us astray from the sense
of Scripture. The Apostle warns us to avoid "profane novelties of
words" (1 Tim. 6:20).
Reply to Objection 2: Although this name "person" may not belong
to God as regards the origin of the term, nevertheless it excellently
belongs to God in its objective meaning. For as famous men were
represented in comedies and tragedies, the name "person" was
given to signify those who held high dignity. Hence, those who held
high rank in the Church came to be called "persons." Thence by
some the definition of person is given as "hypostasis distinct by
reason of dignity." And because subsistence in a rational nature is of
high dignity, therefore every individual of the rational nature is called
a "person." Now the dignity of the divine nature excels every other
dignity; and thus the name "person" pre-eminently belongs to God.
Reply to Objection 3: The word "hypostasis" does not apply to God
as regards its source of origin, since He does not underlie accidents;
but it applies to Him in its objective sense, for it is imposed to signify
the subsistence. Jerome said that "poison lurks in this word,"
forasmuch as before it was fully understood by the Latins, the
heretics used this term to deceive the simple, to make people
profess many essences as they profess several hypostases,
inasmuch as the word "substance," which corresponds to

hypostasis in Greek, is commonly taken amongst us to mean
essence.
Reply to Objection 4: It may be said that God has a rational "nature,"
if reason be taken to mean, not discursive thought, but in a general
sense, an intelligent nature. But God cannot be called an "individual"
in the sense that His individuality comes from matter; but only in the
sense which implies incommunicability. "Substance" can be applied
to God in the sense of signifying self-subsistence. There are some,
however, who say that the definition of Boethius, quoted above
(Article 1), is not a definition of person in the sense we use when
speaking of persons in God. Therefore Richard of St. Victor amends
this definition by adding that "Person" in God is "the
incommunicable existence of the divine nature."