man was debarred from enjoying the same blessings which those over whom he
ruled obtained; but after many labors and sufferings, after that unspeakable
wandering, after so many battles fought and victories won, he died outside the
land to reach which he had undergone so much toil and trial; and though he had
weathered the storms of the deep, he failed to enjoy the blessings of the haven
after all. From hence then you see that not only they who grasp at this office are
left without excuse for the sins they commit in the discharge thereof, but they too
who come to it through the ambitious desire of others; for truly if those persons
who have been chosen for this high office by God himself, though they have
never so often refused it, have paid such heavy penalties, and if nothing has
availed to deliver any of them from this danger, neither Aaron nor Eli, nor that
holy man the Saint, the prophet, the wonder worker, the meek above all the men
which were upon the face of the earth, [Numbers 12:3] who spoke with God, as
a man speaks unto his friend, [Exodus 33:11] hardly shall we who fall so
infinitely short of the excellence of that great man, be able to plead as a
sufficient excuse the consciousness that we have never been ambitious of the
dignity, more especially when many of the ordinations now-a-days do not
proceed from the grace of God, but are due to human ambition. God chose
Judas, and counted him one of the sacred band, and committed to him, as to the
rest, the dignity of the apostolic office; yea he gave him somewhat beyond the
others, the stewardship of the money. [John 12:6] But what of that? When he
afterwards abused both these trusts, betraying Him whom he was commissioned
to preach, and misapplying the money which he should have laid out well; did he
escape punishment? nay for this very reason he even brought upon himself
greater punishment, and very reasonably too. For we must not use the high
honors given to us by God so as to offend Him, but so as to please Him better.
But he who claims exemption from punishment where it is due, because he has
been exalted to higher honor than others, acts very much like one of those
unbelieving Jews, who after hearing Christ say, "If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin," "If I had not done among them the works which

none other did, they had not had sin," [John 15:22-24] should reproach the
Saviour and benefactor of mankind by replying, "Why, then, did you come and
speak? Why did you work miracles? Was it that you might punish us the more?"
But these are the words of madness and of utter senselessness. For the Great
Physician came not to give you over, but to heal you— not to pass you by when
thou were sick, but to rid you entirely of disease. But you have of your own
accord withdrawn yourself from his hands; receive therefore the sorer
punishment. For as you would have been freed from your former maladies if you
had yielded to his treatment, so if, when you saw him coming to your aid you
fled from him, you will no longer be able to cleanse yourself of these infirmities,
and as you are unable, you will both suffer punishment for them, and also
because for your part you made God's solicitude for your good of none effect.
Therefore we who act like this are not subjected to the same torment after as
before we received honor at God's hands, but far severer torment after than
before. For he who has not become good even by being well treated, deserves all
the bitterer punishment. Since, then, this excuse of yours has been shown to be
weak, and not only fails to save those who take refuge in it, but exposes them so
much the more, we must provide ourselves with some other means of safety.
Basil: Tell me of what nature is that? Since, as for me, I am at present
scarce master of myself, you have reduced me to such a state of fear and
trembling by what you have said.
Chrysostom: Do not, I beseech and implore you, do not be so downcast. For
while there is safety for us who are weak, namely, in not undertaking this office
at all, there is safety for you too who are strong, and this consists in making your
hopes of salvation depend, next to the grace of God, on avoiding every act
unworthy of this gift, and of God who gave it. For they certainly would be
deserving of the greatest punishment who, after obtaining this dignity through
their own ambition, should then either on account of sloth, or wickedness, or
even inexperience, abuse the office. Not that we are to gather from this that there
is pardon in store for those who have not been thus ambitious. Yea, even they too