lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be glory to the Father and
to the Holy Spirit for ever and ever— Amen.

## Three Homilies on the Devil

Homily 1. Against Those Who Say that
Demons Govern Human Affairs.
Against those who say that demons govern human affairs, and who are
displeased at the chastisement of God, and are offended at the prosperity of
the wicked and the hardships of the just.
I indeed was hoping, that from the continuance of my discourse, you would
have had a surfeit of my words: but I see that the contrary is happening: that no
surfeit is taking place from this continuance, but that your desire is increased,
that an addition is made not to your satiety but to your pleasure, that the same
thing is happening which the winebibbers at heathen drinking-bouts experience;
for they, the more they pour down unmixed wine, so much the rather they kindle
their thirst, and in your case the more teaching we inculcate, so much the rather
do we kindle your desire, we make your longing greater, your love for it the
stronger. On this account, although I am conscious of extreme poverty, I do not
cease to imitate the ostentatious among entertainers, both setting before you my
table continuously, and placing on it the cup of my teaching, filled full: for I see
that after having drunk it all, you retire again thirsting. And this indeed has
become evident during the whole time, but especially since the last Lord's Day:
For that ye partake of the divine oracles insatiably, that day particularly showed:
whereon I discoursed about the unlawfulness of speaking ill one of another,
when I furnished you with a sure subject for self accusation, suggesting that you
should speak ill of your own sins, but should not busy yourselves about those of
other people: when I brought forward the Saints as accusing themselves indeed,
but sparing others: Paul saying I am the chief of sinners, and that God had
compassion on him who was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious, and

calling himself one born out of due time, and not even thinking himself worthy
of the title of Apostle: Peter saying "Depart from me because I am a sinful man:"
Matthew styling himself a publican even in the days of his Apostleship: David
crying out and saying "My iniquities have gone over my head, and as a heavy
burden have been burdensome to me:" and Isaiah lamenting and bewailing "I am
unclean, and have unclean lips:" The three children in the furnace of fire,
confessing and saying that they have sinned and transgressed, and have not kept
the commandments of God. Daniel again makes the same lamentation. When
after the enumeration of these Saints, I called their accusers flies, and introduced
the right reason for the comparison, saying, that just as they fasten themselves
upon the wounds of others, so also the accusers bite at other people's sins,
collecting disease therefrom for their acquaintance, and those who do the
opposite, I designated bees, not gathering together diseases, but building
honeycombs with the greatest devotion, and so flying to the meadow of the
virtue of the Saint: Then accordingly—then ye showed your insatiable longing.
For when my discourse was extended to some length, yea to an interminable
length, such as never was, many indeed expected that your eagerness would be
quenched by the abundance of what was said. But the contrary happened. For
your heart was the rather warmed, your desire was the rather kindled: and
whence was this evident? The acclamations at least which took place at the end
were greater, and the shouts more clear, and the same thing took place as at the
forge. For as there at the beginning indeed the light of the fire is not very clear,
but when the flame has caught the whole of the wood that is laid upon it, it is
raised to a great height; so also accordingly this happened on the occasion of that
day. At the beginning indeed, this assembly was not vehemently stirred by me.
But when the discourse was extended to some length, and gradually took hold of
all the subjects and the teaching spread more widely, then accordingly, then the
desire of listening was kindled in you, and the applause broke forth, more
vehemently. On this account, although I had been prepared to say less than was
spoken, I then exceeded the measure, nay rather I never exceeded the measure.