said unto them."] [Recapitulation, Acts 4:23] See the unostentatious conduct of
the Apostles, and their largeness of mind. They did not go about boasting, and
say, "How we served ([ἀ] [πεχρησάμεθα]) the priests!" nor were they ambitious
of honor: but, we read, they came unto their own company. Observe how they do
not cast themselves upon temptations, but when the temptations present
themselves, with courage endure them. Had it been some other of the disciples,
perhaps, emboldened by the countenance of the multitude, he might have
insulted, might have vented ever so many harsh expressions. But not so these
true philosophers; they do all with mildness and with gentleness. "And when they
heard that, we read, with one accord they lifted up their voice to God." [Acts
4:24] That shout proceeded from delight and great emotion. Such indeed are the
prayers which do their work, prayers replete with true philosophy, prayers
offered up for such objects, by such persons, on such occasions, in such a
manner; whereas all others are abominable and profane. "Lord, Thou the God
that made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that in them is." Observe how they
say nothing idle, no old wives' talk and fables, but speak of His power. Just as
Christ Himself said to the Jews, "If I by the Spirit of God do cast out devils:"
behold the Father also speaks by the Spirit. For what says it? "Lord, the God
Who, by the Holy Ghost, through the mouth of our father Your servant David
said, Why did the nations rage?" [Acts 4:25] Scripture is wont thus to speak of
one as of many. "For of a truth, Lord, against Your Holy Child Jesus, Whom You
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate," etc. [Acts 4:27] Observe how, even in
prayer, they circumstantially describe the Passion, and refer all to God.— That
is, Not they had power to do this: but Thou did it all, Thou that permitted, that
dost call to account, and yet brought to accomplishment, Thou the All-skilful
and Wise, that served You of Your enemies for Your own pleasure. [Acts 4:28]
"For to do whatever Your hand," etc. Here they discourse of His exceeding Skill
and Wisdom and Power. So then, as enemies they came together, and with
murderous purpose, and as opposing themselves, but they did what things You
would: "For to do," as it is said, "whatsoever Your hand and Your purpose

determined before to be done." What means, "Your hand?" Here he seems to me
to denote one and the same thing by power and purpose, meaning that for You it
is enough but to will: for it is not by power that one determines. "Whatsoever
Your hand," etc. i.e. Whatsoever You ordained: either this is the meaning, or, that
by His hand He did effect. "And now, Lord, regard their threatenings." [Acts
4:29] As at that time, it is said, they "imagined vain things," so "now," grant that
their imaginations may be in vain: i.e. let not their threatenings come into
accomplishment. And this they said not because they would themselves
deprecate any hardship, but for the preaching's sake. For they do not say, "and
deliver us out of dangers;" but what? "And grant unto Your servants, that with
all boldness they may speak Your word." You Who brought to pass the former
designs, bring these also to accomplishment. Observe, how they affirm God to
be the Author of their confidence; and how they ask all for God's sake, nothing
for their own glory or ambition. They promise for their own part, that they will
not be dismayed; but they pray that signs may be wrought "by stretching forth
Your hand to heal, and that signs and wonders may be done:" [Acts 4:30] for
without these, however great the zeal they showed, they would be striving to no
purpose. God assented to their prayer, and manifested this, by shaking the place.
For "when they had prayed," it is said, "the place was shaken." [Acts 4:31] And
wherefore this was done, hear from the prophet, when he says, He looks on the
earth, and makes it to tremble. [Psalm 104:32] For by this He made it manifest
that He is present to their prayers. And again, another prophet says, "The earth
was shaken, and did tremble at the presence of the Lord." [Psalm 18:7; lxviii, 8]
And God did this, both to make it more awful, and to lead them on to a
courageous trust. "And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke
the word of God with boldness." They gained increased boldness. As it was the
beginning (of their work), and they had besought a sensible sign for their
persuasion ([πρὸς τὸ πεισθἥναι αὐτους])— but after this we nowhere find the
like happening— therefore great was the encouragement they received. In fact,
they had no means of proving that He was risen, save by miraculous signs. So