besides all that, I will say this too. What does Paul wish to establish by this
example? Surely, to lead the Philippians to humility. To what purpose then did he
bring forward this example? For no one who would exhort to humility speaks
thus; "Be thou humble, and think less of yourself than of your equals in honor,
for such an one who is a slave has not risen against his master; do thou imitate
him." This, any one would say, is not humility, but arrogance. Learn ye what
humility is, you who have a devilish pride! What then is humility? To be lowly
minded. And he is lowly minded who humbles himself, not he who is lowly by
necessity. To explain what I say; and do ye attend; he who is lowly minded,
when he has it in his power to be high minded, is humble, but he who is so
because he is not able to be high minded, is no longer humble. For instance, If a
King subjects himself to his own officer, he is humble, for he descends from his
high estate; but if an officer does so, he will not be lowly minded; for how? He
has not humbled himself from any high estate. It is not possible to show humblemindedness except it be in our power to do otherwise. For if it is necessary for
us to be humble even against our will, that excellency comes not from the spirit
or the will, but from necessity. This virtue is called humble-mindedness, because
it is the humbling of the mind.
If he who has it not in his power to snatch at another's goods, continues in
the possession of his own; should we praise him, think you, for his justice? I
trow not, and why? The praise of free choice is taken away by the necessity. If
he, who has it not in his power to usurp and be a king, remains a private citizen,
should we praise him for his quietness? I trow not. The same rule applies here.
For praise, O you most senseless ones, is not given for abstaining from these
things, but for the performance of good deeds; for the former is free indeed from
blame, but partakes not yet of praise, while eulogy of the other is meet. Observe
accordingly that Christ gives praise on this principle, when He says, "Come, you
blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world. For I was an hungered, and you gave Me meat; I was thirsty, and
you gave Me drink." [Matthew 25:34-35] He did not say, Because you have not

been covetous, because you have not robbed; these are slight things; but because
"ye saw Me an hungered, and fed Me." Who ever praised either his friends or his
enemies in this sort? No one ever praised even Paul. Why say Paul? No one ever
praised even a common man, as thou dost praise Christ, because he did not take
that rule which was not his due. To admire for such things as this, is to give
evidence of much evil. And why? Because with evil men this is a matter of
praise, as of one that steals, if he steal no more; but it is otherwise among good
men. [Ephesians 4:28] Because a man has not seized on a rule and an honor
which was not his due, is he praiseworthy? What folly is this?
Attend, I entreat you, for the reasoning is long. Again, who would ever
exhort to humility from such grounds as this? Examples ought to be much
greater than the subject, to which we are exhorting, for no one will be moved by
what is foreign to the subject. For instance, when Christ would lead us to do
good to our enemies, He brought a great example, even that of His Father, "For
He makes His sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and
the unjust." [Matthew 5:45] When He would lead to endurance of wrong He
brought an example, "Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart." [Matthew
11:29] And again, "If I your Lord and Master do these things, how much more
should ye"? [John 13:14] Do you see how these examples are not distant, for
there is no need they should be so distant, for indeed we also do these things,
especially as in this case the example is not even near. And how? If He be a
servant, He is inferior, and subject to Him that is greater; but this is not lowliness
of mind. It was requisite to show the contrary, namely, that the greater person
subjected himself to the lesser. But since he found not this distinction in the case
of God, between greater and lesser, he made at least an equality. Now if the Son
were inferior, this were not a sufficient example to lead us to humility. And why?
Because it is not humility, for the lesser not to rise against the greater, not to
snatch at rule, and to be "obedient unto death."
Again, consider what he says after the example, "In lowliness of mind, each
counting other better than themselves." [Philippians 2:3] He says, "counting,"