down? What sort of raising up does he call that which took place after the return
from Babylon? "That the residue of men," he says, "may seek the Lord, even all
the Gentiles upon whom My Name is called." [Acts 15:17] Then, what makes his
word authoritative— "Says the Lord, which does all these things:" and, for that
this is no new thing, but all was planned from the beginning, "Known unto God
are all His works from everlasting." [Acts 15:18] And then again his authority
([καὶ τὸ ἀξίωμα πάλιν]) (as Bishop): "Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble
not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned to God: but that we write
unto them, that they abstain from pollution of idols, and from fornication, and
from things strangled, and from blood. For Moses of old time has in every city
them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath day." [Acts
15:19-21] Since then they had heard of the Law, with good reason he enjoins
these things from the Law, that he may not seem to make it of no authority. And
(yet) observe how he does not let them be told these things from the Law, but
from himself, saying, It is not that I heard these things from the Law, but how?
"We have judged." Then the decree is made in common. "Then pleased it the
Apostles and elders, together with the whole Church, to choose men of their own
company"— do you observe they do not merely enact these matters, and nothing
more?— "and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: namely, Judas
surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren: and they wrote
letters by them after this manner." [Acts 15:22] And observe, the more to
authenticate the decree, they send men of their own, that there may be no room
for regarding Paul and his company with suspicion. "The Apostles and elders
and brethren send greeting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in
Antioch and Syria and Cilicia." [Acts 15:23] And mark with what forbearance of
all harsh vituperation of those (brethren) they indite their epistle. "Forasmuch as
we have heard, that certain which went out from us have troubled you with
words, subverting your souls, saying, You must be circumcised, and keep the
Law: to whom we gave no such commandment." [Acts 15:24] Sufficient was this
charge against the temerity of those men, and worthy of the Apostles'

moderation, that they said nothing beyond this. Then to show that they do not act
despotically, that all are agreed in this, that with deliberation they write this— "It
seemed good to us, being assembled with one accord, to send men of ours whom
we have chosen" [Acts 15:25]— then, that it may not look like disparagement of
Paul and Barnabas, that those men are sent, observe the encomium passed upon
them— "together with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, men that have hazarded
their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. We have sent therefore Judas
and Silas; who shall also tell you the same things by mouth. For it seemed good
to the Holy Spirit and to us"— it is not man's doing, it says— "to lay upon you
no greater burden"— again it calls the Law a burden: then apologizing even for
these injunctions— "save these necessary things" [Acts 15:26-28]: "That ye
abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled,
and from fornication from which if you keep yourselves, you shall do well. [Acts
15:29] For these things the New Testament did not enjoin: we nowhere find that
Christ discoursed about these matters; but these things they take from the Law.
"From things strangled," it says, "and from blood." Here it prohibits murder. [cf.
Genesis 9:5] "So when they were dismissed, they came to Antioch: and when
they had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle: which when
they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation." (v. 30, 31.) Then those
(brethren) also exhorted them: and having established them, for towards Paul
they were contentiously disposed, so departed from them in peace. "And Judas
and Silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren with many
words, and confirmed them. And after they had tarried there a space, they were
let go in peace from the brethren unto the Apostles." (v. 32, 33.) No more
factions and fightings, but thenceforth Paul taught.
(Recapitulation.) "Then all the multitude kept silence," etc. [Acts 15:12]
There was no arrogance in the Church. After Peter Paul speaks, and none
silences him: James waits patiently, not starts up (for the next word). Great the
orderliness (of the proceedings). No word speaks John here, no word the other
Apostles, but held their peace, for James was invested with the chief rule, and