SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.128, C.2.

most akin to virtue, since it is an attestation to a person's virtue, as
stated above (Question 103, Articles 1,2); and because it is offered to
God and to the best; and again because, in order to obtain honor
even as to avoid shame, men set aside all other things. Now a man is
said to be magnanimous in respect of things that are great
absolutely and simply, just as a man is said to be brave in respect of
things that are difficult simply. It follows therefore that magnanimity
is about honors.
Reply to Objection 1: Good and evil absolutely considered regard the
concupiscible faculty, but in so far as the aspect of difficult is added,
they belong to the irascible. Thus it is that magnanimity regards
honor, inasmuch, to wit, as honor has the aspect of something great
or difficult.
Reply to Objection 2: Although honor is neither a passion nor an
operation, yet it is the object of a passion, namely hope, which tends
to a difficult good. Wherefore magnanimity is immediately about the
passions of hope, and mediately about honor as the object of hope:
even so, we have stated (Question 123, Articles 4,5) with regard to
fortitude that it is about dangers of death in so far as they are the
object of fear and daring.
Reply to Objection 3: Those are worthy of praise who despise riches
in such a way as to do nothing unbecoming in order to obtain them,
nor have too great a desire for them. If, however, one were to
despise honors so as not to care to do what is worthy of honor, this
would be deserving of blame. Accordingly magnanimity is about
honors in the sense that a man strives to do what is deserving of
honor, yet not so as to think much of the honor accorded by man.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.128, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether magnanimity is essentially about great

honors?
Objection 1: It seems that magnanimity is not essentially about great
honors. For the proper matter of magnanimity is honor, as stated
above (Article 1). But great and little are accidental to honor.
Therefore it is not essential to magnanimity to be about great
honors.
Objection 2: Further, just as magnanimity is about honor, so is
meekness about anger. But it is not essential to meekness to be
about either great or little anger. Therefore neither is it essential to
magnanimity to be about great honor.
Objection 3: Further, small honor is less aloof from great honor than
is dishonor. But magnanimity is well ordered in relation to dishonor,
and consequently in relation to small honors also. Therefore it is not
only about great honors.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 7) that magnanimity
is about great honors.
I answer that According to the Philosopher (Phys. vii, 17, 18), virtue
is a perfection, and by this we are to understand the perfection of a
power, and that it regards the extreme limit of that power, as stated
in De Coelo i, 116. Now the perfection of a power is not perceived in
every operation of that power, but in such operations as are great or
difficult: for every power, however imperfect, can extend to ordinary
and trifling operations. Hence it is essential to a virtue to be about
the difficult and the good, as stated in Ethic. ii, 3.
Now the difficult and the good (which amount to the same) in an act
of virtue may be considered from two points of view. First, from the
point of view of reason, in so far as it is difficult to find and establish
the rational means in some particular matter: and this difficulty is
found only in the act of intellectual virtues, and also of justice. The
other difficulty is on the part of the matter, which may involve a
certain opposition to the moderation of reason, which moderation
has to be applied thereto: and this difficulty regards chiefly the other
moral virtues, which are about the passions, because the passions
resist reason as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv, 4).