Reply to Objection 2: The fire of hell is called eternal, only because it
never ends. Still, there is change in the pains of the lost, according
to the words "To extreme heat they will pass from snowy
waters" (Job 24:19). Hence in hell true eternity does not exist, but
rather time; according to the text of the Psalm "Their time will be for
ever" (Ps. 80:16).
Reply to Objection 3: Necessary means a certain mode of truth; and
truth, according to the Philosopher (Metaph. vi), is in the mind.
Therefore in this sense the true and necessary are eternal, because
they are in the eternal mind, which is the divine intellect alone; hence
it does not follow that anything beside God is eternal.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether eternity differs from time?

Objection 1: It seems that eternity does not differ from time. For two
measures of duration cannot exist together, unless one is part of the
other; for instance two days or two hours cannot be together;
nevertheless, we may say that a day or an hour are together,
considering hour as part of a day. But eternity and time occur
together, each of which imports a certain measure of duration. Since
therefore eternity is not a part of time, forasmuch as eternity exceeds
time, and includes it, it seems that time is a part of eternity, and is
not a different thing from eternity.
Objection 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Phys. iv), the
"now" of time remains the same in the whole of time. But the nature
of eternity seems to be that it is the same indivisible thing in the
whole space of time. Therefore eternity is the "now" of time. But the
"now" of time is not substantially different from time. Therefore
eternity is not substantially different from time.
Objection 3: Further, as the measure of the first movement is the
measure of every movement, as said in Phys. iv, it thus appears that
the measure of the first being is that of every being. But eternity is
the measure of the first being---that is, of the divine being. Therefore
eternity is the measure of every being. But the being of things
corruptible is measured by time. Time therefore is either eternity or
is a part of eternity.
On the contrary, Eternity is simultaneously whole. But time has a
"before" and an "after." Therefore time and eternity are not the same
thing.
I answer that, It is manifest that time and eternity are not the same.
Some have founded this difference on the fact that eternity has
neither beginning nor an end; whereas time has a beginning and an
end. This, however, makes a merely accidental, and not an absolute
difference because, granted that time always was and always will be,
according to the idea of those who think the movement of the
heavens goes on for ever, there would yet remain a difference
between eternity and time, as Boethius says (De Consol. v), arising
from the fact that eternity is simultaneously whole; which cannot be
applied to time: for eternity is the measure of a permanent being;