for ever? Nothing! No, nor anything in us but the soul, and that we neglect. Of
things subject to change we take abundant care, as if they were permanent: but
that which is to endure for ever we neglect, as if it were soon to pass away. Some
one is enabled to perform mighty actions, but they shall last till tomorrow, and
then he perishes, as we see in the instances of those who have had yet greater
power, and are now to be seen no more. Life is a dream, and a scene; and as on
the stage when the scene is shifted the various pageants disappear, and as dreams
flit away when the sunbeams rise, so here when the end comes, whether the
universal or that of each one, all is dissolved and vanishes away. The tree that
you have planted remains, and the house that you have built, it too stands on. But
the planter and the builder go away, and perish. Yet these things happen without
our regarding it, and we live on in luxury and pleasure, and are ever furnishing
ourselves with such things, as if we were immortal.
Hear what Solomon says, who knew the present world by actual
experience. "I built me houses, I planted me vineyards, I made me gardens, and
orchards and pools of water. I gathered me also silver and gold. I gat myself
men-singers, and women-singers, and flocks, and herds." [Ecclesiastes 2:4-5]
There was no one who lived in greater luxury, or higher glory. There was no one
so wise or so powerful, no one who saw all things so succeeding to his heart's
desire. What then? He had no enjoyment from all these things. What after all
does he say of it himself? "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." [Ecclesiastes 12:8]
Vanity not simply but superlatively. Let us believe him, and lay hold on that in
which there is no vanity, in which there is truth; and what is based upon a solid
rock, where there is no old age, nor decline, but all things bloom and flourish,
without decay, or waxing old, or approaching dissolution. Let us, I beseech you,
love God with genuine affection, not from fear of hell, but from desire of the
kingdom. For what is comparable to seeing Christ? Surely nothing! What to the
enjoyment of those good things? Surely nothing! Well may there be nothing; for
"eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the
things which God has prepared for them that love Him." [1 Corinthians 2:9] Let

us be anxious to obtain those things, and let us despise all these. Are we not
continually complaining that human life is nothing? Why are you solicitous for
what is nothing? Why do you sustain such toils, for what is nothing? You see
splendid houses, does the sight of them delude you? Look up to heaven. Raise
your view from pillars of stone to that beautiful fabric, compared with which the
others are as the works of ants and pismires. Learn philosophy from that
spectacle, ascend to heavenly things, and look thence upon our splendid
buildings, and see that they are nothing, the mere toys of little children. Do you
see not how much finer, how much lighter, how much purer, how much more
translucent, is the air the higher you ascend? There have they that do alms their
mansions and their tabernacles. These that are here are dissolved at the
resurrection, or rather before the resurrection destroyed by the stroke of time.
Nay often in their most flourishing state and period an earthquake overthrows, or
fire entirely ruins them. For not only the bodies of men, but their very buildings
are liable to untimely deaths. Nay, sometimes things decayed by time stand firm
under the shock of an earthquake, while glittering edifices, firmly fixed, and
newly constructed, are struck but by lightning and perish. And this, I believe, is
the interposition of God, that we may not take pride in our buildings.
Would you again have another ground for cheerfulness? Go to the public
buildings, in which you share equally with others. For the most magnificent
private houses, after all, are less splendid than the public edifices. There you
may remain, as long as you please. They belong to you as much as to others,
since they are common to you with others; they are common, and not private.
But those, you say, delight you not. They delight you not, partly because you are
familiar with them, and partly from your covetousness. So the pleasantness is not
in the beauty, but in the appropriating! So the pleasure is in greediness, and in
the wish to make every man's goods your own! How long are we to be nailed to
these things? How long are we to be fastened to the earth, and grovel, like
worms, in the dirt? God has given us a body of earth, that we might carry it with
us up to heaven, not that we should draw our soul down with it to earth. Earthy it