their tongues cut out, than suffer an oath to proceed from their mouths! This will
be your ornament and defence, and not only so, but it will bring an abundant
reward. For others also will certainly emulate, and imitate you. But if, when a
person has gained but one or two, [James 5:20] he shall receive so great a reward
from God; what recompense shall you not receive when you are the instructors
of the whole world. It is your duty then to bestir yourselves, to be watchful, and
to be sober; knowing that not only from our own personal good works, but from
those we have also wrought in others, shall we receive the best recompense, and
enjoy much favour with God, which may He grant us all continually to enjoy,
and hereafter to obtain the kingdom of heaven, in Christ Jesus our Lord; to
Whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be glory and power both now and
ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 20 on the Statues
That the fast of Lent is not sufficient to make us competent to partake
of the Communion, but that holiness is the first thing required. How it is
possible not to entertain resentment, and that God takes much account of
this law; and that the entertaining of resentment punishes those who are
guilty of it even before they reach the place of torment.— Also concerning
abstinence from oaths, and those who have not succeeded in abstaining
from swearing.
1. At length the season is verging towards the end of the Fast, and therefore
we ought the more earnestly to devote ourselves to holiness. For as in the case of
those who run a race, all their circuits will be of no avail if they miss the prize;
so neither will any advantage result from these manifold labours and toils with
regard to the fast, if we are not able to enjoy the sacred Table with a good
conscience. For this end are fasting and Lent appointed, and so many days of
solemn assemblies, auditories, prayers, and teachings, in order that by this
earnestness being cleansed in every possible way from the sins which we had
contracted during the whole year, we may with spiritual boldness religiously
partake of that unbloody Sacrifice; so that should this not be the result, we shall
have sustained so much labour entirely in vain, and without any profit. Let every
one, therefore, consider with himself what defect he has corrected, what good
work he has attained to; what sin he has cast off, what stain he has purged away;
in what respect he has become better. And should he discover that in this good
traffic he has made any gain by the fast, and be conscious in himself of much
care taken of his wounds, let him draw near! But if he has remained negligent,
having nothing to show but mere fasting, and has done nothing which is right
besides, let him remain outside; and then let him enter, when he has purged out
all these offenses. Let no one rest on the fast merely; while continuing