same way as the desire of Baptism delivers those who are going to
be baptized.
Reply to Objection 2: In the text venial does not designate guilt, but
punishment that is easily expiated. and so it does not follow that one
guilt is changed into another but that it is wholly done away. For
"venial" is taken in three senses [FS, Question 88, Article 2]: first, for
what is venial generically, e.g. an idle word: secondly, for what is
venial in its cause, i.e. having within itself a motive of pardon, e.g.
sins due to weakness: thirdly, for what is venial in the result, in
which sense it is understood here, because the result of confession
is that man's past guilt is pardoned.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether confession delivers from punishment in

some way?
Objection 1: It would seem that confession nowise delivers from
punishment. For sin deserves no punishment but what is either
eternal or temporal. Now eternal punishment is remitted by
contrition, and temporal punishment by satisfaction. Therefore
nothing of the punishment is remitted by confession.
Objection 2: Further, "the will is taken for the deed" [Can. Magna
Pietas, De Poenit., Dist. i], as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D, 17). Now
he that is contrite has the intention to confess. wherefore his
intention avails him as though he had already confessed, and so the
confession which he makes afterwards remits no part of the
punishment.
On the contrary, Confession is a penal work. But all penal works
expiate the punishment due to sin. Therefore confession does also.
I answer that, Confession together with absolution has the power to
deliver from punishment, for two reasons. First, from the power of
absolution itself: and thus the very desire of absolution delivers a
man from eternal punishment, as also from the guilt. Now this
punishment is one of condemnation and total banishment: and when
a man is delivered therefrom he still remains bound to a temporal
punishment, in so far as punishment is a cleansing and perfecting
remedy; and so this punishment remains to be suffered in Purgatory
by those who also have been delivered from the punishment of hell.
Which temporal punishment is beyond the powers of the penitent
dwelling in this world, but is so far diminished by the power of the
keys, that it is within the ability of the penitent, and he is able, by
making satisfaction, to cleanse himself in this life. Secondly,
confession diminishes the punishment in virtue of the very nature of
the act of the one who confesses, for this act has the punishment of
shame attached to it, so that the oftener one confesses the same
sins, the more is the punishment diminished.
This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: The will is not taken for the deed, if this is done
by another, as in the case of Baptism: for the will to receive Baptism