unknown to you when even to the Father, of whom you have had so much
experience, you have done the very same? Forsaking Him, you have run unto the
devils, drawing to yourselves wicked lovers. With this Ezekiel too was
continually upbraiding them.
Now by these sayings He signified Himself to be of one accord with His
Father, and them to be doing nothing new; He was also unfolding their secrets,
how with hypocrisy and as enemies they were making their demand. Therefore
He called them "an evil generation," because they have been always ungrateful
towards their benefactors; because upon favors they become worse, which
belongs to extreme wickedness.
And He called it "adulterous," declaring both their former and their present
unbelief; whereby He implies Himself again to be equal to the Father, if at least
the not believing Him makes it "adulterous."
2. Then, after His reproach, what says He? "There shall no sign be given to
it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet." Now is He striking the first note of the
doctrine of His resurrection, and confirming it by the type.
What then? One may say; was no sign given it? None was given to it on
asking. For not to bring in them did He work His signs (for He knew them to be
hardened), but in order to amend others. Either then this may be said, or that they
were not to receive such a sign as that was. For a sign did befall them, when by
their own punishment they learned His power. Here then He speaks as
threatening, and with this very meaning obscurely conveyed: as if He said,
innumerable benefits have I showed forth, none of these has drawn you to me,
neither were ye willing to adore my power. You shall know therefore my might
by the contrary tokens, when you shall see your city cast down to the ground, the
walls also dismantled, the temple become a ruin; when you shall be cast out both
from your former citizenship and freedom, and shall again go about everywhere,
houseless and in exile. (For all these things came to pass after the cross.) These
things therefore shall be to you for great signs. And indeed it is an exceeding
great sign, that their ills remain unchanged; that although ten thousand have

attempted it, no one has been able to reverse the judgment once gone forth
against them.
All this however He says not, but leaves it to after time to make it clear to
them, but for the present He is making trial of the doctrine of His resurrection,
which they were to come to know by the things which they should afterwards
suffer.
"For as Jonas," says He, "was three days and three nights in the whale's
belly, so shall the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the
earth." [Matthew 22:40] Thus, He said not indeed openly that He should rise
again, since they would have even laughed Him to scorn, but He intimated it in
such manner, that they might believe Him to have foreknown it. For as to their
being aware of it, they say to Pilate, "That deceiver said," these are their words,
"while He was yet alive, After three days I will rise again;" and yet we know His
disciples were ignorant of this; even as they had been beforehand more void of
understanding than these: wherefore also these became self-condemned.
But see how exactly He expresses it, even though in a dark saying. For He
said not, "In the earth," but, "In the heart of the earth;" that He might designate
His very sepulchre, and that no one might suspect a mere semblance. And for
this intent too did He allow three days, that the fact of His death might be
believed. For not by the cross only does He make it certain, and by the sight of
all men, but also by the time of those days. For to the resurrection indeed all
succeeding time was to bear witness; but the cross, unless it had at the time
many signs bearing witness to it, would have been disbelieved; and with this
disbelief would have gone utter disbelief of the resurrection also. Therefore He
calls it also a sign. But had He not been crucified, the sign would not have been
given. For this cause too He brings forward the type, that the truth may be
believed. For tell me, was Jonah in the whale's belly a mere appearance? Nay,
you can not say so. Therefore neither was Christ in the heart of the earth such.
For surely the type is not in truth, and the truth in mere appearance. For this
cause we every where show forth His death, both in the mysteries, and in