(really) seeks his own good when he looks to that of his neighbor. What is their
good is ours; we are one body, and parts and limbs one of another. Let us not
then be as though we were rent asunder. Let no one say, "such a person is no
friend of mine, nor relation, nor neighbor, I have nought to do with him, how
shall I approach, how address him?" Though he be neither relation nor friend,
yet he is a man, who shares the same nature with you, owns the same Lord, is
your fellow-servant, and fellow-sojourner, for he is born in the same world. And
if besides he partakes of the same faith, behold he has also become a member of
you: for what friendship could work such union, as the relationship of faith? And
our intimacy one with another must not be such nearness only as friends ought to
show to friends, but such as is between limb and limb, because no man can
possibly discover any intimacy greater than this sort of friendship and
fellowship. As then you cannot say, "Whence arises my intimacy and connection
with this limb?" (that would be ridiculous;) so neither can you say so in the case
of your brother. "We are all baptized into one body" [1 Corinthians 12:13], says
Paul. "Wherefore into one body?" That we be not rent asunder, but preserve the
just proportions of that one body by our intercourse and friendship one with
another.
Let us not then despise one another, lest we be neglectful of ourselves. "For
no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it." [Ephesians
5:29] And therefore God has given to us but one habitation, this earth, has
distributed all things equally, has lighted one sun for us all, has spread above us
one roof, the sky, made one table, the earth, bear food for us. And another table
has He given far better than this, yet that too is one, (those who share our
mysteries understand my words,) one manner of birth He has bestowed on all,
the spiritual, we all have one country, that in the heavens, of the same cup drink
we all. He has not bestowed on the rich man a gift more abundant and more
honorable, and on the poor one more mean and small, but He has called all alike.
He has given carnal things with equal regard to all, and spiritual in like manner.
Whence then proceeds the great inequality of conditions in life? From the

avarice and pride of the wealthy. But let not, brethren, let not this any longer be;
and when matters of universal interest and more pressing necessity bring us
together, let us not be divided by things earthly and insignificant: I mean, by
wealth and poverty, by bodily relationship, by enmity and friendship; for all
these things are a shadow, nay less substantial than a shadow, to those who
possess the bond of charity from above. Let us then preserve this unbroken, and
none of those evil spirits will be able to enter in, who cause division in so perfect
union; to which may we all attain by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
glory, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.