done for God's sake. The stranger requires much attendance, much
encouragement, and with all this it is difficult for him not to feel abashed; for so
delicate is his position, that while he receives the favor, he is ashamed. That
shame we ought to remove by the most attentive service, and to show by words
and actions, that we do not think we are conferring a favor, but receiving one,
that we are obliging less than we are obliged. So much does good will multiply
the kindness. For as he who considers himself a loser, and thinks that he is doing
a favor, destroys all the merit of it; so he who looks upon himself as receiving a
kindness, increases the reward. "For God loves a cheerful giver." [2 Corinthians
9:7] So that you are rather indebted to the poor man for receiving your kindness.
For if there were no poor, the greater part of your sins would not be removed.
They are the healers of your wounds, their hands are medicinal to you. The
physician, extending his hand to apply a remedy, does not exercise the healing
art more than the poor man, who stretches out his hand to receive your alms, and
thus becomes a cure for your ills. You give your money, and with it your sins
pass away. Such were the Priests of old, of whom it was said, "They eat up the
sin of My people." [Hosea 4:8] Thus you receive more than you give, you are
benefited more than you benefit. You lend to God, not to men. You increase your
wealth, rather than diminishest it. But if you dost not lessen it by giving, then it
is indeed diminished!
"If she have received strangers, if she have washed the Saints' feet." But
who are these? The distressed saints, not any saints whatever. For there may be
saints, who are much waited on by every one. Do not visit these, who are in the
enjoyment of plenty, but those who are in tribulation, who are unknown, or
known to few. He who has "done it unto the least of these," He says, "has done it
unto Me." [Matthew 25:40]
Moral. Give not your alms to those who preside in the Church to distribute.
Bestow it yourself, that you may have the reward not of giving merely, but of
kind service. Give with your own hands. Cast into the furrow yourself. Here it is
not required to handle the plow, to yoke the ox, to wait the season, nor to break

up the earth, or to contend with the frost. No such trouble is required here, where
you sow for heaven, where there is no frost nor winter nor any such thing. You
sow in souls, where no one takes away what is sown, but it is firmly retained
with all care and diligence. Cast the seed yourself, why deprive yourself of your
reward. There is great reward in dispensing even what belongs to others. There
is a reward not only for giving, but for dispensing well the things that are given.
Why will you not have this reward? For that there is a reward for this, hear how
we read that the Apostles appointed Stephen to the ministry of the widows. [Acts
6:5-7]
Be thou the dispenser of your own gifts. Your own benevolence and the fear
of God appoint you to that ministry. Thus vainglory is excluded. This refreshes
the soul, this sanctifies the hands, this pulls down pride. This teaches you
philosophy, this inflames your zeal, this makes you to receive blessings. Your
head, as you depart, receives all the blessings of the widows.
Be more earnest in your prayers. Inquire diligently for holy men, men that
are truly such, who, in the retirement of the desert, cannot beg, but are wholly
devoted to God. Take a long journey to visit them, and give with your own hand.
For you may profit much in your own person, if you give. Do you see their tents,
their lodging? Do you see the desert? Do you see the solitude? Often when you
have gone to bestow money, you give your whole soul. You are detained, and
hast become his fellow-captive, and hast been alike estranged from the world.
It is of great benefit even to see the poor. "It is better," he says, "to go to the
house of mourning, than to the house of feasting." [Ecclesiastes 7:2] By the latter
the soul is inflamed. For if you can imitate the luxury, then you are encouraged
to self-indulgence, and if you can not, you are grieved. In the house of mourning
there is nothing of this kind. If you can not afford to be luxurious, you are not
pained; and if you can, you are restrained. Monasteries are indeed houses of
mourning. There is sackcloth and ashes, there is solitude, there is no laughter, no
pressure of worldly business. There is fasting, and lying upon the ground; there
is no impure savor of rich food, no blood shed, no tumult, no disturbance, or