pay the tribute; and having cast forth His commandment like a net into that
abyss, to bring up the one that bore the piece of money; but it was of a divine
and unutterable power, thus to make even the sea bear gifts, and that its
subjection to Him should be shown on all hands, as well when in its madness it
was silent, [Matthew 8:26] and when, though fierce, it received its fellow
servant; [Matthew 14:29] as now again, when it makes payment in His behalf to
them that are demanding it.
"And give unto them," He says, "for me and you." Do you see the exceeding
greatness of the honor? See also the self-command of Peter's mind. For this point
Mark, the follower of this apostle, does not appear to have set down, because it
indicated the great honor paid to him; but while of the denial he wrote as well as
the rest, the things that make him illustrious he has passed over in silence, his
master perhaps entreating him not to mention the great things about himself.
And He used the phrase, "for me and you," because Peter too was a firstborn
child.
Now as you are amazed at Christ's power, so I bid you admire also the
disciple's faith, that to a thing beyond possibility he so gave ear. For indeed it
was very far beyond possibility by nature. Wherefore also in requital for his
faith, He joined him to Himself in the payment of the tribute.
3. "In that hour came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who then is the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven?"
The disciples experienced some feeling of human weakness; wherefore the
evangelist also adds this note, saying, "In that hour;" when He had preferred him
to all. For of James too, and John, one was a firstborn son, but no such thing as
this had He done for them.
Then, being ashamed to avow their feeling, they say not indeed openly,
"Wherefore have you preferred Peter to us?" or, "Is he greater than we are?" for
they were ashamed; but indefinitely they ask, "Who then is greater?" For when
they saw the three preferred, they felt nothing of the kind; but now that the honor
had come round to one, they were vexed. And not for this only, but there were

many other things which they put together to kindle that feeling. For to him He
had said, "I will give you the keys;" [Matthew 16:19] to him, "Blessed are you,
Simon Barjona;" to him here, "Give unto them for me and you;" and seeing too
in general how freely he was allowed to speak, it somewhat fretted them.
And if Mark says, [Mark 9:34] that they did not ask, but reasoned in
themselves, that is nothing contrary to this. For it is likely that they did both the
one and the other, and whereas before, on another occasion, they had had this
feeling, both once and twice, that now they did both declare it, and reason
among themselves.
But to you I say, "Look not to the charge against them only, but consider
this too; first, that they seek none of the things of this world; next, that even this
passion they afterwards laid aside, and give up the first place one to another."
But we are not able to attain so much as unto their faults, neither do we seek,
"who is greatest in the kingdom of heaven;" but, who is greatest in the earthly
kingdom, who is wealthiest, who most powerful.
What then says Christ? He unveils their conscience, and replies to their
feeling, not merely to their words. "For He called a little child unto Him," says
the Scripture, "and said, Unless you are converted, and become as this little
child, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven." [Matthew 18:2-3] "Why,
you," He says, "inquire who is greatest, and are contentious for first honors; but
I pronounce him, that is not become lowest of all, unworthy so much as to enter
in there."
And full well does He both allege that pattern, and not allege it only, but
also set the child in the midst, by the very sight abashing them, and persuading
them to be in like manner lowly and artless. Since both from envy the little child
is pure, and from vainglory, and from longing for the first place; and he is
possessed of the greatest of virtues, simplicity, and whatever is artless and lowly.
Not courage then only is wanted, nor wisdom, but this virtue also, humility
I mean, and simplicity. Yea, and the things that belong to our salvation halt even
in the chiefest point, if these be not with us.