But he leaves no opening for this cavil, by mentioning at once both the Son and
the Father, and making his language apply to both. This he does, not as referring
the acts of the Son to the Father, but to show that the expression implies no
distinction of Essence. Further, what can now be said by those, who have
gathered a notion of inferiority from the Baptismal formula,— from our being
baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit? For if the Son be
inferior because He is named after the Father, what will they say seeing that, in
the passage before us, the Apostle beginning from Christ proceeds to mention
the Father?— but let us not even utter such a blasphemy, let us not swerve from
the truth in our contention with them; rather let us preserve, even if they rave ten
thousand times, the due measures of reverence. Since then it would be the height
of madness and impiety to argue that the Son was greater than the Father
because Christ was first named, so we dare not hold that the Son is inferior to the
Father, because He is placed after Him in the Baptismal formula.
"Who raised Him from the dead."
Wherefore is it, O Paul, that, wishing to bring these Judaizers to the faith,
you introduce none of those great and illustrious topics which occur in your
Epistle to the Philippians, as, "Who, being in the form of God, counted it not a
prize to be on an equality with God," [Philippians 2:6] or which you afterwards
declared in that to the Hebrews, "the effulgence of his glory, and the very image
of His substance;" [Hebrews 1:3] or again, what in the opening of his Gospel the
son of thunder sounded forth, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God;" [John 1:1.] or what Jesus Himself oftentimes
declared to the Jews, "that His power and authority was equal to the Father's?"
[John 5:19-27, etc.] Do you omit all these, and make mention of the economy of
His Incarnation only, bringing forward His cross and dying? "Yes," would Paul
answer. For had this discourse been addressed to those who had unworthy
conceptions of Christ, it would have been well to mention those things; but,
inasmuch as the disturbance comes from persons who fear to incur punishment
should they abandon the Law, he therefore mentions that whereby all need of the

Law is excluded, I mean the benefit conferred on all through the Cross and the
Resurrection. To have said that "in the beginning was the Word," and that "He
was in the form of God, and made Himself equal with God," and the like, would
have declared the divinity of the Word, but would have contributed nothing to
the matter in hand. Whereas it was highly pertinent thereto to add, "Who raised
Him from the dead," for our chiefest benefit was thus brought to remembrance,
and men in general are less interested by discourses concerning the majesty of
God, than by those which set forth the benefits which come to mankind.
Wherefore, omitting the former topic, he discourses of the benefits which had
been conferred on us.
But here the heretics insultingly exclaim, "Lo, the Father raises the Son!"
For when once infected, they are wilfully deaf to all sublimer doctrines; and
taking by itself and insisting on what is of a less exalted nature, and expressed in
less exalted terms, either on account of the Son's humanity, or in honor of the
Father, or for some other temporary purpose, they outrage, I will not say the
Scripture, but themselves. I would fain ask such persons, why they say this? Do
they hope to prove the Son weak and powerless to raise one body? Nay, verily,
faith in Him enabled the very shadows of those who believed in Him to effect
the resurrection of the dead. [Acts 5:15] Then believers in Him, though mortal,
yet by the very shadows of their earthly bodies, and by the garments which had
touched these bodies, could raise the dead, but He could not raise Himself? Is
not this manifest madness, a great stretch of folly? Have you not heard His
saying, "Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up?" [John 2:19]
and again, "I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it
again?" [John 10:18] Wherefore then is the Father said to have raised Him up, as
also to have done other things which the Son Himself did? It is in honor of the
Father, and in compassion to the weakness of the hearers.
"And all the brethren which are with me."
Why is it that he has on no other occasion in sending an epistle added this
phrase? For either he puts his own name only or that of two or three others, but