Reply to Objection 1: Good can exist without evil; whereas evil
cannot exist without good (Question 49, Article 3); so there is order
in the demons, as possessing a good nature.
Reply to Objection 2: If we consider the ordering of the demons on
the part of God Who orders them, it is sacred; for He uses the
demons for Himself; but on the part of the demons' will it is not a
sacred thing, because they abuse their nature for evil.
Reply to Objection 3: The name "Seraphim" is given from the ardor
of charity; and the name "Thrones" from the Divine indwelling; and
the name "Dominations" imports a certain liberty; all of which are
opposed to sin; and therefore these names are not given to the
angels who sinned.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether among the demons there is precedence?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no precedence among the
demons. For every precedence is according to some order of justice.
But the demons are wholly fallen from justice. Therefore there is no
precedence among them.
Objection 2: Further, there is no precedence where obedience and
subjection do not exist. But these cannot be without concord; which
is not to be found among the demons, according to the text, "Among
the proud there are always contentions" (Prov. 13:10). Therefore
there is no precedence among the demons.
Objection 3: If there be precedence among them it is either
according to nature, or according to their sin or punishment. But it is
not according to their nature, for subjection and service do not come
from nature but from subsequent sin; neither is it according to sin or
punishment, because in that case the superior demons who have
sinned the most grievously, would be subject to the inferior.
Therefore there is no precedence among the demons.
On the contrary, On 1 Cor. 15:24 the gloss says: "While the world
lasts, angels will preside over angels, men over men, and demons
over demons."
I answer that, Since action follows the nature of a thing, where
natures are subordinate, actions also must be subordinate to each
other. Thus it is in corporeal things, for as the inferior bodies by
natural order are below the heavenly bodies, their actions and
movements are subject to the actions and movements of the
heavenly bodies. Now it is plain from what we have said (Article 1),
that the demons are by natural order subject to others; and hence
their actions are subject to the action of those above them, and this
is what we mean by precedence---that the action of the subject
should be under the action of the prelate. So the very natural
disposition of the demons requires that there should be authority
among them. This agrees too with Divine wisdom, which leaves
nothing inordinate, which "reacheth from end to end mightily, and
ordereth all things sweetly" (Wis. 8:1).
Reply to Objection 1: The authority of the demons is not founded on