remembrance. But may God, who is more sparing of our souls than we are, make
us perfect in this, and every good work; that so having completed the whole fruit
of righteousness, we may be found worthy of the kingdom of heaven, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom, and with
Whom, to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 10 on the Statues
Commendation of those who came to hear after taking a meal.—
Observations on the physiology of the natural world; and against those who
deify the creation; and on the duty of not swearing.
1. I joy, and rejoice with you all, that you have actually put in practice that
admonition of ours, which we lately made with respect to those who were
absent, for the reason that they were not fasting. For I think that many of those
who have dined are today present; and go to fill up this goodly assemblage; and
that this is the fact, I conjecture from the more brilliant spectacle that I see
around me, and the greater concourse of hearers. Not in vain, it seems, did I
lately spend so many words on their account, appealing to your Charity, to draw
them to their Mother; and to persuade them that it is lawful, even after bodily
nourishment, to partake also of that which is spiritual. And in which case,
beloved, I ask, did ye act for the better; at the time of the last assembly when
after your meal ye turned to your slumbers; or now, when after the meal you
have presented yourselves at the hearing of the divine laws? Was it best when
you loitered about in the forum, and took part in meetings which were no wise
profitable; or now, when you stand with your own brethren, and hear the
prophetic oracles? It is no disgrace, beloved, to have eaten, but after eating to
remain at home, and so to be deprived of this sacred banquet. For while you
remain at home, you will be more slothful and supine; but coming here you will
shake off all slumber and listlessness; and laying aside not only listlessness, but
also all sadness, you will be more at ease, and in better heart in all the events that
may happen.
2. What need then is there to say more? Stand only near the man who fasts,
and you will straightway partake of his good odour; for fasting is a spiritual
perfume; and through the eyes, the tongue, and every part, it manifests the good

disposition of the soul. I have said this, not for the purpose of condemning those
who have dined, but that I may show the advantage of fasting. I do not, however,
call mere abstinence from meats, fasting; but even before this, abstinence from
sin; since he who, after he has taken a meal, has come hither with suitable
sobriety, is not very far behind the man who fasts; even as he who continues
fasting, if he does not give earnest and diligent heed to what is spoken, will
derive no great benefit from his fast. He who eats, and yet takes a part in the
sacred assembly with suitable earnestness, is in much better case than he who
eats not at all, and remains absent. This abstinence will by no means be able to
benefit us as much as the participation in spiritual instruction conveys to us
benefit and advantage. Where indeed, besides, will you hear the things upon
which you meditate here? Were you to go to the bench of justice? Quarrels and
contentions are there! Or into the council-chamber? There is anxious thought
about political matters! Or to your home? Solicitude on the subject of your
private affairs afflicts you in every direction! Or were thou to go to the
conferences and debates of the forum? Every thing there is earthly and
corruptible! For all the words that pass among those assembled there, are
concerning merchandize, or taxes, or the sumptuous table, or the sale of lands, or
other contracts, or wills, or inheritances, or some other things of that kind. And
should you enter even into the royal halls, there again you would hear in the
same way all discoursing of wealth, or power, or of the glory which is held in
honour here, but of nothing that is spiritual. But here on the contrary everything
relates to heaven, and heavenly things; to our soul, to our life, the purpose for
which we were born, and why we spend an allotted time upon earth, and on what
terms we migrate from hence, and into what condition we shall enter after these
things, and why our body is of clay, what also is the nature of death, what, in
short, the present life is, and what the future. The discourses that are here made
by us contain nothing at all of an earthly kind, but are all in reference to spiritual
things. Thus, then, it is that we shall have made great provision for our salvation,
and shall depart hence with a good hope.