idolaters who tender that service to images which is due to God. For it is
this service concerning which it is said, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God, and Him only shalt thou serve." For this is found also more
distinctly in the Greek Scriptures, which have λατρεύσεις. Now if we are
forbidden to serve the creature with such a service, seeing that it is
written, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou
serve" (and hence, too, the apostle repudiates those who worship and
serve the creature more than the Creator), then assuredly the Holy Spirit
is not a creature, to whom such a service is paid by all the saints; as says
the apostle, "For we are the circumcision, which serve the Spirit of God,"
which is in the Greek λατρεύοντες. For even most Latin copies also have
it thus, "We who serve the Spirit of God;" but all Greek ones, or almost
all, have it so. Although in some Latin copies we find, not "We worship
the Spirit of God," but, "We worship God in the Spirit." But let those who
err in this case, and refuse to give up to the more weighty authority, tell
us whether they find this text also varied in the MSS.: "Know ye not that
your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have
of God?" Yet what can be more senseless or more profane, than that any
one should dare to say that the members of Christ are the temple of one
who, in their opinion, is a creature inferior to Christ? For the apostle says
in another place, "Your bodies are members of Christ." But if the
members of Christ are also the temple of the Holy Spirit, then the Holy
Spirit is not a creature; because we must needs owe to Him, of whom our
body is the temple, that service wherewith God only is to be served, which
in Greek is called λατρεία. And accordingly the apostle says, "Therefore
glorify God in your body."

### CHAP. 7.—IN WHAT MANNER THE SON IS LESS THAN THE FATHER, AND THAN HIMSELF.

14. In these and like testimonies of the divine Scriptures, by free use of
which, as I have said, our predecessors exploded such sophistries or
errors of the heretics, the unity and equality of the Trinity are intimated
to our faith. But because, on account of the incarnation of the Word of
God for the working out of our salvation, that the man Christ Jesus might
be the Mediator between God and men, many things are so said in the
sacred books as to signify, or even most expressly declare, the Father to

be greater than the Son; men have erred through a want of careful
examination or consideration of the whole tenor of the Scriptures, and
have endeavored to transfer those things which are said of Jesus Christ
according to the flesh, to that substance of His which was eternal before
the incarnation, and is eternal. They say, for instance, that the Son is less
than the Father, because it is written that the Lord Himself said, "My
Father is greater than I." But the truth shows that after the same sense
the Son is less also than Himself; for how was He not made less also than
Himself, who "emptied Himself, and took upon Him the form of a
servant?" For He did not so take the form of a servant as that He should
lose the form of God, in which He was equal to the Father. If, then, the
form of a servant was so taken that the form of God was not lost, since
both in the form of a servant and in the form of God He Himself is the
same only-begotten Son of God the Father, in the form of God equal to
the Father, in the form of a servant the Mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus; is there any one who cannot perceive that He
Himself in the form of God is also greater than Himself, but yet likewise
in the form of a servant less than Himself? And not, therefore, without
cause the Scripture says both the one and the other, both that the Son is
equal to the Father, and that the Father is greater than the Son. For there
is no confusion when the former is understood as on account of the form
of God, and the latter as on account of the form of a servant. And, in
truth, this rule for clearing the question through all the sacred Scriptures
is set forth in one chapter of an epistle of the Apostle Paul, where this
distinction is commended to us plainly enough. For he says, "Who, being
in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but
emptied Himself, and took upon Him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men: and was found in fashion5 as a man." The
Son of God, then, is equal to God the Father in nature, but less in
"fashion." For in the form of a servant which He took He is less than the
Father; but in the form of God, in which also He was before He took the
form of a servant, He is equal to the Father. In the form of God He is the
Word, "by whom all things are made;" but in the form of a servant He was
"made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under
the law." In like manner, in the form of God He made man; in the form
of a servant He was made man. For if the Father alone had made man
without the Son, it would not have been written, "Let us make man in our