FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.2.

spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, hath delivered me from the law of sin
and of death." Hence Augustine says (De Spir. et Lit. xxiv) that "as
the law of deeds was written on tables of stone, so is the law of faith
inscribed on the hearts of the faithful": and elsewhere, in the same
book (xxi): "What else are the Divine laws written by God Himself on
our hearts, but the very presence of His Holy Spirit?"
Nevertheless the New Law contains certain things that dispose us to
receive the grace of the Holy Ghost, and pertaining to the use of that
grace: such things are of secondary importance, so to speak, in the
New Law; and the faithful need to be instructed concerning them,
both by word and writing, both as to what they should believe and as
to what they should do. Consequently we must say that the New Law
is in the first place a law that is inscribed on our hearts, but that
secondarily it is a written law.
Reply to Objection 1: The Gospel writings contain only such things
as pertain to the grace of the Holy Ghost, either by disposing us
thereto, or by directing us to the use thereof. Thus with regard to the
intellect, the Gospel contains certain matters pertaining to the
manifestation of Christ's Godhead or humanity, which dispose us by
means of faith through which we receive the grace of the Holy
Ghost: and with regard to the affections, it contains matters touching
the contempt of the world, whereby man is rendered fit to receive the
grace of the Holy Ghost: for "the world," i.e. worldly men, "cannot
receive" the Holy Ghost (Jn. 14:17). As to the use of spiritual grace,
this consists in works of virtue to which the writings of the New
Testament exhort men in divers ways.
Reply to Objection 2: There are two ways in which a thing may be
instilled into man. First, through being part of his nature, and thus
the natural law is instilled into man. Secondly, a thing is instilled into
man by being, as it were, added on to his nature by a gift of grace. In
this way the New Law is instilled into man, not only by indicating to
him what he should do, but also by helping him to accomplish it.
Reply to Objection 3: No man ever had the grace of the Holy Ghost
except through faith in Christ either explicit or implicit: and by faith
in Christ man belongs to the New Testament. Consequently whoever
had the law of grace instilled into them belonged to the New
Testament.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the New Law justifies?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law does not justify. For no
man is justified unless he obeys God's law, according to Heb. 5:9:
"He," i.e. Christ, "became to all that obey Him the cause of eternal
salvation." But the Gospel does not always cause men to believe in
it: for it is written (Rm. 10:16): "All do not obey the Gospel."
Therefore the New Law does not justify.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle proves in his epistle to the Romans
that the Old Law did not justify, because transgression increased at
its advent: for it is stated (Rm. 4:15): "The Law worketh wrath: for
where there is no law, neither is there transgression." But much
more did the New Law increase transgression: since he who sins
after the giving of the New Law deserves greater punishment,
according to Heb. 10:28,29: "A man making void the Law of Moses
dieth without any mercy under two or three witnesses. How much
more, do you think, he deserveth worse punishments, who hath
trodden underfoot the Son of God," etc.? Therefore the New Law, like
the Old Law, does not justify.
Objection 3: Further, justification is an effect proper to God,
according to Rm. 8:33: "God that justifieth." But the Old Law was
from God just as the New Law. Therefore the New Law does not
justify any more than the Old Law.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 1:16): "I am not ashamed of
the Gospel: for it is in the power of God unto salvation to everyone
that believeth." But there is no salvation but to those who are
justified. Therefore the Law of the Gospel justifies.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), there is a twofold element
in the Law of the Gospel. There is the chief element, viz. the grace of
the Holy Ghost bestowed inwardly. And as to this, the New Law
justifies. Hence Augustine says (De Spir. et Lit. xvii): "There," i.e. in
the Old Testament, "the Law was set forth in an outward fashion, that
the ungodly might be afraid"; "here," i.e. in the New Testament, "it is
given in an inward manner, that they may be justified." The other
element of the Evangelical Law is secondary: namely, the teachings
of faith, and those commandments which direct human affections
and human actions. And as to this, the New Law does not justify.