On the contrary, A gloss on 1 Cor. 4:5, "will . . . bring to light the
hidden things of darkness," says: "Deeds and thoughts both good
and evil will then be revealed and made known to all."
Further, the past sins of all the good will be equally blotted out. Yet
we know the sins of some saints, for instance of Magdalen, Peter,
and David. Therefore in like manner the sins of the other elect will be
known, and much more those of the damned.
I answer that, At the last and general judgment it behooves the
Divine justice, which now is in many ways hidden, to appear
evidently to all. Now the sentence of one who condemns or rewards
cannot be just, unless it be delivered according to merits and
demerits. Therefore just as it behooves both judge and jury to know
the merits of a case, in order to deliver a just verdict, so is it
necessary, in order that the sentence appear to be just, that all who
know the sentence should be acquainted with the merits. Hence,
since every one will know of his reward or condemnation, so will
every one else know of it, and consequently as each one will recall
his own merits or demerits, so will he be cognizant of those of
others. This is the more probable and more common opinion,
although the Master (Sent. iv, D, 43) says the contrary, namely that a
man's sins blotted out by repentance will not be made known to
others at the judgment. But it would follow from this that neither
would his repentance for these sins be perfectly known, which would
detract considerably from the glory of the saints and the praise due
to God for having so mercifully delivered them.
Reply to Objection 1: All the preceding merits or demerits will come
to a certain amount in the glory or unhappiness of each one rising
again. Consequently through eternal things being seen, all things in
their consciences will be visible, especially as the Divine power will
conduce to this so that the Judge's sentence may appear just to all.
Reply to Objection 2: It will be possible for a man's merits or
demerits to be made known by their effects as stated above (Article
1, ad 1), or by the power of God, although the power of the created
intellect is not sufficient for this.
Reply to Objection 3: The manifestation of his sins to the confusion
of the sinner is a result of his neglect in omitting to confess them.
But that the sins of the saints be revealed cannot be to their

confusion or shame, as neither does it bring confusion to Mary
Magdalen that her sins are publicly recalled in the Church, because
shame is "fear of disgrace," as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii),
and this will be impossible in the blessed. But this manifestation will
bring them great glory on account of the penance they did, even as
the confessor hails a man who courageously confesses great
crimes. Sins are said to be blotted out because God sees them not
for the purpose of punishing them.
Reply to Objection 4: The sinner's confusion will not be diminished,
but on the contrary increased, through his seeing the sins of others,
for in seeing that others are blameworthy he will all the more
acknowledge himself to be blamed. For that confusion be diminished
by a cause of this kind is owing to the fact that shame regards the
esteem of men, who esteem more lightly that which is customary.
But then confusion will regard the esteem of God, which weighs
every sin according to the truth, whether it be the sin of one man or
of many.