THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.10.

Reply to Objection 2: With this word "begin" we cannot argue from
the lower species to the higher. For it does not follow if "this began
to be white," that therefore "it began to be colored." And this
because "to begin" implies being now and not heretofore: for it does
not follow if "this was not white hitherto" that "therefore it was not
colored hitherto." Now, to be simply is higher than to be man. Hence
this does not follow: "Christ began to be Man---therefore He began to
be."
Reply to Objection 3: This word "Man," as it is taken for Christ,
although it signifies the human nature, which began to be,
nevertheless signifies the eternal suppositum which did not begin to
be. Hence, since it signifies the suppositum when placed in the
subject, and refers to the nature when placed in the predicate,
therefore this is false: "The Man Christ began to be": but this is true:
"Christ began to be Man."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether this is true: "Christ as Man is a

creature"?
Objection 1: It would seem that this is false: "Christ as Man is a
creature," or "began to be." For nothing in Christ is created except
the human nature. But this is false: "Christ as Man is the human
nature." Therefore this is also false; Christ as Man is a creature.
Objection 2: Further, the predicate is predicated of the term placed in
reduplication, rather than of the subject of the proposition; as when I
say: "A body as colored is visible," it follows that the colored is
visible. But as stated (Articles 8,9) we must not absolutely grant that
"the Man Christ is a creature"; nor consequently that "Christ as Man
is a creature."
Objection 3: Further, whatever is predicated of a man as man is
predicated of him "per se" and simply, for "per se" is the same as
"inasmuch as itself," as is said Metaph. v, text. 23. But this is false:
"Christ as Man is per se and simply a creature." Hence this, too, is
false; "Christ as Man is a creature."
On the contrary, Whatever is, is either Creator or creature. But this is
false: "Christ as Man is Creator." Therefore this is true: "Christ as
Man is a creature."
I answer that, When we say "Christ as Man" this word "man" may be
added in the reduplication, either by reason of the suppositum or by
reason of the nature. If it be added by reason of the suppositum,
since the suppositum of the human nature in Christ is eternal and
uncreated, this will be false: "Christ as Man is a creature." But if it be
added by reason of the human nature, it is true, since by reason of
the human nature or in the human nature, it belongs to Him to be a
creature, as was said (Article 8).
It must however be borne in mind that the term covered by the
reduplication signifies the nature rather than the suppositum, since
it is added as a predicate, which is taken formally, for it is the same
to say "Christ as Man" and to say "Christ as He is a Man." Hence this
is to be granted rather than denied: "Christ as Man is a creature."
But if something further be added whereby is attracted to the
suppositum, this proposition is to be denied rather than granted, for