a vessel clean, should fill it with unclean gifts, would it not be ridiculous
mockery? Let the hands be clean; and they will be so, if we wash them not with
water only, but first with righteousness. This is the purifier of the hands. But if
they be full of unrighteousness, though they be washed a thousand times, it
avails nothing. "Wash you, make you clean" [Isaiah 1:16], He says, but does He
add, "Go to the baths, the lakes, the rivers"? No; but what? "Put away the evil of
your doings from your souls." This is to be clean. This it is to be cleansed from
defilement. This is real purity. The other is of little use; but this bestows upon us
confidence towards God. The one may be obtained by adulterers, thieves,
murderers, by worthless, and dissolute, and effeminate persons, and especially
the latter. For they are ever careful of the cleanliness of their bodies, and scented
with perfumes, cleansing their sepulcher. For their body is but a sepulcher, since
the soul is dead within it. This cleanness therefore may be theirs, but not that
which is inward.
To wash the body is no great matter. That is a Jewish purification, senseless
and unprofitable, where purity within is wanting. Suppose one to labor under a
putrefying sore, or consuming ulcer; let him wash his body ever so much, it is of
no advantage. And if the putrefaction of the body receives no benefit from
cleansing and disguising the outward appearance; when the soul is infected with
rottenness, what is gained by the purity of the body? Nothing! Our prayers ought
to be pure, and pure they cannot be, if they are sent forth from a corrupt soul,
and nothing so corrupts the soul as avarice and rapine. But there are some who
after committing numberless sins during the day, wash themselves in the evening
and enter the churches, holding up their hands with much confidence, as if by the
washing of the bath they had put off all their guilt. And if this were the case, it
would be a vast advantage to use the bath daily! I would not myself cease to
frequent the baths, if it made us pure, and cleansed us from our sins! But these
things are trifling and ridiculous, the toys of children. It is not the filth of the
body, but the impurity of the soul, to which God is averse. For He says, "Blessed
are the pure"— does He say in body? No— "in heart: for they shall see God."

[Matthew 5:8] And what says the Prophet: "Create in me a clean heart, O God."
[Psalm 51:10] And again, "Wash my heart from wickedness." [Jeremiah 4:14]
It is of great use to be in the habit of doing good actions. See how trifling
and unprofitable these washings are. But when the soul is prepossessed by a
habit, it does not depart from it, nor does it venture to draw near in prayer, till it
has fulfilled these ceremonies. For instance, we have brought ourselves to a habit
of washing and praying, and without washing we do not think it right to pray.
And we do not willingly pray with unwashed hands, as if we should offend God,
and violate our conscience. Now if this trifling custom has so great power over
us, and is observed every day; if we had brought ourselves to a habit of
almsgiving, and had determined so constantly to observe it, as never to enter a
house of prayer with empty hands, the point would be gained. For great is the
power of habit both in good things and in evil, and when this carries us on, there
will be little trouble. Many are in the habit of crossing themselves continually,
and they need no one to remind them of it, but often when the mind is wandering
after other things, the hand is involuntarily drawn by custom, as by some living
teacher, to make the sign. Some have brought themselves into a habit of not
swearing at all, and therefore neither willingly nor unwillingly do they ever do it.
Let us then bring ourselves into such a habit of almsgiving.
What labors were it worth to us to discover such a remedy. For say, were
there not the relief of almsgiving, while we still by our numberless sins rendered
ourselves liable to Divine vengeance, should we not have lamented sadly?
Should we not have said, O that it were possible by our wealth to wash away our
sins, and we would have parted with it all! O that by our riches we could put
away the wrath of God, then we would not spare our substance? For if we do this
in sickness, and at the point of death we say, "If it were possible to buy off death,
such an one would give all his possessions"; much more in this matter. For see
how great is the love of God for man. He has granted us power to buy off not
temporal but eternal death. Do not purchase, He says, this short life, but that life
that is everlasting. It is that I sell you, not the other: I do not mock you. Did you