unprofitable questions, and himself escape the above-named censures. In short,
to meet all these difficulties, there is no help given but that of speech, and if any
be destitute of this power, the souls of those who are put under his charge (I
mean of the weaker and more meddlesome kind) are no better off than ships
continually storm-tossed. So that the Priest should do all that in him lies, to gain
this means of strength.
6. Basil: "Why, then, was not St. Paul ambitious of becoming perfect in this
art? He makes no secret of his poverty of speech, but distinctly confesses himself
to be unskilled, even telling the Corinthians so, who were admired for their
eloquence, and prided themselves upon it."
Chrysostom: This is the very thing which has ruined many and made them
remiss in the study of true doctrine. For while they failed to fathom the depths of
the apostle's mind, and to understand the meaning of his words, they passed all
their time slumbering and yawning, and paying respect not to that ignorance
which St. Paul acknowledges, but to a kind from which he was as free as any
man ever was in the world.
But leaving this subject to await our consideration, I say this much in the
meantime. Granting that St. Paul was in this respect as unskilled as they would
have him to be, what has that to do with the men of today? For he had a greater
power by far than power of speech, power which brought about greater results
too; which was that his bare presence, even though he was silent, was terrible to
the demons. But the men of the present day, if they were all collected in one
place, would not be able, with infinite prayers and tears, to do the wonders that
once were done by the handkerchief of St. Paul. He too by his prayers raised the
dead, [Acts 20:10] and wrought such other miracles, that he was held to be a god
by heathen; [Acts 14:11] and before he was removed from this life, he was
thought worthy to be caught up as far as the third heaven, and to share in such
converse as it is not lawful for mortal ears to hear. [2 Corinthians 12:2-4] But the
men of today— not that I would say anything harsh or severe, for indeed I do not
speak by way of insult to them, but only in wonder— how is it that they do not

shudder when they measure themselves with so great a man as this? For if we
leave the miracles and turn to the life of this blessed saint, and look into his
angelic conversation, it is in this rather than in his miracles that you will find this
Christian athlete a conqueror. For how can one describe his zeal and forbearance,
his constant perils, his continual cares, and incessant anxiety for the Churches;
his sympathy with the weak, his many afflictions, his unwonted persecutions, his
deaths daily? Where is the spot in the world, where is the continent or sea, that is
a stranger to the labours of this righteous man? Even the desert has known his
presence, for it often sheltered him in time of danger. For he underwent every
species of attack, and achieved every kind of victory, and there was never any
end to his contests and his triumphs.
Yet, all unawares, I have been led to do this man an injury. For his exploits
are beyond all powers of description, and beyond mine in particular, just as the
masters of eloquence surpass me. Nevertheless, since that holy apostle will judge
us, not by the issue, but by the motive, I shall not forbear till I have stated one
more circumstance which surpasses anything yet mentioned, as much as he
himself surpasses all his fellow men. And what is this? After so many exploits,
after such a multitude of victories, he prayed that he might go into hell, and be
handed over to eternal punishment, if so be that those Jews, who had often
stoned him, and done what they could to make away with him, might be saved,
and come over to Christ. [Romans 9:3] Now who so longed for Christ? If,
indeed, his feelings towards him ought not to be described as something nobler
than longing; shall we then any more compare ourselves with this saint, after so
great grace was imparted to him from above, after so great virtue was manifested
in himself? What could be more presumptuous?
Now, that he was not so unskilled, as some count him to be, I shall try to
show in what follows. The unskilled person in men's estimation is not only one
who is unpracticed in the tricks of profane oratory, but the man who is incapable
of contending for the defence of the right faith, and they are right. But St. Paul
did not say that he was unskilled in both these respects, but in one only; and in