FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.2.

be in something in two ways. First, as in that which measures and
rules: and since this is proper to reason, it follows that, in this way,
law is in the reason alone. Secondly, as in that which is measured
and ruled. In this way, law is in all those things that are inclined to
something by reason of some law: so that any inclination arising
from a law, may be called a law, not essentially but by participation
as it were. And thus the inclination of the members to
concupiscence is called "the law of the members."
Reply to Objection 2: Just as, in external action, we may consider the
work and the work done, for instance the work of building and the
house built; so in the acts of reason, we may consider the act itself
of reason, i.e. to understand and to reason, and something produced
by this act. With regard to the speculative reason, this is first of all
the definition; secondly, the proposition; thirdly, the syllogism or
argument. And since also the practical reason makes use of a
syllogism in respect of the work to be done, as stated above
(Question 13, Article 3; Question 76, Article 1) and since as the
Philosopher teaches (Ethic. vii, 3); hence we find in the practical
reason something that holds the same position in regard to
operations, as, in the speculative intellect, the proposition holds in
regard to conclusions. Such like universal propositions of the
practical intellect that are directed to actions have the nature of law.
And these propositions are sometimes under our actual
consideration, while sometimes they are retained in the reason by
means of a habit.
Reply to Objection 3: Reason has its power of moving from the will,
as stated above (Question 17, Article 1): for it is due to the fact that
one wills the end, that the reason issues its commands as regards
things ordained to the end. But in order that the volition of what is
commanded may have the nature of law, it needs to be in accord
with some rule of reason. And in this sense is to be understood the
saying that the will of the sovereign has the force of law; otherwise
the sovereign's will would savor of lawlessness rather than of law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the law is always something directed to

the common good?
Objection 1: It would seem that the law is not always directed to the
common good as to its end. For it belongs to law to command and to
forbid. But commands are directed to certain individual goods.
Therefore the end of the law is not always the common good.
Objection 2: Further, the law directs man in his actions. But human
actions are concerned with particular matters. Therefore the law is
directed to some particular good.
Objection 3: Further, Isidore says (Etym. v, 3): "If the law is based on
reason, whatever is based on reason will be a law." But reason is the
foundation not only of what is ordained to the common good, but
also of that which is directed private good. Therefore the law is not
only directed to the good of all, but also to the private good of an
individual.
On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. v, 21) that "laws are enacted for
no private profit, but for the common benefit of the citizens."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the law belongs to that
which is a principle of human acts, because it is their rule and
measure. Now as reason is a principle of human acts, so in reason
itself there is something which is the principle in respect of all the
rest: wherefore to this principle chiefly and mainly law must needs
be referred. Now the first principle in practical matters, which are the
object of the practical reason, is the last end: and the last end of
human life is bliss or happiness, as stated above (Question 2, Article
7; Question 3, Article 1). Consequently the law must needs regard
principally the relationship to happiness. Moreover, since every part
is ordained to the whole, as imperfect to perfect; and since one man
is a part of the perfect community, the law must needs regard
properly the relationship to universal happiness. Wherefore the
Philosopher, in the above definition of legal matters mentions both
happiness and the body politic: for he says (Ethic. v, 1) that we call
those legal matters "just, which are adapted to produce and preserve
happiness and its parts for the body politic": since the state is a
perfect community, as he says in Polit. i, 1.