To the second we reply that although immobility is simply nobler
than movement, yet movement in a subject which thereby can
acquire a perfect participation of the Divine goodness is nobler than
rest in a subject which is altogether unable to acquire that perfection
by movement. For this reason the earth which is the lowest of the
elements is without movement: although God Who is exalted above
all things is without movement, by Whom the more noble bodies are
moved. Hence also it is that the movements of the higher bodies
might be held to be perpetual, so far as their natural power is
concerned, and never to terminate in rest, although the movement of
lower bodies terminates in rest.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the brightness of the heavenly bodies

will be increased at this renewal?
Objection 1: It would seem that the brightness of the heavenly
bodies will not be increased at this renewal. For this renewal as
regards the lower bodies will be caused by the cleansing fire. But the
cleansing fire will not reach the heavenly bodies. Therefore the
heavenly bodies will not be renewed by receiving an increase of
brightness.
Objection 2: Further, just as the heavenly bodies are the cause of
generation in this lower world by their movement, so are they by
their light. But, when generation ceases, movement will cease as
stated above (Article 2). Therefore in like manner the light of the
heavenly bodies will cease rather than increase.
Objection 3: Further, if the heavenly bodies will be renewed when
man is renewed, it follows that when man deteriorated they
deteriorated likewise. But this does not seem probable, since these
bodies are unalterable as to their substance. Therefore neither will
they be renewed when man is renewed.
Objection 4: Further, if they deteriorated then it follows that their
deterioration was on a par with the amelioration which, it is said, will
accrue to them at man's renewal. Now it is written (Is. 30:26) that "the
light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun." Therefore in the
original state before sin the moon shone as much as the sun does
now. Therefore whenever the moon was over the earth, it made it to
be day as the sun does now: which is proved manifestly to be false
from the statement of Gn. 1:16 that the moon was made "to rule the
night." Therefore when man sinned the heavenly bodies were not
deprived of their light; and so their light will not be increased, so it
seems, when man is glorified.
Objection 5: Further, the brightness of the heavenly bodies, like
other creatures, is directed to the use of man. Now, after the
resurrection, the brightness of the sun will be of no use to man: for it
is written (Is. 60:19): "Thou shalt no more have the sun for thy light
by day, neither shall the brightness of the moon enlighten thee," and
(Apoc. 21:23): "The city hath no need of the sun, nor of the moon to
shine in it." Therefore their brightness will not be increased.