Ignatius later in his life seems to have described, and thought of, this experience in the words of the Diary, 'a placing with the Son by the Father': it is described thus in the autobiographical fragment dictated to Fr L. Gonalves da Camara.1 However, at the time of the revelation, when he described the event to his two companions, Frs Faber and Lainez, he seems to have been more explicit as to the details. The vision was of Christ carrying his cross, and the Father had joined Ignatius with his Son in the labour of carrying the Cross. The deep impression made by this vision is comparable in intensity with very few experiences of the saint. Perhaps the trinitarian revelations of Manresa (1522) and the Diary (1544) are the only events of equal importance.

## Beyond the Exercises

There can be no doubt that the Exercises provide the key to the initial understanding of the Diary. However, it would be a pity if preconceptions gained from the Exercises were allowed to obscure a deeper appreciation. And indeed the Exercises themselves must not be judged prematurely: they gain in stature when seen as the path towards the Diary. The christocentric nature of Ignatian spirituality is a case in point. Vital and essential as is the role given to the humanity of Christ throughout the final three weeks, there so Exx 9 r.

example, brings to mind a printed title-page:23 the three persons are handling the orb of the earth at the top of the page, the scene of the Annunciation occupies the centre; in the course of the contemplation the exercitant thinks of their words and actions; and he makes a colloquy to them.4 But who would guess from this brief mention that Ignatius' Diary would be full of devotion to the Trinity? In the Exercises the holy Spirit is hardly mentioned3 5 In the Diary some of the most striking visions are of the Third Person: I made a colloquy with the holy Spirit in preparation for saying his mass; I experienced the same devotion and tears, and seemed to see or perceive him in a dense clarity or in the colour of burning flame a way quite strange to me. (February I o). The portion of the Exercises which opens out onto the great future horizons of Ignatius' own spirituality is the 'Contemplation to obtain love'. It forms one of the appendices, so to speak, which he added, along with notes on technical methods of prayer, to the fourth week. Here, in a few brief paragraphs, Ignatius initiates the exercitant into the new life for which the Exercises have prepared him: the great quest into the nature of God, an investigation whose object is not knowledge but deeper love. In the Diary, an endearing phrase to refer to God is that of 'giver of graces': in the 'Contemplation', a rough intimation of the treasures these words enclose is imparted. The gift is the Giver himself, a Giver who is both present and dynamic in the gift, a Giver who is infinite in the number and variety of his gifts, to such an extent that no gift is not the Giver himself. Here, in this notion of 'giving', of'communication', which for Ignatius is the quintessence of love, is to be found the seed, hidden and expectant, of the trinitarian revelations. Ignatius seems to have been unusually aware of the inter-connections between dogmas. This appears in his marian devotion. Our Lady is 'part or portal' (parte o puerta) of grace: During the prayers to the Father and the Son and at his consecration, I could not but perceive or see her... (At the consecration she showed that her own flesh was in that of her Son). February 15. Nothing could be more foreign to ignatian spirituality than the strange departmentalism that so often seems to beset christian devotions. For him the saints are united with Mary among the 'mediators' (among whom appears Dr A Suqufa, La Santa Misa en la Espiritualidad de San Ignaclo de Loyola, (Madrid, 195 o), has some interesting remarks on tile illustrations concerning the Trinity to be found in missals of the period. Cf pp i93-i94.