in proportion as the strain of the affliction is increased are the garlands of victory
multiplied; in proportion as the gold is heated does it become purified, the longer
the merchant makes his voyage on the sea, the larger is the freight which he
collects. Do not then think that the labour now allotted to you is a slight one, but
rather that it is higher than all which you have undergone, I mean that which
consists in infirmity of body. For in the case of Lazarus [Luke xvi] (and although
I may have often said this to you, it nowise hinders me from saying it now) this
bodily infirmity availed for his salvation; and he departed to the bosom of the
man who possessed a dwelling which he shared with all who passed by, and was
continually shifting his home on account of God's command, and sacrificed his
own son, his only begotten, who had been given him in extreme old age;
although Lazarus had done none of these things yet he obtained this blessing
inasmuch as he cheerfully endured poverty, and infirmity, and friendlessness. For
this is so great a good to those who bear anything bravely that it releases any one
who may have committed the greatest sins from the heaviest burden of them; or
if any one is an upright and just man it becomes an additional ground of the
greatest confidence. For it is a bright wreath of victory for the just, shining far
above the brightness of the sun, and it is the greatest means of purification for
those who have sinned. On this account Paul delivers the man who had made the
incestuous marriage to "destruction of the flesh," purifying him by this means.
For as a proof that what was done did purify even from so great a stain hear his
words "that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord." [1 Corinthians 5:5]
And when he was accusing others of another very awful sin, that of partaking
unworthily of the holy table and those secret mysteries, and had said that such a
person will be "guilty of the body and blood of the Lord," [1 Corinthians 11:27]
observe how he says that they also are purified from that grievous stain—
"therefore are many weak and sickly among you." [1 Corinthians 11:30] And
then by way of proving that they will not be confined to this condition of
punishment, but that some profit will be derived from it, namely release from the
penalties to which the sin is liable, he added: "for if we would judge ourselves,

we should not be judged. But now when we are judged, we are chastened of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world." [1 Corinthians 11:3132] Moreover that they who have lived very righteously derive much benefit
from such chastisement is plain from the case of Job, who was more illustrious
after it than before, and from the case of Timothy, who although he was such a
good man, and entrusted with such an important ministry, and made the circuit of
the world with Paul passed not two or three days, nor ten or twenty, or a
hundred, but many in succession in ill health, his body being very seriously
enfeebled. Paul shows this where he said "Use a little wine for your stomach's
sake, and your frequent infirmities." [1 Timothy 5:23] And he who raised the
dead did not cure this man's infirmity, but left him in the furnace of his sickness
so that he might therefrom contract a very great abundance of confidence. For
the lessons which Paul himself had enjoyed from his Master, and the training
which he had received from Him, he imparted to his disciple. For although he
was not subjected to bodily infirmity, yet he was buffeted by trials not less
severe, which inflicted much physical pain. "For there was given unto me" he
says "a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me" meaning by this the
blows, the bonds, the chains, the imprisonments, the being dragged about, and
maltreated, and tortured by the scourges of public executioners. Wherefore also
being unable to bear the pain occasioned to the body by these things "for this I
besought the Lord thrice (thrice here meaning many times) that I might be
delivered from this thorn." And then when he did not obtain his petition, having
learned the benefit of the trial, he held his peace, and rejoiced at the things which
happened unto him.
Therefore even if you remain at home, and are set fast in bed, do not
consider your life an idle one; for you undergo more severe pains than those who
are dragged, and maltreated, and tortured by executioners, inasmuch as in this
excessive infirmity of yours you have a perpetual executioner residing with you.
4. Do not then now desire death, nor neglect the means of cure; for indeed
this would not be safe. On this account Paul also exhorts Timothy to take the