104. Demands that the legitimate rights of women be respected, based on the firm conviction that
men and women are equal in dignity, present the Church with profound and challenging questions
which cannot be lightly evaded. The reservation of the priesthood to males, as a sign of Christ the
Spouse who gives himself in the Eucharist, is not a question open to discussion, but it can prove
especially divisive if sacramental power is too closely identified with power in general. It must be
remembered that when we speak of sacramental power “we are in the realm of function, not that
of dignity or holiness”. The ministerial priesthood is one means employed by Jesus for the
service of his people, yet our great dignity derives from baptism, which is accessible to all. The
configuration of the priest to Christ the head – namely, as the principal source of grace – does not
imply an exaltation which would set him above others. In the Church, functions “do not favour the
superiority of some vis-à-vis the others”. Indeed, a woman, Mary, is more important than the
bishops. Even when the function of ministerial priesthood is considered “hierarchical”, it must be
remembered that “it is totally ordered to the holiness of Christ’s members”. Its key and axis is
not power understood as domination, but the power to administer the sacrament of the Eucharist;
this is the origin of its authority, which is always a service to God’s people. This presents a great
challenge for pastors and theologians, who are in a position to recognize more fully what this
entails with regard to the possible role of women in decision-making in different areas of the
Church’s life.

105. Youth ministry, as traditionally organized, has also suffered the impact of social changes.
Young people often fail to find responses to their concerns, needs, problems and hurts in the usual
structures. As adults, we find it hard to listen patiently to them, to appreciate their concerns and
demands, and to speak to them in a language they can understand. For the same reason, our
efforts in the field of education do not produce the results expected. The rise and growth of
associations and movements mostly made up of young people can be seen as the work of the
Holy Spirit, who blazes new trails to meet their expectations and their search for a deep spirituality
and a more real sense of belonging. There remains a need, however, to ensure that these

associations actively participate in the Church’s overall pastoral efforts.

106. Even if it is not always easy to approach young people, progress has been made in two
areas: the awareness that the entire community is called to evangelize and educate the young,
and the urgent need for the young to exercise greater leadership. We should recognize that
despite the present crisis of commitment and communal relationships, many young people are
making common cause before the problems of our world and are taking up various forms of
activism and volunteer work. Some take part in the life of the Church as members of service
groups and various missionary initiatives in their own dioceses and in other places. How beautiful
it is to see that young people are “street preachers” (callejeros de la fe), joyfully bringing Jesus to
every street, every town square and every corner of the earth!