of the court of justice, rolling themselves on the pavement, and becoming a
common spectacle to all the bystanders; veiling their faces, and showing no
sense of shame, but that which the urgency of the calamity permitted. No maid
servant, nor neighbour, nor female friend, nor any other relative accompanied
them. But hemmed in by a crowd of soldiers, alone, and meanly clad, and
grovelling on the ground, about the very doors, they were in more pitiable case
than those who were undergoing judgment within, and hearing as they did the
voice of the executioners, the strokes of the scourge, the wailing of those who
were being scourged, the fearful threats of the judges, they themselves endured,
at every scourging, sharper pains than those who were beaten. For since, in the
confessions of others, there was a danger of accusations being proved, if they
heard any one scourged that he might mention those who were guilty, and
uttering cries, they, looking up to heaven, besought God to give the sufferer
some strength of endurance, lest the safety of their own relations should be
betrayed by the weakness of others, while incapable of sustaining the sharp
anguish of the strokes. And again, the same thing occurred as in the case of men
who are struggling with a tempest. For just as when they perceive the violence of
a wave lifting up its head from afar, and gradually increasing, and ready to
overwhelm the vessel, they are almost dead with terror, before it comes near the
ship; so also was it with these. If at any time they heard voices, and cries that
reached them, they saw a thousand deaths before their eyes, being in terror, lest
those who were urged to bear witness, giving way to their torments, should name
some one of those who were their own relatives. And thus, one saw tortures both
within and without. Those within the executioners were tormenting; these
women, the despotic force of nature, and the sympathy of the affections. There
was lamentation within, and without! Inside, on the part of those who were
found guilty, and outside on the part of their relatives. Yea, rather not these only,
but their very judges inwardly lamented, and suffered more severely than all the
rest; being compelled to take part in so bitter a tragedy.
4. As for me, while I sat and beheld all this, how matrons and virgins, wont

to live in seclusion, were now made a common spectacle to all; and how those
who were accustomed to lie on a soft couch, had now the pavement for their bed;
and how they who had enjoyed so constant an attendance of female servants and
eunuchs, and every sort of outward distinction, were now bereft of all these
things; and grovelling at the feet of every one, beseeching him to lend help by
any means in his power to those who were undergoing examination, and that
there might be a kind of general contribution of mercy from all; I exclaimed, in
those words of Solomon, "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." [Ecclesiastes 1:2] For
I saw both this and another oracle fulfilled in every deed, which says, "All the
glory of man is as the flower of grass. The grass withers, and the flower falls
away." [Isaiah 42:6-7] For then indeed, wealth, and nobility, and notoriety, and
the patronage of friends, and kinship and all worldly things, were found
worthless; the sin, and transgression of the law which had taken place, having
put all these succours to flight. And just as the mother of young birds, when the
nestlings have been carried away, coming and finding her nest empty, is unable
to rescue her captive brood; but by hovering around the hands of the fowler, in
this way displays her grief; even so did these women then do, when their
children were snatched away from their dwellings, and shut up within, as it were
in a net, or a trap. They could not indeed come in and deliver the prisoners, but
they manifested their anguish by wallowing on the ground near the very doors;
by lamentation and groans; and by endeavouring to approach as near as possible
to those who had captured them. These things then beholding, I cast in my mind
That Dread Tribunal; and I said within myself, If now, when men are the judges,
neither mother, nor sister, nor father, nor any other person, though guiltless of
the deeds which have been perpetrated, can avail to rescue the criminals; who
will stand by us when we are judged at the dread Tribunal of Christ? Who will
dare to raise his voice? Who will be able to rescue those who shall be led away
to those unbearable punishments. Notwithstanding they were the first men of the
city who were then brought to trial, and the very chief of the nobility, yet they
would have been glad if it could be granted them to lose all their possessions,