"God"; so they are one principle of the Holy Ghost by reason of the
unity of the property that is signified in this word "principle."
Reply to Objection 1: If we consider the spirative power, the Holy
Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son as they are one in the
spirative power, which in a certain way signifies the nature with the
property, as we shall see later (ad 7). Nor is there any reason against
one property being in two "supposita" that possess one common
nature. But if we consider the "supposita" of the spiration, then we
may say that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son,
as distinct; for He proceeds from them as the unitive love of both.
Reply to Objection 2: In the proposition "the Father and the Son are
one principle of the Holy Ghost," one property is designated which is
the form signified by the term. It does not thence follow that by
reason of the several properties the Father can be called several
principles, for this would imply in Him a plurality of subjects.
Reply to Objection 3: It is not by reason of relative properties that we
speak of similitude or dissimilitude in God, but by reason of the
essence. Hence, as the Father is not more like to Himself than He is
to the Son; so likewise neither is the Son more like to the Father than
is the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 4: These two propositions, "The Father and the
Son are one principle which is the Father," or, "one principle which
is not the Father," are not mutually contradictory; and hence it is not
necessary to assert one or other of them. For when we say the
Father and the Son are one principle, this word "principle" has not
determinate supposition but rather it stands indeterminately for two
persons together. Hence there is a fallacy of "figure of speech" as
the argument concludes from the indeterminate to the determinate.
Reply to Objection 5: This proposition is also true:---The one
principle of the Holy Ghost is the Father and the Son; because the
word "principle" does not stand for one person only, but indistinctly
for the two persons as above explained.
Reply to Objection 6: There is no reason against saying that the
Father and the Son are the same principle, because the word
"principle" stands confusedly and indistinctly for the two Persons
together.

Reply to Objection 7: Some say that although the Father and the Son
are one principle of the Holy Ghost, there are two spirators, by
reason of the distinction of "supposita," as also there are two
spirating, because acts refer to subjects. Yet this does not hold good
as to the name "Creator"; because the Holy Ghost proceeds from the
Father and the Son as from two distinct persons, as above
explained; whereas the creature proceeds from the three persons
not as distinct persons, but as united in essence. It seems, however,
better to say that because spirating is an adjective, and spirator a
substantive, we can say that the Father and the Son are two
spirating, by reason of the plurality of the "supposita" but not two
spirators by reason of the one spiration. For adjectival words derive
their number from the "supposita" but substantives from
themselves, according to the form signified. As to what Hilary says,
that "the Holy ghost is from the Father and the Son as His authors,"
this is to be explained in the sense that the substantive here stands
for the adjective.