THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.4.

womb, the Virgin was not freed from the fomes in its essence, but
that it remained fettered: not indeed by an act of her reason, as in
holy men, since she had not the use of reason from the very first
moment of her existence in her mother's womb, for this was the
singular privilege of Christ: but by reason of the abundant grace
bestowed on her in her sanctification, and still more perfectly by
Divine Providence preserving her sensitive soul, in a singular
manner, from any inordinate movement. Afterwards, however, at the
conception of Christ's flesh, in which for the first time immunity from
sin was to be conspicuous, it is to be believed that entire freedom
from the fomes redounded from the Child to the Mother. This indeed
is signified (Ezech. 43:2): "Behold the glory of the God of Israel came
in by the way of the east," i.e. by the Blessed Virgin, "and the earth,"
i.e. her flesh, "shone with His," i.e. Christ's, "majesty."
Reply to Objection 1: Death and such like penalties do not of
themselves incline us to sin. Wherefore though Christ assumed
them, He did not assume the fomes. Consequently in order that the
Blessed Virgin might be conformed to her Son, from "whose
fulness" her grace was derived, the fomes was at first fettered and
afterwards taken away: while she was not freed from death and other
such penalties.
Reply to Objection 2: The "infirmity" of the flesh, that pertains to the
fomes, is indeed to holy men an occasional cause of perfect virtue:
but not the "sine qua non" of perfection: and it is quite enough to
ascribe to the Blessed Virgin perfect virtue and abundant grace: nor
is there any need to attribute to her every occasional cause of
perfection.
Reply to Objection 3: The Holy Ghost effected a twofold purification
in the Blessed Virgin. The first was, as it were, preparatory to
Christ's conception: which did not cleanse her from the stain of sin
or fomes, but rather gave her mind a unity of purpose and
disengaged it from a multiplicity of things (Cf. Dionysius, Div. Nom.
iv), since even the angels are said to be purified, in whom there is no
stain, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. vi). The second purification
effected in her by the Holy Ghost was by means of the conception of
Christ which was the operation of the Holy Ghost. And in respect of
this, it may be said that He purified her entirely from the fomes.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.4.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether by being sanctified in the womb the

Blessed Virgin was preserved from all actual sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that by being sanctified in the womb the
Blessed Virgin was not preserved from all actual sin. For, as we have
already stated (Article 3), after her first sanctification the fomes
remained in the Virgin. Now the motion of the fomes, even if it
precede the act of the reason, is a venial sin, albeit extremely slight,
as Augustine says in his work De Trinitate [Sent. ii, D, 24]. Therefore
there was some venial sin in the Blessed Virgin.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine (Qq. Nov. et Vet. Test. lxxiii on Lk.
2:35: "Thy own soul a sword shall pierce") says that the Blessed
Virgin "was troubled with wondering doubt at the death of our Lord."
But doubt in matters of faith is a sin. Therefore the Blessed Virgin
was not preserved from all actual sin.
Objection 3: Further, Chrysostom (Hom. xlv in Matth.) expounding
the text: "Behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without, seeking
thee," says: "It is clear that they did this from mere vain glory."
Again, on Jn. 2:3: "They have no wine," the same Chrysostom says
that "she wished to do them a favor, and raise herself in their
esteem, by means of her Son: and perchance she succumbed to
human frailty, just as did His brethren when they said: 'Manifest
Thyself to the world.'" And a little further on he says: "For as yet she
did not believe in Him as she ought." Now it is quite clear that all this
was sinful. Therefore the Blessed Virgin was not preserved from all
sin.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Nat. et Grat. xxxvi): "In the
matter of sin, it is my wish to exclude absolutely all questions
concerning the holy Virgin Mary, on account of the honor due to
Christ. For since she conceived and brought forth Him who most
certainly was guilty of no sin, we know that an abundance of grace
was given her that she might be in every way the conqueror of sin."
I answer that, God so prepares and endows those, whom He
chooses for some particular office, that they are rendered capable of
fulfilling it, according to 2 Cor. 3:6: "(Who) hath made us fit ministers
of the New Testament." Now the Blessed Virgin was chosen by God
to be His Mother. Therefore there can be no doubt that God, by His