SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.3.

poor, who, as far as possible, should be supported from the
possessions of the Church: for our Lord had a purse for the use of
the poor, as Jerome observes on Mt. 17:26, "That we may not
scandalize them."
Reply to Objection 1: Whatever is given to the poor is not a sacrifice
properly speaking; yet it is called a sacrifice in so far as it is given to
them for God's sake. In like manner, and for the same reason, it can
be called an oblation, though not properly speaking, since it is not
given immediately to God. Oblations properly so called fall to the use
of the poor, not by the dispensation of the offerers, but by the
dispensation of the priests.
Reply to Objection 2: Monks or other religious may receive oblations
under three counts. First, as poor, either by the dispensation of the
priests, or by ordination of the Church; secondly, through being
ministers of the altar, and then they can accept oblations that are
freely offered; thirdly, if the parishes belong to them, and they can
accept oblations, having a right to them as rectors of the Church.
Reply to Objection 3: Oblations when once they are consecrated,
such as sacred vessels and vestments, cannot be granted to the use
of the laity: and this is the meaning of the words of Pope Damasus.
But those which are unconsecrated may be allowed to the use of
layfolk by permission of the priests, whether by way of gift or by way
of sale.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a man may make oblations of whatever

he lawfully possesses?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man may not make oblations of
whatever he lawfully possesses. According to human law [Dig. xii, v,
de Condict. ob. turp. vel iniust. caus. 4] "the whore's is a shameful
trade in what she does but not in what she takes," and consequently
what she takes she possesses lawfully. Yet it is not lawful for her to
make an oblation with her gains, according to Dt. 23:18, "Thou shalt
not offer the hire of a strumpet . . . in the house of the Lord thy God."
Therefore it is not lawful to make an oblation of whatever one
possesses lawfully.
Objection 2: Further, in the same passage it is forbidden to offer "the
price of a dog" in the house of God. But it is evident that a man
possesses lawfully the price of a dog he has lawfully sold. Therefore
it is not lawful to make an oblation of whatever we possess lawfully.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Malachi 1:8): "If you offer the lame
and the sick, is it not evil?" Yet an animal though lame or sick is a
lawful possession. Therefore it would seem that not of every lawful
possession may one make an oblation.
On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 3:9): "Honor the Lord with thy
substance." Now whatever a man possesses lawfully belongs to his
substance. Therefore he may make oblations of whatever he
possesses lawfully.
I answer that, As Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. Serm. cxiii),
"shouldst thou plunder one weaker than thyself and give some of the
spoil to the judge, if he should pronounce in thy favor, such is the
force of justice that even thou wouldst not be pleased with him: and
if this should not please thee, neither does it please thy God." Hence
it is written (Ecclus. 34:21): "The offering of him that sacrificeth of a
thing wrongfully gotten is stained." Therefore it is evident that an
oblation must not be made of things unjustly acquired or possessed.
In the Old Law, however, wherein the figure was predominant,
certain things were reckoned unclean on account of their
signification, and it was forbidden to offer them. But in the New Law
all God's creatures are looked upon as clean, as stated in Titus 1:15:
and consequently anything that is lawfully possessed, considered in