entreat despitefully, and art in dismay? Do you judge, and yet tremble? So feeble
is wickedness.
But the Apostles not so, but how? "We cannot but speak the things which
we have seen and heard." [Acts 4:20] Do you see a noble spirit? Do you see a
rock laughing waves to scorn? Do you see a house unshaken? And what is yet
more marvellous; so far from turning cowards themselves at the plots formed
against them, they even took more courage, and cast the others into greater
anxiety. For so he that smites adamant, is himself the one smitten; and he that
kicks against the pricks, is himself the one pricked, the one on whom the severe
wounds fall: and he who is forming plots against the virtuous, is himself the one
in jeopardy. For wickedness becomes so much the weaker, the more it sets itself
in array against virtue. And as he who wraps up fire in a garment, extinguishes
not the flame, but consumes the garment; so he that is doing despite to virtuous
men, and oppressing them, and binding them, makes them more glorious, but
destroys himself. For the more ills you suffer, living righteously, the stronger are
you become; since the more we honor self-restraint, the less we need anything;
and the less we need anything, the stronger we grow, and the more above all.
Such a one was John; wherefore him no man pained, but he caused pain to
Herod; so he that had nothing prevailed against him that ruled; and he that wore
a diadem, and purple, and endless pomp, trembles, and is in fear of him that is
stripped of all, and not even when beheaded could he without fear see his head.
For that even after his death he had the terror of him in full strength, hear what
He says, "This is John, whom I slew." Now the expression, "I slew," is that of one
not exulting, but soothing his own terror, and persuading his troubled soul to call
to mind, that he himself slew him. So great is the force of virtue, that even after
death it is more powerful than the living. For this same cause again, when he
was living, they that possessed much wealth came unto him, and said, "What
shall we do?" Is so much yours, and are you minded to learn the way of your
prosperity from him that has nothing? The rich from the poor? The soldiers from
him that has not even a house?

Such an one was Elias too: wherefore also with the same freedom did he
discourse to the people. For as the former said, "You generation of vipers;"
[Matthew 3:7] so this latter, "How long will you halt upon both your hips?" And
the one said, "Have you killed, and inherited?" the other, "It is not lawful for you
to have your brother Philip's wife." [Mark 6:18]
Do you see the rock? Do you see the sand; how easily it sinks down, how it
yields to calamities? How it is overthrown, though it have the support of royalty,
of number, of nobility? For them that pursue it, it makes more senseless than all.
And it does not merely fall, but with great calamity: for "great indeed," He
says, "was the fall of it." The risk not being of trifles, but of the soul, of the loss
of Heaven, and those immortal blessings. Or rather even before that loss, no life
so wretched as he must live that follows after this; dwelling with continual
despondencies, alarms, cares, anxieties; which a certain wise man also was
intimating when he said, "The wicked flees, when no man is pursuing."
[Proverbs 28:1] For such men tremble at their shadows, suspect their friends,
their enemies, their servants, such as know them, such as know them not; and
before their punishment, suffer extreme punishment here. And to declare all this,
Christ said, "And great was the fall of it;" shutting up these good commandments
with that suitable ending, and persuading even by the things present the most
unbelieving to flee from vice.
For although the argument from what is to come be vaster, yet is this of
more power to restrain the grosser sort, and to withdraw them from wickedness.
Wherefore also he ended with it, that the profit thereof might make its abode in
them.
Conscious therefore of all these things, both the present, and the future, let
us flee from vice, let us emulate virtue, that we may not labor fruitlessly and at
random, but may both enjoy the security here, and partake of the glory there:
unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the might forever and ever.
Amen.