SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: The measures of salable commodities must
needs be different in different places, on account of the difference of
supply: because where there is greater abundance, the measures are
wont to be larger. However in each place those who govern the state
must determine the just measures of things salable, with due
consideration for the conditions of place and time. Hence it is not
lawful to disregard such measures as are established by public
authority or custom.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xi, 16) the price
of things salable does not depend on their degree of nature, since at
times a horse fetches a higher price than a slave; but it depends on
their usefulness to man. Hence it is not necessary for the seller or
buyer to be cognizant of the hidden qualities of the thing sold, but
only of such as render the thing adapted to man's use, for instance,
that the horse be strong, run well and so forth. Such qualities the
seller and buyer can easily discover.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the seller is bound to state the defects of

the thing sold?
Objection 1: It would seem that the seller is not bound to state the
defects of the thing sold. Since the seller does not bind the buyer to
buy, he would seem to leave it to him to judge of the goods offered
for sale. Now judgment about a thing and knowledge of that thing
belong to the same person. Therefore it does not seem imputable to
the seller if the buyer be deceived in his judgment, and be hurried
into buying a thing without carefully inquiring into its condition.
Objection 2: Further, it seems foolish for anyone to do what prevents
him carrying out his work. But if a man states the defects of the
goods he has for sale, he prevents their sale: wherefore Tully (De
Offic. iii, 13) pictures a man as saying: "Could anything be more
absurd than for a public crier, instructed by the owner, to cry: 'I offer
this unhealthy horse for sale?'" Therefore the seller is not bound to
state the defects of the thing sold.
Objection 3: Further, man needs more to know the road of virtue
than to know the faults of things offered for sale. Now one is not
bound to offer advice to all or to tell them the truth about matters
pertaining to virtue, though one should not tell anyone what is false.
Much less therefore is a seller bound to tell the faults of what he
offers for sale, as though he were counseling the buyer.
Objection 4: Further, if one were bound to tell the faults of what one
offers for sale, this would only be in order to lower the price. Now
sometimes the price would be lowered for some other reason,
without any defect in the thing sold: for instance, if the seller carry
wheat to a place where wheat fetches a high price, knowing that
many will come after him carrying wheat; because if the buyers knew
this they would give a lower price. But apparently the seller need not
give the buyer this information. Therefore, in like manner, neither
need he tell him the faults of the goods he is selling.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Offic. iii, 10): "In all contracts the
defects of the salable commodity must be stated; and unless the
seller make them known, although the buyer has already acquired a
right to them, the contract is voided on account of the fraudulent
action."