unchastened tongue and an unchecked utterance. Hence come many slips on our
part: hence many serious accusations against us. And the ease of these falls
through the tongue a certain one showed, when he said, "Many fell by the sword,
but not so many as by the tongue." [Sirach 28:22] Now the gravity of the fall the
same person shows us again when he says: "To slip upon a pavement is better
than to slip with the tongue." [Sirach 20:18] And what he speaks of is of this
kind. Better it is, says he, that the body should fall and be crushed, than that such
a word should go forth as destroys the soul; and he does not speak of falls
merely; he also admonishes us that much forethought should be exercised, so
that we should not be tripped up, thus saying "Make a door and bars for your
mouth," [Sirach 20:25] not that we should prepare doors and bars, but that with
much security, we should shut the tongue off from outrageous words; and again
in another place, after showing that we need influence from above, both as
accompanying and preceding our own effort so as to keep this wild beast within:
stretching forth his hands to God, the prophet said, "Let the lifting up of my
hands be an evening sacrifice, set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the
door of my lips;" and he who before admonished, himself too says again "Who
shall set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips?"
[Sirach 22:27] Do you not see, each one fearing these falls and bewailing them,
both giving advice, and praying that the tongue may have the benefit of much
watchfulness? And for what reason, says one, if this organ brings us such ruin,
did God originally place it within us? Because indeed, it is of great use, and if
we are careful, it is of use only, and brings no ruin. Hear, for example, what he
says who spoke the former words, "Death and life are in the power of the
tongue." [Proverbs 18:21] And Christ points to the same thing when he says, "By
your words you shall be condemned, and by your words you shall be justified."
[Mark 12:27] For the tongue stands in the midst ready for use on either hand.
You are its master. Thus indeed a sword lies in the midst, and if you use it
against your enemies, this organ becomes a means of safety for you. But if you
thrust its stroke against yourself, not the nature of the iron, but your own

transgression becomes the cause of your slaughter. Let us then take this view of
the tongue. It is a sword lying in the midst; sharpen it for the purpose of accusing
your own sins. Thrust not the stroke against your brother. For this reason God
surrounded it with a double fortification; with the fence of the teeth and the
barrier of the lips, that it may not rashly and without circumspection utter words
which are not convenient. Well, do you say it will not endure this? Bridle it
therefore within. Restrain it by means of the teeth, as though giving over its body
to these executioners and making them bite it. For it is better that when it sins
now it should be bitten by the teeth, than one day when it seeks a drop of water
and is parched with heat, to be unable to obtain this consolation. In many other
ways indeed it is wont to sin, by raillery and blasphemy, by uttering foul words,
by slander, swearing, and perjury.
5. But in order that we may not by saying everything at once today, confuse
your minds, we put before you one custom, namely, about the avoidance of
oaths, saying this much by way of preface, and speaking plainly— that if you do
not avoid oaths, I say not perjury merely, but those too which happen in the
cause of justice, we shall not further discourse upon any other subject. For it is
monstrous that teachers of letters should not give a second lesson to their
children until they see the former one fixed well in their memory, but that we,
without being able to express our first lessons clearly, should inculcate others
before the first are completed. For this is nothing else than to pour into a
perforated jar. Give great care, then, that you silence not our mouth. For this
error is grave, and it is exceedingly grave because it does not seem to be grave,
and on this account I fear it, because no one fears it. On this account the disease
is incurable, because it does not seem to be a disease; but just as simple speech is
not a crime, so neither does this seem to be a crime, but with much boldness this
transgression is committed: and if any one call it in question, straightway
laughter follows, and much ridicule, not of those who are called in question for
their oaths, but of those who wish to rectify the disease. On this account I largely
extend my discourse about these matters. For I wish to pull up a deep root, and