sometimes a daughter, sometimes a virgin, sometimes a bondmaid, sometimes a
queen, sometimes a barren woman, sometimes a mountain, sometimes a garden,
sometimes fruitful in children, sometimes a lily, sometimes a fountain: She is all
things. Therefore having heard these things, think not I pray you that they are
corporeal; but stretch your thought further: for such things cannot be corporeal.
For example: the mountain is not the maid: the maid is not the bride: the queen is
not the bond-maid: yet the Church is all these things. Wherefore? Because the
element in which they exist is not corporeal but spiritual. For in a corporeal
sphere these things are confined within narrow limits: but in a spiritual sphere
they have a wide field of operation. "The queen stood on your right hand." The
queen? How did she who was down-trodden and poor become a queen? And
where did she ascend? The queen herself stood on high by the side of the king.
How? Because the king became a servant; He was not that by nature, but He
became so. Understand therefore the things which belong to the Godhead, and
discern those which belong to the Dispensation. Understand what He was, and
what He became for your sake, and do not confuse things which are distinct, nor
make the argument of his lovingkindness an occasion for blasphemy. He was
lofty, and she was lowly: lofty not by position but by nature. His essence was
pure, and imperishable: His nature was incorruptible, unintelligible, invisible,
incomprehensible, eternal, unchangeable, transcending the nature of angels,
higher than the powers above, overpowering reason, surpassing thought,
apprehended not by sight but by faith alone. Angels beheld Him and trembled,
the Cherubim veiled themselves with their wings, in awe. He looked upon the
earth, and caused it to tremble: He threatened the sea and dried it up:
[Isaiah 51:10] he brought rivers out of the desert: He weighed the mountains in
scales, and the valleys in a balance. How shall I express myself? How shall I
present the truth? His greatness has no bounds, His wisdom is beyond reckoning,
His judgments are untraceable, His ways unsearchable. Such is His greatness
and His power, if indeed it is safe even to use such expressions. But what am I to
do? I am a human being and I speak in human language: my tongue is of earth

and I crave forgiveness from my Lord. For I do not use these expressions in a
spirit of presumption, but on account of the poverty of my resources arising from
my feebleness and the nature of our human tongue. Be merciful to me, O Lord,
for I utter these words not in presumption but because I have no others:
nevertheless I do not rest content with the meanness of my speech, but soar
upwards on the wings of my understanding. Such is His greatness and power. I
say this, that without dwelling on the words, or on the poverty of the
expressions, you may also yourself learn to act in the same way. Why do you
marvel if I do this, inasmuch as He also does the same, when He wishes to
present something to our minds which transcends human powers? Since He
addresses human beings He uses also human illustration, which are indeed
insufficient to represent the thing spoken of, and cannot exhibit the full
proportions of the matter, yet suffice for the infirmity of the hearers.
10. Make an effort, and do not grow weary of my prolonged discourse. For
as when He manifests Himself, He is not manifested as He really is, nor is His
bare essence manifested (for no man has seen God in His real nature; for when
He is but partially revealed the Cherubim tremble— the mountains smoke, the
sea is dried up, the heaven is shaken, and if the revelation were not partial who
could endure it?) as then, I say, He does not manifest Himself as He really is, but
only as the beholder is able to see Him, therefore does He appear sometimes in
the form of old age, sometimes of youth, sometimes in fire, sometimes in air,
sometimes in water, sometimes in armour, not altering his essential nature, but
fashioning His appearance to suit the various condition of those who are affected
by it. In like manner also when any one wishes to say anything concerning Him
he employs human illustrations. For instance I say: "He went up into the
mountain and He was transfigured before them, and His countenance shone as
the sun, and His raiment became white as snow." He disclosed, it is said, a little
of the Godhead, He manifested to them the God dwelling among them "and He
was transfigured before them." Attend carefully to the statement. The writer says
and He was transfigured before them, and His raiment shone as the light, and His