after another, even if it be strong, is exhausted, but when it is freed from this
attack, it recovers its proper force, so also the soul in youth is feverish, and is
chiefly possessed by the love of glory, and luxurious living, and sensual lusts,
and many other imaginations; but old age, when it comes on, drives away all
these passions, some through satiety, some through philosophy. For old age
relaxes the powers of the body, and does not permit the soul to make use of them
even if it wish, but repressing them as enemies of various kinds, it sets her in a
place free from troubles and produces a great calm, and brings in a greater fear.
For if none else does, it is said, yet they who are grown old know, that they
are drawing to their end, and that they certainly stand near to death. When
therefore the desires of this life are withdrawing, and the expectation of the
judgment-seat is coming on, softening the stubbornness of the soul, does it not
become more attentive, if one be willing?
8. What then (you allege) when we see old men more intractable than
young ones? Thou tellest me of an excess of wickedness. For in the case of
madmen too, we see them going over precipices, when no man pushes them.
When therefore, an old man has the diseases of the young, this is an excess of
wickedness; besides not even in youth would such an one have an excuse: since
he is not able to say, "Remember not the sins of my youth, and my ignorances."
[Psalm 25:7] For he who in old age remains the same, shows that even in youth,
he was what he was not from ignorance, nor from inexperience, nor from the
time of life, but from slothfulness. For that man may say, "Remember not the
sins of my youth, and mine ignorances," who does such things as become an old
man, who changes in old age. But if even in age he continue the same unseemly
courses, how can such an one be worthy of the name of an old man, who has no
reverence even for the time of life? For he who says, "Remember not the sins of
my youth, nor my ignorances," utters this, as one doing right in his old age. Do
not then, by the deeds of age, deprive yourself also of pardon for the sins of
youth.
For how can what is done be otherwise than unreasonable, and beyond

pardon? An old man sits in taverns. An old man hurries to horse-races— an old
man goes up into theaters, running with the crowd like children. Truly it is a
shame and a mockery, to be adorned outside with gray hairs, but within to have
the mind of a child.
And indeed if a young man insult [him], he immediately puts forward his
gray hairs. Reverence them first yourself; if however thou dost not reverence
your own even when old, how can you demand of the young to reverence them?
Thou dost not reverence the gray hairs, but puttest them to shame. God has
honored you with whiteness of hairs: He has given you high dignity. Why do
you betray the honor? How shall the young man reverence you, when you are
more wanton than he? For the hoary head is then venerable, when it acts
worthily of the gray head; but when it plays youth, it will be more ridiculous
than the young. How then will you old men be able to give these exhortations to
the young man when you are intoxicated by your disorderliness?
9. I say not these things as accusing the old, but the young. For in my
judgment they who act thus even if they have come to their hundredth year, are
young; just as the young if they be but little children, yet if they are soberminded, are better than the old. And this doctrine is not my own, but Scripture
also recognizes the same distinction. "For," it says, "honorable age is not that
which stands in length of time, and an unspotted life is old age." [Wisdom 4:8-9]
For we honor the gray hair, not because we esteem the white color above
the black, but because it is a proof of a virtuous life; and when we see them we
conjecture therefrom the inward hoariness. But if men continue to do what is
inconsistent with the hoary head, they will on that account become the more
ridiculous. Since we also honor the Emperor, and the purple and the diadem,
because they are symbols of his office. But if we should see him, with the
purple, spitted on, trodden under foot by the guards, seized by the throat, cast
into prison, torn to pieces, shall we then reverence the purple or the diadem, and
not rather weep over the pomp itself? Claim not then to be honored for your
hoary head, when you yourself wrongest it. For it ought indeed itself to receive