discourses with them; threshing floor, and harvest, and vineyard, and wine-press,
and field, and net, and fishing, and all things familiar, and among which they
were busied He makes ingredients in His discourses. This kind of thing then the
Baptist likewise did here, and offered an exceeding great demonstration of his
words, the giving of the Spirit. For "He who has so great power, as both to
forgive sins, and to give the Spirit, much more will these things also be within
His power:" so he speaks.
Do you see how now in due order the mystery came to be laid as a
foundation, before the resurrection and judgment? [Hebrews 6:1-2]
"And wherefore," it may be said, "did he not mention the signs and wonders
which were straightway to be done by Him?" Because this was greater than all,
and for its sake all those were done. Thus, in his mention of the chief thing, he
comprehended all; death dissolved, sins abolished, the curse blotted out, those
long wars done away; our entrance into paradise, our ascent into heaven, our
citizenship with the angels, our partaking of the good things to come: for in truth
this is the earnest of them all. So that in mentioning this, he has mentioned also
the resurrection of our bodies, and the manifestation of His miracles here, and
our partaking of His kingdom, and the good things, which "eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man." [1 Corinthians 2:9] For
all these things He bestowed on us by that gift. It was therefore superfluous to
speak of the signs that were immediately to ensue, and which sight can judge of;
but those were meet to be discoursed on, whereof they doubted; as for instance,
that He is the Son of God; that He exceeds John beyond comparison; that He
"bears the sin of the world;" that He will require an account of all that we do;
that our interests are not limited to the present, but elsewhere every one will
undergo the due penalty. For these things were not as yet proveable by sight.
8. Therefore, knowing these things, let us use great diligence, while we are
in the threshing floor; for it is possible while we are here, to change even out of
chaff into wheat, even as on the other hand many from wheat have become chaff.
Let us not then be supine, nor be carried about with every wind; neither let us

separate ourselves from our brethren, though they seem to be small and mean;
forasmuch as the wheat also compared with the chaff is less in measure, but
better in nature. Look not therefore to the forms of outward pomp, for they are
prepared for the fire, but to this godly humility, so firm and indissoluble, and
which cannot be cut, neither is burnt by the fire. It being for their sake that He
bears long with the very chaff, that by their intercourse with them they may
become better. Therefore judgment is not yet, that we may be all crowned
together, that from wickedness many may be converted unto virtue.
Let us tremble then at hearing this parable. For indeed that fire is
unquenchable. "And how," it may be said, "is it unquenchable?" Do you see not
this sun ever burning, and never quenched? Did you not behold the bush
burning, and not consumed? If then you also desire to escape the flame, lay up
alms beforehand, and so you will not even taste of that fire. For if, while here,
you will believe what is told you, you shall not so much as see this furnace, after
your departure into that region; but if you disbelieve it now, you shall know it
there full well by experience, when no sort of escape is possible. Since in truth
no entreaty shall avert the punishment from them who have not shown forth an
upright life. For believing surely is not enough, since even the devils tremble at
God, but for all that they will be punished.
9. Wherefore our care of our conduct has need to be great. Why, this is the
very reason of our continually assembling you here; not simply that you should
enter in, but that you should also reap some fruit from your continuance here.
But if you come indeed constantly, but go away again reaping no fruit from
thence, you will have no advantage from your entering in and attendance in this
place.
For if we, when sending children to teachers, should we see them reaping
no benefit thereby, begin to be severe in blaming the teachers, and remove them
often to others; what excuse shall we have for not bestowing upon virtue even so
much diligence as upon these earthly things, but forever bringing our tablets
home empty? And yet our teachers here are more in number and greater. For no