they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory."
Behold another incentive. I endure these things, he says, not for myself, but
for the salvation of others. It was in my power to have lived free from danger; to
have suffered none of these things, if I had consulted my own interest. On what
account then do I suffer these things? For the good of others, that others may
obtain eternal life. What then do you promise yourself? He has not said, simply
on account of these particular persons; but "for the elect's sake." If God has
chosen them, it becomes us to suffer everything for their sakes. "That they also
may obtain salvation." By saying, "they also," he means, as well as we. For God
has chosen us also; and as God suffered for our sakes, so should we suffer for
their sakes. Thus it is a matter of retribution, not of favor. On the part of God it
was grace, for He having received no previous benefit, has done us good: but on
our parts it is retribution, we having previously received benefits from God,
suffer for these, for whom we suffer, in order "that they may obtain salvation."
What do you say? What salvation? Are you who wast not the author of salvation
to yourself, but wast destroying yourself, are you the author of salvation to
others? Surely not, and therefore he adds, "salvation that is in Christ Jesus"; that
which is truly salvation, "with eternal glory." Present things are afflictive, but
they are but on earth. Present things are ignominious, but they are temporary.
They are full of bitterness and pain; but they last only today and tomorrow.
Such is not the nature of the good things, they are eternal, they are in
heaven. That is true glory, this is dishonor.
Moral. For observe, I pray, beloved, that is not glory which is on earth, the
true glory is in heaven. But if any one would be glorified, let him be dishonored.
If he would obtain rest, let him suffer affliction. If any one would be forever
illustrious, would enjoy pleasure, let him despise temporal things. And that
dishonor is glory, and glory dishonor, let us now set before us to the best of our
power, that we may see what is real glory. It is not possible to be glorified upon
earth; if you would be glorified, it must be through dishonor. And let us prove
this in the examples of two persons, Nero and Paul. The one had the glory of this

world, the other the dishonor. How? The first was a tyrant, had obtained great
success, had raised many trophies, had wealth ever flowing in, numerous armies
everywhere; he had the greater part of the world and the imperial city subject to
his sway, the whole senate crouching to him, and his palace too was advancing
with splendid show. When he must be armed, he went forth arrayed in gold and
precious stones. When he was to sit still in peace, he sat clothed in robes of
purple. He was surrounded by numerous guards and attendants. He was called
Lord of land and sea, Emperor, Augustus, Cæsar, King, and other such highsounding names as implied flattery and courtship; and nothing was wanting that
might tend to glory. Even wise men and potentates and sovereigns trembled at
him. For beside all this, he was said to be a cruel and violent man. He even
wished to be thought a god, and he despised both all the idols, and the very God
Who is over all. He was worshipped as a god. What greater glory than this? Or
rather what greater dishonor? For— I know not how— my tongue is carried
away by the force of truth, and passes sentence before judgment. Meanwhile let
us examine the matter according to the opinion of the multitude, and of
unbelievers, and the estimation of flattery.
What is greater in the common estimation of glory than to be reputed a
god? It is indeed a great disgrace that any human being should be so mad, but for
the present let us consider the matter according to the opinion of the multitude.
Nothing then was wanting to him, that contributes to human glory, but he was
worshipped by all as a god. Now in opposition to him, let us consider Paul. He
was a Cilician, and the difference between Rome and Cilicia, all know. He was a
tent-maker, a poor man, unskilled in the wisdom of those without, knowing only
the Hebrew tongue, a language despised by all, especially by the Italians. For
they do not so much despise the barbarian, the Greek, or any other tongue as the
Syriac, and this has affinity with the Hebrew. Nor wonder at this, for if they
despised the Greek, which is so admirable and beautiful, much more the Hebrew.
He was a man that often lived in hunger, often went to bed without food, a man
that was naked, and had not clothes to put on; "in cold, and nakedness," as he