man using what he has as he will. Next, if a man do even use things as he will,
neither is this a great matter: for the present time is short compared with the ages
without end. Are you high-minded, O man, because you are rich? On what
account? For what cause? For this befalls also robbers, and thieves, and manslayers, and effeminate, and whoremongers, and all sorts of wicked men.
Wherefore then are you high-minded? Since if you have made meet use of it,
you must not be high-minded, lest you profane the commandment: but if unmeet,
by this indeed [it has come to pass that] you have become a slave of money, and
goods, and art overcome by them. For tell me, if any man sick of a fever should
drink much water, which for a short space indeed quenches his thirst, but
afterwards kindles the flame, ought he to be high-minded? And what, if any man
have many cares without cause, ought he therefore to be high-minded? Tell me,
wherefore? Because you have many masters? Because you have ten thousand
cares? Because many will flatter you? [Surely not.] For you are even their slave.
And to prove that to you, hear plainly. The other affections which are within us,
are in some cases useful. For instance, Anger is often useful. For (says he)
"unjust wrath shall not be innocent" [Sirach 1:22]: wherefore it is possible for
one to be justly in wrath. And again, "He that is angry with his brother without
cause, shall be in danger of hell." [Matthew 5:22] Again for instance, emulation,
desire, [are useful]: the one when it has reference to the procreation of children,
the other when he directs his emulation to excellent things. As Paul also says, "It
is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing" and, "Covet earnestly
the best gifts." 1 Corinthians 12:31] Both therefore are useful: but an insolent
spirit is in no case good, but is always unprofitable and hurtful.
However, if a man must be proud, [let it be] for poverty, not for wealth.
Wherefore? Because he who can live upon a little, is far greater and better than
he who cannot. For tell me, supposing certain persons called to the Imperial City,
if some of them should need neither beasts, nor slaves, nor umbrellas, nor
lodging-places, nor sandals, nor vessels, but it should suffice them to have bread,
and to take water from the wells,— while others of them should say, "unless ye

give us conveyances, and a soft bed, we cannot come; unless also we have many
followers, unless we may be allowed continually to rest ourselves, we cannot
come, nor unless we have the use of beasts, unless too we may travel but a small
portion of the day— and we have need of many other things also": whom should
we admire? Those or these? Plainly, these who require nothing. So also here:
some need many things for the journey through this life; others, nothing. So that
it would be more fitting to be proud, for poverty if it were fitting at all.
"But the poor man," they say, "is contemptible." Not he, but those who
despise him. For why do not I despise those who know not how to admire what
they ought? Why, if a person be a painter, he will laugh to scorn all who jeer at
him, so long as they are uninstructed; nor does he regard the things which they
say, but is content with his own testimony. And shall we depend on the opinion
of the many? Therefore, we are worthy of contempt when men despise us for our
poverty, and we do not despise them nor call them miserable.
And I say not how many sins are produced by wealth, and how many good
things by poverty. But rather, neither wealth nor poverty is excellent in itself, but
through those who use it. The Christian shines out in poverty rather than in
riches. How? He will be less arrogant, more sober-minded, graver, more
equitable, more considerate: but he that is in wealth, has many impediments to
these things. Let us see then what the rich man does, or rather, he who uses his
wealth amiss. Such an one practices rapine, fraud, violence. Men's unseemly
loves, unholy unions, witchcrafts, poisonings, all their other horrors,— will you
not find them produced by wealth? Do you see, that in poverty rather than in
wealth the pursuit of virtue is less laborious? For do not, I beseech you, think
that because rich men do not suffer punishment here, neither do they sin. Since if
it were easy for a rich man to suffer punishment, you would surely have found
the prisons filled with them. But among its other evils, wealth has this also, that
he who possesses it, transgressing in evil with impunity, will never be stayed
from doing so, but will receive wounds without remedies, and no man will put a
bridle on him.