## Homily 10 on Romans

Rom. V. 12
" Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and
so death passed upon ([διἥλθεν] 6 manuscripts [εἴς] ...) all men, for that all have
sinned."
As the best physicians always take great pains to discover the source of
diseases, and go to the very fountain of the mischief, so does the blessed Paul
also. Hence after having said that we were justified, and having shown it from
the Patriarch, and from the Spirit, and from the dying of Christ (for He would
not have died unless He intended to justify), he next confirms from other sources
also what he had at such length demonstrated. And he confirms his proposition
from things opposite, that is, from death and sin. How, and in what way? He
enquires whence death came in, and how it prevailed. How then did death come
in and prevail? "Through the sin of one." But what means, "for that all have
sinned?" This; he having once fallen, even they that had not eaten of the tree did
from him, all of them, become mortal.
Ver. 13. "For until the Law sin was in the world, but sin is not imputed
where there is no law."
The phrase "till the Law" some think he used of the time before the giving
of the Law— that of Abel, for instance, or of Noah, or of Abraham— till Moses
was born. What was the sin in those days, at this rate? Some say he means that in
Paradise. For hitherto it was not done away, (he would say,) but the fruit of it
was yet in vigor. For it had borne that death whereof all partake, which prevailed
and lorded over us. Why then does he proceed, "But sin is not imputed when
there is no law?" It was by way of objection from the Jews, say they who have
spoken on our side, that he laid this position down and said, if there be no sin
without the Law, how came death to consume all those before the Law? But to

me it seems that the sense presently to be given has more to be said for it, and
suits better with the Apostle's meaning. And what sense is this? In saying, that
"till the Law sin was in the world," what he seems to me to mean is this, that
after the Law was given the sin resulting from the transgression of it prevailed,
and prevailed too so long as the Law existed. For sin, he says, can have no
existence if there be no law. If then it was this sin, he means, from the
transgression of the Law that brought forth death, how was it that all before the
Law died? For if it is in sin that death has its origin, but when there is no law, sin
is not imputed, how came death to prevail? From whence it is clear, that it was
not this sin, the transgression, that is, of the Law, but that of Adam's
disobedience, which marred all things. Now what is the proof of this? The fact
that even before the Law all died: for "death reigned," he says, "from Adam to
Moses, even over them that had not sinned."
How did it reign? "After the similitude of Adam's transgression, who is the
figure of Him that was to come." Now this is why Adam is a type of Christ. How
a type? It will be said. Why in that, as the former became to those who were
sprung from him, although they had not eaten of the tree, the cause of that death
which by his eating was introduced; thus also did Christ become to those sprung
from Him, even though they had not wrought righteousness, the Provider of that
righteousness which through His Cross He graciously bestowed on us all. For
this reason, at every turn he keeps to the "one," and is continually bringing it
before us, when he says, "As by one man sin entered into the world"— and, "If
through the offense of one many be dead:" and, "Not as it was by one that
sinned, so is the gift;" and, "The judgment was by one to condemnation:" and
again, "If by one (or, the one) man's offense death reigned by one;" and
"Therefore as by the offense of one." And again, "As by one man's disobedience
many (or, the many) were made sinners." And so he lets not go of the one, that
when the Jew says to you, How came it, that by the well-doing of this one
Person, Christ, the world was saved? You might be able to say to him, How by
the disobedience of this one person, Adam, came it to be condemned? And yet