Playing upon the doctrines of the heretics with respect to vacuity and shade.

adoption of sons pertaining to the Father, which is eternal life, takes place through Himself,
conferring it [as He does] on all the righteous.
2. But since these men delight in attacking us, and in their true character of cavillers assail us
with points which really tell not at all against us, bringing forward in opposition to us a multitude
of parables and [captious] questions, I have thought it well, on the other side, first of all to put to
them the following inquiries concerning their own doctrines, to exhibit their improbability, and to
put an end to their audacity. After this has been done, [I intend] to bring forward the discourses of
the Lord, so that they may not only be rendered destitute of the means of attacking us, but that,
since they will be unable reasonably to reply to those questions which are put, they may see that
their plan of argument is destroyed; so that, either returning to the truth, and humbling themselves,
and ceasing from their multifarious phantasies, they may propitiate God for those blasphemies they
have uttered against Him, and obtain salvation; or that, if they still persevere in that system of
vainglory which has taken possession of their minds, they may at least find it necessary to change
their kind of argument against us.

### Chapter XII.—The Triacontad of the heretics errs both by defect and excess: Sophia could
never have produced anything apart from her consort; Logos and Sige could not have been
contemporaries.
1. We may remark, in the first place, regarding their Triacontad, that the whole of it
marvellously falls to ruin on both sides, that is, both as respects defect and excess. They say that
to indicate it the Lord came to be baptized at the age of thirty years. But this assertion really amounts
to a manifest subversion of their entire argument. As to defect, this happens as follows: first of all,
because they reckon the Propator among the other Æons. For the Father of all ought not to be
counted with other productions; He who was not produced with that which was produced; He who
was unbegotten with that which was born; He whom no one comprehends with that which is
comprehended by Him, and who is on this account [Himself] incomprehensible; and He who is
without figure with that which has a definite shape. For inasmuch as He is superior to the rest, He
ought not to be numbered with them, and that so that He who is impassible and not in error should
be reckoned with an Æon subject to passion, and actually in error. For I have shown in the book
which immediately precedes this, that, beginning with Bythus, they reckon up the Triacontad to
Sophia, whom they describe as the erring Æon; and I have also there set forth the names of their
[Æons]; but if He be not reckoned, there are no longer, on their own showing, thirty productions
of Æons, but these then become only twenty-nine.
2. Next, with respect to the first production EnnÏa, whom they also term Sige, from whom
again they describe Nous and Aletheia as having been sent forth, they err in both particulars. For