through their deeds, are drawn on to the like emulation.
For what couldest thou say, for not being amended? Are you ignorant of
letters, and hast not looked into the Scriptures that you might learn the virtues of
them of old? To say the truth, this is itself blameworthy, when the church is
constantly standing open, not to enter in, and partake of those sacred streams.
However, although thou know not the departed by the Scriptures, these
living men you ought to see. But is there no one to lead you? Come to me, and I
will show you the places of refuge of these holy men; come and learn thou of
them something useful. Shining lamps are these in every part of the earth; as
walls are they set about the cities. For this cause have they occupied the deserts,
that they may instruct you to despise the tumults in the midst of the world.
For they, as being strong, are able even in the midst of the raging of the
waters to enjoy a calm; but thou, who art leaky on every side, hast need of
tranquility, and to take breath a little, after the successive waves. Go then there
continually, that, having purged away the abiding stain by their prayers and
admonitions, you may both pass in the best manner the present life, and attain
unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, be unto the Father, together with the
Holy Ghost, glory, might, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 73 on Matthew

Matt. XXIII. 14.
"Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you devour widows'
houses, and for a pretense make long prayers: therefore you shall receive greater
damnation."
After this, next He derides them for gluttony: and the grievous thing was,
that not from rich men's goods, but from the poor they indulged their own belly,
and aggravated their poverty, which they should have relieved. For neither did
they merely eat, but devoured.
Moreover also the manner of their overreaching was yet more grievous,
"for a pretense making long prayers."
For every one is worthy of vengeance who does any evil thing; but he that
is deriving even the reason for so doing from godliness, and is using this cloke
for his wickedness, is justly liable to a far more grievous punishment. And
wherefore did He not depose them? Because the time suffered it not as yet. So
therefore He lets them alone for a time, but by His sayings, He secures that the
people be not deceived, lest, through the dignity of those men, they be drawn on
to the same emulation.
For as He had said, "Whatsoever they bid you do, that do;" He shows how
many things they do amiss, lest from thence He should be supposed among the
unwise to commit all to them.
"Woe unto you, for you shut up the kingdom against men; for you neither go
in yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in." But if to profit
no one be a charge against a man, even to hurt and hinder, what plea has that?
But what means, "them that are entering in?" Them that are fit for it. For when
they were to lay injunctions on others, they used to make the burdens intolerable,
but when they themselves were to do any of the things required, on the contrary,