answer in Goodness. Let us show mercy to our neighbors, that mercy may be
shown to us. These acts of mercy we show not so much to them, as lay up for
ourselves against That Day. When the flame of the fire is great, this oil (mercy)
is that which quenches the fire, and this brings light to us. Thus by this means
shall we be freed from the fire of hell. For whence will He be compassionate and
show mercy? Mercy comes of love! Nothing incenses God so much as to be
pitiless. "A man was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents, and he
was moved with compassion, and forgave him. And there were owing to that man
from his fellow-servant a hundred pence, and he caught him by the throat.
Therefore the Lord delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay what was
due." Let us on hearing this be merciful to those who are our debtors in money
or in sins. Let no one remember evils, if at least he does not wish to injure
himself; for he does not so much aggrieve the other (as he injures himself). For
he either will follow him with vengeance, or he has not done so; but dost you
yourself, while not forgiving your neighbor his sins, seek for a kingdom? Lest
this should happen to us, let us forgive all, (for it is ourselves that we pardon,)
that God may forgive us our sins, and so we may obtain the good things which
are in store, through the grace and lovingkindness, etc.

## Homily 5 on Philippians

[Philippians 2:1-4]
"If there is therefore any comfort in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any tender mercies and compassions, fulfil ye my joy,
that you be of the same mind, having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind; doing nothing through faction or through vainglory; but in lowliness of
mind, each counting other better than himself; not looking each of you to his
own things, but each of you also to the things of others."
There is nothing better, there is nothing more affectionate, than a spiritual
teacher; such an one surpasses the kindness of any natural father. Do but
consider, how this blessed one entreats the Philippians concerning the things
which were to their own advantage. What says he, in exhorting them concerning
concord, that cause of all good things? See how earnestly, how vehemently, with
how much sympathy he speaks, "If there be therefore any comfort in Christ,"
that is, if you have any comfort in Christ, as if he had said, If you make any
account of me, if you have any care of me, if you have ever received good at my
hands, do this. This mode of earnestness we use when we claim a matter which
we prefer to everything else. For if we did not prefer it to everything, we should
not wish to receive in it our recompense for all things, nor say that through it all
is represented. We indeed remind men of our carnal claims; for example, if a
father were to say, If you have any reverence for your father, if any remembrance
of my care in nourishing you, if any affection towards me, if any memory of the
honor you have received of me, if any of my kindness, be not at enmity with
your brother; that is, for all those things, this is what I ask in return.
But Paul does not so; he calls to our remembrance no carnal, but all of them
spiritual benefits. That is, if you wish to give me any comfort in my temptations,
and encouragement in Christ, if any consolation of love, if you wish to show any