of conduct must be a voluntary act, not an inevitable necessity. On careful consideration
we find that the case of morals is in some respects like, in some respects unlike the
case of physics. The unlikeness consists in this, that a moral fault is viewed as
consisting in the action alone, not in any effect produced: for moral virtues are not
effective, but active, while arts are effective; and therefore it has been said that art is at
fault in the same way as nature. Moral evil therefore is not estimated according to the
matter and form of the effect, but follows simply from the agent. Now in moral actions
there are found in orderly enumeration four active principles. One principle is the
executive power, namely, the motor power which moves the limbs to execute the
command of the will. This power is moved by the will, and so the will is another
principle. The will is moved by the judgement of the apprehensive faculty, which judges
the particular thing proposed to be good or bad. -- good and bad being the (formal)
objects of the will, the one object of seeking, the other of avoidance. Lastly, the
apprehensive faculty is moved by the thing apprehended. The first active principle then
in moral actions is the thing apprehended; the second is the apprehensive faculty; the
third is the will; the fourth is motor power which executes the command of reason. But
the act of the executive power already presupposes moral good or evil; for these
exterior acts bear a moral character only in so far as they are voluntary. Hence if the act
of the will is good, the exterior act will also be called good; and evil, if the volition is evil.
It would be no point of moral badness for the exterior act to fail by some defect
unconnected with the will: thus lameness is not a moral but a natural blemish. Such a
lack of executive power diminishes, if it does not totally excuse from, moral blemish.
Again, the act whereby the object moves the apprehensive faculty is exempt from moral
blemish: for it is according to the order of nature that what is visible affects the sight,
and every object affects the corresponding passive potentiality. Even the act of the
apprehensive faculty, considered in itself, is nowise morally blameworthy, as we see
that any defect in it excuses from or diminishes moral blame, like the lack of executive
power: for infirmity and ignorance alike excuse from sin, or diminish it. It remains then
that moral blameworthiness is found first and foremost in the act of the will alone; and
reasonably so, since an act is called `moral' from being voluntary. In the act of the will
then is to be sought the root and origin of what in the moral order is sin.
But this investigation leads us into an apparent difficulty. On the understanding that
defect in an act arises from some defect in the principle of action, some defect in the will
must be presupposed before there can be any moral fault. If this defect is natural, it is
ever inherent in the will; and the consequence is that the will must always do wrong in
action, a consequence proved false by the fact of there being such things as acts of
virtue. On the other hand, if the defect is voluntary, that is already a moral fault, the
cause of which must stand over for further enquiry; and so we shall have a running
account to infinity. We must therefore say that the defect pre-existing in the will is no
natural necessity, otherwise it would follow that the will sinned in every act: nor again is
a thing of chance and ill luck, for at that rate there could be in us no moral fault, since
events of chance are unpremeditated and beyond the control of reason. The defect
therefore is voluntary, but not a moral fault: so we must suppose to save the account
running to infinity.