Iliad, xiv. 201; vii. 99.

was the first who maintained that numerous and diverse figures were stamped, as it were, with the
forms [of things above], and descended from universal space into this world. But Plato, for his part,
speaks of matter, and exemplar, and God. These men, following those distinctions, have styled
what he calls ideas, and exemplar, the images of those things which are above; while, through a
mere change of name, they boast themselves as being discoverers and contrivers of this kind of
imaginary fiction.
4. This opinion, too, that they hold the Creator formed the world out of previously existing
matter, both Anaxagoras, Empedocles, and Plato expressed before them; as, forsooth, we learn they
also do under the inspiration of their Mother. Then again, as to the opinion that everything of
necessity passes away to those things out of which they maintain it was also formed, and that God
is the slave of this necessity, so that He cannot impart immortality to what is mortal, or bestow
incorruption on what is corruptible, but every one passes into a substance similar in nature to itself,
both those who are named Stoics from the portico (!"#$), and indeed all that are ignorant of God,
poets and historians alike, make the same affirmation. Those [heretics] who hold the same [system
of] infidelity have ascribed, no doubt, their own proper region to spiritual beings,—that, namely,
which is within the Pleroma, but to animal beings the intermediate space, while to corporeal they
assign that which is material. And they assert that God Himself can do no otherwise, but that every
one of the [different kinds of substance] mentioned passes away to those things which are of the
same nature [with itself].
5. Moreover, as to their saying that the Saviour was formed out of all the Æons, by every one
of them depositing, so to speak, in Him his own special flower, they bring forward nothing new
that may not be found in the Pandora of Hesiod. For what he says respecting her, these men insinuate
concerning the Saviour, bringing Him before us as Pandoros (All-gifted), as if each of the Æons
had bestowed on Him what He possessed in the greatest perfection. Again, their opinion as to the
indifference of [eating of] meats and other actions, and as to their thinking that, from the nobility
of their nature, they can in no degree at all contract pollution, whatever they eat or perform, they
have derived it from the Cynics, since they do in fact belong to the same society as do these
[philosophers]. They also strive to transfer to [the treatment of matters of] faith that hairsplitting
and subtle mode of handling questions which is, in fact, a copying of Aristotle.
6. Again, as to the desire they exhibit to refer this whole universe to numbers, they have learned
it from the Pythagoreans. For these were the first who set forth numbers as the initial principle of
all things, and [described] that initial principle of theirs as being both equal and unequal, out of
Plato supposed to have existed for ever in the divine mind.
the heathen, explains the hold it seems to have gained among nominal converts to Christianity, and also the necessity for a
painstaking refutation of what seem to us mere absurdities. The great merit of Irenæus is thus illustrated: he gave the death-blow
to heathenism in extirpating heresy.]