1 Corinthians 10:21
"You cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of demons: ye cannot
partake of the Lord's table, and of the table of demons."
And he contents himself with the mere terms, for the purpose of keeping
them away. Then, speaking also to their sense of shame,

1 Corinthians 10:22
"Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than He?" i.e., "Are
we tempting Him, whether He is able to punish us, and irritating Him by going
over to the adversaries and taking our stand with His enemies?" And this he
said, reminding them of an ancient history and of their fathers' transgression.
Wherefore also he makes use of this expression, which Moses likewise of old
used against the Jews, accusing them of idolatry in the person of God. "For
they," says He, "moved Me to jealousy with that which is not God; they provoked
Me to anger with their idols." [Deuteronomy 32:21]
"Are we stronger than He?" Do you see how terribly, how awfully he
rebukes them, thoroughly shaking their very nerves, and by his way of reducing
them to an absurdity, touching them to the quick and bringing down their pride?
"Well, but why," some one will say, "did he not set down these things at first,
which would be most effectual to withdraw them?" Because it is his custom to
prove his point by many particulars, and to place the strongest last, and to prevail
by proving more than was necessary. On this account then, he began from the
lesser topics, and so made his way to that which is the sum of all evils: since thus
that last point also became more easily admitted, their mind having been
smoothed down by the things said before.

1 Corinthians 10:23-24
"All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: all things are
lawful for me, but all things edify not. Let no man seek his own, but each his
neighbor's good."
Do you see his exact wisdom? Because it was likely that they might say, "I
am perfect and master of myself, and it does me no harm to partake of what is
set before me;" "Even so," says he, "perfect you are and master of yourself; do
not however look to this, but whether the result involve not injury, nay
subversion." For both these he mentioned, saying, "All things are not expedient,
all things edify not;" and using the former with reference to one's self, the latter,
to one's brother: since the clause, "are not expedient," is a covert intimation of
the ruin of the person to whom he speaks; but the clause, "edify not," of the
stumbling block to the brother.
Wherefore also he adds, "Let no man seek his own;" which he every where
through the whole Epistle insists upon and in that to the Romans; when he says,
"For even Christ pleased not Himself:" [Romans 15:3] and again, "Even as I
please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit." [1 Corinthians 10:33]
And again in this place; he does not, however, fully work it out here. That is,
since in what had gone before he had established it at length, and shown that he
no where "seeks his own," but both "to the Jews became as a Jew and to them
that are without law as without law," and used not his own "liberty" and "right"
at random, but to the profit of all, serving all; he here broke off, content with a
few words, by these few guiding them to the remembrance of all which had been
said.
7. These things therefore knowing, let us also, beloved, consult for the good
of the brethren and preserve unity with them. For to this that fearful and
tremendous sacrifice leads us, warning us above all things to approach it with