Reply to Objection 1: God is above all things by the excellence of His
nature; nevertheless, He is in all things as the cause of the being of
all things; as was shown above in this article.
Reply to Objection 2: Although corporeal things are said to be in
another as in that which contains them, nevertheless, spiritual things
contain those things in which they are; as the soul contains the
body. Hence also God is in things containing them; nevertheless, by
a certain similitude to corporeal things, it is said that all things are in
God; inasmuch as they are contained by Him.
Reply to Objection 3: No action of an agent, however powerful it may
be, acts at a distance, except through a medium. But it belongs to
the great power of God that He acts immediately in all things. Hence
nothing is distant from Him, as if it could be without God in itself. But
things are said to be distant from God by the unlikeness to Him in
nature or grace; as also He is above all by the excellence of His own
nature.
Reply to Objection 4: In the demons there is their nature which is
from God, and also the deformity of sin which is not from Him;
therefore, it is not to be absolutely conceded that God is in the
demons, except with the addition, "inasmuch as they are beings."
But in things not deformed in their nature, we must say absolutely
that God is.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether God is everywhere?

Objection 1: It seems that God is not everywhere. For to be
everywhere means to be in every place. But to be in every place does
not belong to God, to Whom it does not belong to be in place at all;
for "incorporeal things," as Boethius says (De Hebdom.), "are not in
a place." Therefore God is not everywhere.
Objection 2: Further, the relation of time to succession is the same
as the relation of place to permanence. But one indivisible part of
action or movement cannot exist in different times; therefore neither
can one indivisible part in the genus of permanent things be in every
place. Now the divine being is not successive but permanent.
Therefore God is not in many places; and thus He is not everywhere.
Objection 3: Further, what is wholly in any one place is not in part
elsewhere. But if God is in any one place He is all there; for He has
no parts. No part of Him then is elsewhere; and therefore God is not
everywhere.
On the contrary, It is written, "I fill heaven and earth." (Jer. 23:24).
I answer that, Since place is a thing, to be in place can be
understood in a twofold sense; either by way of other things---i.e. as
one thing is said to be in another no matter how; and thus the
accidents of a place are in place; or by a way proper to place; and
thus things placed are in a place. Now in both these senses, in some
way God is in every place; and this is to be everywhere. First, as He
is in all things giving them being, power and operation; so He is in
every place as giving it existence and locative power. Again, things
placed are in place, inasmuch as they fill place; and God fills every
place; not, indeed, like a body, for a body is said to fill place
inasmuch as it excludes the co-presence of another body; whereas
by God being in a place, others are not thereby excluded from it;
indeed, by the very fact that He gives being to the things that fill
every place, He Himself fills every place.
Reply to Objection 1: Incorporeal things are in place not by contact
of dimensive quantity, as bodies are but by contact of power.
Reply to Objection 2: The indivisible is twofold. One is the term of