respecting the Lord God its creator, whether by devout faith, or by any
discernment whatsoever; it feared to say three essences, lest any
difference should be understood to exist in that absolute equality. Again,
it could not say that there were not three somewhats (tria quædam), for it
was because Sabellius said this that he fell into heresy. For it must be
devoutly believed, as most certainly known from the Scriptures, and must
be grasped by the mental eye with undoubting perception, that there is
both Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit; and that the Son is not the same
with the Father, nor the Holy Spirit the same with the Father or the Son.
It sought then what three it should call them, and answered substances or
persons; by which names it did not intend diversity to be meant, but
singleness to be denied: that not only unity might be understood therein
from the being called one essence, but also Trinity from the being called
three substances or persons. For if it is the same thing with God to be
(esse) as to subsist (subsistere), they were not to be called three
substances, in such sense as they are not called three essences; just as,
because it is the same thing with God to be as to be wise, as we do not say
three essences, so neither three wisdoms. For so, because it is the same
thing to Him to be God as to be, it is not right to say three essences, as it
is not right to say three Gods. But if it is one thing to God to be, another
to subsist, as it is one thing to God to be, another to be the Father or the
Lord (for that which He is, is spoken in respect to Himself, but He is
called Father in relation to the Son, and Lord in relation to the creature
which serves Him); therefore He subsists relatively, as He begets
relatively, and bears rule relatively: so then substance will be no longer
substance, because it will be relative. For as from being, He is called
essence, so from subsisting, we speak of substance. But it is absurd that
substance should be spoken relatively, for everything subsists in respect
to itself; how much more God?

### CHAP. 5.—IN GOD, SUBSTANCE IS SPOKEN IMPROPERLY, ESSENCE PROPERLY.

10. If, however, it is fitting that God should be said to subsist—(For this
word is rightly applied to those things, in which as subjects those things
are, which are said to be in a subject, as color or shape in body. For body
subsists, and so is substance; but those things are in the body, which

subsists and is their subject, and they are not substances, but are in a
substance: and so, if either that color or that shape ceases to be, it does
not deprive the body of being a body, because it is not of the being of
body, that it should retain this or that shape or color; therefore neither
changeable nor simple things are properly called substances.)—If, I say,
God subsists so that He can be properly called a substance, then there is
something in Him as it were in a subject, and He is not simple, i.e. such
that to Him to be is the same as is anything else that is said concerning
Him in respect to Himself; as, for instance, great, omnipotent, good, and
whatever of this kind is not unfitly said of God. But it is an impiety to say
that God subsists, and is a subject in relation to His own goodness, and
that this goodness is not a substance or rather essence, and that God
Himself is not His own goodness, but that it is in Him as in a subject. And
hence it is clear that God is improperly called substance, in order that He
may be understood to be, by the more usual name essence, which He is
truly and properly called; so that perhaps it is right that God alone should
be called essence. For He is truly alone, because He is unchangeable; and
declared this to be His own name to His servant Moses, when He says, "I
am that I am;" and, "Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: He
who is hath sent me unto you." However, whether He be called essence,
which He is properly called, or substance, which He is called improperly,
He is called both in respect to Himself, not relatively to anything; whence
to God to be is the same thing as to subsist; and so the Trinity, if one
essence, is also one substance. Perhaps therefore they are more
conveniently called three persons than three substances.