did." She was not ashamed to say that He "told me all that ever I did." Yet she
might have spoken otherwise, "Come, see one that prophesies"; but when the
soul is inflamed with holy fire, it looks then to nothing earthly, neither to glory
nor to shame, but belongs to one thing alone, the flame which occupies it.
"Is not this the Christ?" Observe again here the great wisdom of the
woman; she neither declared the fact plainly, nor was she silent, for she desired
not to bring them in by her own assertion, but to make them to share in this
opinion by hearing Him; which rendered her words more readily acceptable to
them. Yet He had not told all her life to her, only from what had been said she
was persuaded (that He was informed) as to the rest. Nor did she say, "Come,
believe," but, "Come, see"; a gentler expression than the other, and one which
more attracted them. Do you see the wisdom of the woman? She knew, she knew
certainly that having but tasted that Well, they would be affected in the same
manner as herself. Yet any one of the grosser sort would have concealed the
reproof which Jesus had given; but she parades her own life, and brings it
forward before all men, so as to attract and capture all.

John 4:31
"In the mean time His disciples asked Him, saying, Master, eat. . ."
"Asked," here is "besought," in their native language; for seeing Him
wearied with the journey, and the oppressive heat, they entreated Him; for their
request concerning food proceeded not from hastiness, but from loving affection
for their Teacher? What then says Christ?

John 4:32-33
"I have meat to eat that you know not of. Therefore, said the disciples one to
another, Hath any man brought Him anything to eat?"
Why now do you wonder that the woman when she heard of "water," still
imagined mere water to be meant, when even the disciples are in the same case,
and as yet suppose nothing spiritual, but are perplexed? Though they still show
their accustomed modesty and reverence toward their Master, conversing one
with the other, but not daring to put any question to Him. And this they do in
other places, desiring to ask Him, but not asking. What then says Christ?

John 4:34
"My meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me, and to finish His work."
He here calls the salvation of men "meat," showing what an earnest desire
He has of providing for us; for as we long for food, so He that we may be saved.
And hear how in all places He reveals not all off-hand, but first throwes the
hearer into perplexity, in order that having begun to seek the meaning of what
has been said, and then being perplexed and in difficulty, he may when what he
sought appears, receive it the more readily, and be made more attentive to
listening. For wherefore said He not at once, "My meat is to do the will of My
Father?" (though not even this would have been clear, yet clearer than the other.)
But what says He? "I have meat to eat that you know not of"; for He desires, as I
said, first to make them more attentive through their uncertainty, and by dark
sayings like these to accustom them to listen to His words. But what is "the will
of the Father"? He next speaks of this, and explains.