the trinity of the divine persons by its proper attributes, such as
paternity, filiation, and procession, according to the Apostle's words,
"We speak the wisdom of God which none of the princes of the
world"---i.e. the philosophers---"knew" (1 Cor. 2:6). Nevertheless,
they knew some of the essential attributes appropriated to the
persons, as power to the Father, wisdom to the Son, goodness to the
Holy Ghost; as will later on appear. So, when Aristotle said, "By this
number," etc., we must not take it as if he affirmed a threefold
number in God, but that he wished to say that the ancients used the
threefold number in their sacrifices and prayers on account of some
perfection residing in the number three. In the Platonic books also
we find, "In the beginning was the word," not as meaning the Person
begotten in God, but as meaning the ideal type whereby God made
all things, and which is appropriated to the Son. And although they
knew these were appropriated to the three persons, yet they are said
to have failed in the third sign---that is, in the knowledge of the third
person, because they deviated from the goodness appropriated to
the Holy Ghost, in that knowing God "they did not glorify Him as
God" (Rm. 1); or, because the Platonists asserted the existence of
one Primal Being whom they also declared to be the father of the
universe, they consequently maintained the existence of another
substance beneath him, which they called "mind" or the "paternal
intellect," containing the idea of all things, as Macrobius relates
(Som. Scip. iv). They did not, however, assert the existence of a third
separate substance which might correspond to the Holy Ghost. So
also we do not assert that the Father and the Son differ in substance,
which was the error of Origen and Arius, who in this followed the
Platonists. When Trismegistus says, "Monad begot monad," etc.,
this does not refer to the generation of the Son, or to the procession
of the Holy Ghost, but to the production of the world. For one God
produced one world by reason of His love for Himself.
Reply to Objection 2: Reason may be employed in two ways to
establish a point: firstly, for the purpose of furnishing sufficient
proof of some principle, as in natural science, where sufficient proof
can be brought to show that the movement of the heavens is always
of uniform velocity. Reason is employed in another way, not as
furnishing a sufficient proof of a principle, but as confirming an
already established principle, by showing the congruity of its results,
as in astrology the theory of eccentrics and epicycles is considered
as established, because thereby the sensible appearances of the
heavenly movements can be explained; not, however, as if this proof
were sufficient, forasmuch as some other theory might explain them.