accomplished, but the less that the Only-Begotten did? Surely not. For it was
God that was the principal doer of that also, in that He gave us the law of nature,
and added the written one to it. Again, there were no use of the greater, if the
lesser had not been supplied. For what good is it to know what things ought to be
done, if a man does not follow it out? None, for it were but a greater
condemnation. And so He that has saved the soul it is, Who has made the flesh
also easy to bridle. For to teach is easy, but to show besides a way in which these
things were easily done, this is the marvel. Now it was for this that the OnlyBegotten came, and did not depart before He had set us free from this difficulty.
But what is greater, is the method of the victory; for He took none other flesh,
but this very one which was beset with troubles. So it is as if any one were to see
in the street a vile woman of the baser sort being beaten, and were to say he was
her son, when he was the king's, and so to get her free from those who ill treated
her. And this He really did, in that He confessed that He was the Son of Man,
and stood by it (i.e. the flesh), and condemned the sin. However, He did not
endure to smite it besides; or rather, He smote it with the blow of His death, but
in this very act it was not the smitten flesh which was condemned and perished,
but the sin which had been smiting. And this is the greatest possible marvel. For
if it were not in the flesh that the victory took place, it would not be so
astonishing, since this the Law also wrought. But the wonder is, that it was with
the flesh ([μετὰ σαρκὸς]) that His trophy was raised, and that what had been
overthrown numberless times by sin, did itself get a glorious victory over it. For
behold what strange things there were that took place! One was, that sin did not
conquer the flesh; another, that sin was conquered, and conquered by it too. For
it is not the same thing not to get conquered, and to conquer that which was
continually overthrowing us. A third is, that it not only conquered it, but even
chastised it. For by not sinning it kept from being conquered, but by dying also,
He overcame and condemned it, having made the flesh, that before was so
readily made a mock of by it, a plain object of fear to it. In this way then, He at
once unnerved its power, and abolished the death by it introduced. For so long as

it took hold of sinners, it with justice kept pressing to its end. But after finding a
sinless body, when it had given it up to death, it was condemned as having acted
unjustly. Do you observe, how many proofs of victory there are? The flesh not
being conquered by sin, Its even conquering and condemning it, Its not
condemning it barely, but condemning it as having sinned. For after having
convicted it of injustice, he proceeds to condemn it, and that not by power and
might barely, but even by the rules of justice. For this is what he means by
saying, "for sin condemned sin in the flesh." As if he had said that he had
convicted it of great sin, and then condemned it. So you see it is sin that gets
condemned everywhere, and not the flesh, for this is even crowned with honor,
and has to give sentence against the other. But if he does say that it was "in the
likeness" of flesh that he sent the Son, do not therefore suppose that His flesh
was of a different kind. For as he called it "sinful," this was why he put the word
"likeness." For sinful flesh it was not that Christ had, but like indeed to our sinful
flesh, yet sinless, and in nature the same with us. And so even from this it is
plain that by nature the flesh was not evil. For it was not by taking a different
one instead of the former, nor by changing this same one in substance, that
Christ caused it to regain the victory: but He let it abide in its own nature, and
yet made it bind on the crown of victory over sin, and then after the victory
raised it up, and made it immortal. What then, it may be said, is this to me,
whether it was this flesh that these things happened in? Nay, it concerns you very
much. Wherefore also he proceeds:
Ver. 4. "That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk
not after the flesh."
What means this word, righteousness? Why, the end, the scope, the welldoing. For what was its design, and what did it enjoin? To be without sin. This
then is made good to us ([κατώρθωται ἡμἵν]) now through Christ. And the
making a stand against it, and the getting the better of it, came from Him. But it
is for us to enjoy the victory. Then shall we never sin henceforth? We never shall
unless we have become exceedingly relaxed and supine. And this is why he