SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.2.

necessary for him to live in keeping with his condition of life.
Wherefore it will be a sin for him to exceed this measure, by wishing
to acquire or keep them immoderately. This is what is meant by
covetousness, which is defined as "immoderate love of possessing."
It is therefore evident that covetousness is a sin.
Reply to Objection 1: It is natural to man to desire external things as
means to an end: wherefore this desire is devoid of sin, in so far as it
is held in check by the rule taken from the nature of the end. But
covetousness exceeds this rule, and therefore is a sin.
Reply to Objection 2: Covetousness may signify immoderation about
external things in two ways. First, so as to regard immediately the
acquisition and keeping of such things, when, to wit, a man acquires
or keeps them more than is due. In this way it is a sin directly against
one's neighbor, since one man cannot over-abound in external
riches, without another man lacking them, for temporal goods
cannot be possessed by many at the same time. Secondly, it may
signify immoderation in the internal affection which a man has for
riches when, for instance, a man loves them, desires them, or
delights in them, immoderately. In this way by covetousness a man
sins against himself, because it causes disorder in his affections,
though not in his body as do the sins of the flesh.
As a consequence, however, it is a sin against God, just as all mortal
sins, inasmuch as man contemns things eternal for the sake of
temporal things.
Reply to Objection 3: Natural inclinations should be regulated
according to reason, which is the governing power in human nature.
Hence though old people seek more greedily the aid of external
things, just as everyone that is in need seeks to have his need
supplied, they are not excused from sin if they exceed this due
measure of reason with regard to riches.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether covetousness is a special sin?

Objection 1: It seems that covetousness is not a special sin. For
Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. iii): "Covetousness, which in Greek is
called philargyria, applies not only to silver or money, but also to
anything that is desired immoderately." Now in every sin there is
immoderate desire of something, because sin consists in turning
away from the immutable good, and adhering to mutable goods, as
state above (FS, Question 71, Article 6, Objection 3). Therefore
covetousness is a general sin.
Objection 2: Further, according to Isidore (Etym. x), "the covetous
[avarus] man" is so called because he is "greedy for brass [avidus
aeris]," i.e. money: wherefore in Greek covetousness is called
philargyria, i.e. "love of silver." Now silver, which stands for money,
signifies all external goods the value of which can be measured by
money, as stated above (Question 117, Article 2, ad 2). Therefore
covetousness is a desire for any external thing: and consequently
seems to be a general sin.
Objection 3: Further, a gloss on Rm. 7:7, "For I had not known
concupiscence," says: "The law is good, since by forbidding
concupiscence, it forbids all evil." Now the law seems to forbid
especially the concupiscence of covetousness: hence it is written
(Ex. 20:17): "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods." Therefore
the concupiscence of covetousness is all evil, and so covetousness
is a general sin.
On the contrary, Covetousness is numbered together with other
special sins (Rm. 1:29), where it is written: "Being filled with all
iniquity, malice, fornication, covetousness", etc.
I answer that, Sins take their species from their objects, as stated
above (FS, Question 72, Article 1). Now the object of a sin is the
good towards which an inordinate appetite tends. Hence where there
is a special aspect of good inordinately desired, there is a special
kind of sin. Now the useful good differs in aspect from the delightful
good. And riches, as such, come under the head of useful good,
since they are desired under the aspect of being useful to man.
Consequently covetousness is a special sin, forasmuch as it is an
immoderate love of having possessions, which are comprised under