former things? What recompense did he repay? None, but from mere goodness.
For they were a gift, not a recompense; a grace, not a reward. Well then, let us
bear these also nobly."
This discourse let us, both men and women, have recorded, and let us
engrave the words in our minds, both these and those before them: and by
sketching upon our minds as in picture the history of their sufferings, I mean the
loss of wealth, the bereavement of children, the disease of body, the reproaches,
the mockings, the devices of his wife, the snare of the devil, in a word, all the
calamities of that righteous man, and that with exactness, let us provide
ourselves with a most ample port of refuge: that, enduring all things nobly and
thankfully, we may both in the present life cast off all despondency, and receive
the rewards that belong to this good way of taking things; by the grace and
mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost,
be glory, power, and honor, now and forever, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 29 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 12:1-2
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant.
You know that when you were Gentiles, you were led away unto those dumb
idols, howsoever ye might be led.
This whole place is very obscure: but the obscurity is produced by our
ignorance of the facts referred to and by their cessation, being such as then used
to occur but now no longer take place. And why do they not happen now? Why
look now, the cause too of the obscurity has produced us again another question:
namely, why did they then happen, and now do so no more?
This however let us defer to another time, but for the present let us state
what things were occurring then. Well: what did happen then? Whoever was
baptized he straightway spoke with tongues and not with tongues only, but many
also prophesied, and some also performed many other wonderful works. For
since on their coming over from idols, without any clear knowledge or training
in the ancient Scriptures, they at once on their baptism received the Spirit, yet
the Spirit they saw not, for It is invisible; therefore God's grace bestowed some
sensible proof of that energy. And one straightway spoke in the Persian, another
in the Roman, another in the Indian, another in some other such tongue: and this
made manifest to them that were without that it is the Spirit in the very person
speaking. Wherefore also he so calls it, saying, "But to each one the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal;" [1 Corinthians 12:7] calling
the gifts "a manifestation of the Spirit." For as the Apostles themselves had
received this sign first, so also the faithful went on receiving it, I mean, the gift
of tongues; yet not this only but also many others: inasmuch as many used even
to raise the dead and to cast out devils and to perform many other such wonders: