far as they could, if they could, the Trinity which is God, in our own
memory, understanding, will. Which three things, if any one intelligently
regards as by nature divinely appointed in his own mind, and remembers
by memory, contemplates by understanding, embraces by love, how great
a thing that is in the mind, whereby even the eternal and unchangeable
nature can be recollected, beheld, desired, doubtless that man finds an
image of that highest Trinity. And he Ought to refer the whole of his life
to the remembering, seeing, loving that highest Trinity, in order that he
may recollect, contemplate, be delighted by it. But I have warned him, so
far as seemed sufficient, that he must not so compare this image thus
wrought by that Trinity, and by his own fault changed for the worse, to
that same Trinity as to think it in all points like to it, but rather that he
should discern in that likeness, of whatever sort it be, a great unlikeness
also.

### CHAP. 21.—OF THE LIKENESS OF THE FATHER AND OF THE SON ALLEGED TO BE IN OUR MEMORY AND UNDERSTANDING. OF THE LIKENESS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN OUR WILL OR LOVE

40. I have undoubtedly taken pains so far as I could, not indeed so that
the thing might be seen face to face, but that it might be seen by this
likeness in an enigma, in how small a degree soever, by conjecture, in our
memory and understanding, to intimate God the Father and God the Son:
i.e. God the begetter, who has in some way spoken by His own co-eternal
Word all things that He has in His substance; and God His Word Himself,
who Himself has nothing either more or less in substance than is in Him,
who, not lyingly but truly, hath begotten the Word; and I have assigned to
memory everything that we know, even if we were not thinking of it, but
to understanding the formation after a certain special mode of the
thought. For we are usually said to understand what, by thinking of it, we
have found to be true; and this it is again that we leave in the memory.
But that is a still more hidden depth of our memory, wherein we found
this also first when we thought of it, and wherein an inner word is
begotten such as belongs to no tongue,—as it were, knowledge of
knowledge, vision of vision, and understanding which appears in
thought; of understanding which had indeed existed before in
the memory, but was latent there, although, unless the thought itself had

also some sort of memory of its own, it would not return to those things
which it had left in the memory while it turned to think of other things.
41. But I have shown nothing in this enigma respecting the Holy Spirit
such as might appear to be like Him, except our own will, or love, or
affection, which is a stronger will, since our will which we have naturally
is variously affected, according as various objects are adjacent or occur to
it, by which we are attracted or offended. What, then, is this? Are we to
say that our will, when it is right, knows not what to desire, what to
avoid? Further, if it knows, doubtless then it has a kind of knowledge of
its own, such as cannot be without memory and understanding. Or are we
to listen to any one who should say that love knows not what it does,
which does not do wrongly? As, then, there are both understanding and
love in that primary memory wherein we find provided and stored up that
to which we can come in thought, because we find also those two things
there, when we find by thinking that we both understand and love
anything; which things were there too when we were not thinking of
them: and as there are memory and love in that understanding, which is
formed by thought, which true word we say inwardly without the tongue
of any nation when we say what we know; for the gaze of our thought
does not return to anything except by remembering it, and does not care
to return unless by loving it: so love, which combines the vision brought
about in the memory, and the vision of the thought formed thereby, as if
parent and offspring, would not know what to love rightly unless it had a
knowledge of what it desired, which it cannot have without memory and
understanding.