John i. 6.

the glad tidings of his birth: [that God] who also had promised by the prophets that He would send
His messenger before the face of His Son, who should prepare His way, that is, that he should
bear witness of that Light in the spirit and power of Elias. But, again, of what God was Elias the
servant and the prophet? Of Him who made heaven and earth, as he does himself confess. John,
therefore, having been sent by the founder and maker of this world, how could he testify of that
Light, which came down from things unspeakable and invisible? For all the heretics have decided
that the Demiurge was ignorant of that Power above him, whose witness and herald John is found
to be. Wherefore the Lord said that He deemed him "more than a prophet." For all the other
prophets preached the advent of the paternal Light, and desired to be worthy of seeing Him whom
they preached; but John did both announce [the advent] beforehand, in a like manner as did the
others, and actually saw Him when He came, and pointed Him out, and persuaded many to believe
on Him, so that he did himself hold the place of both prophet and apostle. For this is to be more
than a prophet, because, "first apostles, secondarily prophets;" but all things from one and the
same God Himself.
5. That wine, which was produced by God in a vineyard, and which was first consumed, was
good. None of those who drank of it found fault with it; and the Lord partook of it also. But that
wine was better which the Word made from water, on the moment, and simply for the use of those
who had been called to the marriage. For although the Lord had the power to supply wine to those
feasting, independently of any created substance, and to fill with food those who were hungry, He
did not adopt this course; but, taking the loaves which the earth had produced, and giving thanks,
and on the other occasion making water wine, He satisfied those who were reclining [at table], and
gave drink to those who had been invited to the marriage; showing that the God who made the
earth, and commanded it to bring forth fruit, who established the waters, and brought forth the
fountains, was He who in these last times bestowed upon mankind, by His Son, the blessing of
food and the favour of drink: the Incomprehensible [acting thus] by means of the comprehensible,
and the Invisible by the visible; since there is none beyond Him, but He exists in the bosom of the
Father.

Matt. xi. 9; Luke vii. 26.

The transition here is so abrupt, that some critics suspect the loss of part of the text before these words.

6. For "no man," he says, "hath seen God at any time," unless "the only-begotten Son of God,
which is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared [Him]." For He, the Son who is in His
bosom, declares to all the Father who is invisible. Wherefore they know Him to whom the Son
reveals Him; and again, the Father, by means of the Son, gives knowledge of His Son to those who
love Him. By whom also Nathanael, being taught, recognised [Him], he to whom also the Lord
bare witness, that he was "an Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile." The Israelite recognised
his King, therefore did he cry out to Him, "Rabbi, Thou art the Son of God, Thou art the King of
Israel." By whom also Peter, having been taught, recognised Christ as the Son of the living God,
when [God] said, "Behold My dearly beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: I will put my Spirit
upon Him, and He shall show judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall
any man hear His voice in the streets. A bruised reed shall He not break, and smoking flax shall
He not quench, until He send forth judgment into contention; and in His name shall the Gentiles
trust."
7. Such, then, are the first principles of the Gospel: that there is one God, the Maker of this
universe; He who was also announced by the prophets, and who by Moses set forth the dispensation
of the law,—[principles] which proclaim the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and ignore any other
God or Father except Him. So firm is the ground upon which these Gospels rest, that the very
heretics themselves bear witness to them, and, starting from these [documents], each one of them
endeavours to establish his own peculiar doctrine. For the Ebionites, who use Matthew's Gospel
only, are confuted out of this very same, making false suppositions with regard to the Lord. But
Marcion, mutilating that according to Luke, is proved to be a blasphemer of the only existing God,
from those [passages] which he still retains. Those, again, who separate Jesus from Christ, alleging
that Christ remained impassible, but that it was Jesus who suffered, preferring the Gospel by Mark,
if they read it with a love of truth, may have their errors rectified. Those, moreover, who follow
Valentinus, making copious use of that according to John, to illustrate their conjunctions, shall be
proved to be totally in error by means of this very Gospel, as I have shown in the first book. Since,
then, our opponents do bear testimony to us, and make use of these [documents], our proof derived
from them is firm and true.
8. It is not possible that the Gospels can be either more or fewer in number than they are. For,
since there are four zones of the world in which we live, and four principal winds, while the