instances, that I may give one explanation of all. And what is that explanation?
Christ did not say, "Mine hour is not yet come," as being subject to the necessity
of seasons, or the observance of an "hour"; how can He be so, who is Maker of
seasons, and Creator of the times and the ages? To what else then did He allude?
He desires to show this; that He works all things at their convenient season, not
doing all at once; because a kind of confusion and disorder would have ensued,
if, instead of working all at their proper seasons, He had mixed all together, His
Birth, His Resurrection, and His coming to Judgment. Observe this; creation was
to be, yet not all at once; man and woman were to be created, yet not even these
together; mankind were to be condemned to death, and there was to be a
resurrection, yet the interval between the two was to be great; the law was to be
given, but not grace with it, each was to be dispensed at its proper time. Now
Christ was not subject to the necessity of seasons, but rather settled their order,
since He is their Creator; and therefore He says in this place, "Mine hour is not
yet come." And His meaning is, that as yet He was not manifest to the many, nor
had He even His whole company of disciples; Andrew followed Him, and next
to him Philip, but no one else. And moreover, none of these, not even His mother
nor His brethren, knew Him as they ought; for after His many miracles, the
Evangelist says of His brethren, "For neither did His brethren believe in Him."
[John 7:5] And those at the wedding did not know Him either, for in their need
they would certainly have come to and entreated Him. Therefore He says, "Mine
hour is not yet come"; that is, "I am not yet known to the company, nor are they
even aware that the wine has failed; let them first be sensible of this. I ought not
to have been told it from you; you are My mother, and renderest the miracle
suspicious. They who wanted the wine should have come and besought Me, not
that I need this, but that they might with an entire assent accept the miracle. For
one who knows that he is in need, is very grateful when he obtains assistance;
but one who has not a sense of his need, will never have a plain and clear sense
of the benefit."
Why then after He had said, "Mine hour is not yet come," and given her a

denial, did He what His mother desired? Chiefly it was, that they who opposed
Him, and thought that He was subject to the "hour," might have sufficient proof
that He was subject to no hour; for had He been so, how could He, before the
proper "hour" had come, have done what He did? And in the next place, He did
it to honor His mother, that He might not seem entirely to contradict and shame
her that bare Him in the presence of so many; and also, that He might not be
thought to want power, for she brought the servants to Him.
Besides, even while saying to the Canaanitish woman, "It is not meet to
take the children's bread, and to give it unto dogs" [Matthew 15:26], He still
gave the bread, as considering her perseverance; and though after his first reply,
He said, "I am not sent save unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel," yet even
after saying this, He healed the woman's daughter. Hence we learn, that although
we be unworthy, we often by perseverance make ourselves worthy to receive.
And for this reason His mother remained by, and openly brought to Him the
servants, that the request might be made by a greater number; and therefore she
added,