us, whether a special or a general notion; and thus love also that thing
which we believe and do not yet know, from the parity of the thing which
we do know? But this certainly is not so. Or is it that, as we love in our
Lord Jesus Christ, that He rose from the dead, although we never saw any
one rise from thence, so we can believe in and love the Trinity which we
do not see, and the like of which we never have seen? But we certainly
know what it is to die, and what it is to live; because we both live, and
from time to time have seen and experienced both dead and dying
persons. And what else is it to rise again, except to live again, that is, to
return to life from death? When, therefore, we say and believe that there
is a Trinity, we know what a Trinity is, because we know what three are;
but this is not what we love. For we can easily have this whenever we will,
to pass over other things, by just holding up three fingers. Or do we
indeed love, not every trinity, but the Trinity, that is God? We love then in
the Trinity, that it is God: but we never saw or knew any other God,
because God is One; He alone whom we have not yet seen, and whom we
love by believing. But the question is, from what likeness or comparison
of known things can we believe, in order that we may love God, whom we
do not yet know?

### CHAP. 6.—HOW THE MAN NOT YET RIGHTEOUS CAN KNOW THE RIGHTEOUS MAN WHOM HE LOVES.

9. Return then with me, and let us consider why we love the apostle. Is it
at all on account of his human kind, which we know right well, in that we
believe him to have been a man? Assuredly not; for if it were so, he now is
not him whom we love, since he is no longer that man, for his soul is
separated from his body. But we believe that which we love in him to be
still living, for we love his righteous mind. From what general or special
rule then, except that we know both what a mind is, and what it is to be
righteous? And we say, indeed, not unfitly, that we therefore know what a
mind is, because we too have a mind. For neither did we ever see it with
our eyes, and gather a special or general notion from the resemblance of
more minds than one, which we had seen; but rather, as I have said
before, because we too have it. For what is known so intimately, and so
perceives itself to be itself, as that by which also all other things are
perceived, that is, the mind itself? For we recognize the movements of

bodies also, by which we perceive that others live besides ourselves, from
the resemblance of ourselves; since we also so move our body in living as
we observe those bodies to be moved. For even when a living body is
moved, there is no way opened to our eyes to see the mind, a thing which
cannot be seen by the eyes; but we perceive something to be contained in
that bulk, such as is contained in ourselves, so as to move in like manner
our-own bulk, which is the life and the soul. Neither is this, as it were, the
property of human foresight and reason, since brute animals also
perceive that not only they themselves live, but also other brute animals
interchangeably, and the one the other, and that we ourselves do so.
Neither do they see our souls, save from the movements of the body, and
that immediately and most easily by some natural agreement. Therefore
we both know the mind of any one from our own, and believe also from
our own of him whom we do not know. For not only do we perceive that
there is a mind, but we can also know what a mind is, by reflecting upon
our own: for we have a mind. But whence do we know what a righteous
man is? For we said above that we love the apostle for no other reason
except that he is a righteous mind. We know, then, what a righteous man
also is, just as we know what a mind is. But what a mind is, as has been
said, we know from ourselves, for there is a mind in us. But whence do we
know what a righteous man is, if we are not righteous? But if no one but
he who is righteous knows what is a righteous man, no one but a
righteous man loves a righteous man; for one cannot love him whom one
believes to be righteous, for this very reason that one does believe him to
be righteous, if one does not know what it is to be righteous; according to
that which we have shown above, that no one loves what he believes and
does not see, except by some rule of a general or special notion. And if for
this reason no one but a righteous man loves a righteous man, how will
any one wish to be a righteous man who is not yet so? For no one wishes
to be that which he does not love. But, certainly, that he who is not
righteous may be so, it is necessary that he should wish to be righteous;
and in order that he may wish to be righteous, he loves the righteous
man. Therefore, even he who is not yet righteous, loves the righteous
man. But he cannot love the righteous man, who is ignorant what a
righteous man is. Accordingly, even he who is not yet righteous, knows
what a righteous man is. Whence then does he know this? Does he see it
with his eyes? Is any corporeal thing righteous, as it is white, or black, or