Timothy 6:9] Seek not therefore in your wife abundance of wealth, and you shall
find everything else go well. Who, tell me, would overlook the most important
things, to attend to those which are less so? And yet, alas! This is in every case
our feeling. Yes, if we have a son, we concern ourselves not how he may be
made virtuous, but how we may get him a rich wife; not how he may be wellmannered, but well-monied: if we follow a business, we enquire not how it may
be clear of sin, but how it may bring us in most profit. And everything has
become money; and thus is everything corrupted and ruined, because that
passion possesses us.
Ver. 28. "Even so ought husbands to love their own wives," says he, "as
their own bodies."
What, again, means this? To how much greater a similitude, and stronger
example has he come; and not only so, but also to one how much nearer and
clearer, and to a fresh obligation. For that other one was of no very constraining
force, for He was Christ, and was God, and gave Himself. He now manages his
argument on a different ground, saying, "so ought men"; because the thing is not
a favor, but a debt. Then, "as their own bodies." And why?
Ver. 29. "For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes
it."
That is, tends it with exceeding care. And how is she his flesh? Hearken;
"This now is bone of my bones," says Adam, "and flesh of my flesh." [Genesis
2:23] For she is made of matter taken from us. And not only so, but also, "they
shall be," says God, "one flesh." [Genesis 2:24]
"Even as Christ also the Church." Here he returns to the former example.
Ver. 30. "Because we are members of His body, of His flesh and of His
bones."
Ver. 31. "For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall
cleave to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh."
Behold again a third ground of obligation; for he shows that a man leaving
them that begot him, and from whom he was born, is knit to his wife; and that

then the one flesh is, father, and mother, and the child, from the substance of the
two commingled. For indeed by the commingling of their seeds is the child
produced, so that the three are one flesh. Thus then are we in relation to Christ;
we become one flesh by participation, and we much more than the child. And
why and how so? Because so it has been from the beginning.
Tell me not that such and such things are so. Do you see not that we have in
our own flesh itself many defects? For one man, for instance, is lame, another
has his feet distorted, another his hands withered, another some other member
weak; and yet nevertheless he does not grieve at it, nor cut it off, but oftentimes
prefers it even to the other. Naturally enough; for it is part of himself. As great
love as each entertains towards himself, so great he would have us entertain
towards a wife. Not because we partake of the same nature; no, this ground of
duty towards a wife is far greater than that; it is that there are not two bodies but
one; he the head, she the body. And how says he elsewhere "and the Head of
Christ is God"? [1 Corinthians 11:3] This I too say, that as we are one body, so
also are Christ and the Father One. And thus then is the Father also found to be
our Head. He sets down two examples, that of the natural body and that of
Christ's body. And hence he further adds,
Ver. 32. "This is great mystery: but I speak in regard of Christ and of the
Church."
Why does he call it a great mystery? That it was something great and
wonderful, the blessed Moses, or rather God, intimated. For the present,
however, says he, I speak regarding Christ, that having left the Father, He came
down, and came to the Bride, and became one Spirit. "For he that is joined unto
the Lord is one Spirit." [1 Corinthians 6:17] And well says he, "it is a great
mystery." And then as though he were saying, "But still nevertheless the allegory
does not destroy affection," he adds,
Ver. 33. "Nevertheless do ye also severally love each one his own wife even
as himself; and let the wife see that she fear her husband."
For indeed, in very deed, a mystery it is, yea, a great mystery, that a man