with each other, by mutually giving what they have, (and this is communication,)
so too is it here. For there is not anything more profitable than this trade and
traffic. It is performed on the earth, but is completed in heaven. They who buy
are on the earth, but they buy and agree about heavenly things, while they lay
down an earthly price.
But despond not; heavenly things are not to be bought with money, riches
cannot purchase these things, but the purpose of him who gives the money, his
true wisdom, his superiority to earthly things, his love toward man, his
mercifulness. For if money could purchase it, she who threw in the two mites
would have gained nothing great. But since it was not the money, but the
purpose that availed, she received everything, who exhibited a full purpose of
mind. Let us not then say, that the Kingdom can be bought with money; it is not
by money, but by purpose of mind which is exhibited by the money. Therefore,
will one answer, there is no need of money? There is no need of money, but of
the disposition; if you have this, you will be able even by two mites to purchase
Heaven; where this is not, not even ten thousand talents of gold will be able to
do that, which the two mites could. Wherefore? Because if you who hast much
throwest in but a small portion, you gave an alms indeed, but not so great as the
widow did; for thou did not throw it in with the same readiness as she. For she
deprived herself of all she had, or rather she deprived not, but gave it all as a free
gift to herself. Not for a cup of cold water has God promised the kingdom, but
for readiness of heart; not for death, but for purpose of mind. For indeed it is no
great thing. For what is it to give one life? That is giving one man; but one man
is not of worth enough.
Ver. 16. "For even in Thessalonica, you sent once and again unto my need."
Here again is great praise, that he, when dwelling in the metropolis, should
be nourished by a little city. And lest, by always withdrawing himself from the
supposition of want, he should, as I said at first, render them amiss, having
previously shown by so many proofs that he is not in want, he here does it by
one word only, by saying "needs." And he said not "my," but absolutely,—

having a care of dignity. And not this only, but what follows too, for since he
was conscious that it was a very lowly thing, he again secures it, by adding as a
correction,
Ver. 17. "Not that I seek for the gift."
As he said above, "Not that I speak in respect of want"; that is stronger than
this. For it is one thing, that he who is in want, should not seek, and another that
he who is in want should not even consider himself to be in want. "Not that I
seek for the gift," he says, "but I seek for the fruit, that increases to your
account." Not my own. Do you see, that the fruit is produced for them? This say
I for your sake, says he, not for my own, for your salvation. For I gain nothing
when I receive, but the grace belongs to the givers, for the recompense is yonder
in store for givers, but the gifts are here consumed by them who receive. Again
even his desire is combined with praise and sympathy.
When he had said, I do not seek, lest he should again render them remiss,
he adds,
Ver. 18. "But I have all things and abound," i.e. through this gift you have
filled up what was wanting, which would make them more eager. For
benefactors, the wiser they are, the more do they seek gratitude from the
benefited. That is, you have not only filled up what was deficient in former time,
but you have gone beyond. For lest by these words he should seem to accuse
them, see how he seals up all. After he had said, "Not that I seek for the gift,"
and "Now at length"; and had shown that their deed was a debt, for this is meant
by, "I have all," then again he shows, that they had acted above what was due,
and says, "I have all things and abound, I am filled." I say not this at hazard, or
only from the feeling of my mind, but why? "Having received of Epaphroditus
the things that came from you, an odor of a sweet smell; a sacrifice acceptable,
well pleasing to God." Lo, whither he has raised their gift; not I, he says,
received, but God through me. Wherefore though I be not in need, regard it not,
for God had no need, and He received at their hands in such sort, that the Holy
Scriptures shrunk not from saying, "God smelled a sweet savor" [Genesis 8:21],