And what goes before also establishes this interpretation. For he does not
merely say, "Behold, the Virgin shall be with child," but having first said,
"Behold, the Lord Himself shall give you a sign," then he subjoins, "Behold, the
Virgin shall be with child." [Isaiah 7:14] Whereas, if she that was to give birth
was not a virgin, but this happened in the way of marriage, what sort of sign
would the event be? For that which is a sign must of course be beyond the course
of common events, it must be strange and extraordinary; else how could it be a
sign?
5. "Then Joseph, being raised from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had
bidden him." Do you see obedience, and a submissive mind? Do you see a soul
truly wakened, and in all things incorruptible? For neither when he suspected
something painful or amiss could he endure to keep the Virgin with him; nor yet,
after he was freed from this suspicion, could he bear to cast her out, but he rather
keeps her with him, and ministers to the whole Dispensation.
"And took unto him Mary his wife." Do you see how continually the
evangelist uses this word, not willing that that mystery should be disclosed as
yet, and annihilating that evil suspicion?
And when he had taken her, "he knew her not, till she had brought forth her
first-born Son." He has here used the word "till," not that you should suspect that
afterwards he did know her, but to inform you that before the birth the Virgin
was wholly untouched by man. But why then, it may be said, has he used the
word, "till"? Because it is usual in Scripture often to do this, and to use this
expression without reference to limited times. For so with respect to the ark
likewise, it is said, "The raven returned not till the earth was dried up."
[Genesis 8:7] And yet it did not return even after that time. And when
discoursing also of God, the Scripture says, "From age until age You are," not as
fixing limits in this case. And again when it is preaching the Gospel beforehand,
and saying, "In his days shall righteousness flourish, and abundance of peace,
till the moon be taken away," it does not set a limit to this fair part of creation.
So then here likewise, it uses the word "till," to make certain what was before

the birth, but as to what follows, it leaves you to make the inference. Thus, what
it was necessary for you to learn of Him, this He Himself has said; that the
Virgin was untouched by man until the birth; but that which both was seen to be
a consequence of the former statement, and was acknowledged, this in its turn he
leaves for you to perceive; namely, that not even after this, she having so become
a mother, and having been counted worthy of a new sort of travail, and a childbearing so strange, could that righteous man ever have endured to know her. For
if he had known her, and had kept her in the place of a wife, how is it that our
Lord [John 19:27] commits her, as unprotected, and having no one, to His
disciple, and commands him to take her to his own home?
How then, one may say, are James and the others called His brethren? In the
same kind of way as Joseph himself was supposed to be husband of Mary. For
many were the veils provided, that the birth, being such as it was, might be for a
time screened. Wherefore even John so called them, saying, "For neither did His
brethren believe in Him."
6. Nevertheless they, who did not believe at first, became afterwards
admirable, and illustrious. At least when Paul and they that were of his company
had come up to Jerusalem about decrees, they went in straightway unto James.
For he was so admired as even to be the first to be entrusted with the bishop's
office. And they say he gave himself up to such great austerity, that even his
members became all of them as dead, and that from his continual praying, and
his perpetual intercourse with the ground, his forehead became so callous as to
be in no better state than a camel's knees, simply by reason of his striking it so
against the earth. This man gives directions to Paul himself, when he was after
this come up again to Jerusalem, saying, "You see, brother, how many thousands
there are of them that have come together." So great was his understanding and
his zeal, or rather so great the power of Christ. For they that mock Him when
living, after His death are so filled with awe, as even to die for Him with
exceeding readiness. Such things most of all show the power of His resurrection.
For this, you see, was the reason of the more glorious things being kept till