John 7:40-42
"Some said, This is the Prophet. Others said, He deceives the people; others
said, Christ comes not from Galilee, but from the village of Bethlehem."
Others said, "When Christ comes, no man knows whence He is" [John
7:27]; and there was a difference of opinion, as might be expected in a confused
multitude; for not attentively did they listen to His words, nor for the sake of
learning. Wherefore He makes them no answer; yet they said, "Does Christ
come out of Galilee?" And He had praised, as being "an Israelite indeed,"
Nathanael, who had said in a more forcible and striking manner, "Can there any
good thing come out of Nazareth?" [John 1:46] But then these men, and they
who said to Nicodemus, "Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no prophet"
[John 7:52], said it not seeking to learn, but merely to overturn the opinion
concerning Christ. Nathanael said this, being a lover of the truth, and knowing
exactly all the ancient histories; but they looked only to one thing, and that was
to remove the opinion that He was the Christ, on which account He revealed
nothing to them. For they who even contradicted themselves, and said at one
time, "No man knows whence He comes," at another, "From Bethlehem," would
manifestly even if they had been informed have opposed Him. For be it that they
knew not the place of His birth, that He was from Bethlehem, because of His
dwelling in Nazareth, (yet this cannot be allowed, for He was not born there,)
were they ignorant of His race also, that He was "of the house and lineage of
David"? How then said they, "Does not Christ come of the seed of David?" [John
7:42] Because they wished to conceal even this fact by that question, saying all
that they said with malicious intent. Why did they not come to Him and say,
"Since we admire you in other respects, and you bid us believe you according to
the Scriptures, tell us how it is that the Scriptures say that Christ must come from
Bethlehem, when you have come from Galilee?" But they said nothing of the
kind, but all in malice. And to show that they spoke not enquiringly, nor as

desiring to learn, the Evangelist straightway has added, that,

John 7:44
"Some of them would have taken Him, but no man laid his hand upon Him."
This, if nothing else, might have been sufficient to cause compunction in
them, but they felt it not, as the Prophet says, "They were cleft asunder, and were
not pricked in heart." [Psalm 35:15, Septuagint]
3. Such a thing is malice! It will give way to nothing, it looks to one thing
only, and that is, to destroy the person against whom it plots. But what says the
Scripture? "Whoso digs a pit for his neighbor, shall fall into it himself."
[Proverbs 26:27] Which was the case then. For they desired to kill Him, to stop,
as they thought, His preaching; the result was the opposite. For the preaching
flourishes by the grace of Christ, while all that was theirs is quenched and
perished; they have lost their country, their freedom, their security, their worship,
they have been deprived of all their prosperity, and have become slaves and
captives.
Knowing then this, let us never plot against others, aware that by so doing
we whet the sword against ourselves, and inflict upon ourselves the deeper
wound. Hath any one grieved you, and desires thou to avenge yourself on him?
Avenge not yourself; so shall you be able to be avenged; but if you avenge
yourself, you are not avenged. Think not that this is a riddle, but a true saying.
"How, and in what way?" Because if you avenge not yourself on him, you make
God his enemy; but if you avenge yourself, no longer so. "Vengeance is Mine, I
will repay, says the Lord." [Romans 12:19] For if we have servants, and they
having quarreled with each other, do not give place to us for judgment and for
punishment, but take it upon themselves; though they come to us ten thousand
times, we not only shall not avenge them, but shall even be angry with them,
saying, "Thou runaway, you flogging-post, you ought to have submitted all to us,
but since you have prevented us and avenged yourself, trouble us no farther";
much more shall God, who has bidden us commit all unto Him, say this. For