his pride. And he neither puts the charge first, for fear of making him hardened,
as singled out for accusation before the rest; nor yet later, lest he should suppose
that what related to him was but incidental. But, having first excited great alarm
in him by his plain speaking towards others, then, and not till then, he goes on to
him, in the course of his rebuke to others giving the man's wilfulness a share
beforehand.
For these same words, viz. "I know nothing against myself, yet am I not
hereby justified," and this, "He that judges me is the Lord, who will both bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the
hearts," glance not lightly both upon that person, and upon such as act in concert
with him and despise the saints. "For what," says he, "if any outwardly appear to
be virtuous and admirable persons? He, the Judge, is not a discerner of
externals only, but also brings to light all secrets."
5. On two accounts you see, or rather on three, correct judgement belongs
not to us. One, because, though we be conscious to ourselves of nothing, still we
need one to reprove our sins with strictness. Another, because the most part of
the things which are done escape us and are concealed. And for a third besides
these, because many things which are done by others seem to us indeed fair, but
they come not of a right mind. Why do you say then, that no sin has been
committed by this or that person? That such an one is better than such another?
Seeing that this we are not to pronounce, not even concerning him who knows
nothing against himself. For He who discerns secrets, He it is who with certainty
judges. Behold, for example; I for my part know nothing against myself: yet
neither so am I justified, that is, I am not quit of accounts to be given, nor of
charges to be answered. For he does not say this, "I rank not among the
righteous;" but "I am not pure from sin." For elsewhere he says also, [Romans
6:7, δεδικαίωται, τουτεστιν ἀπήλλακται] "He that has died is justified from sin,"
that is, "is liberated."
Again, many things we do, good indeed, but not of a right mind. For so we
commend many, not from a wish to render them conspicuous, but to wound

others by means of them. And the thing done indeed is right for the well-doer is
praised; but the intention is corrupt: for it is done of a satanical purpose. For this
one has often done, not rejoicing with his brother, but desiring to wound the
other party.
Again, a man has committed a great error; some other person, wishing to
supplant him, says that he has done nothing, and comforts him forsooth in his
error by recurring to the common frailty of nature. But oftentimes he does this
from no mind to sympathize, but to make him more easy in his faults.
Again, a man rebukes oftentimes not so much to reprove and admonish, as
publicly to ([ἐκπομπεῦσαι καὶ ἐκτραγωδῆσαι]) display and exaggerate his
neighbor's sin. Our counsels however themselves men do not know; but,
[Romans 8:27] "He that searches the hearts," knows them perfectly; and He will
bring all such things into view at that time. Wherefore he says, "Who will bring
to light the secret things of darkness and make manifest the counsels of the
hearts."
6. Seeing then that not even where we "know nothing against ourselves,"
can we be clean from accusations, and where we do any thing good, but do it not
of a right mind, we are liable to punishment; consider how vastly men are
deceived in their judgments. For all these matters are not be come at by men, but
by the unsleeping Eye alone: and though we may deceive men, our sophistry will
never avail against Him. Say not then, darkness is around me and walls; who
sees me? For He who by Himself formed our hearts, Himself knows all things.
[Psalm 139:12] "For darkness is no darkness with Him." And yet he who is
committing sin, well says, "Darkness is around me and walls;" for were there
not a darkness in his mind he would not have cast out the fear of God and acted
as he pleased. For unless the ruling principle be first darkened, the entrance of
sin without fear is a thing impossible. Say not then, who sees me? For there is
that [Hebrews 4:12] "pierces even unto soul and spirit, joints and marrow;" but
you see not yourself nor can you pierce the cloud; but as if you had a wall on all
sides surrounding you, you are without power to look up unto the heaven.