You will not? Why then do you destroy yourself too? Why do you cast away
what you have? Can you not be like him, nor gain any good thing? Why then do
you besides this take for yourself evil, when you ought to rejoice with him, that
so even if you be not able to share his toils, you may profit by rejoicing with
Him? For often even the will is able to effect great good. At least Ezekiel says,
that the Moabites were punished because they rejoiced over the Israelites, and
that certain others were saved because they mourned over the misfortunes of
their neighbors. [Ezekiel 25:8] Now if there be any comfort for those who mourn
over the woes of others, much more for those who rejoice at the honors of
others. He charged the Moabites with having exulted over the Israelites, yet it
was God that punished them; but not even when He punishes will He have us
rejoice over those that are punished. For it is not His wish to punish them. Now
if we must condole with those who are punished, much more must we avoid
envying those who are honored. Thus, for example, Corah and Dathan perished
with their company, making those whom they envied brighter, and giving
themselves up to punishment. For a venomous beast is envy, an unclean beast, a
deliberate vice which admits not of pardon, a wickedness stripped of excuse, the
cause and mother of all evils. Wherefore let us pluck it up by the roots, that we
may be freed from evil here, and may obtain blessings hereafter; through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory now and ever and world without end.
Amen.

Homily 56 on the Gospel of John
John 9:1-2
"And as Jesus passed by, He saw a man which was blind from his birth. And
His disciples asked Him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents,
that he was born blind?"
1. " And as Jesus passed by, He saw a man which was blind from his birth."
Being full of love for man, and caring for our salvation, and desiring to stop the
mouths of the foolish, He omits nothing of His own part, though there be none to
give heed. And the Prophet knowing this says, "That You might be justified when
You speak, and be clear when You are judged." [Psalm 51:4] Wherefore here,
when they would not receive His sublime sayings, but said that He had a devil,
and attempted to kill Him, He went forth from the Temple, and healed the blind,
mitigating their rage by His absence, and by working the miracle softening their
hardness and cruelty, and establishing His assertions. And He works a miracle
which was no common one, but one which took place then for the first time.
"Since the world began," says he who was healed, "was it not heard that any
man opened the eyes of one that was born blind." [John 9:32] Some have,
perhaps, opened the eyes of the blind, but of one born blind never. And that on
going out of the Temple, He proceeded intentionally to the work, is clear from
this; it was He who saw the blind man, not the blind man who came to Him; and
so earnestly did He look upon him, that even His disciples perceived it. From
this, at least, they came to question Him; for when they saw Him earnestly
regarding the man, they asked Him, saying, "Who did sin, this man, or his
parents?" A mistaken question, for how could he sin before he was born? And
how, if his parents had sinned, would he have been punished? Whence then
came they to put this question? Before, when He healed the paralytic, He said,