## Homily 29 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 13:1
This is the third time I am coming to you. At the mouth of two witnesses or
three shall every word be established.
The wisdom of Paul and his much tender affection, one may observe in
many other circumstances, but especially in this, his being so abundant and
vehement in his admonitions, but so tardy and procrastinating in his
punishments. For he did not chastise them immediately on their sinning, but
warned them once and again; and not even so, upon their paying no attention,
does he exact punishment, but warns again, saying, "This is the third time I am
coming to you;" and 'before I come I write again.' Then, that his procrastinating
may not produce indifference, see how he corrects this result also, by threatening
continually and holding the blow suspended over them, and saying, "If I come
again I will not spare;" and "lest when I come again I should mourn for many."
These things, then, he does and speaks, in this too imitating the Lord of all:
because that God also threatens indeed continually and warns often, but not
often chastises and punishes. And so in truth also does Paul, and therefore he
said also before, "To spare you I came not as yet to Corinth." What is, "to spare
you?" Lest finding you to have sinned and to continue unamended, I should visit
with chastisement and punishment. And here, "This is the third time I am coming
to you. At the mouth of two witnesses or three shall every word be established."
He joins the unwritten to the written, as he has done also in another place,
saying, "He that is joined to an harlot is one body; for the two," says He, "shall
become one flesh." [1 Corinthians 6:16] Howbeit, this was spoken of lawful
marriage; but he diverted its application unto this thing conveniently, so as to
terrify them the more. And so he does here also, setting his comings and his

warnings in the place of witnesses. And what he says is this: 'I spoke once and
again when I was with you; I speak also now by letter. And if indeed ye attend to
me, what I desired is accomplished; but if you pay no attention, it is necessary
henceforth to stop speaking, and to inflict the punishment.' Wherefore he says,

2 Corinthians 13:2
"I have said beforehand, and I do say beforehand when I was present the
second time; so now being absent I write to them that sinned heretofore and to
all the rest, that if I come again, I will not spare."
'For if at the mouth of two witnesses or three every word shall be
established, and I have come twice and spoken, and speak now also by this
Epistle; it follows, I must after this keep my word. For think not, I pray you, that
my writing is of less account than my coming; for as I spoke when present, so
now I write also when absent.' Do you see his fraternal solicitude? Do you see
forethought becoming a teacher? He neither kept silence nor punished, but he
both foretells often, and continues ever threatening, and puts off the punishment,
and if they should continue unamended, then he threatens to bring it to the proof.
'But what did you tell them before when present, and when absent writest?' "That
if I come again, I will not spare." Having showed before that he is unable to do
this unless he is compelled, and having called the thing a mourning, and a
humbling; (for he says, lest my God should humble me before you, and I should
mourn for them that have sinned heretofore, and not repented; [2 Corinthians
12:21]) and having made his excuse unto them, namely, that he had told them
before, once and twice and thrice, and that he does and contrives all he can so as
to hold back the punishment, and by the fear of his words to make them better,
he then used this unpleasing and terrifying expression, "If I come again, I will
not spare." He did not say, 'I will avenge and punish and exact satisfaction:' but
again expresses even punishment itself in paternal language; showing his tender
affection, and his heart to be grieved along with them; because that he always to
"spare" them put off. Then that they may not think now also that there will be
again a putting off, and merely a threat in words, therefore he both said before,
"At the mouth of two witnesses or three shall every word be established;" and