also. That no one should except any created things from the works of God
because of their being invisible, nor yet should confound the Comforter with
them, after running through the objects of sense which are known to all, he
enumerates also things in the heavens, saying, "Whether they be thrones, or
dominions, or principalities, or powers"; for the expression "whether" subjoined
to each, shows to us nothing else but this, that "by Him all things were made,
and without Him was not anything made that was made."
But if you think that the expression "by" is a mark of inferiority, (as making
Christ an instrument,) hear him say, "You, Lord, in the beginning, hast laid the
foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Your hands." [Psalm
102:25] He says of the Son what is said of the Father in His character of Creator;
which he would not have said, unless he had deemed of Him as of a Creator, and
yet not subservient to any. And if the expression "by Him" is here used, it is put
for no other reason but to prevent any one from supposing the Son to be
Unbegotten. For that in respect of the title of Creator He is nothing inferior to the
Father; hear from Himself, where He says, "As the Father raises up the dead and
quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom He will." [John 5:21] If now in
the Old Testament it is said of the Son, "You, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the
foundation of the earth," His title of Creator is plain. But if you say that the
Prophet spoke this of the Father, and that Paul attributed to the Son what was
said of the Father, even so the conclusion is the same. For Paul would not have
decided that the same expression suited the Son, unless he had been very
confident that between Father and Son there was an equality of honor; since it
would have been an act of extremest rashness to refer what suited an
incomparable Nature to a nature inferior to, and falling short of it. But the Son is
not inferior to, nor falls short of, the Essence of the Father; and therefore Paul
has not only dared to use these expressions concerning Him, but also others like
them. For the expression "from Whom," which you decide to belong properly to
the Father alone, he uses also concerning the Son, when he says, "from which all
the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together,

increases with the increase of God." [Colossians 2:19]
3. And he is not content with this only, he stops your mouths in another way
also, by applying to the Father the expression "by whom," which you say is a
mark of inferiority. For he says, "God is faithful, by whom you were called unto
the fellowship of His Son" [1 Corinthians 1:9]: and again, "By His will" [1
Corinthians 1:1, etc.]; and in another place, "For of Him, and through Him, and
to Him, are all things." [Romans 11:26] Neither is the expression "from whom,"
assigned to the Son only, but also to the Spirit; for the angel said to Joseph,
"Fear not to take unto you Mary your wife, for that which is conceived in her is
of the Holy Ghost." [Matthew 1:20] As also the Prophet does not deem it
improper to apply to the Father the expression "in whom," which belongs to the
Spirit, when he says, "In God we shall do valiantly." [Psalm 60:12] And Paul,
"Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous
journey, in the will of God, to come unto you." [Romans 1:10] And again he uses
it of Christ, saying, "In Christ Jesus." [Romans 6:11, 23, etc.] In short, we may
often and continually find these expressions interchanged; now this would not
have taken place, had not the same Essence been in every instance their subject.
And that you may not imagine that the words, "All things were made by Him,"
are in this case used concerning His miracles, (for the other Evangelists have
discoursed concerning these;) he farther goes on to say, "He was in the world,
and the world was made by Him"; (but not the Spirit, for This is not of the
number of created things, but of those above all creation.)
Let us now attend to what follows. John having spoken of the work of
creation, that "All things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything
made that was made," goes on to speak concerning His Providence, where he
says, "In Him was Life." That no one may doubt how so many and so great
things were "made by Him," he adds, that "In Him was Life." For as with the
fountain which is the mother of the great deeps, however much you take away
you nothing lessen the fountain; so with the energy of the Only-Begotten,
however much you believe has been produced and made by it, it has become no