Virgil said that Ulysses did not forget himself, what else did he mean,
except that he remembered himself? And since he was present to himself,
he could not possibly remember himself, unless memory pertained to
things present. And, therefore, as that is called memory in things past
which makes it possible to recall and remember them; so in a thing
present, as the mind is to itself, that is not unreasonably to be called
memory, which makes the mind at hand to itself, so that it can be
understood by its own thought, and then both be joined together by love
of itself.

### CHAP. 12.—THE TRINITY IN THE MIND IS THE IMAGE OF GOD, IN THAT IT REMEMBERS, UNDERSTANDS, AND LOVES GOD, WHICH TO DO IS WISDOM.

15. This trinity, then, of the mind is not therefore the image of God,
because the mind remembers itself, and understands and loves itself; but
because it can also remember, understand, and love Him by whom it was
made. And in so doing it is made wise itself. But if it does not do so, even
when it remembers, understands, and loves itself, then it is foolish. Let it
then remember its God, after whose image it is made, and let it
understand and love Him. Or to say the same thing more briefly, let it
worship God, who is not made, by whom because itself was made, it is
capable and can be partaker of Him; wherefore it is written, "Behold, the
worship of God, that is wisdom." And then it will be wise, not by its own
light, but by participation of that supreme Light; and wherein it is
eternal, therein shall reign in blessedness. For this wisdom of man is so
called, in that it is also of God. For then it is true wisdom; for if it is
human, it is vain. Yet not so of God, as is that wherewith God is wise. For
He is not wise by partaking of Himself, as the mind is by partaking of
God. But as we call it the righteousness of God, not only when we speak of
that by which He Himself is righteous, but also of that which He gives to
man when He justifies the ungodly, which latter righteousness the apostle
commending, says of some, that "not knowing the righteousness of God
and going about to establish their own righteousness, they are not subject
to the righteousness of God;" so also it may be said of some, that not
knowing the wisdom of God and going about to establish their own
wisdom, they are not subject to the wisdom of God.

16. There is, then, a nature not made, which made all other natures, great
and small, and is without doubt more excellent than those which it has
made, and therefore also than that of which we are speaking; viz. than the
rational and intellectual nature, which is the mind of man, made after the
image of Him who made it. And that nature, more excellent than the rest,
is God. And indeed "He is not far from every one of us," as the apostle
says, who adds, "For in Him we live, and are moved, and have our being."
And if this were said in respect to the body, it might be understood even
of this corporeal world; for in it too in respect to the body, we live, and
are moved, and have our being. And therefore it ought to be taken in a
more excellent way, and one that is spiritual, not visible, in respect to the
mind, which is made after His image For what is there that is not in Him,
of whom it is divinely written, "For of Him, and through Him, and in
Him, are all things"?2 If, then, all things are in Him, in whom can any
possibly live that do live, or be moved that are moved, except in Him in
whom they are? Yet all are not with Him in that way in which it is said to
Him, "I am continually with Thee." Nor is He with all in that way in
which we say, The Lord be with you. And so it is the especial
wretchedness of man not to be with Him, without whom he cannot be.
For, beyond a doubt, he is not without Him in whom he is; and yet if he
does not remember, and understand, and love Him, he is not with Him.
And when any one absolutely forgets a thing, certainly it is impossible
even to remind him of it.