unquestionable." And it is not these men only who declare this but also the
prophet thus saying: "who is God as thou?" and then, indicating His special
attribute he adds "taking away iniquity and passing over unrighteousness."
[Micah 7:18] If then any one else appears thus doing the same thing He also is
God, God even as that one is God. But let us observe how Christ argues with
them, how meekly and gently, and with all tenderness. "And behold some of the
scribes said within themselves: this man blasphemes." They did not utter the
word, they did not proclaim it through the tongue, but reasoned in the secret
recesses of their heart. How then did Christ act? He made public their secret
thoughts before the demonstration which was concerned with the cure of the
paralytic's body, wishing to prove to them the power of His Godhead. For that it
is an attribute of God alone, a sign of His deity to show the secrets of His mind,
the Scripture says "Thou alone know men's hearts." [1 Kings 8:39] Do you see
that this word "alone," is not used with a view of contrasting the Son with the
Father. For if the Father alone knows the heart, how does the Son know the
secrets of the mind? "For He Himself" it is said, "knew what was in man;"
[John 2:25] and Paul when proving that the knowledge of secret things is a
special attribute of God says, "and He that search the heart," [Romans 8:27]
showing that this expression is equivalent to the appellation "God." For just as
when I say "He who causes rain said," I signify none other than God by
mentioning the deed, since it is one which belongs to Him alone: and when I say
"He who makes the sun to rise," without adding the word God, I yet signify Him
by mentioning the deed: even so when Paul said "He who searches the hearts,"
he proved that to search the heart is an attribute of God alone. For if this
expression had not been of equal force with the name "God" for pointing out
Him who was signified, he would not have used it absolutely and by itself. For if
the power were shared by Him in common with some created being, we should
not have known who was signified, the community of power causing confusion
in the mind of the hearers. Inasmuch then as this appears to be a special attribute
of the Father, and yet is manifested of the Son whose equality becomes thence

unquestionable, therefore we read "why think ye evil in your hearts? For whether
is easier: to say: Your sins are forgiven you or to say arise and walk?"
7. See moreover He makes a second proof of His power of forgiving sins.
For to forgive sins is a very much greater act than to heal the body, greater in
proportion as the soul is greater than the body. For as paralysis is a disease of the
body, even so sin is a disease of the soul: but although this is the greater it is not
palpable: whereas the other although it be less is manifest. Since then He is
about to use the less for a demonstration of the greater proving that He acted
thus on account of their weakness, and by way of condescension to their feeble
condition He says "whether is easier? To say your sins are forgiven you or to say
arise and walk?" For what reason then should He address Himself to the lesser
act on their account? Because that which is manifest presents the proof in a more
distinct form. Therefore He did not enable the man to rise until He had said to
them "But that you may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive
sins, (then says He to the sick of the palsy) arise and walk:" as if He had said:
forgiveness of sins is indeed a greater sign: but for your sakes I add the less also
since this seems to you to be a proof of the other. For as in another case when He
praised the centurion for saying "speak the word only and my servant shall be
healed: for I also say to this man go and he goes and to the other come and he
comes," He confirmed his opinion by the eulogy which He pronounced: and
again when He reproved the Jews for finding fault with Him on the Sabbath day
saying that He transgressed the law, He proved that He had authority to alter
laws: even so in this instance also when some said "He makes Himself equal
with God by promising that which belongs only to the Father," He having
upbraided and accused them and proved by His deeds that He did not blaspheme
supplied us with indisputable evidence that He could do the same things as the
Father who begot Him. Observe at least the manner in which He pleases to
establish the fact that what belongs to the Father only, belongs also to Himself:
for He did not simply enable the paralytic to get up, but also said "but that you
may know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins:" thus it was