standards with him! "And as Paul was to be led into the castle, he said unto the
tribune, May I speak unto you?" [Acts 21:37] In the act of being borne along up
the stairs, he requests to say something to the tribune: and observe how quietly
he does it. "May I speak unto you?" he says. "Who said, Can you speak Greek?
Are you not then that Egyptian, which before these days made an uproar, and
leddest out into the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers?" [Acts
21:38] For (this Egyptian) was a revolutionary and seditious person. With regard
to this then Paul clears himself, and * *
(Recapitulation.) "Do therefore this that we say unto you," etc. (v. 23, 24.)
He shows that it was not necessary to do this upon principle ([προηγουμένως])—
whence also they obtain his compliance— but that it was economy and
condescension. "As touching the Gentiles," etc. [Acts 21:25] Why, then, this was
no hindrance to the preaching, seeing they themselves legislated for them to this
effect. Why, then, in his taking Peter to task he does not absolutely ([ἁ] [πλὥς])
charge him with doing wrong: for precisely what he does on this occasion
himself, the same does Peter on that occasion, (merely) holding his peace, and
establishing his doctrine. [Galatians 2:11] And he says not, For why? It is not
right to teach those among the Gentiles. "It is not enough to have not (so)
preached there, but there was need also to do something more, that those may be
persuaded that you observe the law. The affair is one of condescension, be not
alarmed." They do not advise him (to this course) sooner, until they have first
spoken of the economy and the gain. "And besides, the doing this in Jerusalem,
is a thing to be borne. 'Do thou this thing therefore' here, that it may be in your
power abroad to do the other." (b) "The next day," it says, "he took them" [Acts
21:26]: he deferred it not; for when there is economy in the case, this is the way
of it. (a) "Jews from Asia having seen him," for it was natural that they were
spending some days there, "in the Temple." [Acts 21:27] (c) Mark the economy
(of Providence) that appeared (in this). (p. 279, note 1) After the (believing)
Jews had been persuaded (concerning him), then it is that those (Jews of Asia)
set upon him in order that those (believing Jews) may not also set upon him.

Help, say they, "ye men of Israel!" as though it were some (monster) difficult to
be caught, and hard to be overcome, that has fallen into their hands. "All men,"
they say, "everywhere, he ceases not to teach;" not here only. And then the
accusation (is) more aggravated by the present circumstances. "And yet more,"
say they, "he has polluted the temple, having brought into it men who are
Greeks." [Acts 21:28] And yet in Christ's time there "came up (Greeks) to
worship" [John 12:20]: true, but here it speaks of Greeks who had no mind to
worship. "And they seized Paul," etc. [Acts 21:30-35] They no longer wanted
laws nor courts of justice: they also beat him. But he forbore to make his defence
then; he made it afterward: with reason; for they would not even have heard him
then. Pray, why did they cry, "Away with him?" [Acts 21:36] They feared he
might escape them. Observe how submissively Paul speaks to the tribune. "May
I speak unto you? Then art not thou that Egyptian?" (v. 37, 38.) This Egyptian,
namely, was a cheat and impostor, and the devil expected to cast a cloud over
(the Gospel) through him, and implicate both Christ and His Apostles in the
charges pertaining to those (imposters): but he prevailed nothing, nay the truth
became even more brilliant, being nothing defeated by the machinations of the
devil, nay rather shining forth all the more. Since if there had not been
impostors, and then these (Christ and His Apostles) had prevailed, perhaps some
one might have laid hold upon this: but when those impostors did actually
appear, this is the wonder. "In order," says (the Apostle), "that they which are
approved may be made manifest." [1 Corinthians 11:19] And Gamaliel says,
"Before these days stood up Theudas." Then let us not grieve that heresies exist,
seeing that false Christs wished to attack even Christ both before this and after;
with a view to throw Him into the shade, but on every occasion we find the truth
shining out transparent. So it was with the Prophets: there were false prophets,
and by contrast with these they shone the more: just as disease enhances health,
and darkness light, and tempest calm. There is no room left for the Greeks to say
that (our teachers) were impostors and mountebanks: for those (that were such)
were exposed. It was the same in the case of Moses: God suffered the magicians,