FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.3.

according to his own capacity, in the way explained above, yet none
can comprehend it: for it cannot be made perfectly known by its
effects. Therefore it does not follow that anyone who knows the
eternal law in the way aforesaid, knows also the whole order of
things, whereby they are most orderly.
Reply to Objection 3: To judge a thing may be understood in two
ways. First, as when a cognitive power judges of its proper object,
according to Job 12:11: "Doth not the ear discern words, and the
palate of him that eateth, the taste?" It is to this kind of judgment
that the Philosopher alludes when he says that "anyone can judge
well of what he knows," by judging, namely, whether what is put
forward is true. In another way we speak of a superior judging of a
subordinate by a kind of practical judgment, as to whether he should
be such and such or not. And thus none can judge of the eternal law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether every law is derived from the eternal

law?
Objection 1: It would seem that not every law is derived from the
eternal law. For there is a law of the "fomes," as stated above
(Question 91, Article 6), which is not derived from that Divine law
which is the eternal law, since thereunto pertains the "prudence of
the flesh," of which the Apostle says (Rm. 8:7), that "it cannot be
subject to the law of God." Therefore not every law is derived from
the eternal law.
Objection 2: Further, nothing unjust can be derived from the eternal
law, because, as stated above (Article 2, Objection 2), "the eternal
law is that, according to which it is right that all things should be
most orderly." But some laws are unjust, according to Is. 10:1: "Woe
to them that make wicked laws." Therefore not every law is derived
from the eternal law.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 5) that "the law
which is framed for ruling the people, rightly permits many things
which are punished by Divine providence." But the type of Divine
providence is the eternal law, as stated above (Article 1). Therefore
not even every good law is derived from the eternal law.
On the contrary, Divine Wisdom says (Prov. 8:15): "By Me kings
reign, and lawgivers decree just things." But the type of Divine
Wisdom is the eternal law, as stated above (Article 1). Therefore all
laws proceed from the eternal law.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 90, Articles 1,2), the law
denotes a kind of plan directing acts towards an end. Now wherever
there are movers ordained to one another, the power of the second
mover must needs be derived from the power of the first mover;
since the second mover does not move except in so far as it is
moved by the first. Wherefore we observe the same in all those who
govern, so that the plan of government is derived by secondary
governors from the governor in chief; thus the plan of what is to be
done in a state flows from the king's command to his inferior
administrators: and again in things of art the plan of whatever is to
be done by art flows from the chief craftsman to the under-craftsmen, who work with their hands. Since then the eternal law is the