neither is the nature of the flesh, even if sin subdues us by means of it. For in this
way the soul will be evil, and much more so too, since it has authority in matters
of action. But these things are not so, certainly they are not. Since neither if a
tyrant and a robber were to take possession of a splendid mansion and a king's
court, would the circumstance be any discredit to the house, inasmuch as the
entire blame would come on those who contrived such an act. But the enemies of
the truth, along with their impiety, fall unawares also into great
unreasonableness. For they do not accuse the flesh only, but they also disparage
the Law. And yet if the flesh were evil, the Law would be good. For it wars
against the Law, and opposes it. If, however, the Law be not good, then the flesh
is good. For it wars and fights against it even by their own account. How come
they then to assert that both belong to the devil, putting things opposed to each
other before us? Do you see, along with their impiety, how great is their
unreasonableness also? But such doctrines as these are not the Church's, for it is
the sin only that she condemns; and both the Laws which God has given, both
that of nature and that of Moses, she says are hostile to this, and not to the flesh;
for the flesh she denies to be sin, for it is a work of God's, and one very useful
too in order to virtue, if we live soberly.
Ver. 24. "O wretched man that I am! Who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?"
Do you notice what a great thraldom that of vice is, in that it overcomes
even a mind that delighted in the Law? For no one can rejoin, he means, that I
hate the Law and abhor it, and so sin overcomes me. For "I delight in it, and
consent to it," and flee for refuge to it, yet still it had not the power of saving one
who had fled to it. But Christ saved even one that fled from Him. See what a
vast advantage grace has! Yet the Apostle has not stated it thus; but with a sigh
only, and a great lamentation, as if devoid of any to help him, he points out by
his perplexity the might of Christ, and says, "O wretched man that I am! Who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?" The Law has not been able:
conscience has proved unequal to it, though it praised what was good, and did

not praise it only, but even fought against the contrary of it. For by the very
words "wars against" he shows that he was marshalled against it for his part.
From what quarter then is one to hope for salvation?
Ver. 25. "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord."
Observe how he shows the necessity of having grace present with us, and
that the well-doings herein belong alike to the Father and the Son. For if it is the
Father Whom he thanks, still the Son is the cause of this thanksgiving. But when
you hear him say, "Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" do not
suppose him to be accusing the flesh. For he does not say "body of sin," but
"body of death:" that is, the mortal body— that which has been overcome by
death, not that which gendered death. And this is no proof of the evil of the
flesh, but of the marring ([ἐ] [πηρείας], thwarting) it has undergone. As if any
one who was take captive by the savages were to be said to belong to the
savages, not as being a savage, but as being detained by them: so the body is said
to be of death, as being held down thereby, not as producing it. Wherefore also it
is not the body that he himself wishes to be delivered from, but the mortal body,
hinting, as I have often said, that from its becoming subject to suffering, it also
became an easy prey to sin. Why then, it may be said, the thraldom of sin being
so great before the times of grace, were men punished for sinning? Because they
had such commands given them as might even under sin's dominion be
accomplished. For he did not draw them to the highest kind of conversation, but
allowed them to enjoy wealth, and did not forbid having several wives, and to
gratify anger in a just cause, and to make use of luxury within bounds. [Matthew
5:38] And so great was this condescension, that the written Law even required
less than the law of nature. For the law of nature ordered one man to associate
with one woman throughout. And this Christ shows in the words, "He which
made them at the beginning, made them male and female." [Matthew 19:4] But
the Law of Moses neither forbade the putting away of one and the taking in of
another, nor prohibited the having of two at once! [Matthew 5:31] And besides
this there are also many other ordinances of the Law, that one might see those