the one effect; as in the case of natural things, which are only acted
upon as though directed by another towards an end; and do not act
of themselves, as if they directed themselves towards an end, like
rational creatures, through the possession of free will, by which
these are able to take counsel and make a choice. Hence it is
significantly said: "In the hand of his own counsel." But since the
very act of free will is traced to God as to a cause, it necessarily
follows that everything happening from the exercise of free will must
be subject to divine providence. For human providence is included
under the providence of God, as a particular under a universal
cause. God, however, extends His providence over the just in a
certain more excellent way than over the wicked; inasmuch as He
prevents anything happening which would impede their final
salvation. For "to them that love God, all things work together unto
good" (Rm. 8:28). But from the fact that He does not restrain the
wicked from the evil of sin, He is said to abandon them: not that He
altogether withdraws His providence from them; otherwise they
would return to nothing, if they were not preserved in existence by
His providence. This was the reason that had weight with Tully, who
withdrew from the care of divine providence human affairs
concerning which we take counsel.
Reply to Objection 5: Since a rational creature has, through its free
will, control over its actions, as was said above (Question 19, Article
10), it is subject to divine providence in an especial manner, so that
something is imputed to it as a fault, or as a merit; and there is given
it accordingly something by way of punishment or reward. In this
way, the Apostle withdraws oxen from the care of God: not, however,
that individual irrational creatures escape the care of divine
providence; as was the opinion of the Rabbi Moses.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether God has immediate providence over

everything?
Objection 1: It seems that God has not immediate providence over all
things. For whatever is contained in the notion of dignity, must be
attributed to God. But it belongs to the dignity of a king, that he
should have ministers; through whose mediation he provides for his
subjects. Therefore much less has God Himself immediate
providence over all things.
Objection 2: Further, it belongs to providence to order all things to
an end. Now the end of everything is its perfection and its good. But
it appertains to every cause to direct its effect to good; wherefore
every active cause is a cause of the effect of providence. If therefore
God were to have immediate providence over all things, all
secondary causes would be withdrawn.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (Enchiridion 17) that, "It is
better to be ignorant of some things than to know them, for example,
vile things": and the Philosopher says the same (Metaph. xii, 51). But
whatever is better must be assigned to God. Therefore He has not
immediate providence over bad and vile things.
On the contrary, It is said (Job 34:13): "What other hath He appointed
over the earth? or whom hath He set over the world which He
made?" On which passage Gregory says (Moral. xxiv, 20): "Himself
He ruleth the world which He Himself hath made."
I answer that, Two things belong to providence---namely, the type of
the order of things foreordained towards an end; and the execution
of this order, which is called government. As regards the first of
these, God has immediate providence over everything, because He
has in His intellect the types of everything, even the smallest; and
whatsoever causes He assigns to certain effects, He gives them the
power to produce those effects. Whence it must be that He has
beforehand the type of those effects in His mind. As to the second,
there are certain intermediaries of God's providence; for He governs
things inferior by superior, not on account of any defect in His
power, but by reason of the abundance of His goodness; so that the
dignity of causality is imparted even to creatures. Thus Plato's
opinion, as narrated by Gregory of Nyssa (De Provid. viii, 3), is