therefore, both of the year and of the twelfth month has been proved false, and they ought to reject
either their explanation or the Gospel; otherwise [this unanswerable question forces itself upon
them], How is it possible that the Lord preached for one year only?
4. Being thirty years old when He came to be baptized, and then possessing the full age of a
Master, He came to Jerusalem, so that He might be properly acknowledged by all as a Master.
For He did not seem one thing while He was another, as those affirm who describe Him as being
man only in appearance; but what He was, that He also appeared to be. Being a Master, therefore,
He also possessed the age of a Master, not despising or evading any condition of humanity, nor
setting aside in Himself that law which He had appointed for the human race, but sanctifying
every age, by that period corresponding to it which belonged to Himself. For He came to save all
through means of Himself—all, I say, who through Him are born again to God—infants, and
children, and boys, and youths, and old men. He therefore passed through every age, becoming an
infant for infants, thus sanctifying infants; a child for children, thus sanctifying those who are of
this age, being at the same time made to them an example of piety, righteousness, and submission;
a youth for youths, becoming an example to youths, and thus sanctifying them for the Lord. So
likewise He was an old man for old men, that He might be a perfect Master for all, not merely as
respects the setting forth of the truth, but also as regards age, sanctifying at the same time the aged
also, and becoming an example to them likewise. Then, at last, He came on to death itself, that He
might be "the first-born from the dead, that in all things He might have the pre-eminence," the
Prince of life, existing before all, and going before all.
5. They, however, that they may establish their false opinion regarding that which is written,
"to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord," maintain that He preached for one year only, and
then suffered in the twelfth month. [In speaking thus,] they are forgetful to their own disadvantage,
destroying His whole work, and robbing Him of that age which is both more necessary and more
reading audiret.
has a peculiar significance, nor abrogating his own law."
iii. 17, 1.
in the primitive Church.

honourable than any other; that more advanced age, I mean, during which also as a teacher He
excelled all others. For how could He have had disciples, if He did not teach? And how could He
have taught, unless He had reached the age of a Master? For when He came to be baptized, He had
not yet completed His thirtieth year, but was beginning to be about thirty years of age (for thus
Luke, who has mentioned His years, has expressed it: "Now Jesus was, as it were, beginning to be
thirty years old," when He came to receive baptism); and, [according to these men,] He preached
only one year reckoning from His baptism. On completing His thirtieth year He suffered, being in
fact still a young man, and who had by no means attained to advanced age. Now, that the first stage
of early life embraces thirty years, and that this extends onwards to the fortieth year, every one
will admit; but from the fortieth and fiftieth year a man begins to decline towards old age, which
our Lord possessed while He still fulfilled the office of a Teacher, even as the Gospel and all the
elders testify; those who were conversant in Asia with John, the disciple of the Lord, [affirming]
that John conveyed to them that information. And he remained among them up to the times of
Trajan. Some of them, moreover, saw not only John, but the other apostles also, and heard the
very same account from them, and bear testimony as to the [validity of] the statement. Whom then
should we rather believe? Whether such men as these, or Ptolemæus, who never saw the apostles,
and who never even in his dreams attained to the slightest trace of an apostle?
6. But, besides this, those very Jews who then disputed with the Lord Jesus Christ have most
clearly indicated the same thing. For when the Lord said to them, "Your father Abraham rejoiced
to see My day; and he saw it, and was glad," they answered Him, "Thou art not yet fifty years old,
and hast Thou seen Abraham?" Now, such language is fittingly applied to one who has already
passed the age of forty, without having as yet reached his fiftieth year, yet is not far from this latter
period. But to one who is only thirty years old it would unquestionably be said, "Thou art not yet
forty years old." For those who wished to convict Him of falsehood would certainly not extend the