FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.73, C.9.

does not follow that this alone renders a sin more grievous: in fact, it
is inordinateness which of itself aggravates a sin. Wherefore the
harm itself that ensues aggravates a sin, in so far only as it renders
the act more inordinate. Hence it does not follow, supposing harm to
be inflicted chiefly by sins against our neighbor, that such sins are
the most grievous, since a much greater inordinateness is to be
found against which man commits against God, and in some which
he commits against himself. Moreover we might say that although no
man can do God any harm in His substance, yet he can endeavor to
do so in things concerning Him, e.g. by destroying faith, by
outraging holy things, which are most grievous sins. Again, a man
sometimes knowingly and freely inflicts harm on himself, as in the
case of suicide, though this be referred finally to some apparent
good, for example, delivery from some anxiety.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument does not prove, for two
reasons: first, because the murderer intends directly to do harm to
his neighbors; whereas the fornicator who solicits the woman
intends not to harm but pleasure; secondly, because murder is the
direct and sufficient cause of bodily death; whereas no man can of
himself be the sufficient cause of another's spiritual death, because
no man dies spiritually except by sinning of his own will.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.73, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether a sin is aggravated by reason of the

condition of the person against whom it is committed?
Objection 1: It would seem that sin is not aggravated by reason of
the condition of the person against whom it is committed. For if this
were the case a sin would be aggravated chiefly by being committed
against a just and holy man. But this does not aggravate a sin:
because a virtuous man who bears a wrong with equanimity is less
harmed by the wrong done him, than others, who, through being
scandalized, are also hurt inwardly. Therefore the condition of the
person against whom a sin is committed does not aggravate the sin.
Objection 2: Further, if the condition of the person aggravated the
sin, this would be still more the case if the person be near of kin,
because, as Cicero says (Paradox. iii): "The man who kills his slave
sins once: he that takes his father's life sins many times." But the
kinship of a person sinned against does not apparently aggravate a
sin, because every man is most akin to himself; and yet it is less
grievous to harm oneself than another, e.g. to kill one's own, than
another's horse, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. v, 11). Therefore
kinship of the person sinned against does not aggravate the sin.
Objection 3: Further, the condition of the person who sins
aggravates a sin chiefly on account of his position or knowledge,
according to Wis. 6:7: "The mighty shall be mightily tormented," and
Lk. 12:47: "The servant who knew the will of his lord . . . and did it
not . . . shall be beaten with many stripes." Therefore, in like manner,
on the part of the person sinned against, the sin is made more
grievous by reason of his position and knowledge. But, apparently, it
is not a more grievous sin to inflict an injury on a rich and powerful
person than on a poor man, since "there is no respect of persons
with God" (Col. 3:25), according to Whose judgment the gravity of a
sin is measured. Therefore the condition of the person sinned
against does not aggravate the sin.
On the contrary, Holy Writ censures especially those sins that are
committed against the servants of God. Thus it is written (3 Kgs.
19:14): "They have destroyed Thy altars, they have slain Thy
prophets with the sword." Moreover much blame is attached to the
sin committed by a man against those who are akin to him,
according to Micah 7:6: "the son dishonoreth the father, and the