and be spectators of what came to pass, because the place was near; and that not
they alone should be witnesses of His burial, but His enemies also, for the
placing seals on the tomb, and the sitting by of the soldiers to watch it, were the
actions of men testifying to the burial. For Christ earnestly desired that this
should be confessed, no less than the Resurrection. Wherefore also the disciples
are very earnest about this, the showing that He died. For the Resurrection all
succeeding time would confirm, but the Death, if at that time it had been
partially concealed, or not made very manifest, was likely to harm the account of
the Resurrection. Nor was it for these reasons only that He was laid near, but
also that the story about the stealing might be proved false.

John 20:1
"The first day of the week" (that is, the Lord's day) "comes Mary Magdalene,
very early in the morning, and sees the stone taken away from the sepulcher."
For He arose while both stone and seals lay over Him; but because it was
necessary that others should be fully satisfied, the tomb was opened after the
Resurrection, and thus what had come to pass was confirmed. This then was
what moved Mary. For being entirely full of loving affection towards her Master,
when the Sabbath was past, she could not bear to rest, but came very early in the
morning, desiring to find some consolation from the place. But when she saw the
place, and the stone taken away, she neither entered in nor stooped down, but ran
to the disciples, in the greatness of her longing; for this was what she earnestly
desired, she wished very speedily to learn what had become of the body. This
was the meaning of her running, and her words declare it.

John 20:2
"They have taken away," she says, "my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid Him."
Do you see how she knew not as yet anything clearly concerning the
Resurrection, but thought there had been a removal of the body, and tells all
simply to the disciples? And the Evangelist has not deprived the woman of such
a praise, nor thought it shame that they should have learned these things first
from her who had passed the night in watching. Thus everywhere does the truthloving nature of his disposition shine forth. When then she came and said these
things, they hearing them, draw near with great eagerness to the sepulcher, and
see the linen clothes lying, which was a sign of the Resurrection. For neither, if
any persons had removed the body, would they before doing so have stripped it;
nor if any had stolen it, would they have taken the trouble to remove the napkin,
and roll it up, and lay it in a place by itself; but how? They would have taken the
body as it was. On this account John tells us by anticipation that it was buried
with much myrrh, which glues linen to the body not less firmly than lead; in
order that when you hear that the napkins lay apart, you may not endure those
who say that He was stolen. For a thief would not have been so foolish as to
spend so much trouble on a superfluous matter. For why should he undo the
clothes? And how could he have escaped detection if he had done so? Since he
would probably have spent much time in so doing, and be found out by delaying
and loitering. But why do the clothes lie apart, while the napkin was wrapped
together by itself? That you may learn that it was not the action of men in
confusion or haste, the placing some in one place, some in another, and the
wrapping them together. From this they believed in the Resurrection. On this
account Christ afterwards appeared to them, when they were convinced by what
they had seen. Observe too here again the absence of boastfulness in the
Evangelist, how he witnesses to the exactness of Peter's search. For he himself