THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.4.

living things, which is properly called nativity.
Reply to Objection 2: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): "The
temporal nativity by which Christ was born for our salvation is, in a
way, natural, since a Man was born of a woman, and after the due
lapse of time from His conception: but it is also supernatural,
because He was begotten, not of seed, but of the Holy Ghost and the
Blessed Virgin, above the law of conception." Thus, then, on the part
of the mother, this nativity was natural, but on the part of the
operation of the Holy Ghost it was supernatural. Therefore the
Blessed Virgin is the true and natural Mother of Christ.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 31, Article 5, ad 3;
Question 32, Article 4), the resolution of the woman's semen is not
necessary for conception; neither, therefore, is it required for
motherhood.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Blessed Virgin should be called the

Mother of God?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Blessed Virgin should not be
called the Mother of God. For in the Divine mysteries we should not
make any assertion that is not taken from Holy Scripture. But we
read nowhere in Holy Scripture that she is the mother or parent of
God, but that she is the "mother of Christ" or of "the Child," as may
be seen from Mt. 1:18. Therefore we should not say that the Blessed
Virgin is the Mother of God.
Objection 2: Further, Christ is called God in respect of His Divine
Nature. But the Divine Nature did not first originate from the Virgin.
Therefore the Blessed Virgin should not be called the Mother of God.
Objection 3: Further, the word "God" is predicated in common of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. If, therefore, the Blessed Virgin is
Mother of God it seems to follow that she was the Mother of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, which cannot be allowed. Therefore the
Blessed Virgin should not be called Mother of God.
On the contrary, In the chapters of Cyril, approved in the Council of
Ephesus (P. 1, Cap. xxvi), we read: "If anyone confess not that the
Emmanuel is truly God, and that for this reason the Holy Virgin is the
Mother of God, since she begot of her flesh the Word of God made
flesh, let him be anathema."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 16, Article 1), every word
that signifies a nature in the concrete can stand for any hypostasis
of that nature. Now, since the union of the Incarnation took place in
the hypostasis, as above stated (Question 2, Article 3), it is manifest
that this word "God" can stand for the hypostasis, having a human
and a Divine nature. Therefore whatever belongs to the Divine and to
the human nature can be attributed to that Person: both when a word
is employed to stand for it, signifying the Divine Nature, and when a
word is used signifying the human nature. Now, conception and birth
are attributed to the person and hypostasis in respect of that nature
in which it is conceived and born. Since, therefore, the human nature
was taken by the Divine Person in the very beginning of the
conception, as stated above (Question 33, Article 3), it follows that it
can be truly said that God was conceived and born of the Virgin.