described it in this way, and introduced the rich man thus tormented. For longing
for a drop of water, and not enjoying it, this was his punishment. So then he that
despises wealth quiets the desire, but he that desires to be rich has inflamed it
more, and not yet does he stay; but though he have got ten thousand talents, he
desires as much more; though he obtain these, again he aims at twice as much
more, and going on he desires even the mountains, and the earth, and the sea,
and all to become gold for him, being mad with a kind of new and fearful
madness, and one that can never thus be extinguished.
And that you might learn, that not by addition but by taking away this evil
is stayed; if you had ever had an absurd desire to fly and to be borne through the
air, how would you extinguish this unreasonable desire? By fashioning wings,
and preparing other instruments, or by convincing the mind that it is desiring
things impossible, and that one should attempt none of these things? It is quite
plain, that by convincing the mind. But that, you may say, is impossible. But this
again is more impossible, to find a limit for this desire. For indeed it is more
easy for men to fly, than to make this lust cease by an addition of more. For
when the objects of desire are possible, one may be soothed by the enjoyment of
them, but when they are impossible, one must labor for one thing, to draw
ourselves off from the desire, as otherwise at least it is not possible to recover
the soul.
Therefore that we may not have superfluous sorrows, let us forsake the love
of money that is ever paining, and never endures to hold its peace, and let us
remove ourselves to another love, which both makes us happy, and has great
facility, and let us long after the treasures above. For neither is the labor here so
great, and the gain is unspeakable, and it is not possible for him to fail of them
who is but in any wise watchful and sober, and despises the things present; even
as on the other hand, as to him that is a slave to these last, and is utterly given up
to them, it as altogether of necessity that he fail of those better riches.
4. Considering then all these things, put away the wicked desire of wealth.
For neither couldest thou say this, that it gives the things present, though it

deprive us of the things to come, albeit even if this were so, this were extreme
punishment, and vengeance. But now not even this may be. For besides hell, and
before that hell, even here it casts you into a more grievous punishment. For
many houses has this lust overthrown, and fierce wars has it stirred up, and
compelled men to end their lives by a violent death; and before these dangers it
ruins the nobleness of the soul, and is wont often to make him that has it
cowardly, and unmanly, and rash, and false, and calumnious, and ravenous, and
over-reaching, and all the worst things.
But seeing perhaps the brightness of the silver, and the multitude of the
servants, and the beauty of the buildings, the court paid in the market-place, are
you bewitched thereby? What remedy then may there be for this evil wound? If
you consider how these things affect your soul, how dark, and desolate, and foul
they render it, and how ugly; if you reckon with how many evils these things
were acquired, with how many labors they are kept, with how many dangers: or
rather they are not kept unto the end, but when you have escaped the attempts of
all, death coming on you is often wont to remove these things into the hand of
your enemies, and goes and takes you with him destitute, drawing after you none
of these things, save the wounds and the sores only, which the soul received
from these, before its departing. When then you see any one resplendent
outwardly with raiment and large attendance, lay open his conscience, and you
shall see many a cobweb within, and much dust. Consider Paul, Peter. Consider
John, Elias, or rather the Son of God Himself, who has not where to lay His
head. Be an imitator of Him, and of His servants, and imagine to yourself the
unspeakable riches of these.
But if having obtained a little sight by these, you should be darkened again,
as in any shipwreck when a storm has come on, hear the declaration of Christ,
which affirms, that it is impossible "for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
Heaven." And against this declaration set the mountains, and the earth, and the
sea; and all things, if you will, suppose to be gold; for you shall see nothing
equal to the loss arising to you from thence. And thou indeed makest mention of