name of Paul?" "Tell me not," says he, "who baptized, but into whose name. For
not he that baptizes, but he who is invoked in the Baptism, is the subject of
enquiry. For this is He who forgives our sins. "
And at this point he stays the discourse, and does not pursue the subject any
further. For he says not, "Did Paul declare to you the good things to come? Did
Paul promise you the kingdom of heaven?" Why, then, I ask, does he not add
these questions also? Because it is not all as one, to promise a kingdom and to be
crucified. For the former neither had danger nor brought shame; but the latter, all
these. Moreover, he proves the former from the latter: for having said, [Romans
8:32] "He that spared not His own Son," he adds, "How shall He not with Him
also freely give us all things?" And again, [Romans 5:10] "For if when we were
enemies we were reconciled unto God by the death of His Son, much more bring
reconciled, we shall be saved." This was one reason for his not adding what I
just mentioned: and also because the one they had not as yet, but of the other
they had already made trial. The one were in promise; the other had already
come to pass.

1 Corinthians 1:14
6. "I thank God that I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius." "Why
are you elate at having baptized, when I for my part even give thanks that I have
not done so!" Thus saying, by a kind of divine art ([οἰκονομικῶς]) he does away
with their swelling pride upon this point; not with the efficacy of the baptism,
(God forbid,) but with the folly of those who were puffed up at having been
baptizers: first, by showing that the Gift is not theirs; and, secondly, by thanking
God therefore. For Baptism truly is a great thing: but its greatness is not the
work of the person baptizing, but of Him who is invoked in the Baptism: since to
baptize is nothing as regards man's labor, but is much less than preaching the
Gospel. Yea, again I say, great indeed is Baptism, and without baptism it is
impossible to obtain the kingdom. Still a man of no singular excellence is able to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel there is need of great labor.

1 Corinthians 1:15
He states also the reason, why he gives thanks that he had baptized no one.
What then is this reason? "Lest anyone should say that you were baptized into
my own name." Why, did he mean that they said this in those other cases? Not at
all; but, "I fear," says he, "lest the disease should proceed even to that. For if,
when insignificant persons and of little worth baptize, a heresy arises, had I, the
first announcer of Baptism, baptized many, it was likely that they forming a
party, would not only call themselves by my name, but also ascribe the Baptism
to me." For if from the inferiors so great an evil arose, from those of higher order
it would perhaps have gone on to something far more grievous.