it is plain, that whoso is lowly, the same is high and great of soul. For pride
comes from an ordinary mind and an ignoble spirit, but moderation, from
greatness of mind and a lofty soul.
5. And if you please, let us try each by examples. For tell me, what was
there ever more exalted than Abraham? And yet it was he that said, "I am but
dust and ashes;" it was he who said, [Genesis 13:8] "Let there be no strife
between me and you." But this man, so humble, [Genesis 14:21-24] despised
("Persian," i.e. perhaps, "of Elam.") Persian spoils, and regarded not Barbaric
trophies; and this he did of much highmindedness, and of a spirit nobly nurtured.
For he is indeed exalted who is truly humble; (not the flatterer nor the
dissembler;) for true greatness is one thing, and arrogance another. And this is
plain from hence; if one man esteem clay to be clay, and despise it, and another
admire the clay as gold, and account it a great thing; which, I ask, is the man of
exalted mind? Is it not he who refuses to admire the clay? And which, abject and
mean? Is it not he who admires it, and set much store by it? Just so do thou
esteem of this case also; that he who calls himself but dust and ashes is exalted,
although he say it out of humility; but that he who does not consider himself dust
and ashes, but treats himself lovingly and has high thoughts, this man for his part
must be counted mean, esteeming little things to be great. Whence it is clear that
out of great loftiness of thought the patriarch spoke that saying, "I am but dust
and ashes;" from loftiness of thought, not from arrogance.
For as in bodies it is one thing to be healthy and plump, ([σφριγῶντα], firm
and elastic.) and another thing to be swoln, although both indicate a full habit of
flesh, (but in this case of unsound, in that of healthful flesh;) so also here: it is
one thing to be arrogant, which is, as it were, to be swoln, and another thing to
be high-souled, which is to be in a healthy state. And again, one man is tall from
the stature of his person; another, being short, by adding buskins becomes taller;
now tell me, which of the two should we call tall and large? Is it not quite plain,
him whose height is from himself? For the other has it as something not his own;
and stepping upon things low in themselves, turns out a tall person. Such is the

case with many men who mount themselves up on wealth and glory; which is
not exaltation, for he is exalted who wants none of these things, but despises
them, and has his greatness from himself. Let us therefore become humble that
we may become exalted; [Luke 14:11] "For he that humbles himself shall be
exalted." Now the self-willed man is not such as this; rather he is of all
characters the most ordinary. For the bubble, too, is inflated, but the inflation is
not sound; wherefore we call these persons "puffed up." Whereas the soberminded man has no high thoughts, not even in high fortunes, knowing his own
low estate; but the vulgar even in his trifling concerns indulges a proud fancy.
6. Let us then acquire that height which comes by humility. Let us look into
the nature of human things, that we may kindle with the longing desire of the
things to come; for in no other way is it possible to become humble, except by
the love of what is divine and the contempt of what is present. For just as a man
on the point of obtaining a kingdom, if instead of that purple robe one offer him
some trivial compliment, will count it to be nothing; so shall we also laugh to
scorn all things present, if we desire that other sort of honor. Do you not see the
children, when in their play they make a band of soldiers, and heralds precede
them and lictors, and a boy marches in the midst in the general's place, how
childish it all is? Just such are all human affairs; yea and more worthless than
these: today they are, and tomorrow they are not. Let us therefore be above these
things; and let us not only not desire them, but even be ashamed if any one hold
them forth to us. For thus, casting out the love of these things, we shall possess
that other love which is divine, and shall enjoy immortal glory. Which may God
grant us all to obtain, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ; with whom be to the Father, together with the holy and good Spirit, the
glory and the power for ever and ever. Amen.