be what He has. And this is said more plainly, if any one is fit to receive it,
in that place where He says: "For as the Father hath life in Himself, so
hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself." For He did not give to
Him, already existing and not having life, that He should have life in
Himself; inasmuch as, in that He is, He is life. Therefore "He gave to the
Son to have life in Himself" means, He begat the Son to be unchangeable
life, which is life eternal. Since, therefore, the Word of God is the Son of
God, and the Son of God is "the true God and eternal life," as John says in
his Epistle; so here, what else are we to acknowledge when the Lord says,
"The word which I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last
day," and calls that very word the word of the Father and the
commandment of the Father, and that very commandment everlasting
life?" "And I know," He says, "that His commandment is life everlasting.". I ask, therefore, how we are to understand, "I will not judge him; but
the Word which I have spoken shall judge him:" which appears from what
follows to be so said, as if He would say, I will not judge; but the Word of
the Father will judge. But the Word of the Father is the Son of God
Himself. Is it to be so understood: I will not judge, but I will judge? How
can this be true, unless in this way: viz., I will not judge by human power,
because I am the Son of man; but I will judge by the power of the Word,
because I am the Son of God? Or if it still seems contradictory and
inconsistent to say, I will not judge, but I will judge; what shall we say of
that place where He says, "My doctrine is not mine?" How "mine," when
"not mine?" For He did not say, This doctrine is not mine, but "My
doctrine is not mine:" that which He called His own, the same He called
not His own. How can this be true, unless He has called it His own in one
relation; not His own, in another? According to the form of God, His own;
according to the form of a servant, not His own. For when He says, "It is
not mine, but His that sent me," He makes us recur to the Word itself.
For the doctrine of the Father is the Word of the Father, which is the Only
Son. And what, too, does that mean, "He that believeth on me, believeth
not on me?" How believe on Him, yet not believe on Him? How can so
opposite and inconsistent a thing be understood—"Whoso believeth on
me," He says, "believeth not on me, but on Him that sent me;"—unless
you so understand it, Whoso believeth on me believeth not on that which
he sees, lest our hope should be in the creature; but on Him who took the

creature, whereby He might appear to human eyes, and so might cleanse
our hearts by faith, to contemplate Himself as equal to the Father? So
that in turning the attention of believers to the Father, and saying,
"Believeth not on me, but on Him that sent me," He certainly did not
mean Himself to be separated from the Father, that is, from Him that
sent Him; but that men might so believe on Himself, as they believe on
the Father, to whom He is equal. And this He says in express terms in
another place, "Ye believe in God, believe also in me:" that is, in the same
way as you believe in God, so also believe in me; because I and the Father
are One God. As therefore, here, He has as it were withdrawn the faith of
men from Himself, and transferred it to the Father, by saying, "Believeth
not on me, but on Him that sent me," from whom nevertheless He
certainly did not separate Himself; so also, when He says, "It is not mine
to give, but  for whom it is prepared by my
Father," it is I think plain in what relation both are to be taken. For that
other also is of the same kind, "I will not judge;" whereas He Himself
shall judge the quick and dead. But because He will not do so by human
power, therefore, reverting to the Godhead, He raises the hearts of men
upwards; which to lift up, He Himself came down.