Plato, who said that the first mover moves Himself; calling every
operation a movement, even as the acts of understanding, and
willing, and loving, are called movements. Therefore because God
understands and loves Himself, in that respect they said that God
moves Himself, not, however, as movement and change belong to a
thing existing in potentiality, as we now speak of change and
movement.
Reply to Objection 2: Wisdom is called mobile by way of similitude,
according as it diffuses its likeness even to the outermost of things;
for nothing can exist which does not proceed from the divine
wisdom by way of some kind of imitation, as from the first effective
and formal principle; as also works of art proceed from the wisdom
of the artist. And so in the same way, inasmuch as the similitude of
the divine wisdom proceeds in degrees from the highest things,
which participate more fully of its likeness, to the lowest things
which participate of it in a lesser degree, there is said to be a kind of
procession and movement of the divine wisdom to things; as when
we say that the sun proceeds to the earth, inasmuch as the ray of
light touches the earth. In this way Dionysius (Coel. Hier. i) expounds
the matter, that every procession of the divine manifestation comes
to us from the movement of the Father of light.
Reply to Objection 3: These things are said of God in Scripture
metaphorically. For as the sun is said to enter a house, or to go out,
according as its rays reach the house, so God is said to approach to
us, or to recede from us, when we receive the influx of His goodness,
or decline from Him.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether to be immutable belongs to God alone?

Objection 1: It seems that to be immutable does not belong to God
alone. For the Philosopher says (Metaph. ii) that "matter is in
everything which is moved." But, according to some, certain created
substances, as angels and souls, have not matter. Therefore to be
immutable does not belong to God alone.
Objection 2: Further, everything in motion moves to some end. What
therefore has already attained its ultimate end, is not in motion. But
some creatures have already attained to their ultimate end; as all the
blessed in heaven. Therefore some creatures are immovable.
Objection 3: Further, everything which is mutable is variable. But
forms are invariable; for it is said (Sex Princip. i) that "form is
essence consisting of the simple and invariable." Therefore it does
not belong to God alone to be immutable.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Nat. Boni. i), "God alone is
immutable; and whatever things He has made, being from nothing,
are mutable."
I answer that, God alone is altogether immutable; whereas every
creature is in some way mutable. Be it known therefore that a
mutable thing can be called so in two ways: by a power in itself; and
by a power possessed by another. For all creatures before they
existed, were possible, not by any created power, since no creature
is eternal, but by the divine power alone, inasmuch as God could
produce them into existence. Thus, as the production of a thing into
existence depends on the will of God, so likewise it depends on His
will that things should be preserved; for He does not preserve them
otherwise than by ever giving them existence; hence if He took away
His action from them, all things would be reduced to nothing, as
appears from Augustine (Gen. ad lit. iv, 12). Therefore as it was in the
Creator's power to produce them before they existed in themselves,
so likewise it is in the Creator's power when they exist in themselves
to bring them to nothing. In this way therefore, by the power of
another---namely, of God---they are mutable, inasmuch as they are
producible from nothing by Him, and are by Him reducible from
existence to non-existence.