Reply: In the speculative sciences we always proceed from something previously known, both
in demonstrating propositions and also in finding definitions. For just as one comes to know a
conclusion by means of propositions previously known, so also from the concept of a genus and
difference and from the causes of a thing he comes to know its species. But it is impossible to go
on to infinity in this case, because then all science would cease, both as regards demonstrations
and as regards definitions, since the infinite cannot be traversed. So inquiry in all the speculative
sciences works back to something first given, which one does not have to learn or discover
(otherwise he would have to go on to infinity), but which he knows naturally. Such are the
indemonstrable principles of demonstration (for example, Every whole is greater than its part,
and the like), to which all demonstrations in the sciences are reducible. Such, too, are the first
conceptions of the intellect (for example, being, one, and the like), to which all definitions in the
sciences must be reduced.

From this it is clear that the only things we can know in the speculative sciences, either through
demonstration or definition, are those that lie within the range of these naturally known
principles. Now these principles are revealed to man by the light of the agent intellect, which is
something natural to him; and this light makes things known to us only to the extent that it
renders images actually intelligible; for in this consists the operation of the agent intellect, as the
De Anima says. Now images are taken from the senses. So our knowledge of the abovementioned principles begins in the senses and memory, as is evident from the Philosopher.
Consequently, these principles do not carry us beyond that which we can know from the objects
grasped by the senses.

Now we cannot know the essence of the separate substances through that which we take from

the senses. This is clear from what was said above. But through sensible things we can arrive at
a knowledge of the existence of these substances and of some of their characteristics. So we
cannot know the quiddity of any separate substance by means of a speculative science, though
the speculative sciences enable us to know the existence of these substances and some of their
traits; for instance, that they are intellectual, incorruptible, and the like. This is also the teaching of
the Commentator. Avempace (Ibn-Bajja) was of the opposite opinion; he thought that the
quiddities of sensible things adequately reveal immaterial quiddities; but, as the Commentator
says, this is clearly false, because quiddity is predicated of both almost in an equivocal sense.

#### Replies to Opposing Arguments:

Reply to 1. Boethius does not intend to say that through the science of theology we can
contemplate the essence of the divine form itself, but only that is transcends all images.