to lay hold on Him, they sent servants, and then Herodians, and the like, but in
this instance, "priests and Levites," and not merely "priests," but those "from
Jerusalem," that is, the more honorable; for the Evangelist did not notice this
without a cause. And they send to ask, "Who are you?" Yet the manner of his
birth was well known to all, so that all said, "What manner of child shall this
be?" [Luke 1:66]; and the report had gone forth into all the hill country. And
afterwards when he came to Jordan, all the cities were set on the wing, and came
to him from Jerusalem, and from all Judæa, to be baptized. Why then do they
now ask? Not because they did not know him, (how could that be, when he had
been made manifest in so many ways?) but because they wished to bring him to
do that which I have mentioned.
2. Hear then how this blessed person answered to the intention with which
they asked the question, not to the question itself. When they said, "Who are
you?" he did not at once give them what would have been the direct answer, "I
am the voice of one crying in the wilderness." But what did he? He removed the
suspicion they had formed; for, says the Evangelist, being asked, "Who are
you?"

John 1:20
"He confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am not the Christ."
Observe the wisdom of the Evangelist. He mentions this for the third time,
to set forth the excellency of the Baptist, and their wickedness and folly. And
Luke also says, that when the multitudes supposed him to be the Christ, he again
removes their suspicion. This is the part of an honest servant, not only not to
take to himself his master's honor, but also to reject it when given to him by the
many. But the multitudes arrived at this supposition from simplicity and
ignorance; these questioned him from an ill intention, which I have mentioned,
expecting, as I said, to draw him over to their purpose by their flattery. Had they
not expected this, they would not have proceeded immediately to another
question, but would have been angry with him for having given them an answer
foreign to their enquiry, and would have said, "Why, did we suppose that? Did
we come to ask you that?" But now as taken and detected in the fact, they
proceed to another question, and say,

John 1:21
"What then? Are you Elias? And he says, I am not."
For they expected that Elias also would come, as Christ declares; for when
His disciples enquired, "How then do the scribes say that Elias must first come?"
[Matthew 17:10] He replied, "Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things."
Then they ask, "Are you that prophet? And he answered, No." [Matthew 17:10]
Yet surely he was a prophet. Wherefore then does he deny it? Because again he
looks to the intention of his questioners. For they expected that some special
prophet should come, because Moses said, "The Lord your God will raise up
unto you a Prophet of your brethren like me, unto Him shall you harken."
[Deuteronomy 18:15] Now this was Christ. Wherefore they do not say, "Are you
a prophet?" meaning thereby one of the ordinary prophets; but the expression,
"Are you the prophet?" with the addition of the article, means, "Are you that
Prophet who was foretold by Moses?" and therefore he denied not that he was a
prophet, but that he was "that Prophet."