SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.164, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the manner and order of the first

temptation was fitting?
Objection 1: It would seem that the manner and order of the first
temptation was not fitting. For just as in the order of nature the angel
was above man, so was the man above the woman. Now sin came
upon man through an angel: therefore in like manner it should have
come upon the woman through the man; in other words the woman
should have been tempted by the man, and not the other way about.
Objection 2: Further, the temptation of our first parents was by
suggestion. Now the devil is able to make suggestions to man
without making use of an outward sensible creature. Since then our
first parents were endowed with a spiritual mind, and adhered less to
sensible than to intelligible things, it would have been more fitting
for man to be tempted with a merely spiritual, instead of an outward,
temptation.
Objection 3: Further, one cannot fittingly suggest an evil except
through some apparent good. But many other animals have a greater
appearance of good than the serpent has. Therefore man was
unfittingly tempted by the devil through a serpent.
Objection 4: Further, the serpent is an irrational animal. Now
wisdom, speech, and punishment are not befitting an irrational
animal. Therefore the serpent is unfittingly described (Gn. 3:1) as
"more subtle than any of the beasts of the earth," or as "the most
prudent of all beasts" according to another version [The Septuagint]:
and likewise is unfittingly stated to have spoken to the woman, and
to have been punished by God.
On the contrary, That which is first in any genus should be
proportionate to all that follow it in that genus. Now in every kind of
sin we find the same order as in the first temptation. For, according
to Augustine (De Trin. xii, 12), it begins with the concupiscence of
sin in the sensuality, signified by the serpent; extends to the lower
reason, by pleasure, signified by the woman; and reaches to the
higher reason by consent in the sin, signified by the man. Therefore
the order of the first temptation was fitting.
I answer that, Man is composed of a twofold nature, intellective and

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.164, C.3.

sensitive. Hence the devil, in tempting man, made use of a twofold
incentive to sin: one on the part of the intellect, by promising the
Divine likeness through the acquisition of knowledge which man
naturally desires to have; the other on the part of sense. This he did
by having recourse to those sensible things, which are most akin to
man, partly by tempting the man through the woman who was akin to
him in the same species; partly by tempting the woman through the
serpent, who was akin to them in the same genus; partly by
suggesting to them to eat of the forbidden fruit, which was akin to
them in the proximate genus.
Reply to Objection 1: In the act of tempting the devil was by way of
principal agent; whereas the woman was employed as an instrument
of temptation in bringing about the downfall of the man, both
because the woman was weaker than the man, and consequently
more liable to be deceived, and because, on account of her union
with man, the devil was able to deceive the man especially through
her. Now there is no parity between principal agent and instrument,
because the principal agent must exceed in power, which is not
requisite in the instrumental agent.
Reply to Objection 2: A suggestion whereby the devil suggests
something to man spiritually, shows the devil to have more power
against man than outward suggestion has, since by an inward
suggestion, at least, man's imagination is changed by the devil [FP,
Question 91, Article 3]; whereas by an outward suggestion, a change
is wrought merely on an outward creature. Now the devil had a
minimum of power against man before sin, wherefore he was unable
to tempt him by inward suggestion, but only by outward suggestion.
Reply to Objection 3: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xi, 3), "we
are not to suppose that the devil chose the serpent as his means of
temptation; but as he was possessed of the lust of deceit, he could
only do so by the animal he was allowed to use for that purpose."
Reply to Objection 4: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xi, 29),
"the serpent is described as most prudent or subtle, on account of
the cunning of the devil, who wrought his wiles in it: thus, we speak
of a prudent or cunning tongue, because it is the instrument of a
prudent or cunning man in advising something prudently or
cunningly. Nor indeed (Gen. ad lit. xi, 28) did the serpent understand
the sounds which were conveyed through it to the woman; nor again
are we to believe that its soul was changed into a rational nature,