By the mystery of the Assumption into heaven there were definitively accomplished in
Mary all the effects of the one mediation of Christ the Redeemer of the world and Risen
Lord: "In Christ shall all be made alive. But each in his own order: Christ the first fruits,
then at his coming those who belong to Christ" (1 Cor. 15:22-23). In the mystery of the
Assumption is expressed the faith of the Church, according to which Mary is "united by a
close and indissoluble bond" to Christ, for, if as Virgin and Mother she was singularly
united with him in his first coming, so through her continued collaboration with him she
will also be united with him in expectation of the second; "redeemed in an especially
sublime manner by reason of the merits of her Son," she also has that specifically
maternal role of mediatrix of mercy at his final coming, when all those who belong to
Christ "shall be made alive," when "the last enemy to be destroyed is death" (1 Cor.
15:26)."

Connected with this exaltation of the noble "Daughter of Sion" through her
Assumption into heaven is the mystery of her eternal glory. For the Mother of Christ is
glorified as "Queen of the Universe." She who at the Annunciation called herself the
"handmaid of the Lord" remained throughout her earthly life faithful to what this name
expresses. In this she confirmed that she was a true "disciple" of Christ, who strongly
emphasized that his mission was one of service: the Son of Man came not to be served
but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many" (Mt. 20:28). In this way Mary
became the first of those who, "serving Christ also in others, with humility and patience
lead their brothers and sisters to that King whom to serve is to reign," and she fully
obtained that "state of royal freedom" proper to Christ's disciples: to serve means to
reign!

"Christ obeyed even at the cost of death, and was therefore raised up by the Father (cf.
Phil. 2:8-9). Thus he entered into the glory of his kingdom. To him all things are made
subject until he subjects himself and all created things to the Father, that God may be all

in all (cf. 1 Cor. 15:27-28)." Mary, the handmaid of the Lord, has a share in this
Kingdom of the Son. The glory of serving does not cease to be her royal exaltation:
assumed into heaven, she does not cease her saving service, which expresses her maternal
mediation "until the eternal fulfillment of all the elect." Thus, she who here on earth
"loyally preserved in her union with her Son unto the Cross," continues to remain united
with him, while now "all things are subjected to him, until he subjects to the Father
himself and all things." Thus in her Assumption into heaven, Mary is as it were clothed
by the whole reality of the Communion of Saints, and her very union with the Son in
glory is wholly oriented towards the definitive fullness of the Kingdom, when "God will
be all in all."