be slandered? Well this is a possible case; but even such an one ought not to be
promoted. For the result is much to be feared. Therefore it is said he should have
"a good report," for your good works are to shine. As therefore no one will say
that the sun is dark, not even the blind, (for he will be ashamed to oppose the
opinion of all,) so him that is of remarkable goodness no one will blame. And
though, on account of his doctrines, the Heathen will often slander him, yet they
will not attack his virtuous life, but will join with others in admiring and
revering it.
Moral. Let us then so live, that the name of God be not blasphemed. Let us
not, on the one hand, look to human reputation; nor on the other, subject
ourselves to an evil report, but on both sides let us observe moderation; as he
says, "Among whom you shine as lights in the world." [Philippians 2:15] For on
this account He left us here, that we may be as luminaries. that we may be
appointed Teachers of others, that we may be as leaven; that we may converse as
angels among men, as men with children, as spiritual with natural men, that they
may profit by us, that we may be as seed, and may bring forth much fruit. There
were no need of words, if we so shone forth in our lives, there were no need of
Teachers, did we but exhibit works. There would be no Heathen, if we were such
Christians as we ought to be. If we kept the commandments of Christ, if we
suffered injury, if we allowed advantage to be taken of us, if being reviled we
blessed, if being ill-treated we did good [1 Corinthians 4:12]; if this were the
general practice among us, no one would be so brutal as not to become a convert
to godliness. And to show this; Paul was but one man, yet how many did he
draw after him? If we were all such as he, how many worlds might we not have
drawn to us? Behold, Christians are more numerous than Heathens. And in other
arts, one man can teach a hundred boys together; but here, where there are many
more teachers, and many more than the learners, no one is brought over. For
those who are taught, look to the virtue of their teachers: and when they see us
manifesting the same desires, pursuing the same objects, power and honor, how
can they admire Christianity? They see our lives open to reproach, our souls

worldly. We admire wealth equally with them, and even more. We have the same
horror of death, the same dread of poverty, the same impatience of disease, we
are equally fond of glory and of rule. We harass ourselves to death from our love
of money, and serve the time. How then can they believe? From miracles? But
these are no longer wrought. From our conversation? It has become corrupt.
From charity? Not a trace of it is anywhere to be seen. Therefore we shall have
to give an account not only of our own sins, but of the injury done by them to
others.
Let us then return to a sound mind; let us watch, and show forth a heavenly
conversation upon earth. Let us say, "Our conversation is in heaven"
[Philippians 3:20], and let us upon earth maintain the contest. There have been
great men, it may be said, among us, but "how," says the Greek, "shall I believe
it? For I do not see anything like it in your conduct. If this is to be said, we too
have had our philosophers, men admirable for their lives." "But show me
another Paul, or a John: you cannot." Would he not then laugh at us for
reasoning in this manner? Would he not continue to sit still in ignorance, seeing
that the wisdom we profess is in words, not in works? For now for a single
halfpenny you are ready to slay or be slain! For a handful of earth you raise
lawsuit after lawsuit! For the death of a child you turn all upside down: I omit
other things that might make us weep; your auguries, your omens, your
superstitious observances, your casting of nativities, your signs, your amulets,
your divinations, your incantations, your magic arts. These are crying sins,
enough to provoke the anger of God; that after He has sent His own Son, you
should venture on such things as these.
What then can we do but weep? For hardly is a small portion of the world
in the way of salvation, and they who are perishing hear it, and rejoice that they
are not destined to suffer alone, but in company with numbers. But what cause is
this for joy? That very joy will subject them to punishment. For do not think that
it is there as here, that to have companions in suffering affords consolation. And
whence is this manifest? I will make it clear. Suppose that a man were