THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether Christ suffered at a suitable time?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ did not suffer at a suitable
time. For Christ's Passion was prefigured by the sacrifice of the
Paschal lamb: hence the Apostle says (1 Cor. 5:7): "Christ our Pasch
is sacrificed." But the paschal lamb was slain "on the fourteenth day
at eventide," as is stated in Ex. 12:6. Therefore it seems that Christ
ought to have suffered then; which is manifestly false: for He was
then celebrating the Pasch with His disciples, according to Mark's
account (14:12): "On the first day of the unleavened bread, when
they sacrificed the Pasch"; whereas it was on the following day that
He suffered.
Objection 2: Further, Christ's Passion is called His uplifting,
according to Jn. 3:14: "So must the Son of man be lifted up." And
Christ is Himself called the Sun of Justice, as we read Mal. 4:2.
Therefore it seems that He ought to have suffered at the sixth hour,
when the sun is at its highest point, and yet the contrary appears
from Mk. 15:25: "It was the third hour, and they crucified Him."
Objection 3: Further, as the sun is at its highest point in each day at
the sixth hour, so also it reaches its highest point in every year at the
summer solstice. Therefore Christ ought to have suffered about the
time of the summer solstice rather than about the vernal equinox.
Objection 4: Further, the world was enlightened by Christ's presence
in it, according to Jn. 9:5: "As long as I am in the world I am the light
of the world." Consequently it was fitting for man's salvation that
Christ should have lived longer in the world, so that He should have
suffered, not in young, but in old, age.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 13:1): "Jesus, knowing that His hour
was come for Him to pass out of this world to the Father"; and (Jn.
2:4): "My hour is not yet come." Upon which texts Augustine
observes: "When He had done as much as He deemed sufficient,
then came His hour, not of necessity, but of will, not of condition, but
of power." Therefore Christ died at an opportune time.
I answer that, As was observed above (Article 1), Christ's Passion
was subject to His will. But His will was ruled by the Divine wisdom
which "ordereth all things" conveniently and "sweetly" (Wis. 8:1).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.10.

Consequently it must be said that Christ's Passion was enacted at an
opportune time. Hence it is written in De Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test., qu. lv:
"The Saviour did everything in its proper place and season."
Reply to Objection 1: Some hold that Christ did die on the fourteenth
day of the moon, when the Jews sacrificed the Pasch: hence it is
stated (Jn. 18:28) that the Jews "went not into Pilate's hall" on the
day of the Passion, "that they might not be defiled, but that they
might eat the Pasch." Upon this Chrysostom observes (Hom. lxxxii in
Joan.): "The Jews celebrated the Pasch then; but He celebrated the
Pasch on the previous day, reserving His own slaying until the
Friday, when the old Pasch was kept." And this appears to tally with
the statement (Jn. 13:1-5) that "before the festival day of the
Pasch . . . when supper was done" . . . Christ washed "the feet of the
disciples."
But Matthew's account (26:17) seems opposed to this; that "on the
first day of the Azymes the disciples came to Jesus, saying: Where
wilt Thou that we prepare for Thee to eat the Pasch?" From which, as
Jerome says, "since the fourteenth day of the first month is called
the day of the Azymes, when the lamb was slain, and when it was full
moon," it is quite clear that Christ kept the supper on the fourteenth
and died on the fifteenth. And this comes out more clearly from Mk.
14:12: "On the first day of the unleavened bread, when they
sacrificed the Pasch," etc.; and from Lk. 22:7: "The day of the
unleavened bread came, on which it was necessary that the Pasch
should be killed."
Consequently, then, others say that Christ ate the Pasch with His
disciples on the proper day---that is, on the fourteenth day of the
moon---"showing thereby that up to the last day He was not opposed
to the law," as Chrysostom says (Hom. lxxxi in Matth.): but that the
Jews, being busied in compassing Christ's death against the law, put
off celebrating the Pasch until the following day. And on this account
it is said of them that on the day of Christ's Passion they were
unwilling to enter Pilate's hall, "that they might not be defiled, but
that they might eat the Pasch."
But even this solution does not tally with Mark, who says: "On the
first day of the unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the Pasch."
Consequently Christ and the Jews celebrated the ancient Pasch at
the one time. And as Bede says on Lk. 22:7,8: "Although Christ who
is our Pasch was slain on the following day---that is, on the fifteenth