THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.4.

being mutually ordained, they form one thing, then the sign is not
ambiguous but certain: thus this word "man" signifies the soul and
body inasmuch as together they form the human nature. In this way
a sacrament signifies the three things aforesaid, inasmuch as by
being in a certain order they are one thing.
Reply to Objection 2: Since a sacrament signifies that which
sanctifies, it must needs signify the effect, which is implied in the
sanctifying cause as such.
Reply to Objection 3: It is enough for a sacrament that it signify that
perfection which consists in the form, nor is it necessary that it
should signify only that perfection which is the end.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a sacrament is always something

sensible?
Objection 1: It seems that a sacrament is not always something
sensible. Because, according to the Philosopher (Prior. Anal. ii),
every effect is a sign of its cause. But just as there are some
sensible effects, so are there some intelligible effects; thus science
is the effect of a demonstration. Therefore not every sign is sensible.
Now all that is required for a sacrament is something that is a sign of
some sacred thing, inasmuch as thereby man is sanctified, as stated
above (Article 2). Therefore something sensible is not required for a
sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, sacraments belong to the kingdom of God and
the Divine worship. But sensible things do not seem to belong to the
Divine worship: for we are told (Jn. 4:24) that "God is a spirit; and
they that adore Him, must adore Him in spirit and in truth"; and (Rm.
14:17) that "the kingdom of God is not meat and drink." Therefore
sensible things are not required for the sacraments.
Objection 3: Further. Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii) that "sensible
things are goods of least account, since without them man can live
aright." But the sacraments are necessary for man's salvation, as we
shall show farther on (Question 61, Article 1): so that man cannot
live aright without them. Therefore sensible things are not required
for the sacraments.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Tract. lxxx super Joan.): "The word
is added to the element and this becomes a sacrament"; and he is
speaking there of water which is a sensible element. Therefore
sensible things are required for the sacraments.
I answer that, Divine wisdom provides for each thing according to its
mode; hence it is written (Wis. 8:1) that "she . . . ordereth all things
sweetly": wherefore also we are told (Mt. 25:15) that she "gave to
everyone according to his proper ability." Now it is part of man's
nature to acquire knowledge of the intelligible from the sensible. But
a sign is that by means of which one attains to the knowledge of
something else. Consequently, since the sacred things which are
signified by the sacraments, are the spiritual and intelligible goods
by means of which man is sanctified, it follows that the sacramental