for any servant to be good, especially when they have not the benefit of
instruction either from those without or from ourselves. They do not converse
with free men of orderly conduct, who have a great regard for their reputation.
For all these reasons it is a difficult and surprising thing that there should ever be
a good servant.
When therefore it is seen that the power of religion, imposing a restraint
upon a class naturally so self-willed, has rendered them singularly well behaved
and gentle, their masters, however unreasonable they may be, will form a high
opinion of our doctrines. For it is manifest, that having previously instilled in
their souls a fear of the Resurrection, of the Judgment, and of all those things
which we are taught by our philosophy to expect after death, they have been able
to resist wickedness, having in their souls a settled principle to counterbalance
the pleasures of sin. So that it is not by chance or without reason, that Paul
shows so much consideration for this class of men: since the more wicked they
are, the more admirable is the power of that preaching which reforms them. For
we then most admire a physician, when he restores to a healthy and sane state
one who was despaired of, whom nothing benefited, who was unable to
command his unreasonable desires, and wallowed in them. And observe what he
most requires of them; the qualities which contribute most to their masters' ease.
"Not answering again, not purloining"; that is, to show all good will in
matters entrusted to them, to be particularly faithful in their masters' concerns,
and obedient to their commands.
Moral. Do not therefore think that I enlarge upon this subject without a
purpose. For the rest of my discourse will be addressed to servants. Look not to
this, my good friend, that you serve a man, but that your service is to God, that
you adorn the Gospel. Then you will undertake everything in obedience to your
master, bearing with him, though impatient, and angry without a cause. Consider
that you are not gratifying him, but fulfilling the commandment of God; then
you will easily submit to anything. And what I have said before, I repeat here,
that when our spiritual state is right, the things of this life will follow. For a

servant, so tractable and so well disposed, will not only be accepted by God, and
made partaker of those glorious crowns, but his master himself, whom he serves
so well, even though he be brutish and stone-hearted, inhuman and ferocious,
will commend and admire him, and will honor him above all the rest, and will
set him over their heads, though he be a Gentile.
And that servants are required to be thus disposed towards a Gentile master,
I will show you by an example. Joseph, who was of a different religion from the
Egyptian, was sold to the chief cook. What then did he? When he saw the young
man was virtuous, he did not consider the difference of their religion, but loved
and favored and admired him, and committed the others to his superintendence,
and knew nothing of the affairs of his own house because of him. Thus he was a
second master, and even more of a master than his lord, for he knew more of his
master's affairs than his master himself. And even afterwards, as it seems to me,
when he believed the unjust accusation framed against him by his wife, yet from
his former regard for him, retaining a respect for that just man, he satisfied his
resentment with imprisonment. For if he had not greatly reverenced and
esteemed him from his former conduct, he would have thrust his sword through
his body, and dispatched him at once. "For jealousy is the rage of a man;
therefore he will not regard any ransom, neither will he rest content, though you
give many gifts." [Proverbs 6:34-35] And if such is the jealousy of men in
general, much more violent must it have been with him, an Egyptian and
barbarian, and injured as he thought by one whom he had honored. For you all
know that injuries do not affect us in the same way from all persons, but that
those grieve us most bitterly and deeply which proceed from those who were
well-affected toward us, who had trusted us and whom we had trusted, and who
had received many kindnesses from us. He did not consider with himself, nor
say, What! Have I taken a servant into my house, shared with him my substance,
made him free, and even greater than myself, and is this the return that he makes
me? He did not say this, so much was his mind prepossessed by his previous
respect for him.