reproach him with his dream, though they had even received their meat from
him, and planned to deprive him of life and of liberty. And they ate, and cared
not for their brother lying naked in the pit. What could be worse than such
brutality? Were they not worse than any number of murderers? And after this,
having drawn him up, they gave him over to ten thousand deaths, selling him to
barbarian and savage men, who were on their journey to barbarians. Yet he,
when he became ruler, not only remitted them their punishment, but even
acquitted them, as far at least as relating to himself, of their sin, calling what had
been done a dispensation of God, not any wickedness of theirs; and the things
which he did against them he did not as remembering evil, but in all these he
dissembled, for his brother's sake. After this, when he saw them clinging to him,
he straightway threw away the mask, and wept aloud, and embraced them, as
though he had received the greatest benefits, he, who formerly was made away
with by them, and he brought them all down into Egypt, and repaid them with
ten thousand benefits. What excuse then shall we have, if after the Law, and after
grace, and after the addition of so much heavenly wisdom, we do not even strive
to rival him who lived before grace and before the Law? Who shall deliver us
from punishment? For there is nothing, there is nothing more grievous than the
remembrance of injuries. And this the man has showed that owed ten thousand
talents; from whom payment was at one time not demanded, at another time
again demanded; not demanded, because of the lovingkindness of God; but
demanded, because of his own wickedness, and because of his malice toward his
fellow-servant. Knowing all which things, let us forgive our neighbors their
trespasses, and repay them by deeds of an opposite kind, that we too may obtain
mercy from God, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 72 on the Gospel of John
John 13:20
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receives whomsoever I send, receives Me:
and He that receives Me, receives Him that sent Me."
1. Great is the recompense of care bestowed upon the servants of God, and
of itself it yields to us its fruits. For, "he that receives you," it says, "receives Me,
and he that receives Me, receives Him that sent Me." [Matthew 10:40] Now what
can be equal to the receiving Christ and His Father? But what kind of connection
has this with what was said before? What has it in common with that which He
had said, "If you do these things happy are you," to add, "He that receives you"?
A close connection, and very harmonious. Observe how. When they were about
to go forth and to suffer many dreadful things, He comforts them in two ways;
one derived from Himself, the other derived from others. "For if," He says, "you
are truly wise, ever keeping Me in mind, and bearing about all both what I said,
and what I did, you will easily endure terrible things. And not in this way only,
but also from your enjoying great attention from all men." The first point He
declared when He said, "If you do these things happy are you"; the second when
He said, "He that receives you receives Me." For He opened the houses of all
men to them, so that both from the sound wisdom of their manners, and the zeal
of those who would tend them, they might have twofold comfort. Then when He
had given these directions to them as to men about to run through all the world,
reflecting that the traitor was deprived of both of these things, and would enjoy
neither of them, neither patience in toils, nor the service of kind entertainers, He
again was troubled. And the Evangelist to signify this besides, and to show that
it was on his account that He was troubled, adds,