FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.6.

accidentally, through the apprehension of the reason. Hence the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 9) that "properly speaking the
incontinent man is one who does not follow right reason; but
accidentally, he is also one who does not follow false reason." We
must therefore conclude that, absolutely speaking, every will at
variance with reason, whether right or erring, is always evil.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the judgment of an erring reason is
not derived from God, yet the erring reason puts forward its
judgment as being true, and consequently as being derived from
God, from Whom is all truth.
Reply to Objection 2: The saying of Augustine holds good when it is
known that the inferior authority prescribes something contrary to
the command of the higher authority. But if a man were to believe the
command of the proconsul to be the command of the emperor, in
scorning the command of the proconsul he would scorn the
command of the emperor. In like manner if a man were to know that
human reason was dictating something contrary to God's
commandment, he would not be bound to abide by reason: but then
reason would not be entirely erroneous. But when erring reason
proposes something as being commanded by God, then to scorn the
dictate of reason is to scorn the commandment of God.
Reply to Objection 3: Whenever reason apprehends something as
evil, it apprehends it under some species of evil; for instance, as
being something contrary to a divine precept, or as giving scandal,
or for some such like reason. And then that evil is reduced to that
species of malice.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the will is good when it abides by erring

reason?
Objection 1: It would seem that the will is good when it abides by
erring reason. For just as the will, when at variance with the reason,
tends to that which reason judges to be evil; so, when in accord with
reason, it tends to what reason judges to be good. But the will is evil
when it is at variance with reason, even when erring. Therefore even
when it abides by erring reason, the will is good.
Objection 2: Further, the will is always good, when it abides by the
commandment of God and the eternal law. But the eternal law and
God's commandment are proposed to us by the apprehension of the
reason, even when it errs. Therefore the will is good, even when it
abides by erring reason.
Objection 3: Further, the will is evil when it is at variance with erring
reason. If, therefore, the will is evil also when it abides by erring
reason, it seems that the will is always evil when in conjunction with
erring reason: so that in such a case a man would be in a dilemma,
and, of necessity, would sin: which is unreasonable. Therefore the
will is good when it abides by erring reason.
On the contrary, The will of those who slew the apostles was evil.
And yet it was in accord with the erring reason, according to Jn.
16:2: "The hour cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think that he
doth a service to God." Therefore the will can be evil, when it abides
by erring reason.
I answer that, Whereas the previous question is the same as
inquiring "whether an erring conscience binds"; so this question is
the same as inquiring "whether an erring conscience excuses." Now
this question depends on what has been said above about
ignorance. For it was said (Question 6, Article 8) that ignorance
sometimes causes an act to be involuntary, and sometimes not. And
since moral good and evil consist in action in so far as it is
voluntary, as was stated above (Article 2); it is evident that when
ignorance causes an act to be involuntary, it takes away the
character of moral good and evil; but not, when it does not cause the
act to be involuntary. Again, it has been stated above (Question 6,
Article 8) that when ignorance is in any way willed, either directly or