deserve, will have a commensurate reward. For not a single item of good,
however small it may be, will be overlooked by the righteous judge. For if He
makes such an exact scrutiny of our sins, as to require punishment for both our
words and thoughts, much more will our good deeds, whether they be great or
small, be reckoned to our credit at that day. Wherefore, even if you are not able
to return again to the most exact state of discipline, yet if you withdraw yourself
in a slight degree at least from your present disorder and excess, even this will
not be impossible: only set yourself to the task at once, and open the entrance
into the place of contest; but as long as you tarry outside this naturally seems
difficult and impracticable to you. For before making the trial even if things are
easy and manageable they are wont to present an appearance of much difficulty
to us: but when we are actually engaged in the trial, and making the venture the
greater part of our distress is removed, and confidence taking the place of tremor
and despair lessens the fear and increases the facility of operation, and makes
our good hopes stronger. For this reason also the wicked one dragged Judas out
of this world lest he should make a fair beginning, and so return by means of
repentance to the point from which he fell. For although it may seem a strange
thing to say, I will not admit even that sin to be too great for the succour which is
brought to us from repentance. Wherefore I pray and beseech you to banish all
this Satanic mode of thinking from your soul, and to return to this state of
salvation. For if indeed I were commanding you to ascend to your former
altitude all at once, you would naturally complain of there being much difficulty
in doing this: but if all which I now ask you to do is to get up and return thence
in the opposite direction, why do you hesitate, and shrink, and make a retrograde
movement? Have you not seen those who have died in the midst of luxury and
drunkenness, and sport and all the other folly of this life? Where are they now
who used to strut through the market place with much pomp, and a crowd of
attendants? Who were clothed in silk and redolent with perfumes, and kept a
table for their parasites, and were in constant attendance at the theatre? What has
now become of all that parade of theirs? It is all gone—the costly splendour of

their banquets, the throng of musicians, the attentions of flatterers, the loud
laughter, the relaxation of spirit, the enervation of mind, the voluptuous,
abandoned, extravagant manner of life— it has all come to an end. Where now
have all these things taken their flight? What has become of the body which
enjoyed so much attention, and cleanliness. Go your way to the coffin, behold
the dust, the ashes, the worms, behold the loathsomeness of the place, and groan
bitterly. And would that the penalty were limited to the ashes! But now transfer
your thought from the coffin and these worms to that undying worm, to the fire
unquenchable, to the gnashing of teeth, to the outer darkness, to affliction and
straitness, to the parable of Lazarus and the rich man, who although the owner of
so much wealth, and clothed in purple could not become the owner of even a
drop of water; and this when he was placed in a condition of such great
necessity. The things of this world are in their nature no-wise better than dreams.
For just as those who work in the mines or suffer some other kind of punishment
more severe than this, when they have fallen asleep owing to their many weary
toils and the extreme bitterness of their life, and in their dreams see themselves
living in luxury and prosperity, are in no wise grateful to their dreams after they
have awaked, even so that rich man having become rich in this present life, as it
were in a dream, after his departure hence was punished with that bitter
punishment. Consider these things, and having contrasted that fire with the
conflagration of desires which now possesses you, release yourself from the
furnace. For he who has thoroughly quenched this furnace here, will have no
experience of that in the other world: but if a man does not get the better of this
furnace here, the other will lay hold of him more vehemently when he has
departed hence. How long a time do you wish the enjoyment of the present life
to be extended? For I do not suppose indeed that more than fifty years remain to
you so as to reach extreme old age, nor indeed is even this at all assured to us:
for how should they who cannot be confident about living even to the evening
rely upon so many years as these? And not only is this uncertain, but there is the
uncertainty also of a change in our affairs, for often when life has been extended