in whom the movement of his intellective part is either retarded or
thwarted by the inclination of his sensitive part. But when there is
nothing to retard or thwart it, nature is moved with its whole energy.
So it is reasonable to suppose that the angels who had a higher
nature, were turned to God more mightily and efficaciously. The
same thing happens in men, since greater grace and glory are
bestowed according to the greater earnestness of their turning to
God. Hence it appears that the angels who had the greater natural
powers, had the more grace and glory.
Reply to Objection 1: As grace comes of God's will alone, so likewise
does the nature of the angel: and as God's will ordained nature for
grace, so did it ordain the various degrees of nature to the various
degrees of grace.
Reply to Objection 2: The acts of the rational creature are from the
creature itself; whereas nature is immediately from God. Accordingly
it seems rather that grace is bestowed according to degree of nature
than according to works.
Reply to Objection 3: Diversity of natural gifts is in one way in the
angels, who are themselves different specifically; and in quite
another way in men, who differ only numerically. For specific
difference is on account of the end; while numerical difference is
because of the matter. Furthermore, there is something in man which
can thwart or impede the movement of his intellective nature; but not
in the angels. Consequently the argument is not the same for both.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether natural knowledge and love remain in the

beatified angels?
Objection 1: It would seem that natural knowledge and love do not
remain in the beatified angels. For it is said (1 Cor. 13:10): "When
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done
away." But natural love and knowledge are imperfect in comparison
with beatified knowledge and love. Therefore, in beatitude, natural
knowledge and love cease.
Objection 2: Further, where one suffices, another is superfluous. But
the knowledge and love of glory suffice for the beatified angels.
Therefore it would be superfluous for their natural knowledge and
love to remain.
Objection 3: Further, the same faculty has not two simultaneous
acts, as the same line cannot, at the same end, be terminated in two
points. But the beatified angels are always exercising their beatified
knowledge and love; for, as is said Ethic. i, 8, happiness consists not
in habit, but in act. Therefore there can never be natural knowledge
and love in the angels.
On the contrary, So long as a nature endures, its operation remains.
But beatitude does not destroy nature, since it is its perfection.
Therefore it does not take away natural knowledge and love.
I answer that, Natural knowledge and love remain in the angels. For
as principles of operations are mutually related, so are the
operations themselves. Now it is manifest that nature is to beatitude
as first to second; because beatitude is superadded to nature. But
the first must ever be preserved in the second. Consequently nature
must be preserved in beatitude: and in like manner the act of nature
must be preserved in the act of beatitude.
Reply to Objection 1: The advent of a perfection removes the
opposite imperfection. Now the imperfection of nature is not
opposed to the perfection of beatitude, but underlies it; as the
imperfection of the power underlies the perfection of the form, and
the power is not taken away by the form, but the privation which is
opposed to the form. In the same way, the imperfection of natural
knowledge is not opposed to the perfection of the knowledge in