the desert, but Heaven, you accept the contrary. Yet surely, how manifold soever
be their security below, you can never become free from the care of them. I
mean, though thou lose them not, you will never be delivered from anxiety lest
you lose. But there you will undergo none of these things: and mark, what is yet
more, thou dost not only bury your gold, but plantest it. For the same is both
treasure and seed; or rather it is more than either of these. For the seed remains
not for ever, but this abides perpetually. Again, the treasure germinates not, but
this bears you fruits which never die.
6. But if you tell me of the time, and the delay of the recompence, I too can
point out and tell how much you receive back even here: and besides all this,
from the very things of this life, I will try to convict you of making this excuse to
no purpose. I mean, that even in the present life you provide many things which
you are not yourself to enjoy; and should any one find fault, you plead your
children and their children, and so thinkest you have found palliation enough for
your superfluous labors. For when in extreme old age you are building splendid
houses, before the completion of which (in many instances) you will have
departed; when you plant trees, which will bear their fruit after many years;
when you are buying properties and inheritances, the ownership of which you
will acquire after a long time, and art eagerly busy in many other such things, the
enjoyment whereof you will not reap; is it indeed for your own sake, or for those
to come after, that you are so employed? How then is it not the utmost folly, here
not at all to hesitate at the delay of time; and this though you are by this delay to
lose all the reward of your labors: but there, because of such waiting to be
altogether torpid; and this, although it bring you the greater gain, and although it
convey not your good things on to others, but procure the gifts for yourself.
But besides this, the delay itself is not long; nay, for those things are at the
doors, and we know not but that even in our own generation all things which
concern us may have their accomplishment, and that fearful day may arrive,
setting before us the awful and incorruptible tribunal. Yea, for the more part of
the signs are fulfilled, and the gospel moreover has been preached in all parts of

the world, and the predictions of wars, and of earthquakes, and of famines, have
come to pass, and the interval is not great.
But is it that thou dost not see any signs? Why, this self-same thing is a very
great sign. For neither did they in Noah's time see any presages of that universal
destruction, but in the midst of their playing, eating, marrying, doing all things to
which they were used, even so they were overtaken by that fearful judgment.
And they too in Sodom in like manner, living in delight, and suspecting none of
what befell them, were consumed by those lightnings, which then came down
upon them.
Considering then all these things, let us betake ourselves unto the
preparation for our departure hence.
For even if the common day of the consummation never overtake us, the
end of each one is at the doors, whether he be old or young; and it is not possible
for men after they have gone hence, either to buy oil any more, or to obtain
pardon by prayers, though he that entreats be Abraham, [Luke 16:24] or Noah,
or Job, or Daniel. [Ezekiel 14:14]
While then we have opportunity, let us store up for ourselves beforehand
much confidence, let us gather oil in abundance, let us remove all into Heaven,
that in the fitting time, and when we most need them, we may enjoy all: by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory, and
the might, now and always, and forever and ever. Amen.