him, and do you make petty calculations of such things? When you are inviting
the King to your table, do you fear because of such things as these?
Let us suppose two tables, and let one be filled with those, and have the
blind, the halt, the maimed in hand or leg, the barefoot, those clad with but one
scanty garment, and that worn out: but let the other have grandees, generals,
governors, great officers, arrayed in costly robes, and fine lawn, belted with
golden girdles. Again, here at the table of the poor let there be neither silver, nor
store of wine, but just enough to refresh and gladden, and let the drinking cups
and the rest of the vessels be made from glass only; but there, at the table of the
rich, let all the vessels be of silver and gold, and the semicircular table, not such
as one person can lift, but as two young men can with difficulty move, and the
wine-jars lie in order, glittering far beyond the silver with gold, and let the
semicircle be smoothly laid all over with soft drapery. Here, again, let there be
many servants, in garments not less ornamented than those of the guests, and
bravely appareled, and wearing loose trowsers, men beauteous to look upon, in
the very flower of life, plump, and well conditioned; but there let there be only
two servants disdaining all that proud vanity. And let those have costly meats,
but these only enough to appease hunger and inspire cheerfulness. Have I said
enough? And are both tables laid out with sufficient minuteness? Is anything
wanting? I think not. For I have gone over the guests, and the costliness both of
the vessels, and of the linen, and the meats. However, if we should have omitted
anything, we shall discover it as we proceed with the discourse.
Come then, now that we have correctly drawn each table in its proper
outline, let us see at which you will seat yourselves. For I for my part am going
to that of the blind, and the lame, but probably the more part of you will choose
the other, that of the generals, that is so gay and splendid. Let us then see which
of them does more abound in pleasure; for as yet let us not examine into the
things of hereafter, seeing that in those at least this of mine has the superiority.
Wherefore? Because this one has Christ sitting down at it, the other men, this has
the Master, that the servants. But say we nothing of these things as yet; but let us

see which has the more of present pleasure. And even in this respect, then, this
pleasure is greater, for it is more pleasure to sit down with a King than with his
servants. But let us withdraw this consideration also; let us examine the matter
simply by itself. I, then, and those who choose the table I do, shall with much
freedom and ease of mind both say and hear everything: but you trembling and
fearing, and ashamed before those you sit down with, will not even have the
heart to reach out your hands, just as though you had got to a school, and not a
dinner, just as though you were trembling before dreadful masters. But not so
they. But, says one, the honor is great. Nay, I further am in more honor; for your
mean estate appears grander, when even while sharing the same table, the words
ye utter are those of slaves.
For the servant then most of all shows as such, when he sits down with his
master; for he is in a place where he ought not to be; nor has he from such
familiarity so much dignity as he has abasement, for he is then abased
exceedingly. And one may see a servant by himself make a brave appearance,
and the poor man seem splendid by himself, rather than when he is walking with
a rich one; for the low when near the lofty, then appears low, and the
juxtaposition makes the low seem lower, not loftier. So too your sitting down
with them makes you seem as of yet meaner condition. But not so, us. In these
two things, then, we have the advantage, in freedom, and in honor; which have
nothing equal to them in regard of pleasure. For I at least would prefer a crust
with freedom, to thousands of dainties with slavery. For, says one, "Better is an
entertainment of herbs with love and kindness, than an ox from the stall with
hatred." [Proverbs 15:17] For whatsoever those may say, they who are present
must needs praise it, or give offense; assuming thus the rank of parasites, or
rather, being worse than they. For parasites indeed, even though it be with shame
and insult, have yet liberty of speech: but you have not even this. But your
meanness is indeed as great, (for you fear and crouch,) but not so your honor.
Surely then that table is deprived of every pleasure, but this is replete with all
delight of soul.