THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.65, C.2.

Objection 8: Further, there are three kinds of sin, original, mortal and
venial. Now Baptism is intended as a remedy against original sin,
and Penance against mortal sin. Therefore besides the seven
sacraments, there should be another against venial sin.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 62, Article 5; Question 63,
Article 1), the sacraments of the Church were instituted for a twofold
purpose: namely, in order to perfect man in things pertaining to the
worship of God according to the religion of Christian life, and to be a
remedy against the defects caused by sin. And in either way it is
becoming that there should be seven sacraments.
For spiritual life has a certain conformity with the life of the body:
just as other corporeal things have a certain likeness to things
spiritual. Now a man attains perfection in the corporeal life in two
ways: first, in regard to his own person; secondly, in regard to the
whole community of the society in which he lives, for man is by
nature a social animal. With regard to himself man is perfected in the
life of the body, in two ways; first, directly [per se], i.e. by acquiring
some vital perfection; secondly, indirectly [per accidens], i.e. by the
removal of hindrances to life, such as ailments, or the like. Now the
life of the body is perfected "directly," in three ways. First, by
generation whereby a man begins to be and to live: and
corresponding to this in the spiritual life there is Baptism, which is a
spiritual regeneration, according to Titus 3:5: "By the laver of
regeneration," etc. Secondly, by growth whereby a man is brought to
perfect size and strength: and corresponding to this in the spiritual
life there is Confirmation, in which the Holy Ghost is given to
strengthen us. Wherefore the disciples who were already baptized
were bidden thus: "Stay you in the city till you be endued with power
from on high" (Lk. 24:49). Thirdly, by nourishment, whereby life and
strength are preserved to man; and corresponding to this in the
spiritual life there is the Eucharist. Wherefore it is said (Jn. 6:54):
"Except you eat of the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood,
you shall not have life in you."
And this would be enough for man if he had an impassible life, both
corporally and spiritually; but since man is liable at times to both
corporal and spiritual infirmity, i.e. sin, hence man needs a cure from
his infirmity; which cure is twofold. one is the healing, that restores
health: and corresponding to this in the spiritual life there is
Penance, according to Ps. 40:5: "Heal my soul, for I have sinned

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.65, C.2.

against Thee." The other is the restoration of former vigor by means
of suitable diet and exercise: and corresponding to this in the
spiritual life there is Extreme Unction, which removes the remainder
of sin, and prepares man for final glory. Wherefore it is written
(James 5:15): "And if he be in sins they shall be forgiven him."
In regard to the whole community, man is perfected in two ways.
First, by receiving power to rule the community and to exercise
public acts: and corresponding to this in the spiritual life there is the
sacrament of order, according to the saying of Heb. 7:27, that priests
offer sacrifices not for themselves only, but also for the people.
Secondly in regard to natural propagation. This is accomplished by
Matrimony both in the corporal and in the spiritual life: since it is not
only a sacrament but also a function of nature.
We may likewise gather the number of the sacraments from their
being instituted as a remedy against the defect caused by sin. For
Baptism is intended as a remedy against the absence of spiritual life;
Confirmation, against the infirmity of soul found in those of recent
birth; the Eucharist, against the soul's proneness to sin; Penance,
against actual sin committed after baptism; Extreme Unction, against
the remainders of sins---of those sins, namely, which are not
sufficiently removed by Penance, whether through negligence or
through ignorance; order, against divisions in the community;
Matrimony, as a remedy against concupiscence in the individual, and
against the decrease in numbers that results from death.
Some, again, gather the number of sacraments from a certain
adaptation to the virtues and to the defects and penal effects
resulting from sin. They say that Baptism corresponds to Faith, and
is ordained as a remedy against original sin; Extreme Unction, to
Hope, being ordained against venial sin; the Eucharist, to Charity,
being ordained against the penal effect which is malice. order, to
Prudence, being ordained against ignorance; Penance to Justice,
being ordained against mortal sin; Matrimony, to Temperance, being
ordained against concupiscence; Confirmation, to Fortitude, being
ordained against infirmity.
Reply to Objection 1: The same principal agent uses various
instruments unto various effects, in accordance with the thing to be
done. In the same way the Divine power and the Passion of Christ
work in us through the various sacraments as through various
instruments.