THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.89, C.4.

counted among the children of God, and this he recovers by
Penance, which is signified (Lk. 15) in the prodigal son, for when he
repented, his father commanded that the first garment should be
restored to him, together with a ring and shoes. The other is his
secondary dignity, viz. innocence, of which, as we read in the same
chapter, the elder son boasted saying (Lk. 15:29): "Behold, for so
many years do I serve thee, and I have never transgressed thy
commandments": and this dignity the penitent cannot recover.
Nevertheless he recovers something greater sometimes; because as
Gregory says (Hom. de centum Ovibus, 34 in Evang.), "those who
acknowledge themselves to have strayed away from God, make up
for their past losses, by subsequent gains: so that there is more joy
in heaven on their account, even as in battle, the commanding officer
thinks more of the soldier who, after running away, returns and
bravely attacks the foe, than of one who has never turned his back,
but has done nothing brave."
By sin man loses his ecclesiastical dignity, because thereby he
becomes unworthy of those things which appertain to the exercise
of the ecclesiastical dignity. This he is debarred from recovering:
first, because he fails to repent; wherefore Isidore wrote to the
bishop Masso, and as we read in the Distinction quoted above
(Objection 3): "The canons order those to be restored to their former
degree, who by repentance have made satisfaction for their sins, or
have made worthy confession of them. On the other hand, those who
do not mend their corrupt and wicked ways are neither allowed to
exercise their order, nor received to the grace of communion."
Secondly, because he does penance negligently, wherefore it is
written in the same Distinction (OBJ 3): "We can be sure that those
who show no signs of humble compunction, or of earnest prayer,
who avoid fasting or study, would exercise their former duties with
great negligence if they were restored to them."
Thirdly, if he has committed a sin to which an irregularity is
attached; wherefore it is said in the same Distinction (Objection 3),
quoting the council of Pope Martin [Martin, bishop of Braga]: "If a
man marry a widow or the relict of another, he must not be admitted
to the ranks of the clergy: and if he has succeeded in creeping in, he
must be turned out. In like manner, if anyone after Baptism be guilty
of homicide, whether by deed, or by command, or by counsel, or in
self-defense." But this is in consequence not of sin, but of
irregularity.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.89, C.4.

Fourthly, on account of scandal, wherefore it is said in the same
Distinction (Objection 3): "Those who have been publicly convicted
or caught in the act of perjury, robbery, fornication, and of such like
crimes, according to the prescription of the sacred canons must be
deprived of the exercise of their respective orders, because it is a
scandal to God's people that such persons should be placed over
them. But those who commit such sins occultly and confess them
secretly to a priest, may be retained in the exercise of their
respective orders, with the assurance of God's merciful forgiveness,
provided they be careful to expiate their sins by fasts and alms,
vigils and holy deeds." The same is expressed (Extra, De Qual.
Ordinand.): "If the aforesaid crimes are not proved by a judicial
process, or in some other way made notorious, those who are guilty
of them must not be hindered, after they have done penance, from
exercising the orders they have received, or from receiving further
orders, except in cases of homicide."
Reply to Objection 1: The same is to be said of the recovery of
virginity as of the recovery of innocence which belongs to man's
secondary dignity in the sight of God.
Reply to Objection 2: In these words Jerome does not say that it is
impossible, but that it is difficult, for man to recover his former
dignity after having sinned, because this is allowed to none but
those who repent perfectly, as stated above. To those canonical
statutes, which seem to forbid this, Augustine replies in his letter to
Boniface (Ep. clxxxv): "If the law of the Church forbids anyone, after
doing penance for a crime, to become a cleric, or to return to his
clerical duties, or to retain them the intention was not to deprive him
of the hope of pardon, but to preserve the rigor of discipline; else we
should have to deny the keys given to the Church, of which it was
said: 'Whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven.'" And further on he adds: "For holy David did penance for
his deadly crimes, and yet he retained his dignity; and Blessed Peter
by shedding most bitter tears did indeed repent him of having denied
his Lord, and yet he remained an apostle. Nevertheless we must not
deem the care of later teachers excessive, who without endangering
a man's salvation, exacted more from his humility, having, in my
opinion, found by experience, that some assumed a pretended
repentance through hankering after honors and power."
Reply to Objection 3: This statute is to be understood as applying to