There are other beings, however, that transcend both that which falls under the senses and that
which falls under the imagination; namely, those that are entirely independent of matter both with
respect to their being and with respect to their being understood. So, when we know things of
this kind through judgment, our knowledge must terminate neither in the imagination nor in
the senses.

Nevertheless we reach some knowledge of them through the objects of the senses and the
imagination, either by way of causality (as when from an effect we come to know its cause,
which is not proportionate to the effect but transcends it), or by way of transcendence, or by
way of negation (as when we separate from such beings whatever the sense or imagination
apprehends). These are the means of knowing divine things from the sensible world proposed by
Dionysius in his Divine Names.

It follows that we can use the senses and the imagination (+) as the starting points but not (~)
as the termini of our knowledge of divine things, so that we judge them to be the sort of objects
the sense or the imagination apprehends. Now to go to something is to terminate at it. Therefore,
we should go neither to the imagination nor to the senses in divine science, to the imagination
and not to the senses in mathematics, and to the senses in the natural sciences. For this reason
they aree in error who try to proceed in the same way in these three parts of speculative science.

#### Replies to Opposing Arguments:

Reply to 1. Sacred Scripture does not present divine things to us under sensible images so that
our intellect may stop with them, but that it may rise from them to the immaterial world. Thus, as
Dionysius says, it even teaches the divine through symbols of base objects in order to offer less
occasion of stopping with them.

Reply to 2. The operation of our intellect in its present state is never without an image as regards
the beginning of knowledge. But our knowledge need not always terminate at images, so that, in
other words, we judge the objects of our understanding to be of the same kind as the objects of
the imagination.

Reply to 3. The text of Dionysius refers to the beginning of knowledge and not to its end, which
is reached when we know divine things from their sensible effects by the three methods
described above; but not in such a way that we must form our judgment of the divine according
to the manner of being of these sensible effects.

Reply to 4. That argument is valid when the starting point of knowledge adequately leads to the
object we seek to know. This is the way the senses are the starting point in the natural sciences,
but not, as we have said, in divine science.

Reply to 5. An image is the starting point of our knowledge, for it is that from which the
operation of the intellect begins; not that it passes away, but it remains as the foundation of
intellectual activity, just as the principles of demonstration must remain throughout the whole
process of science. This is because images are related to the intellect as objects in which it sees
whatever it sees, either through a perfect representation or through a negation. Consequently,
when our knowledge of images is impeded, we must be completely incapable of knowing
anything with our intellect even about divine things. Clearly, we cannot know that God causes
bodies, or transcends all bodies, or is not a body, if we do not form an image of bodies; but our
judgment of what is divine is not made according to the imagination. Consequently, even though
in our present state of life the imagination is necessary in all our knowledge of the divine, with
regard to such matters we must never terminate in it.