THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.85, C.2.

now, is either a virtue or the act of a virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 84, Article 1, ad 1;
Articles 2,3), in the sacrament of Penance, human acts take the place
of matter, which is not the case in Baptism and Confirmation.
Wherefore, since virtue is a principle of an act, penance is either a
virtue or accompanies a virtue, rather than Baptism or Confirmation.
Reply to Objection 2: Penance, considered as a passion, is not a
virtue, as stated above, and it is thus that it is accompanied by a
bodily alteration. On the other hand, it is a virtue, according as it
includes a right choice on the part of the will; which, however,
applies to penance rather than to shame. Because shame regards
the evil deed as present, whereas penance regards the evil deed as
past. Now it is contrary to the perfection of virtue that one should
have an evil deed actually present, of which one ought to be
ashamed; whereas it is not contrary to the perfection of virtue that
we should have previously committed evil deeds, of which it
behooves us to repent, since a man from being wicked becomes
virtuous.
Reply to Objection 3: It would indeed be foolish to grieve for what
has already been done, with the intention of trying to make it not
done. But the penitent does not intend this: for his sorrow is
displeasure or disapproval with regard to the past deed, with the
intention of removing its result, viz. the anger of God and the debt of
punishment: and this is not foolish.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.85, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Penance is a special virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that penance is not a special virtue. For it
seems that to rejoice at the good one has done, and to grieve for the
evil one has done are acts of the same nature. But joy for the good
one has done is not a special virtue, but is a praiseworthy emotion
proceeding from charity, as Augustine states (De Civ. Dei xiv, 7,8,9):
wherefore the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:6) that charity "rejoiceth not at
iniquity, but rejoiceth with the truth." Therefore, in like manner,
neither is penance, which is sorrow for past sins, a special virtue,
but an emotion resulting from charity.
Objection 2: Further, every special virtue has its special matter,
because habits are distinguished by their acts, and acts by their
objects. But penance has no special matter, because its matter is
past sins in any matter whatever. Therefore penance is not a special
virtue.
Objection 3: Further, nothing is removed except by its contrary. But
penance removes all sins. Therefore it is contrary to all sins, and
consequently is not a special virtue.
On the contrary, The Law has a special precept about penance, as
stated above (Question 84, Articles 5,7).
I answer that, As stated in the FS, Question 54, Article 1, ad 1, Article
2, habits are specifically distinguished according to the species of
their acts, so that whenever an act has a special reason for being
praiseworthy, there must needs be a special habit. Now it is evident
that there is a special reason for praising the act of penance,
because it aims at the destruction of past sin, considered as an
offense against God, which does not apply to any other virtue. We
must therefore conclude that penance is a special virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: An act springs from charity in two ways: first
as being elicited by charity, and a like virtuous act requires no other
virtue than charity, e.g. to love the good, to rejoice therein, and to
grieve for what is opposed to it. Secondly, an act springs from
charity, being, so to speak, commanded by charity; and thus, since
charity commands all the virtues, inasmuch as it directs them to its
own end, an act springing from charity may belong even to another