disgrace. He said, These things shall not be without punishment; and hence he
implants in them fear beyond words. He has reminded them at least of hell. Then
because that was to come, He brought home to them the terrors as even present.
"For all these things shall come," He says, "upon this generation."
He added also unspeakable severity to the vengeance, saying, that they shall
suffer more grievous things than all; yet by none of these things did they become
better. But if any one say, And why do they suffer more grievously than all? We
would say, Because they have first committed more grievous things than all, and
by none of the things that have been done to them have they been brought to a
sound mind.
Heardest thou not Lamech saying, "Of Lamech vengeance shall be taken
seventy times sevenfold;" [Genesis 4:24] that is, "I am deserving of more
punishment than Cain." Why could this be? Yet he did not slay his brother; but
because not even by his example was he brought to a better mind. And this is
what God says elsewhere, "Requiting the sins of fathers upon children for the
third and fourth generation of them that hate me." Not as though one were to
suffer punishment for the crimes committed by others, but inasmuch as they
who, after many sin and have been punished, yet have not grown better, but have
committed the same offenses, are justly worthy to suffer their punishments also.
But see how seasonably he also mentioned Abel, indicating that this murder
likewise is of envy. What then have ye to say? Do you not know what Cain
suffered? Did God hold His peace at his deeds? Did He not exact the severest
penalty? Heard ye not what things your fathers suffered, when they slew the
prophets; were they not delivered over to punishments, and inflictions of
vengeance without number? How then did ye not become better? And why do I
speak of the punishments of your fathers, and what they suffered? Thou who
yourself condemnest your fathers, how is it you do worse? For moreover even ye
yourselves have declared that "He will miserably destroy those wicked men."
[Matthew 21:41] What favor then will you have after this, committing such
things after such a sentence?

But who is this Zacharias? Some say, the father of John; some, the prophet;
some, a priest with two different names, whom the Scripture also calls, the son
of Jehoiada.
But do thou mark this, that the outrage was twofold. For not only did they
slay holy men, but also in a holy place. And saying these things, He did not only
alarm them, but also comfort His disciples, showing that the righteous men also
who were before them suffered these things. But these He alarmed, foretelling
that like as they paid their penalty, even so should these too suffer the utmost
extremities. Therefore He calls them "prophets, and wise men, and scribes,"
even hereby again taking away every plea of theirs. "For you cannot say," He
says, "You sent from among the Gentiles, and therefore we were offended;" but
they were led on unto this by being murderous, and thirsting for blood.
Wherefore He also said beforehand, "For this cause do I send prophets and
scribes." This did the prophets also lay to their charge, saying, "They mingle
blood with blood," and that they are men of blood. Therefore also did He
command the blood to be offered to Him, showing that if in a brute it be thus
precious, much more in a man. Which He says to Noah likewise, "I will require
all blood that is shed." [Genesis 9:5] And ten thousand other such things might
one find Him enjoining with regard to their not committing murder; wherefore
He commanded them not even to eat that which was strangled.
Oh the love of God towards man! That though He foreknew they would
profit nothing, He still does His part. For I will send, He says, and this knowing
they would be slain. So that even hereby they were convicted of saying vainly,
"We should not have been partakers with our fathers." For these too slew
prophets even in their synagogues, and reverenced neither the place, nor the
dignity of the persons. For not merely ordinary persons did they slay, but
prophets and wise men, such that they had nothing to lay to their charge. And by
these He means the apostles, and those after them, for, indeed, many prophesied.
Then, willing to aggravate their fears, He says, "Verily, verily I say unto you, All
these things shall come upon this generation;" that is, I will bring all upon your