this again is no charge against the Law but against their obstinacy. "For without
the Law sin is dead." That is, was not so ascertainable. For even those before the
Law knew that they had sinned, but they came to a more exact knowledge of it
after the giving of the Law. And for this reason they were liable to a greater
accusation: since it was not the same thing to have nature to accuse them, and
besides nature the Law, which told them distinctly every charge.
Ver. 9. "For I was alive without the Law once."
When, pray, was that? Before Moses. See how he sets himself to show that
it, both by the things it did, and the things it did not do, weighed down human
nature. For when "I was alive without the Law," he means, I was not so much
condemned.
"But when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died."
This seems indeed to be an accusing of theLaw. But if any one will look
closely at it, it will be seen to be even an encomium of it. For it did not give
existence to sin that before was not, but only pointed out what had escaped
notice. And this is even a praise of the Law, if at least before it they had been
sinning without perceiving it. But when this came, if they gained nothing besides
from it, at all events this they were distinctly made acquainted with, the fact that
they had been sinning. And this is no small point, with a view to getting free
from wickedness. Now if they did not get free, this has nothing to do with the
Law; which framed everything with a view to this end, but the accusation lies
wholly against their spirit, which was perverse beyond all supposition. For what
took place was not the natural thing—their being injured by things profitable.
And this is why he says "And the commandment, which was ordained to life, I
found to be unto death." He does not say, "it was made," or "it brought forth"
death, but "was found," so explaining the novel and unusual kind of discrepancy,
and making the whole fall upon their own pate. For if, he says, you would know
the aim of it, it led to life, and was given with this view. But if death was the
issue of this, the fault is with them that received the commandment, and not of
this, which was leading them to life. And this is a point on which he has thrown

fresh light by what follows.
Ver. 11. "For sin taking occasion by the commandment deceived me, and by
it slew me."
You observe how he everywhere keeps to sin, and entirely clears the Law of
accusation. And so he proceeds as follows.
Ver. 12. "Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just,
and good."
But, if you be so minded, we will bring before you the language of those
who wrest these declarations. For this will make our own statements clearer. For
there are some that say, that he is not here saying what he does of the Law of
Moses, but some take it of the law of nature; some, of the commandment given
in Paradise. Yet surely Paul's object everywhere is to annul this Law, but he has
not any question with those. And with much reason; for it was through a fear and
a horror of this that the Jews obstinately opposed grace. But it does not appear
that he has ever called the commandment in Paradise "Law" at all; no, nor yet
any other writer. Now to make this plainer from what he has really said, let us
follow out his words, retracing the argument a little. Having then spoken to them
about strictness of conversation, he goes on to say, "Do you not know, brethren,
how that the Law has dominion over a man as long as he lives? Wherefore you
have become dead to the Law." Therefore if these things are said about the
natural law, we are found to be without the natural law. And if this be true, we
are more senseless than the creatures which are without reason. Yet this is not so,
certainly. For with regard to the law in Paradise, there is no need to be
contentious, lest we should be taking up a superfluous trouble, by entering the
lists against things men have made up their minds upon. In what sense then does
he say, "I should not have known sin but by the Law?" He is speaking, not of
absolute want of knowledge, but of the more accurate knowledge. For if this
were said of the law of nature, how would what follows suit? "For I was alive,"
he says, "without the Law once." Now neither Adam, nor any body else, can be
shown ever to have lived without the law of nature. For as soon as God formed