FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.110, C.2.

benefits bestowed "gratis" arises "gratitude."
Now as regards the last two, it is clear that grace implies something
in him who receives grace: first, the gift given gratis; secondly, the
acknowledgment of the gift. But as regards the first, a difference
must be noted between the grace of God and the grace of man; for
since the creature's good springs from the Divine will, some good in
the creature flows from God's love, whereby He wishes the good of
the creature. On the other hand, the will of man is moved by the
good pre-existing in things; and hence man's love does not wholly
cause the good of the thing, but pre-supposes it either in part or
wholly. Therefore it is clear that every love of God is followed at
some time by a good caused in the creature, but not co-eternal with
the eternal love. And according to this difference of good the love of
God to the creature is looked at differently. For one is common,
whereby He loves "all things that are" (Wis. 11:25), and thereby gives
things their natural being. But the second is a special love, whereby
He draws the rational creature above the condition of its nature to a
participation of the Divine good; and according to this love He is
said to love anyone simply, since it is by this love that God simply
wishes the eternal good, which is Himself, for the creature.
Accordingly when a man is said to have the grace of God, there is
signified something bestowed on man by God. Nevertheless the
grace of God sometimes signifies God's eternal love, as we say the
grace of predestination, inasmuch as God gratuitously and not from
merits predestines or elects some; for it is written (Eph. 1:5): "He
hath predestinated us into the adoption of children . . . unto the
praise of the glory of His grace."
Reply to Objection 1: Even when a man is said to be in another's
good graces, it is understood that there is something in him pleasing
to the other; even as anyone is said to have God's grace---with this
difference, that what is pleasing to a man in another is presupposed
to his love, but whatever is pleasing to God in a man is caused by
the Divine love, as was said above.
Reply to Objection 2: God is the life of the soul after the manner of
an efficient cause; but the soul is the life of the body after the
manner of a formal cause. Now there is no medium between form
and matter, since the form, of itself, "informs" the matter or subject;
whereas the agent "informs" the subject, not by its substance, but
by the form, which it causes in the matter.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.110, C.2.

Reply to Objection 3: Augustine says (Retract. i, 25): "When I said
that grace was for the remission of sins, and peace for our
reconciliation with God, you must not take it to mean that peace and
reconciliation do not pertain to general peace, but that the special
name of grace signifies the remission of sins." Not only grace,
therefore, but many other of God's gifts pertain to grace. And hence
the remission of sins does not take place without some effect
divinely caused in us, as will appear later (Question 113, Article 2).