you in some sort," [Romans 15:15] much more would he have seemed to them,
had he not done so, to be too harsh. Since then he showed the greatness of the
grace by the greatness of the sins it healed, and owing to this it seemed in the
eyes of the unthinking to be an encouragement to sin (for if the reason, they
would say, why greater grace was shown, was because we had done great sins,
let us not give over sinning, that grace may be more displayed still), now that
they might not say this or suspect it, see how he turns the objection back again.
First he does it by his deprecation. "God forbid." And this he is in the habit of
doing at things confessed on all hands to be absurd. And then he lays down an
irrefragable argument. And what is it?
Ver. 2. "How shall we," he says, "that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein?"
What does "we are dead" mean? Does it mean that as for that, and as far as
it goes, we have all received the sentence of death? Or, that we became dead to it
by believing any being enlightened. This is what one should rather say, since the
sequel makes this clearly right. But what is becoming dead to it? The not
obeying it in anything any more. For this baptism effected once for all, it made
us dead to it. But this must of our own earnestness thenceforth continually be
maintained, so that, although sin issue countless commands to us, we may never
again obey it, but abide unmovable as a dead man does. And indeed he
elsewhere says that sin itself is dead. But there he sets that down as wishing to
show that virtue is easy, [Romans 7:8?] But here, as he earnestly desires to rouse
the hearer, he puts the death on his side. Next, since what was said was obscure,
he again explains, using what he had said also in the way of reproof.
Ver. 3, 4. "Do you not know," he says, "my brethren, that so many of us as
were baptized into Christ were baptized into His death? Therefore we are buried
with Him by baptism into death."
What does being "baptized into His Death" mean? That it is with a view to
our dying as He did. For Baptism is the Cross. What the Cross then, and Burial,
is to Christ, that Baptism has been to us, even if not in the same respects. For He

died Himself and was buried in the Flesh, but we have done both to sin.
Wherefore he does not say, planted together in His Death, but in the likeness of
His Death. For both the one and the other is a death, but not of the same subject;
since the one is of the Flesh, that of Christ; the other of sin, which is our own. As
then that is real, so is this. But if it be real, then what is of our part again must be
contributed. And so he proceeds,
"That as Christ was raised up from the dead by the Glory of the Father,
even so we also should walk in newness of life."
Here he hints, along with the duty of a careful walk, at the subject of the
resurrection. In what way? Do you believe, he means, that Christ died, and that
He was raised again? Believe then the same of yourself. For this is like to the
other, since both Cross and Burial is yours. For if you have shared in Death and
Burial, much more will you in Resurrection and Life. For now the greater is
done away with, the sin I mean, it is not right to doubt any longer about the
lesser, the doing away of death.
But this he leaves for the present to the conscience of his hearers to reason
out, but himself, after the resurrection to come had been set before us, demands
of us another, even the new conversation, which is brought about in the present
life by a change of habits. When then the fornicator becomes chaste, the
covetous man merciful, the harsh subdued, even here a resurrection has taken
place, the prelude to the other. And how is it a resurrection? Why, because sin is
mortified, and righteousness has risen again, and the old life has been made to
vanish, and this new and angelic one is being lived in. But when you hear of a
new life, look for a great alteration, a wide change. But tears come into my eyes,
and I groan deeply to think how great religiousness ([φιλοσοφίαν]) Paul requires
of us, and what listlessness we have yielded ourselves up to, going back after our
baptism to the oldness we before had, and returning to Egypt, and remembering
the garlic after the manna. [Numbers 11:5] For ten or twenty days at the very
time of our Illumination, we undergo a change, but then take up our former
doings again. But it is not for a set number of days, but for our whole life, that