armor of righteousness is laid up, the armor of light, the limbs which now live,
but which in life were made dead; and in all whereof Christ lived, which were
crucified to the world, which were Christ's members, which were clad in Christ,
were a temple of the Spirit, an holy building, "bound in the Spirit," [Acts 20:22]
riveted to the fear of God, which had the marks of Christ. This body is a wall to
that City, which is safer than all towers, and than thousands of battlements. And
with it is that of Peter. For he honored him while alive. For he "went up to see
Peter," [Galatians 1:18] and therefore even when departed grace deigned to give
him the same abode with him. Fain would I see the spiritual Lion. For as a lion
breathing (Gr. sending,) [Canticles 2:15] forth fire ([πὕρ ἀφιεὶς]) upon the herds
of foxes, so rushed he upon the clan of demons and philosophers, and as the
burst of some thunderbolt, was borne down into the host of the devil. [Luke
13:32] For he did not even come to set the battle in array against him, since he
feared so and trembled at him, as that if he saw his shadow, and heard his voice,
he fled even at a distance. And so did he deliver over to him the fornicator,
though at a distance, and again snatched him out of his hands [1 Corinthians 5:5;
2 Corinthians 2:7-11]; and so others also, that they might be taught "not to
blaspheme." [1 Timothy 1:20] And consider how he sent forth his own liegemen
against him, rousing them, suppling them. And at one time he says to the
Ephesians, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities
and powers." [Ephesians 6:12] Then too he puts our prize in heavenly places.
For we struggle not for things of the earth, he says, but for Heaven, and the
things in the Heavens. And to others, he says, "Do you not know that we shall
judge Angels? How much more the things of this life?" [1 Corinthians 6:3] Let us
then, laying all this to heart, stand nobly; for Paul was a man, partaking of the
same nature with us, and having everything else in common with us. But
because he showed such great love toward Christ, he went up above the
Heavens, and stood with the Angels. And so if we too would rouse ourselves up
some little, and kindle in ourselves that fire, we shall be able to emulate that holy
man. For were this impossible, he would never have cried aloud, and said, "Be

imitators of me, as I am of Christ." [1 Corinthians 11:1] Let us not then admire
him only, or be struck with him only, but imitate him, that we too may, when we
depart hence, be counted worthy to see him, and to share the glory unutterable,
which God grant that we may all attain to by the grace and love toward man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom, and with Whom, be glory to the Father,
with the Holy Ghost, now and evermore. Amen.