SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.2.

circumstance, by a kind of chance are more closely united to us." He
says "by reason of place," because one is not bound to search
throughout the world for the needy that one may succor them; and it
suffices to do works of mercy to those one meets with. Hence it is
written (Ex. 23:4): "If thou meet thy enemy's ass going astray, bring it
back to him." He says also "by reason of time," because one is not
bound to provide for the future needs of others, and it suffices to
succor present needs. Hence it is written (1 Jn. 3:17): "He that . . .
shall see his brother in need, and shall put up his bowels from him,
how doth the charity of God abide in him?" Lastly he says, "or any
other circumstance," because one ought to show kindness to those
especially who are by any tie whatever united to us, according to 1
Tim. 5:8, "If any man have not care of his own, and especially of
those of his house, he hath denied the faith and is worse than an
infidel."
It may happen however that these circumstances concur, and then
we have to consider whether this particular man stands in such a
need that it is not easy to see how he can be succored otherwise,
and then one is bound to bestow the work of mercy on him. If,
however, it is easy to see how he can be otherwise succored, either
by himself, or by some other person still more closely united to him,
or in a better position to help him, one is not bound so strictly to
help the one in need that it would be a sin not to do so: although it
would be praiseworthy to do so where one is not bound to. Therefore
an advocate is not always bound to defend the suits of the poor, but
only when the aforesaid circumstances concur, else he would have
to put aside all other business, and occupy himself entirely in
defending the suits of poor people. The same applies to a physician
with regard to attendance on the sick.
Reply to Objection 1: So long as the ass lies under the burden, there
is no means of help in this case, unless those who are passing along
come to the man's aid, and therefore they are bound to help. But
they would not be so bound if help were possible from another
quarter.
Reply to Objection 2: A man is bound to make good use of the talent
bestowed on him, according to the opportunities afforded by time,
place, and other circumstances, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Not every need is such that it is one's duty to
remedy it, but only such as we have stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is fitting that the law should debar

certain persons from the office of advocate?
Objection 1: It would seem unfitting for the law to debar certain
persons from the office of advocate. For no man should be debarred
from doing works of mercy. Now it belongs to the works of mercy to
defend a man's suit, as stated above (Article 1). Therefore no man
should be debarred from this office.
Objection 2: Further, contrary causes have not, seemingly, the same
effect. Now to be busy with Divine things and to be busy about sin
are contrary to one another. Therefore it is unfitting that some
should be debarred from the office of advocate, on account of
religion, as monks and clerics, while others are debarred on account
of sin, as persons of ill-repute and heretics.
Objection 3: Further, a man should love his neighbor as himself.
Now it is a duty of love for an advocate to plead a person's cause.
Therefore it is unfitting that certain persons should be debarred from
pleading the cause of others, while they are allowed to advocate
their own cause.
On the contrary, According to Decretals III, qu. vii, can. Infames,
many persons are debarred from the office of advocate.
I answer that, In two ways a person is debarred from performing a
certain act: first because it is impossible to him, secondly because it
is unbecoming to him: but, whereas the man to whom a certain act is
impossible, is absolutely debarred from performing it, he to whom an
act is unbecoming is not debarred altogether, since necessity may
do away with its unbecomingness. Accordingly some are debarred
from the office of advocate because it is impossible to them through
lack of sense---either interior, as in the case of madmen and minors--or exterior, as in the case of the deaf and dumb. For an advocate
needs to have both interior skill so that he may be able to prove the
justice of the cause he defends, and also speech and hearing, that
he may speak and hear what is said to him. Consequently those who
are defective in these points, are altogether debarred from being
advocates either in their own or in another's cause. The
becomingness of exercising this office is removed in two ways. First,
through a man being engaged in higher things. Wherefore it is