death, nor any other thing of that kind can possibly be relieved by the
interference of grief, but sin only can it blot out and do away, it is evident that
this is the only reason why it has its existence. Let us therefore no more grieve
for the loss of wealth, but let us grieve only when we commit sin. For great in
this case is the gain that comes of sorrow. Are you amerced? Be not dejected, for
thus you will not be at all benefited. Have you sinned? Then be sorry: for it is
profitable; and consider the skill and wisdom of God. Sin has brought forth for
us these two things, sorrow and death. For "in the day you eat," He says, "you
shall surely die;" and to the woman, "In sorrow you shall bring forth children."
[Genesis 2:17] And by both of these things he took away sin, and provided that
the mother should be destroyed by her offspring. For that death as well as grief
takes away sin, is evident, in the first place, from the case of the martyrs; and it
is plain too from what Paul says to those who had sinned, speaking on this wise,
"For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep."
Inasmuch, he observes, as you have sinned, you die, so that you are freed from
sin by death. Therefore he goes on to say, "For if we would judge ourselves, we
should not be judged. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord,
that we should not be condemned with the world." [1 Corinthians 11:31-32] And
even as the worm is brought forth from the wood, and devours the wood; and a
moth consumes the wool, from whence it originates; so grief and death were
born of sin, and devour sin.
14. Let us not then fear death, but let us only fear sin, and grieve on account
of this. And these things I speak, not anticipating any thing fearful, God forbid!
But wishing you when alarmed to be always thus affected, and to fulfil the law
of Christ in very deed. For "he," says Christ, "that takes not his cross, and
follows after Me, is not worthy of Me." [Matthew 10:38] This He said, not that
we should bear the wood upon our shoulders, but that we should always have
death before our eyes. Even so as Paul, that is, died daily, and laughed at death,
and despised the present life. For indeed you are a soldier, and standest
continually at arms; but a soldier who is afraid of death, will never perform a

noble action. Thus then neither will a Christian man, if fearful of dangers,
perform anything great or admirable; nay, besides this, he will be apt to be easily
vanquished. But not so is it with the man who is bold and lofty minded. He
remains impregnable and unconquerable. As then the Three Children, when they
feared not the fire, escaped from the fire, so also we, if we fear not death, shall
entirely escape from death. They feared not the fire (for it is no crime to be
burnt), but they feared sin, for it is a crime to commit impiety. Let us also imitate
these and all such, and let us not be afraid of dangers, and then we shall pass
safely through them.
15. As for me, "I am not a prophet nor the son of a prophet," [Amos 7:14]
yet I understand clearly thus much of the future, and I proclaim, both loudly and
distinctly, that if we become changed, and bestow some care upon our souls, and
desist from iniquity, nothing will be unpleasant or painful. And this I plainly
know from the love of God toward man, as well as from those things which He
has done for men, and cities, and nations, and whole populations. For He
threatened the city of Nineveh, and said, "There are yet three days, and Nineveh
shall be overthrown." [Jonah iii] What then, I ask, Was Nineveh overthrown?
Was the city destroyed? Nay, quite the contrary; it both arose, and became still
more distinguished; and long as is the time which has elapsed, it has not effaced
its glory, but we all still celebrate and admire it even to this day. For from that
time it has been a sort of excellent haven for all who have sinned, not suffering
them to sink into desperation, but calling all to repentance; and by what it did,
and by what it obtained of God's favour, persuading men never to despair of their
salvation, but exhibiting the best life they can, and setting before them a good
hope, to be confident of the issue as destined in any wise to be favourable. For
who would not be stirred up on hearing of such an example, even if he were the
laziest of mortals?
16. For God even preferred that His own prediction should fall to the
ground, so that the city should not fall. Or rather, the prophecy did not even so
fall to the ground. For if indeed while the men continued in the same