shall receive another precept.
Put it in my power to speak out boldly, in the presence both of Gentiles and
of Jews, and, above all, of God. Yea, I entreat you by the love, by the pangs
wherewith I have travailed for your birth, "my little children." I will not add
what follows, "of whom I travail in birth again;" nor will I say, "until Christ be
formed in you." [Galatians 4:19]. For I am persuaded, that Christ has been
formed in you. Other language I will use towards you; "My brethren, dearly
beloved and longed for, my joy and my crown." [Philippians 4:1] Believe me that
I shall use no other language. If at this moment there were placed upon my head
ten thousand richly-jewelled royal crowns, they could not give me the joy which
I feel at your growth in holiness; or rather, I do not think the monarch himself
has such a joy, as that wherewith I joy over you. Let him have come home,
victorious over all the nations at war with him, let him have won many other
crowns besides the crown of his right; and receive other diadems as tokens of his
victory: I do not think he would joy over his trophies, as I joy over your soul's
progress. For I exult, as if I had a thousand crowns on my head; and well may I
rejoice. For if by the grace of God you achieve this good habit, you will have
gained a thousand battles far more difficult than his; by wrestling and fighting
with malicious demons, and fiendish spirits, with the tongue, not with sword, but
by the will. For consider how much is gained, if so be that you do succeed! You
have eradicated, first, a heinous habit; secondly, an evil conceit, the source of all
evil, namely, the opinion that the thing is indifferent and can do no hurt; thirdly,
wrath; fourthly, covetousness; for all these are the offspring of swearing. Nay,
hence you will acquire a sure footing in the way to all other virtues. For as when
children learn their letters, they learn not them alone, but by means of them are
gradually taught to read; so shall it be with you. That evil conceit will no longer
deceive you, you will not say, This is indifferent; you will no longer speak by
mere habit, but will manfully stand against all, so that having perfected in all
parts that virtue which is after God, you may reap eternal blessings, through the
grace and loving-kindness of His Only-Begotten Son, to Whom with the Father

and the Holy Ghost be glory, power and honor, now and ever, world without end.
Amen.

Homily 12 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts 4:36-37
And Joses, who by the Apostles was surnamed Barnabas (which is, being
interpreted, The son of consolation), a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus,
having land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the Apostles' feet.
The writer is now about to relate the affair of Ananias and Sapphira, and in
order to show that the man's sin was of the worst description, he first mentions
him who performed the virtuous deed; that, there being so great a multitude all
doing the same, so great grace, so great miracles, he, taught by none of these, but
blinded by covetousness, brought destruction upon his own head. "Having land
—meaning that this was all he possessed—sold it, and brought the money, and
laid it at the Apostles' feet. But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his
wife, sold a possession, and kept back part of the price, his wife also being privy
to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the Apostles' feet." [ch. 5:1-2] The
aggravating circumstance was, that the sin was concerted, and none other saw
what was done. How came it into the mind of this hapless wretch to commit this
crime? "But Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the
Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land?" [Acts 5:3] Observe
even in this, a great miracle performed, greater far than the former. "Whiles it
remained," says he, "was it not your own? And after it was sold, was it not in
your own power?" [Acts 5:4] That is, "Was there any obligation and force? Do
we constrain you against your will?" "Why have you conceived this thing in your
heart? You have not lied unto men, but unto God. And Ananias hearing these
words fell down, and gave up the ghost." [Acts 5:5] This miracle is greater than
that of the lame man, in respect of the death inflicted, and the knowing what was
in the thought of the heart, even what was done in secret. "And great fear came
on all them that heard these things. And the young men arose, and wound him