1 Corinthians 15:45
6. "So also it is written, [Genesis 2:7] the first man Adam became a living
soul: the last Adam became a life-giving Spirit."
And yet the one indeed is written, but the other not written. How then said
he, "it is written?" He modified the expression according to the issue of events:
as he is wont continually to do: and indeed as it is the way of every prophet. For
so Jerusalem, the prophet said, should be "called a city of righteousness;" [Isaiah
1:26] yet it was not so called. What then? Did the prophet speak false? By no
means. For he is speaking of the issue of events. And that Christ too should be
called Immanuel; [Isaiah 7:14] yet was he not so called. But the facts utter this
voice; so also here, "the last Adam became a life-giving Spirit."
And these things he said that you may learn that the signs and pledges both
of the present life and of that which is to come have already come upon us; to
wit, of the present life, Adam, and of the life to come, Christ. For since he sets
down the better things as matters of hope, he signifies that their beginning has
already come to pass, and their root and their fountain been brought to light. But
if the root and the fountain be evident to all, there is no need to doubt of the
fruits. Wherefore he says, "The last Adam became a life-giving Spirit." And
elsewhere too, He "shall quicken your mortal bodies through His Spirit that
dwells in you." [Romans 7:11] It is the Spirit's work then to quicken.
Further, lest any should say, "why are the worse things the elder? And why
has the one sort, to wit, the natural, come to pass not merely as far as the firstfruits, but altogether; the other as far as the first-fruits only?"— he signifies that
the principles also of each were so ordered.

1 Corinthians 15:46
"For that is not first," says he, "which is spiritual, but that which is natural,
then that which is spiritual."
And he says not, why, but is content with the ordinance of God, having the
evidence from the facts testifying to that most excellent œconomy of God, and
implying that our state is always going forward to the better; at the same time by
this also adding credibility to his argument. For if the lesser have come to pass,
much more ought we to expect the better.
7. Since then we are to enjoy so great blessings, let us take our station in
this array, and bewail not the departed, but rather those that have ended their life
ill. For so the husbandman, when he sees the grain dissolving, does not mourn;
rather, as long as he beholds it continuing solid in the ground he is in fear and
trembling, but when he sees it dissolved rejoices. For the beginning of the future
crop is its dissolving. So let us also then rejoice when the corruptible house falls,
when the man is sown. And marvel not if he called the burial "a sowing;" for, in
truth, this is the better sowing: inasmuch as that sowing is succeeded by deaths
and labors and dangers and cares; but this, if we lived well, by crowns and
rewards; and that, by corruption and death but this by incorruption and
immortality, and those infinite blessings. To that kind of sowing there went
embraces and pleasures and sleep: but to this, only a voice coming down from
heaven, and all is at once brought to perfection. And he that rises again is no
more led to a life full of toil, but to a place where anguish and sorrow and
sighing are fled away.
If you require protection and therefore mournest your husband, betake
yourself to God, the common Protector and Saviour and Benefactor of all, to that
irresistible alliance, to that ready aid, to that abiding shelter which is every
where present, and is as a wall unto us on every side.