even admit such a thought. Whence was the destructive pest of envy received by
Cain? For I will no longer call him the brother of Abel! Because the foundations
of love had not been firmly fixed in him. Whence did the sons of Noah obtain a
good report? Was it not because they vehemently loved their father, and did not
endure to see his exposure? And whence was the other cursed? Was it not from
not loving him? And whence did Abraham obtain a good report? Was it not from
love in doing what he did concerning his nephew? What he did as to his
supplication for the Sodomites? For strongly, strongly, were the Saints affected
with love and with sympathy.
For consider, I pray; Paul, he that was bold in the face of fire, hard as
adamant, firm and unshaken, on every side compact, riveted in the fear of God,
and inflexible; for, "who (said he) shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword"? [Romans 8:35] he that was bold in the face of all these things, and of
earth and sea, he that laughed to scorn the adamantine gates of death, whom
nothing ever withstood—he, when he saw the tears of some whom he loved, was
so broken and crushed—the adamantine man—that he did not even conceal his
feelings, but said straightway, "What do ye, weeping and breaking my heart?"
[Acts 21:13] What do you say, tell me? Had a tear the power to crush that soul of
adamant? Yea, he says, for I hold out against all things except love. This prevails
over me, and subdues me. This is the mind of God. An abyss of water did not
crush him, and a few tears crushed him. "What do ye, weeping and crushing my
heart?" For great is the force of love. Do you not see him again weeping? Why
do you weep? Tell me. "By the space of three years," he says, "I ceased not to
admonish every one night and day with tears." [Acts 20:31] From his great love
he feared, lest some plague should be introduced among them. And again, "For
out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears." [2
Corinthians 2:4]
And what did Joseph? Tell me, that firm one, who stood up against so great
a tyranny, who appears so noble against so great a flame of love, who so out-

battled and overcame the madness of his mistress. For what was there not then to
charm him? A beautiful person, the pride of rank, the costliness of garments, the
fragrance of perfumes, (for all these things know how to soften the soul,) words
more soft than all the rest! For you know that she who loves, and so vehemently,
nothing so humble but she will bring herself to say it, taking upon her the
attitude of a supplicant. For so broken was this woman, though wearing gold,
and being of royal dignity, that she threw herself at the knees perhaps of the
captive boy, and perhaps even intreated him weeping and clasping his knees, and
had recourse to this not once, and a second time, but oftentimes. Then he might
see her eye shining most brilliantly. For it is probable that she not simply but
with excessive nicety would set off her beauty; as wishing by many nets to catch
the lamb of Christ. Add here I pray also many magic charms. Yet nevertheless
this inflexible, this firm man, of rocky hardness, when he saw his brothers who
had bartered him away, who had thrown him into a pit, who had sold him, who
had even wished to murder him, who were the causes both of the prison and the
honor, when he heard from them how they had worked upon their father, (for, we
said, it says, that one was devoured by a wild beast [Genesis 37:20], and [64:28])
he was broken, softened, crushed, "And he wept," it says, and not being able to
bear his feelings, he went in, and composed himself [Genesis 43:30], that is,
wiped away his tears.
What is this? Do you weep, O Joseph? And yet the present circumstances
are deserving not of tears, but of anger, and wrath, and indignation, and great
revenge and retribution. You have your enemies in your hands, those fratricides;
you can satiate your wrath. And yet neither would this be injustice. For thou dost
not yourself begin the unjust acts, but defendest yourself against those who have
done the wrong. For look not to your dignity. This was not of their contrivance,
but of God, who shed His favor upon you. Why do you weep? But he would
have said, far be it that I, who in all things have obtained a good report, should
by this remembrance of wrongs overturn them all. It is truly a season for tears. I
am not more brutish than beasts. They pour out a libation to nature, whatever