of great emulation; and they who most of all need a sober mind and a strong
body, these are most of all given over to the tyranny of drunkenness; both utterly
weakening the body and darkening the soul. Yet of the lawgivers not one has
punished this fault. What can be worse than this madness?
Is then the good word of men so disposed an object of desire to you, and do
you not hide yourself in the earth? For even though all such admired you, ought
you not to feel ashamed and cover your face, at being applauded by men of such
corrupt judgment?
Again, blasphemy by legislators in general is accounted nothing terrible. At
any rate, no one for having blasphemed God was ever brought to trial and
punishment. But if a man steal another's garment, or cut his purse, his sides are
flayed, and he is often given over unto death: while he that blasphemes God has
nothing laid to his charge by the heathen legislators. And if a man seduce a
female servant when he has a wife, it seems nothing to the heathen laws nor to
men in general.
10. Will you hear besides of some things of another class which show their
folly? For as they punish not these things, so there are others which they enforce
by law. What then are these? They collect crowds to fill theatres, and there they
introduce choirs of harlots and prostituted children, yea such as trample on
nature herself; and they make the whole people sit on high, and so they captivate
their city; so they crown these mighty kings whom they are perpetually admiring
for their trophies and victories. And yet, what can be more insipid than this
honor? What more undelightful than this delight? From among these then do you
seek judges to applaud your deeds? And is it in company with dancers, and
effeminate, and buffoons, and harlots, that you are fain to enjoy the sound of
compliment? Answer me.
How can these things be other than proofs of extreme infatuation? For I
should like to ask them, is it or is it not, a dreadful thing to subvert the laws of
nature, and introduce unlawful intercourse? They will surely say, it is dreadful:
at any rate, they make a show of inflicting a penalty on that crime. Why then do

you bring on the stage those abused wretches; and not only bring them in, but
honor them also with honors innumerable, and gifts not to be told? In other
places you punish those who dare such things; but here even as on common
benefactors of the city, you spend money upon them and supportest them at the
public expense.
"However," you will say, "they are ([ἄτιμοι]) infamous. " Why then train
them up? ([παιδοτριβεῖς]) Why choose the infamous to pay honor to kings
withal? And why ruin our ([ἐκτραχηλίζεις], Plutarch, [περὶ παίδων ἀγωγῆς], c.
17.) cities ? Or why spend so much upon these persons? Since if they be
infamous expulsion is properest for the infamous. For why did you render them
infamous? In praise or in condemnation? Of course in condemnation. Is the next
thing to be, that although as after condemnation you make them infamous, yet as
if they were honorable you run to see them, and admire and praise and applaud?
Why need I speak of the sort of charm which is found in the horse races? Or in
the contests of the wild beasts? For those places too being full of all senseless
excitement train the populace to acquire a merciless and savage and inhuman
kind of temper, and practise them in seeing men torn in pieces, and blood
flowing, and the ferocity of wild beasts confounding all things. Now all these
our wise lawgivers from the beginning introduced, being so many plagues! And
our cities applaud and admire.
11. But, if you will, dismissing these things which clearly and confessedly
are abominable, but seemed ([οὐκ ἐδοξεν] . perhaps "were not decreed.") not
[so] to the heathen legislators, let us proceed to their grave precepts; and you
shall see these too corrupted through the opinion of the multitude. Thus marriage
is accounted an honorable thing [Hebrews 13:4] both by us and by those
without: and it is honorable. But when marriages are solemnized, such ridiculous
things take place as you shall hear of immediately: because the most part,
possessed and beguiled by custom, are not even aware of their absurdity, but
need others to teach them. For dancing, and cymbals, and flutes, and shameful
words, and songs, and drunkenness, and revellings, and all the Devil's great heap