John 2:12
"After this He went down to Capernaum, He, and His mother, and His brethren,
and His disciples; and they continued there not many days."
Wherefore comes He with "His mother to Capernaum"? For He has done
no miracle there, and the inhabitants of that city were not of those who were
rightminded towards Him, but of the utterly corrupt. And this Christ declared
when He said, "And thou, Capernaum, which are exalted to heaven, shall be
thrust down to hell." [Luke 10:15] Wherefore then goes He? I think it was,
because He intended a little after to go up to Jerusalem, that He then went to
Capernaum, to avoid leading about everywhere with Him, His mother and His
brethren. And so, having departed and tarried a little while to honor His mother,
He again commences His miracles after restoring to her home her who had borne
Him. Therefore the Evangelist says, After "not many days,"

John 2:13
"He went up to Jerusalem."
He received baptism then a few days before the passover. But on going up
to Jerusalem, what did He, a deed full of high authority; for He cast out of the
Temple those dealers and money changers, and those who sold doves, and oxen,
and sheep, and who passed their time there for this purpose.
2. Another Evangelist writes, that as He cast them out, He said, Make not
my Father's house "a den of thieves," but this one,

John 2:16
"(Make not My Father's house) an house of merchandise."
They do not in this contradict each other, but show that he did this a second
time, and that both these expressions were not used on the same occasion, but
that He acted thus once at the beginning of His ministry, and again when He had
come to the very time of His Passion. Therefore, (on the latter occasion,)
employing more strong expressions, He spoke of it as (being made) "a den of
thieves," but here at the commencement of His miracles He does not so, but uses
a more gentle rebuke; from which it is probable that this took place a second
time.
"And wherefore," says one, "did Christ do this same, and use such severity
against these men, a thing which He is nowhere else seen to do, even when
insulted and reviled, and called by them 'Samaritan' and 'demoniac'? For He
was not even satisfied with words only, but took a scourge, and so cast them
out." Yes, but it was when others were receiving benefit, that the Jews accused
and raged against Him; when it was probable that they would have been made
savage by His rebukes, they showed no such disposition towards Him, for they
neither accused nor reviled Him. What say they?

John 2:18
"What sign showest Thou unto us, seeing that You do these things?"
Do you see their excessive malice, and how the benefits done to others
incensed them more (than reproofs)?
At one time then He said, that the Temple was made by them "a den of
thieves," showing that what they sold was gotten by theft, and rapine, and
covetousness, and that they were rich through other men's calamities; at another,
"a house of merchandise," pointing to their shameless traffickings. "But
wherefore did He this?" Since he was about to heal on the Sabbath day, and to do
many such things which were thought by them transgressions of the Law, in
order that He might not seem to do this as though He had come to be some rival
God and opponent of His Father, He takes occasion hence to correct any such
suspicion of theirs. For One who had exhibited so much zeal for the House was
not likely to oppose Him who was Lord of the House, and who was worshipped
in it. No doubt even the former years during which He lived according to the
Law, were sufficient to show His reverence for the Legislator, and that He came
not to give contrary laws; yet since it was likely that those years were forgotten
through lapse of time, as not having been known to all because He was brought
up in a poor and mean dwelling, He afterwards does this in the presence of all,
(for many were present because the feast was near at hand,) and at great risk. For
he did not merely "cast them out," but also "overturned the tables," and "poured
out the money," giving them by this to understand, that He who threw Himself
into danger for the good order of the House could never despise his Master. Had
He acted as He did from hypocrisy, He should only have advised them; but to
place Himself in danger was very daring. For it was no light thing to offer
Himself to the anger of so many market-folk, to excite against Himself a most
brutal mob of petty dealers by His reproaches and His blows, this was not the
action of a pretender, but of one choosing to suffer everything for the order of