John 17:9
"I pray for them."
"What sayest Thou?" "Do You teach the Father, as though He were
ignorant? Do You speak to Him as to a man who knows not?" "What then means
this distinction?" Do you see that the prayer is for nothing else than that they
may understand the love which He has towards them? For He who not only
gives what He has of His own, but also calls on Another to do the same, shows
greater love. What then is, "I pray for them"? "Not for all the world," He says,
but "for them whom You have given Me." He continually puts the "hast given,"
that they might learn that this seems good to the Father. Then, because He had
said continually, "they are Yours," and, "You gave them unto Me," to remove any
evil suspicion, and lest any one should think that His authority was recent, and
that He had but now received them, what says He?

John 17:10
"All Mine are Yours, and Yours are Mine; and I am glorified in them."
Do you see the equality of honor? For lest on hearing, "You have given them
Me," you should deem that they were alienated from the authority of the Father,
or before this from that of the Son, He removed both difficulties by speaking as
He did. It was as though He said, "Do not when you hear that 'You have given
them to Me,' deem that they are alienated from the Father, for what is Mine is
His; nor when you hear, 'Yours they were,' think that they were aliens from Me,
for what is His is Mine." So that the, "You have given," is said only for
condescension; for what the Father has is the Son's, and what the Son has is the
Father's. But this cannot even be said of a son after the manner of man, but
because They are upon a greater Equality of honor. For that what belongs to the
less, belongs to the greater also, is clear to every one, but the reverse not so; but
here He converts these terms, and the conversion declares Equality. And in
another place, declaring this, He said, "All things that the Father has are Mine,"
speaking of knowledge. And the "hast given Me," and the like expressions, are to
show that He did not come as an alien and draw them to Him, but received them
as His own. Then He puts the cause and the proof, saying, "And I am glorified in
them," that is, either that "I have power over them," or, that "they shall glorify
Me, believing in You and Me, and shall glorify Us alike." But if He is not
glorified equally in them, what is the Father's is no longer His. For no one is
glorified in those over whom he has no authority. Yet how is He glorified
equally? All die for Him equally as for the Father; they preach Him as they do
the Father; and as they say that all things are done in His Name, so also in the
Name of the Son.

John 17:11
"And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world."
That is, "Although I appear no longer in the flesh, yet by these am I
glorified." But why does He say continuously, that, "I am not in the world"; and
that, "because I leave them I commit them to You"; and that, "when I was in the
world I kept them"? For if one should take these words in their simple sense,
many absurdities will follow. For how could it be reasonable to say, that He is no
longer in the world, and that when He departs He commits them to another?
Since these are the words of a mere man parting from them forever. Do you see
how He speaks for the most part like a man, and in a way adapted to their state
of mind, because they thought that they had a greater degree of safety from His
presence? Wherefore He says, "While I was with them, I kept them." [John
14:28] Yet He tells them, "I come to you"; and, "I am with you till the end."
[Matthew 28:20] How then says He these words, as if about to be parted from
them? He addresses Himself, as I said before, to their thoughts, that they may
take breath a little when they hear Him speaking thus, and delivering them over
to the care of the Father. For since, after hearing many exhortations from Him,
they were not persuaded, He then holds converse with the Father, manifesting
His affection for them. As though He had said, "Since You call Me to Yourself,
place these in safety; for I come to You." "What sayest Thou? Are You not able to
keep them?" "Yea, I am able." "Wherefore then do You speak thus?" "That they
may have My joy fulfilled" [John 17:13]; that is, "may not be confounded, as
being imperfect." And by these words He showed that He had spoken all these
things so, to give them rest and joy. For the saying appears to be contradictory.
"Now I am no longer in the world, and these are in the world." This was what
they were suspecting. For a while therefore He condescends to them, because
had He said, "I keep them," they would not have so well believed; wherefore He
says, "Holy Father, keep them through Your own Name"; that is, "by your help."