Literally, "to these knowing," "his scientibus."

also on account of His infinite love to have preserved those impassible who were produced by Him,
since nothing hindered, and expediency rather required, that they should have known from the
beginning that the Father was altogether incomprehensible.

### Chapter XVIII.—Sophia was never really in ignorance or passion; her Enthymesis could not
have been separated from herself, or exhibited special tendencies of its own.

1. How can it be regarded as otherwise than absurd, that they also affirm this Sophia (wisdom)
to have been involved in ignorance, and degeneracy, and passion? For these things are alien and
contrary to wisdom, nor can they ever be qualities belonging to it. For wherever there is a want of
foresight, and an ignorance of the course of utility, there wisdom does not exist. Let them therefore
no longer call this suffering Æon, Sophia, but let them give up either her name or her sufferings.
And let them, moreover, not call their entire Pleroma spiritual, if this Æon had a place within it
when she was involved in such a tumult of passion. For even a vigorous soul, not to say a spiritual
substance, would not pass through any such experience.
2. And, again, how could her Enthymesis, going forth [from her] along with the passion, have
become a separate existence? For Enthymesis (thought) is understood in connection with some
person, and can never have an isolated existence by itself. For a bad Enthymesis is destroyed and
absorbed by a good one, even as a state of disease is by health. What, then, was the sort of
Enthymesis which preceded that of passion? [It was this]: to investigate the [nature of] the Father,
and to consider His greatness. But what did she afterwards become persuaded of, and so was
restored to health? [This, viz.], that the Father is incomprehensible, and that He is past finding out.
It was not, then, a proper feeling that she wished to know the Father, and on this account she became
passible; but when she became persuaded that He is unsearchable, she was restored to health. And
even Nous himself, who was inquiring into the [nature of] the Father, ceased, according to them,
to continue his researches, on learning that the Father is incomprehensible.
3. How then could the Enthymesis separately conceive passions, which themselves also were
her affections? For affection is necessarily connected with an individual: it cannot come into being
or exist apart by itself. This opinion [of theirs], however, is not only untenable, but also opposed
to that which was spoken by our Lord: "Seek, and ye shall find." For the Lord renders His
disciples perfect by their seeking after and finding the Father; but that Christ of theirs, who is above,
has rendered them perfect, by the fact that He has commanded the Æons not to seek after the Father,
persuading them that, though they should labour hard, they would not find Him. And they declare
that they themselves are perfect, by the fact that they maintain they have found their Bythus; while