of Himself, who has said, "And I will manifest myself to him." And so,
consequently, when Judas had said to Him, "Lord, how is it that Thou
wilt manifest Thyself unto us, and not unto the world?" Jesus answered
and said to him, "If a man love me, he will keep my words: and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him."
Behold, that He manifests not only Himself to him by whom He is loved,
because He comes to him together with the Father, and abides with him.
19. Will it perhaps be thought, that when the Father and the Son make
their abode with him who loves them, the Holy Spirit is excluded from
that abode? What, then, is that which is said above of the Holy Spirit:
"Whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth Him not: but ye know
Him; for He abideth with you, and is in you"? He, therefore, is not
excluded from that abode, of whom it is said, "He abideth with you, and is
in you;" unless, perhaps, any one be so senseless as to think, that when
the Father and the Son have come that they may make their abode with
him who loves them, the Holy Spirit will depart thence, and (as it were)
give place to those who are greater. But the Scripture itself meets this
carnal idea; for it says a little above: "I will pray the Father, and He shall
give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever." He will
not therefore depart when the Father and the Son come, but will be in the
same abode with them eternally; because neither will He come without
them, nor they without Him. But in order to intimate the Trinity, some
things are separately affirmed, the Persons being also each severally
named; and yet are not to be understood as though the other Persons
were excluded, on account of the unity of the same Trinity and the One
substance and Godhead of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit.

### CHAP. 10.—IN WHAT MANNER CHRIST SHALL DELIVER UP THE KINGDOM TO GOD, EVEN THE FATHER. THE KINGDOM HAVING BEEN DELIVERED TO GOD, EVEN THE FATHER, CHRIST WILL NOT THEN MAKE INTERCESSION FOR US.

20. Our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore, will so deliver up the kingdom to
God, even the Father, Himself not being thence excluded, nor the Holy
Spirit, when He shall bring believers to the contemplation of God,
wherein is the end of all good actions, and everlasting rest, and joy which

never will be taken from us. For He signifies this in that which He says: "I
will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice; and your joy no man
taketh from you." Mary, sitting at the feet of the Lord, and earnestly
listening to His word, foreshowed a similitude of this joy; resting as she
did from all business, and intent upon the truth, according to that
manner of which this life is capable, by which, however, to prefigure that
which shall be for eternity. For while Martha, her sister, was cumbered
about necessary business, which, although good and useful, yet, when
rest shall have succeeded, is to pass away, she herself was resting in the
word of the Lord. And so the Lord replied to Martha, when she
complained that her sister did not help her: "Mary hath chosen the best
part, which shall not be taken away from her." He did not say that
Martha was acting a bad part; but that "best part that shall not be taken
away." For that part which is occupied in the ministering to a need shall
be "taken away" when the need itself has passed away. Since the reward
of a good work that will pass away is rest that will not pass away. In that
contemplation, therefore, God will be all in all; because nothing else but
Himself will be required, but it will be sufficient to be enlightened by and
to enjoy Him alone. And so he in whom "the Spirit maketh intercession
with groanings which cannot be uttered," says, "One thing have I desired
of the Lord, that I will seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the
Lord all the days of my life, to contemplate the beauty of the Lord." For
we shall then contemplate God, the Father and the Son and the Holy
Spirit, when the Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father, so as no
longer to make intercession for us, as our Mediator and Priest, Son of
God and Son of man; but that He Himself too, in so far as He is a Priest
that has taken the form of a servant for us, shall be put under Him who
has put all things under Him, and under whom He has put all things: so
that, in so far as He is God. He with Him will have put us under Himself;
in so far as He is a Priest. He with us will be put under Him.8 And
therefore as the  Son is both God and man, it is rather to be
said that the manhood in the Son is another substance ,
than that the Son in the Father ;
just as the carnal nature of my soul is more another substance in relation
to my soul itself, although in one and the same man, than the soul of
another man is in relation to my soul.