The kingdom and its challenge

180. Reading the Scriptures also makes it clear that the Gospel is not merely about our personal

relationship with God. Nor should our loving response to God be seen simply as an accumulation
of small personal gestures to individuals in need, a kind of “charity à la carte”, or a series of acts
aimed solely at easing our conscience. The Gospel is about the kingdom of God (cf. Lk 4:43); it is
about loving God who reigns in our world. To the extent that he reigns within us, the life of society
will be a setting for universal fraternity, justice, peace and dignity. Both Christian preaching and
life, then, are meant to have an impact on society. We are seeking God’s kingdom: “Seek first
God’s kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well” (Mt 6:33).
Jesus’ mission is to inaugurate the kingdom of his Father; he commands his disciples to proclaim
the good news that “the kingdom of heaven is at hand” (Mt 10:7).

181. The kingdom, already present and growing in our midst, engages us at every level of our
being and reminds us of the principle of discernment which Pope Paul VI applied to true
development: it must be directed to “all men and the whole man”. We know that
“evangelization would not be complete if it did not take account of the unceasing interplay of the
Gospel and of man’s concrete life, both personal and social”. This is the principle of
universality intrinsic to the Gospel, for the Father desires the salvation of every man and woman,
and his saving plan consists in “gathering up all things in Christ, things in heaven and things on
earth” (Eph 1:10). Our mandate is to “go into all the world and proclaim the good news to the
whole creation” (Mk 16:15), for “the creation waits with eager longing for the revealing of the
children of God” (Rom 8:19). Here, “the creation” refers to every aspect of human life;
consequently, “the mission of proclaiming the good news of Jesus Christ has a universal
destination. Its mandate of charity encompasses all dimensions of existence, all individuals, all
areas of community life, and all peoples. Nothing human can be alien to it”. True Christian
hope, which seeks the eschatological kingdom, always generates history.

The Church’s teaching on social questions

182. The Church’s teachings concerning contingent situations are subject to new and further
developments and can be open to discussion, yet we cannot help but be concrete – without
presuming to enter into details – lest the great social principles remain mere generalities which
challenge no one. There is a need to draw practical conclusions, so that they “will have greater
impact on the complexities of current situations”. The Church’s pastors, taking into account
the contributions of the different sciences, have the right to offer opinions on all that affects
people’s lives, since the task of evangelization implies and demands the integral promotion of
each human being. It is no longer possible to claim that religion should be restricted to the private
sphere and that it exists only to prepare souls for heaven. We know that God wants his children to
be happy in this world too, even though they are called to fulfilment in eternity, for he has created
all things “for our enjoyment” (1 Tim 6:17), the enjoyment of everyone. It follows that Christian
conversion demands reviewing especially those areas and aspects of life “related to the social
order and the pursuit of the common good”.