233. Realities are greater than ideas. This principle has to do with incarnation of the word and its
being put into practice: “By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh is from God” (1 Jn 4:2). The principle of reality, of a word already made
flesh and constantly striving to take flesh anew, is essential to evangelization. It helps us to see
that the Church’s history is a history of salvation, to be mindful of those saints who inculturated the
Gospel in the life of our peoples and to reap the fruits of the Church’s rich bimillennial tradition,
without pretending to come up with a system of thought detached from this treasury, as if we
wanted to reinvent the Gospel. At the same time, this principle impels us to put the word into
practice, to perform works of justice and charity which make that word fruitful. Not to put the word
into practice, not to make it reality, is to build on sand, to remain in the realm of pure ideas and to
end up in a lifeless and unfruitful self-centredness and gnosticism.

The whole is greater than the part

234. An innate tension also exists between globalization and localization. We need to pay
attention to the global so as to avoid narrowness and banality. Yet we also need to look to the
local, which keeps our feet on the ground. Together, the two prevent us from falling into one of two
extremes. In the first, people get caught up in an abstract, globalized universe, falling into step
behind everyone else, admiring the glitter of other people’s world, gaping and applauding at all the
right times. At the other extreme, they turn into a museum of local folklore, a world apart, doomed
to doing the same things over and over, and incapable of being challenged by novelty or
appreciating the beauty which God bestows beyond their borders.

235. The whole is greater than the part, but it is also greater than the sum of its parts. There is no
need, then, to be overly obsessed with limited and particular questions. We constantly have to
broaden our horizons and see the greater good which will benefit us all. But this has to be done
without evasion or uprooting. We need to sink our roots deeper into the fertile soil and history of
our native place, which is a gift of God. We can work on a small scale, in our own neighbourhood,

but with a larger perspective. Nor do people who wholeheartedly enter into the life of a community
need to lose their individualism or hide their identity; instead, they receive new impulses to
personal growth. The global need not stifle, nor the particular prove barren.

236. Here our model is not the sphere, which is no greater than its parts, where every point is
equidistant from the centre, and there are no differences between them. Instead, it is the
polyhedron, which reflects the convergence of all its parts, each of which preserves its
distinctiveness. Pastoral and political activity alike seek to gather in this polyhedron the best of
each. There is a place for the poor and their culture, their aspirations and their potential. Even
people who can be considered dubious on account of their errors have something to offer which
must not be overlooked. It is the convergence of peoples who, within the universal order, maintain
their own individuality; it is the sum total of persons within a society which pursues the common
good, which truly has a place for everyone.