the attention of the soul to the one does not hinder or lessen its
attention to the other: thus a physician while considering urine is not
less but more able to bear in mind the rules of his art concerning the
colors of urine. And since God is apprehended by the saints as the
type of all things that will be done or known by them, their attention
to perceiving sensibles, or to contemplating or doing anything else
will nowise hinder their contemplation of God, nor conversely. Or we
may say that the reason why one power is hindered in its act when
another power is intensely engaged is because one power does not
alone suffice for such an intense operation, unless it be assisted by
receiving from the principle of life the inflow that the other powers or
members should receive. And since in the saints all the powers will
be most perfect, one will be able to operate intensely without thereby
hindering the operation of another power even as it was with Christ.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether in the blessed, after the resurrection, all

the senses will be in act?
Objection 1: It would seem that all the senses are not in act there.
For touch is the first of all the senses (De Anima ii, 2). But the
glorified body will lack the actual sense of touch, since the sense of
touch becomes actual by the alteration of an animal body by some
external body preponderating in some one of the active or passive
qualities which touch is capable of discerning: and such an
alteration will then be impossible. Therefore all the senses will not be
in act there.
Objection 2: Further, the sense of taste assists the action of the
nutritive power. Now after the resurrection there will be no such
action, as stated above (Question 81, Article 4). Therefore taste
would be useless there.
Objection 3: Further, nothing will be corrupted after the resurrection
because the whole creature will be invested with a certain virtue of
incorruption. Now the sense of smell cannot have its act without
some corruption having taken place, because smell is not perceived
without a volatile evaporation consisting in a certain dissolution.
Therefore the sense of smell is not there in its act.
Objection 4: Further, "Hearing assists teaching" (De Sensu et
Sensato i). But the blessed, after the resurrection, will require no
teaching by means of sensible objects, since they will be filled with
Divine wisdom by the very vision of God. Therefore hearing will not
be there.
Objection 5: Further. seeing results from the pupil receiving the
species of the thing seen. But after the resurrection this will be
impossible in the blessed. Therefore there will be no actual seeing
there, and yet this is the most noble of the senses. The minor is
proved thus: That which is actually lightsome is not receptive of a
visible species; and consequently a mirror placed under the sun's
rays does not reflect the image of a body opposite to it. Now the
pupil like the whole body will be endowed with clarity. Therefore it
will not receive the image of a colored body.
Objection 6: Further, according to the science of perspective,