SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.28, C.4.

Reply to Objection 2: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 6) friends
need not agree in opinion, but only upon such goods as conduce to
life, and especially upon such as are important; because dissension
in small matters is scarcely accounted dissension. Hence nothing
hinders those who have charity from holding different opinions. Nor
is this an obstacle to peace, because opinions concern the intellect,
which precedes the appetite that is united by peace. In like manner if
there be concord as to goods of importance, dissension with regard
to some that are of little account is not contrary to charity: for such a
dissension proceeds from a difference of opinion, because one man
thinks that the particular good, which is the object of dissension,
belongs to the good about which they agree, while the other thinks
that it does not. Accordingly such like dissension about very slight
matters and about opinions is inconsistent with a state of perfect
peace, wherein the truth will be known fully, and every desire
fulfilled; but it is not inconsistent with the imperfect peace of the
wayfarer.
Reply to Objection 3: Peace is the "work of justice" indirectly, in so
far as justice removes the obstacles to peace: but it is the work of
charity directly, since charity, according to its very nature, causes
peace. For love is "a unitive force" as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv):
and peace is the union of the appetite's inclinations.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.28, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether peace is a virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that peace is a virtue. For nothing is a
matter of precept, unless it be an act of virtue. But there are precepts
about keeping peace, for example: "Have peace among you" (Mk.
9:49). Therefore peace is a virtue.
Objection 2: Further, we do not merit except by acts of virtue. Now it
is meritorious to keep peace, according to Mt. 5:9: "Blessed are the
peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God." Therefore
peace is a virtue.
Objection 3: Further, vices are opposed to virtues. But dissensions,
which are contrary to peace, are numbered among the vices (Gal.
5:20). Therefore peace is a virtue.
On the contrary, Virtue is not the last end, but the way thereto. But
peace is the last end, in a sense, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix,
11). Therefore peace is not a virtue.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 28, Article 4), when a
number of acts all proceeding uniformly from an agent, follow one
from the other, they all arise from the same virtue, nor do they each
have a virtue from which they proceed, as may be seen in corporeal
things. For, though fire by heating, both liquefies and rarefies, there
are not two powers in fire, one of liquefaction, the other of
rarefaction: and fire produces all such actions by its own power of
calefaction.
Since then charity causes peace precisely because it is love of God
and of our neighbor, as shown above (Article 3), there is no other
virtue except charity whose proper act is peace, as we have also said
in reference to joy (Question 28, Article 4).
Reply to Objection 1: We are commanded to keep peace because it is
an act of charity; and for this reason too it is a meritorious act.
Hence it is placed among the beatitudes, which are acts of perfect
virtue, as stated above (FS, Question 69, Articles 1,3). It is also
numbered among the fruits, in so far as it is a final good, having
spiritual sweetness.