SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.168, C.2.

"Having food and wherewith to be covered, with these let us be
content;"---and "simplicity," which excludes excessive solicitude
about such things, wherefore he says that "simplicity is a habit that
makes a man contented with what he has."
In the point of deficiency there may be inordinate attachment in two
ways. First, through a man's neglect to give the requisite study or
trouble to the use of outward apparel. Wherefore the Philosopher
says (Ethic. vii, 7) that "it is a mark of effeminacy to let one's cloak
trail on the ground to avoid the trouble of lifting it up." Secondly, by
seeking glory from the very lack of attention to outward attire. Hence
Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 12) that "not only the
glare and pomp of outward things, but even dirt and the weeds of
mourning may be a subject of ostentation, all the more dangerous as
being a decoy under the guise of God's service"; and the
Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 7) that "both excess and inordinate
defect are a subject of ostentation."
Reply to Objection 1: Although outward attire does not come from
nature, it belongs to natural reason to moderate it; so that we are
naturally inclined to be the recipients of the virtue that moderates
outward raiment.
Reply to Objection 2: Those who are placed in a position of dignity,
or again the ministers of the altar, are attired in more costly apparel
than others, not for the sake of their own glory, but to indicate the
excellence of their office or of the Divine worship: wherefore this is
not sinful in them. Hence Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. iii, 12):
"Whoever uses outward things in such a way as to exceed the
bounds observed by the good people among whom he dwells, either
signifies something by so doing, or is guilty of sin, inasmuch as he
uses these things for sensual pleasure or ostentation."
Likewise there may be sin on the part of deficiency: although it is not
always a sin to wear coarser clothes than other people. For, if this be
done through ostentation or pride, in order to set oneself above
others, it is a sin of superstition; whereas, if this be done to tame the
flesh, or to humble the spirit, it belongs to the virtue of temperance.
Hence Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. iii, 12): "Whoever uses
transitory things with greater restraint than is customary with those
among whom he dwells, is either temperate or superstitious."
Especially, however, is the use of coarse raiment befitting to those
who by word and example urge others to repentance, as did the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.168, C.2.

prophets of whom the Apostle is speaking in the passage quoted.
Wherefore a gloss on Mt. 3:4, says: "He who preaches penance,
wears the garb of penance."
Reply to Objection 3: This outward apparel is an indication of man's
estate; wherefore excess, deficiency, and mean therein, are referable
to the virtue of truthfulness, which the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 7)
assigns to deeds and words, which are indications of something
connected with man's estate.