worldly goods, which are uncertain and perishable, are never gained by men
without labor and pains, much less are spiritual. Well, says one, but some inherit
them. Yet even when inherited they are not guarded and preserved without labor,
and care, and trouble, no less than those have that have gained them. And I need
not say that many who have toiled and endured hardships have been
disappointed at the very entrance of the harbor, and an adverse wind has caused
the wreck of their hopes, when they were upon the point of possession. But with
us there is nothing like this. For it is God who promised, and that "hope makes
not ashamed." [Romans 5:5] You who are conversant with worldly affairs, do
you not know how many men, after infinite toils, have not enjoyed the fruit of
their labors, either being previously cut off by death, or overtaken by misfortune,
or assailed by disease, or ruined by false accusers, or some other cause, which
amidst the variety of human casualties, has forced them to go with empty hands?
But do you not see the lucky men, says one, who with little labor acquire
the good things of life? What good things? Money, houses, so many acres of
land, trains of servants, heaps of gold and silver? Can you call these good things,
and not hide your head for shame? A man called to the pursuit of heavenly
wisdom, and gaping after worldly things, and calling them "goods," which are of
no value! If these things are good, then the possessors of them must be called
good. For is not he good, who is the possessor of what is good? But when the
possessors of these things are guilty of fraud and rapine, shall we call them
good? For if wealth is a good, but is increased by grasping, the more it is
increased, the more will its possessor be considered to be good. Is the grasping
man then good? But if wealth is good, and increases by grasping, the more a
man grasps, the better he must be. Is not this plainly a contradiction? But
suppose the wealth is not gained wrongfully. And how is this possible? So
destructive a passion is avarice, that to grow rich without injustice is impossible.
This Christ declared, saying, "Make to yourselves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness." [Luke 16:19] But what if he succeeded to his father's
inheritance? Then he received what had been gathered by injustice. For it was

not from Adam that his ancestor inherited riches, but, of the many that were
before him, some one must probably have unjustly taken and enjoyed the goods
of others. What then? He says, did Abraham hold unrighteous wealth; and Job,
that blameless, righteous, and faithful man, who "feared God and eschewed
evil"? Theirs was a wealth that consisted not in gold and silver, nor in houses,
but in cattle. Besides this, he was enriched by God. And the author of that book,
relating what happened to that blessed man, mentions the loss of his camels, his
mares and asses, but does not speak of treasures of gold or silver being taken
away. The riches of Abraham too were his domestics. What then? Did he not buy
them? No, for to this very point the Scripture says, that the three hundred and
eighteen were born in his house. [Genesis 19:14] He had also sheep and oxen.
Whence then did he send gold to Rebekah? [Genesis 24:22; 12:16] From the
gifts which he received from Egypt without violence or wrong.
Tell me, then, whence are you rich? From whom did you receive it, and
from whom he who transmitted it to you? From his father and his grandfather.
But can you, ascending through many generations, show the acquisition just? It
cannot be. The root and origin of it must have been injustice. Why? Because
God in the beginning made not one man rich, and another poor. Nor did He
afterwards take and show to one treasures of gold, and deny to the other the right
of searching for it: but He left the earth free to all alike. Why then, if it is
common, have you so many acres of land, while your neighbor has not a portion
of it? It was transmitted to me by my father. And by whom to him? By his
forefathers. But you must go back and find the original owner. Jacob had wealth,
but it was earned as the hire of his labors.
But I will not urge this argument too closely. Let your riches be justly
gained, and without rapine. For you are not responsible for the covetous acts of
your father. Your wealth may be derived from rapine; but you were not the
plunderer. Or granting that he did not obtain it by robbery, that his gold was cast
up somewhere out of the earth. What then? Is wealth therefore good? By no
means. At the same time it is not bad, he says, if its possessor be not covetous; it