you had been sure of diligently seeking thereafter without it, then you had not
needed it. But this is not the only thing that circumcision proclaims, namely
righteousness, but righteousness in even an uncircumcised man. Circumcision
then does but proclaim, that there is no need of circumcision.
Ver. 14. "For if they which are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void, and
the promise made of none effect."
He had shown that faith is necessary, that it is older than circumcision, that
it is more mighty than the Law, that it establishes the Law. For if all sinned, it
was necessary: if one being uncircumcised was justified, it is older: if the
knowledge of sin is by the Law and yet it was without the Law made evident, it
is more mighty: if it has testimony borne to it by the Law, and establishes the
Law, it is not opposed to it, but friendly and allied to it. Again, he shows upon
other grounds too that it was not even possible by the Law to attain to the
inheritance, and after having matched it with the circumcision, and gained it the
victory, he brings it besides into contrast with the Law in these words, "For if
they which are of the Law be heirs, faith is made void." To prevent them anyone
from saying that one may have faith and also keep up the Law, he shows this to
be impracticable. For he that clings to the Law, as if of saving force, does
disparagement to faith's power; and so he says, "faith is made void," that is, there
is no need of salvation by grace. For then it cannot show forth its own proper
power; "and the promise is made of none effect." This is because the Jew might
say, What need have I of faith? If then this held, the things that were promised,
would be taken away along with faith. See how in all points he combats with
them from the early times and from the Patriarch. For having shown from thence
that righteousness and faith went together in the inheritance, he now shows that
the promise did likewise. For to prevent the Jew from saying, What matters it to
me if Abraham was justified by faith? Paul says, neither can what you are
interested with, the promise of the inheritance, come into effect apart from it:
which was what scared them most. But what promise is he speaking of? That of
his being "the heir of the world," and that in him all should be blessed. And how

does he say that this promise is made of none effect?
Ver. 15. "Because the Law works wrath: for where no Law is, there is no
transgression."
Now if it works wrath, and renders them liable for transgression, it is plain
that it makes them so to a curse also. But they that are liable under a curse, and
punishments, and transgression, are not worthy of inheriting, but of being
punished and rejected. What then happens? faith comes, drawing on it the grace,
so that the promise comes into effect. For where grace is, there is a remitting,
and where remitting is, there is no punishment. Punishment then being removed,
and righteousness succeeding from faith, there is no obstacle to our becoming
heirs of the promise.
Ver. 16. "Therefore it is of faith," he says, "that it might be by grace; to the
end the promise might be sure to all the seed."
You see that it is not the Law only that faith establishes, but the promise of
God also that it will not allow to fall to the ground. But the Law, on the other
hand, by being kept to unseasonably, makes even the faith of none effect, and
hinders the promise. By this he shows that faith, so far from being superfluous,
is even necessary to that degree, that without it there is no being saved. For the
Law works wrath, as all have transgressed it. But this does not even suffer wrath
to arise at all: for "where no Law is," he says, "there is no transgression." Do
you see how he not only does away with sin after it has existed, but does not
even allow it to be produced? And this is why he says "by grace." For what end?
Not with a view to their being put to shame, but to the end that the promise
might be sure to all the seed. Here he lays down two blessings, both that the
things given are sure, and also that they are to all the seed, so gathering in those
of the Gentiles, and showing that the Jews are without, if they contend against
the faith. For this is a surer thing than that. For faith does you no hurt (be not
contentious), but even now you are in danger from the Law, it preserves you.
Next having said, "to all the seed," he defines what seed he means. That which is
of faith, he says, so blending with it their relationship to the Gentiles, and