THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.8.

senses; because a quantitative body is seen in this sacrament,
which formerly was one, and is now divided into many, and this must
be the subject of the breaking.
But it cannot be said that Christ's true body is broken. First of all,
because it is incorruptible and impassible: secondly, because it is
entire under every part, as was shown above (Question 76, Article 3),
which is contrary to the nature of a thing broken.
It remains, then, that the breaking is in the dimensive quantity of the
bread, as in a subject, just as the other accidents. And as the
sacramental species are the sacrament of Christ's true body, so is
the breaking of these species the sacrament of our Lord's Passion,
which was in Christ's true body.
Reply to Objection 1: As rarity and density remain under the
sacramental species, as stated above (Article 2, ad 3), so likewise
porousness remains, and in consequence breakableness.
Reply to Objection 2: Hardness results from density; therefore, as
density remains under the sacramental species, hardness remains
there too, and the capability of sound as a consequence.
Reply to Objection 3: What is eaten under its own species, is also
broken and masticated under its own species; but Christ's body is
eaten not under its proper, but under the sacramental species.
Hence in explaining Jn. 6:64, "The flesh profiteth nothing,"
Augustine (Tract. xxvii in Joan.) says that this is to be taken as
referring to those who understood carnally: "for they understood the
flesh, thus, as it is divided piecemeal, in a dead body, or as sold in
the shambles." Consequently, Christ's very body is not broken,
except according to its sacramental species. And the confession
made by Berengarius is to be understood in this sense, that the
breaking and the crushing with the teeth is to be referred to the
sacramental species, under which the body of Christ truly is.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether any liquid can be mingled with the

consecrated wine?
Objection 1: It seems that no liquid can be mingled with the
consecrated wine, because everything mingled with another
partakes of its quality. But no liquid can share in the quality of the
sacramental species, because those accidents are without a subject,
as stated above (Article 1). Therefore it seems that no liquid can be
mingled with the sacramental species of the wine.
Objection 2: Further, if any kind of liquid be mixed with those
species, then some one thing must be the result. But no one thing
can result from the liquid, which is a substance, and the sacramental
species, which are accidents; nor from the liquid and Christ's blood,
which owing to its incorruptibility suffers neither increase nor
decrease. Therefore no liquid can be mixed with the consecrated
wine.
Objection 3: Further, if any liquid be mixed with the consecrated
wine, then that also would appear to be consecrated; just as water
added to holy-water becomes holy. But the consecrated wine is truly
Christ's blood. Therefore the liquid added would likewise be Christ's
blood otherwise than by consecration, which is unbecoming.
Therefore no liquid can be mingled with the consecrated wine.
Objection 4: Further, if one of two things be entirely corrupted, there
is no mixture (De Gener. i). But if we mix any liquid, it seems that the
entire species of the sacramental wine is corrupted, so that the
blood of Christ ceases to be beneath it; both because great and little
are difference of quantity, and alter it, as white and black cause a
difference of color; and because the liquid mixed, as having no
obstacle, seems to permeate the whole, and so Christ's blood ceases
to be there, since it is not there with any other substance.
Consequently, no liquid can be mixed with the consecrated wine.
On the contrary, It is evident to our senses that another liquid can be
mixed with the wine after it is consecrated, just as before.
I answer that, The truth of this question is evident from what has
been said already. For it was said above (Article 3; Article 5, ad 2)
that the species remaining in this sacrament, as they acquire the