John 14:26
"The Comforter, whom the Father shall send in My Name, He shall teach you."
"Perhaps these things are not clear to you now, but 'He' is a clear teacher
of them." And the, "remains with you" [John 14:17], is the expression of One
implying that Himself will depart. Then that they may not be grieved, He says,
that as long as He should remain with them and the Spirit should not come, they
would be unable to comprehend anything great or sublime. And this He said to
prepare them to bear nobly His departure, as that which was to be the cause of
great blessings to them. He continually calls Him "Comforter," because of the
afflictions which then possessed them. And since even after hearing these things
they were troubled, when they thought of the sorrows, the wars, His departure,
see how He calms them again by saying,

John 14:27
"Peace I leave to you."
All but saying, "What are you harmed by the trouble of the world, provided
ye be at peace with Me? For this peace is not of the same kind as that. The one is
external, is often mischievous and unprofitable, and is no advantage to those
who possess it; but I give you peace of such a kind that you be at peace with one
another, which thing renders you stronger." And because He said again, "I
leave," which was the expression of One departing, and enough to confound
them, therefore He again says,
"Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid."
Do you see that they were affected partly by loving affection, partly by
fear?

John 14:28
"You have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If
you loved Me, you would rejoice because I said, I go unto the Father; for My
Father is greater than I."
4. And what joy would this bring to them? What consolation? What then
mean the words? They did not yet know concerning the Resurrection, nor had
they right opinion concerning Him; (for how could they, who did not even know
that He would rise again?) but they thought that the Father was mighty. He says
then, that "If you are fearful for Me, as not able to defend Myself, and if you are
not confident that I shall see you again after the Crucifixion, yet when you heard
that I go to the Father, you ought then to have rejoiced because I go away to One
that is greater, and able to undo all dangers." "You have heard how I said unto
you." Why has He put this? Because, He says, "I am so firmly confident about
the things which come to pass, that I even foretell them, so far am I from
fearing." This also is the meaning of what follows.

John 14:29
"And now I have told you before it come to pass, that when it has come to pass,
you might believe that I Am."
As though He had said, "You would not have known, had I not told you. And
I should not have told you, had I not been confident." Do you see that the speech
is one of condescension? For when He says, "Think ye that I cannot pray to the
Father, and He shall presently give Me more than twelve legions of Angels"
[Matthew 26:53], He speaks to the secret thoughts of the hearers; since no one,
even in the height of madness, would say that He was not able to help Himself,
but needed Angels; but because they thought of Him as a man, therefore He
spoke of "twelve legions of Angels." Yet in truth He did but ask those who came
to take Him a question, and cast them backwards. [John 18:6] (If any one say
that the Father is greater, inasmuch as He is the cause of the Son, we will not
contradict this. But this does not by any means make the Son to be of a different
Essence.) But what He says, is of this kind: "As long as I am here, it is natural
that you should deem that I am in danger; but when I have gone 'there,' be
confident that I am in safety; for Him none will be able to overcome." All these
words were addressed to the weakness of the disciples, for, "I Myself am
confident, and care not for death." On this account, He said, "I have told you
these things before they come to pass"; "but since," He says, "you are not yet
able to receive the saying concerning them, I bring you comfort even from the
Father, whom you entitle great." Having thus consoled them, He again tells them
sorrowful things,