because of her being a priest's daughter, much more on the man himself who
bears the priest's office. Was fornication committed with any violence? She is
even freed from punishment. Did one play the harlot being rich, and another
being poor? Here again also is a difference. And this is evident from what we
have said before concerning David. Was any one guilty of fornication after
Christ's coming? Should he depart uninitiated, he will suffer a punishment more
sore than all those. Was any guilty of fornication after the laver? In this case not
even a consolation is left for the sin any more. And this selfsame thing Paul
declared when he said, He that despised Moses' law dies without mercy, under
two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment suppose you shall he be
counted worthy, who has trodden underfoot the Son of God, and has counted the
blood of the covenant an unholy thing, and has done despite to the grace of the
Spirit? Hath any been guilty of fornication, bearing the priest's office now? This
above all is the crown of the evil deeds.
Do you see of one sin how many different forms? One that before the law,
another that after the law, another that of him who bears the priest's office; that
of the rich woman, and that of the poor woman, of her that is a catechumen, and
of the believing woman, of the daughter of the priest.
And from the knowledge again great is the difference; "For he which knew
his Lord's will, and did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes." [Luke 12:47]
And to sin after examples brings greater vengeance. Therefore He says, "But
you, when you had seen it, repented not afterwards," [Matthew 21:32] though ye
had had the advantage of much care. Therefore He upbraids Jerusalem likewise
with this saying, "How often would I have gathered your children together, and
you would not!" [Luke 13:34]
And to sin being in luxury, this is shown by the history of Lazarus. And
from the place also the sin becomes more grievous, which He Himself indicated
when He said, "Between the temple and the altar." [Matthew 23:35]
And from the equality of the offenses themselves, "It is not marvellous if
one be taken stealing;" and again, "You slew your sons and your daughters; this

is beyond all your whoredoms, and your abominations."
And from the persons again: "If one man sin against another, they shall
pray for him; but if he sin against God, who shall entreat for him?"
And when any one surpasses in negligence those who are far inferior;
wherewith in Ezekiel He does charge them, saying, "Not even according to the
judgments of the nations have you done." [Ezekiel 5:7]
And when one is not sobered even by the examples of others, "She saw her
sister," it is said, "and justified her."
And when one has had the advantage of more abundant care; "For if," He
says, "these mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago; but it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon than for that
city." [Matthew 11:21-22]
Do you see perfect exactness, and that all for the same sins are not paying
the same penalty? For moreover when we have had the benefit of long-suffering,
and profit nothing, we shall endure worse things. And this Paul shows, where he
says, "But after your hardness and impenitent heart, you store up for yourself
wrath." [Romans 2:5]
Knowing then these things, let us not be offended, neither let us be
confounded at any of the things that happen, nor bring in upon us the storm of
thought, but giving place to God's providence, let us give heed to virtue, and flee
vice, that we may also attain to the good things to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom be glory unto
the Father together with the Holy Spirit, now and always, and world without end.
Amen.