all things for the belly, for money, for vainglory.
Can one indeed reckon up in words the trespass of their actions? What
should one say of their decisions, their laughter, their unseasonable discourses,
their filthy language? But about covetousness one cannot so much as speak. For
like as the monks on the mountains know not even what covetousness is, so
neither do these; but in an opposite way to them. For they indeed, because of
being far removed from the disease, know not the passion, but these, by reason
of being exceedingly intoxicated with it, have not so much as a perception how
great the evil is. For this vice has so thrust aside virtue and tyrannises, that it is
not accounted so much as a heavy charge with those madmen.
But will you, that we leave these, and go to others of a gentler kind? Come
then, let us examine the race of workmen and artisans. For these above all seem
to live by honest labors, and the sweat of their own brow. But these too, when
they do not take heed to themselves, gather to themselves many evils from
hence. For the dishonesty that arises from buying and selling they bring into the
work of honest labor, and add oaths, and perjuries, and falsehoods to their
covetousness often, and are taken up with worldly things only, and continue
riveted to the earth; and while they do all things that they may get money, they
do not take much heed that they may impart to the needy, being always desirous
to increase their goods. What should one say of the revilings that are uttered
touching such matters, the insults, the loans, the usurious gains, the bargains full
of much mean trafficking, the shameless buyings and sellings.
3. But will you that we leave these too, and go to others who seem to be
more just? Who then are they? They that are possessed of lands, and reap the
wealth that springs from the earth. And what can be more unjust than these? For
if any one were to examine how they treat their wretched and toil-worn laborers,
he will see them to be more cruel than savages. For upon them that are pining
with hunger, and toiling throughout all their life, they both impose constant and
intolerable payments, and lay on them laborious burdens, and like asses or
mules, or rather like stones, do they treat their bodies, allowing them not so

much as to draw breath a little, and when the earth yields, and when it does not
yield, they alike wear them out, and grant them no indulgence. And what can be
more pitiable than this, when after having labored throughout the whole winter,
and being consumed with frost and rain, and watchings, they go away with their
hands empty, yea moreover in debt, and fearing and dreading more that this
famine and shipwreck, the torments of the overlookers, and their dragging them
about, and their demands, and their imprisonments, and the services from which
no entreaty can deliver them!
Why should one speak of the merchandise which they make of them, the
sordid gains which they gain by them, by their labors and their sweat filling
winepresses, and wine vats, but not suffering them to take home so much as a
small measure, but draining off the entire fruits into the casks of their
wickedness, and flinging to them for this a little money?
And new kinds of usuries also do they devise, and not lawful even
according to the laws of the heathens, and they frame contracts for loans full of
many a curse. For not the hundredth part of the sum, but the half of the sum they
press for and exact; and this when he of whom it is exacted has a wife, is
bringing up children, is a human being, and is filling their threshing floor, and
their wine-press by his own toils.
But none of these things do they consider. Wherefore now it were
seasonable to bring forward the prophet and say, "Be astonished, O Heaven, and
be horribly afraid, O earth," [Jeremiah 2:12] to what great brutality has the race
of man been madly carried away!
But these things I say, not blaming crafts, nor husbandry, nor military
service, but ourselves. Since Cornelius also was a centurion, and Paul a worker
in leather, and after his preaching practised his craft, and David was a king, and
Job enjoyed the possession of land and of large revenues, and there was no
hindrance hereby to any of these in the way of virtue.
Bearing in mind all these things, and considering the ten thousand talents,
let us at least hence hasten to remit to our neighbors their few and trifling debts.