justice of public honesty forbids the wives of two cousins to be
married to the same man, the one after the other." But this
prohibition is done away with.
Reply to Objection 2: Although carnal intercourse is a cause of
people being connected with one another, it is not the same kind of
connection.
Reply to Objection 3: The wife contracts the same connection with
her husband's relatives as to the degree but not as to the kind of
connection.
Since however the arguments in the contrary sense would seem to
show that no tie is caused by affinity, we must reply to them lest the
time-honored prohibition of the Church seem unreasonable.
Reply to Objection 4: As stated above, a woman does not contract
affinity of the first kind with the man to whom she is united in the
flesh, wherefore she does not contract affinity of the second kind
with a woman known by the same man; and consequently if a man
marry one of these women, the other does not contract affinity of the
third kind with him. And so the laws of bygone times did not forbid
the same man to marry successively two women known by one man.
Reply to Objection 5: As a man is not connected with his wife by
affinity of the first kind, so he does not contract affinity of the second
kind with the second husband of the same wife. Wherefore the
argument does not prove.
Reply to Objection 6: One person is not connected with me through
another, except they be connected together. Hence through a woman
who is affine to me, no person becomes connected with me, except
such as is connected with her. Now this cannot be except through
carnal procreation from her, or through connection with her by
marriage: and according to the olden legislation, I contracted some
kind of connection through her in both ways: because her son even
by another husband becomes affine to me in the same kind and in a
different degree of affinity, as appears from the rule given above:
and again her second husband becomes affine to me in the second
kind of affinity. But her other blood-relations are not connected with
him, but she is connected with them, either as with father or mother,
inasmuch as she descends from them, or, as with her brothers, as

proceeding from the same principle; wherefore the brother or father
of my affine does not become affine to me in any kind of affinity.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether affinity is an impediment to marriage?

Objection 1: It would seem that affinity is not an impediment to
marriage. For nothing is an impediment to marriage except what is
contrary thereto. But affinity is not contrary to marriage since it is
caused by it. Therefore it is not an impediment to marriage.
Objection 2: Further, by marriage the wife becomes a possession of
the husband. Now the husband's kindred inherit his possessions
after his death. Therefore they can succeed to his wife, although she
is affine to them, as shown above (Article 5). Therefore affinity is not
an impediment to marriage.
On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 18:8): "Thou shalt not uncover the
nakedness of thy father's wife." Now she is only affine. Therefore
affinity is an impediment to marriage.
I answer that, Affinity that precedes marriage hinders marriage being
contracted and voids the contract, for the same reason as
consanguinity. For just as there is a certain need for blood-relations
to live together, so is there for those who are connected by affinity:
and just as there is a tie of friendship between blood-relations, so is
there between those who are affine to one another. If, however,
affinity supervene to matrimony, it cannot void the marriage, as
stated above (Question 50, Article 7).
Reply to Objection 1: Affinity is not contrary to the marriage which
causes it, but to a marriage being contracted with an affine, in so far
as the latter would hinder the extension of friendship and the
curbing of concupiscence, which are sought in marriage.
Reply to Objection 2: The husband's possessions do not become
one with him as the wife is made one flesh with him. Wherefore just
as consanguinity is an impediment to marriage or union with the
husband according to the flesh, so is one forbidden to marry the
husband's wife.