SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.174, C.4.

granted unto man to utter": and such would seem to be words
pertaining to the vision of the blessed, which transcends the state of
the wayfarer, according to Is. 64:4, "Eye hath not seen, O God,
besides Thee, what things Thou hast prepared for them that love
Thee" [1 Cor. 2:9]. Therefore it is more becoming to hold that he saw
God in His essence.
Reply to Objection 1: Man's mind is rapt by God to the contemplation
of divine truth in three ways. First, so that he contemplates it
through certain imaginary pictures, and such was the ecstasy that
came upon Peter. Secondly, so that he contemplates the divine truth
through its intelligible effects; such was the ecstasy of David, who
said (Ps. 115:11): "I said in my excess: Every man is a liar." Thirdly,
so that he contemplates it in its essence. Such was the rapture of
Paul, as also of Moses [Question 174, Article 4]; and not without
reason, since as Moses was the first Teacher of the Jews, so was
Paul the first "Teacher of the gentiles" [FP, Question 68, Article 4].
Reply to Objection 2: The Divine essence cannot be seen by a
created intellect save through the light of glory, of which it is written
(Ps. 35:10): "In Thy light we shall see light." But this light can be
shared in two ways. First by way of an abiding form, and thus it
beatifies the saints in heaven. Secondly, by way of a transitory
passion, as stated above (Question 171, Article 2) of the light of
prophecy; and in this way that light was in Paul when he was in
rapture. Hence this vision did not beatify him simply, so as to
overflow into his body, but only in a restricted sense. Consequently
this rapture pertains somewhat to prophecy.
Reply to Objection 3: Since, in his rapture, Paul was beatified not as
to the habit, but only as to the act of the blessed, it follows that he
had not the act of faith at the same time, although he had the habit.
Reply to Objection 4: In one way by the third heaven we may
understand something corporeal, and thus the third heaven denotes
the empyrean [1 Tim. 2:7; Cf. FP, Question 12, Article 11, ad 2], which
is described as the "third," in relation to the aerial and starry
heavens, or better still, in relation to the aqueous and crystalline
heavens. Moreover Paul is stated to be rapt to the "third heaven," not
as though his rapture consisted in the vision of something
corporeal, but because this place is appointed for the contemplation
of the blessed. Hence the gloss on 2 Cor. 12 says that the "third
heaven is a spiritual heaven, where the angels and the holy souls

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.174, C.4.

enjoy the contemplation of God: and when Paul says that he was
rapt to this heaven he means that God showed him the life wherein
He is to be seen forevermore."
In another way the third heaven may signify a supra-mundane vision.
Such a vision may be called the third heaven in three ways. First,
according to the order of the cognitive powers. In this way the first
heaven would indicate a supramundane bodily vision, conveyed
through the senses; thus was seen the hand of one writing on the
wall (Dan. 5:5); the second heaven would be an imaginary vision
such as Isaias saw, and John in the Apocalypse; and the third
heaven would denote an intellectual vision according to Augustine's
explanation (Gen. ad lit. xii, 26,28,34). Secondly, the third heaven
may be taken according to the order of things knowable, the first
heaven being "the knowledge of heavenly bodies, the second the
knowledge of heavenly spirits, the third the knowledge of God
Himself." Thirdly, the third heaven may denote the contemplation of
God according to the degrees of knowledge whereby God is seen.
The first of these degrees belongs to the angels of the lowest
hierarchy [FP, Question 108, Article 1], the second to the angels of
the middle hierarchy, the third to the angels of the highest hierarchy,
according to the gloss on 2 Cor. 12.
And since the vision of God cannot be without delight, he says that
he was not only "rapt to the third heaven" by reason of his
contemplation, but also into "Paradise" by reason of the consequent
delight.