Isa. lxv. 1. [A beautiful idea for poets and orators, but not to be pressed dogmatically.]
not judge after the sight of His eyes."

was in man." For He called all men that mourn; and granting forgiveness to those who had been
led into captivity by their sins, He loosed them from their chains, of whom Solomon says, "Every
one shall be holden with the cords of his own sins." Therefore did the Spirit of God descend
upon Him, [the Spirit] of Him who had promised by the prophets that He would anoint Him, so
that we, receiving from the abundance of His unction, might be saved. Such, then, [is the witness]
of Matthew.

### Chapter X.—Proofs of the foregoing, drawn from the Gospels of Mark and Luke.

1. Luke also, the follower and disciple of the apostles, referring to Zacharias and Elisabeth,
from whom, according to promise, John was born, says: "And they were both righteous before
God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless." And again,
speaking of Zacharias: "And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest's office before God
in the order of his course, according to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was to burn
incense;" and he came to sacrifice, "entering into the temple of the Lord." Whose angel
Gabriel, also, who stands prominently in the presence of the Lord, simply, absolutely, and decidedly
confessed in his own person as God and Lord, Him who had chosen Jerusalem, and had instituted
the sacerdotal office. For he knew of none other above Him; since, if he had been in possession of
the knowledge of any other more perfect God and Lord besides Him, he surely would never—as I
have already shown —have confessed Him, whom he knew to be the fruit of a defect, as absolutely
and altogether God and Lord. And then, speaking of John, he thus says: "For he shall be great in
the sight of the Lord, and many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And
he shall go before Him in the spirit and power of Elias, to make ready a people prepared for the
Lord." For whom, then, did he prepare the people, and in the sight of what Lord was he made
great? Truly of Him who said that John had something even "more than a prophet," and that
"among those born of women none is greater than John the Baptist;" who did also make the people
ready for the Lord's advent, warning his fellow-servants, and preaching to them repentance, that
they might receive remission from the Lord when He should be present, having been converted to
Him, from whom they had been alienated because of sins and transgressions. As also David says,

Literally, "that he should place the incense." The next clause is most likely an interpolation for the sake of explanation.

"The alienated are sinners from the womb: they go astray as soon as they are born." And it was
on account of this that he, turning them to their Lord, prepared, in the spirit and power of Elias, a
perfect people for the Lord.
2. And again, speaking in reference to the angel, he says: "But at that time the angel Gabriel
was sent from God, who did also say to the virgin, Fear not, Mary; for thou hast found favour with
God." And he says concerning the Lord: "He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the
Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of His father David: and He shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever; and of His kingdom there shall be no end." For who else is
there who can reign uninterruptedly over the house of Jacob for ever, except Jesus Christ our Lord,
the Son of the Most High God, who promised by the law and the prophets that He would make His
salvation visible to all flesh; so that He would become the Son of man for this purpose, that man
also might become the son of God? And Mary, exulting because of this, cried out, prophesying on
behalf of the Church, "My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my
Saviour. For He hath taken up His child Israel, in remembrance of His mercy, as He spake to our
fathers, Abraham, and his seed for ever." By these and such like [passages] the Gospel points
out that it was God who spake to the fathers; that it was He who, by Moses, instituted the legal
dispensation, by which giving of the law we know that He spake to the fathers. This same God,
after His great goodness, poured His compassion upon us, through which compassion "the Day-spring
from on high hath looked upon us, and appeared to those who sat in darkness and the shadow of
death, and has guided our feet into the way of peace;" as Zacharias also, recovering from the
state of dumbness which he had suffered on account of unbelief, having been filled with a new
spirit, did bless God in a new manner. For all things had entered upon a new phase, the Word
arranging after a new manner the advent in the flesh, that He might win back to God that human
nature (hominem) which had departed from God; and therefore men were taught to worship God
after a new fashion, but not another god, because in truth there is but "one God, who justifieth the
circumcision by faith, and the uncircumcision through faith." But Zacharias prophesying,
exclaimed, "Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for He hath visited and redeemed His people, and
hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of His servant David; as He spake by the
mouth of His holy prophets, which have been since the world begun; salvation from our enemies,
and from the hand of all that hate us; to perform the mercy [promised] to our fathers, and to remember