be honor and power everlasting. Amen." In which words neither is the
Father specially named, nor the Son, nor the Holy Spirit; but the blessed
and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; that is, the One
and only and true God, the Trinity itself.
11. But perhaps what follows may interfere with this meaning; because it
is said, "Whom no man hath seen, nor can see:" although this may also be
taken as belonging to Christ according to His divinity, which the Jews did
not see, who yet saw and crucified Him in the flesh; whereas His divinity
can in no wise be seen by human sight, but is seen with that sight with
which they who see are no longer men, but beyond men. Rightly,
therefore, is God Himself, the Trinity, understood to be the "blessed and
only Potentate," who "shows the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in His
own time." For the words, "Who only hath immortality," are said in the
same way as it is said, "Who only doeth wondrous things." And I should
be glad to know of whom they take these words to be said. If only of the
Father, how then is that true which the Son Himself says, "For what
things soever the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise?" Is
there any, among wonderful works, more wonderful than to raise up and
quicken the dead? Yet the same Son saith, "As the Father raiseth up the
dead, and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He will."
How, then, does the Father alone "do wondrous things," when these
words allow us to understand neither the Father only, nor the Son only,
but assuredly the one only true God, that is, the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit?
12. Also, when the same apostle says, "But to us there is but one God, the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in Him: and one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him," who can doubt that he
speaks of all things which are created; as does John, when he says, "All
things were made by Him"? I ask, therefore, of whom he speaks in
another place: "For of Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things:
to whom be glory for ever Amen." For if of the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, so as to assign each clause severally to each person: of
Him, that is to say, of the Father; through Him, that is to say, through the
Son; in Him, that is to say, in the Holy Spirit,—it is manifest that the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit is one God, inasmuch as the

words continue in the singular number, "To whom be glory for ever." For
at the beginning of the passage he does not say, "O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge" of the Father, or of the Son, or of the
Holy Spirit, but "of the wisdom and knowledge of God!" "How
unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding out! For who
hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been His counsellor? Or
who hath first given to Him and it shall be recompensed unto him again?
For of Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things: to whom be
glory for ever. Amen." But if they will have this to be understood only of
the Father, then in what way are all things by the Father, as is said here;
and all things by the Son, as where it is said to the Corinthians, "And one
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things," and as in the Gospel of John,
"All things were made by Him?" For if some things were made by the
Father, and some by the Son, then all things were not made by the Father,
nor all things by the Son; but if all things were made by the Father, and
all things by the Son, then the same things were made by the Father and
by the Son. The Son, therefore, is equal with the Father, and the working
of the Father and the Son is indivisible. Because if the Father made even
the Son, whom certainly the Son Himself did not make, then all things
were not made by the Son; but all things were made by the Son: therefore
He Himself was not made, that with the Father He might make all things
that were made. And the apostle has not refrained from using the very
word itself, but has said most expressly, "Who, being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God;" using here the name of God
specially of the Father;4 as elsewhere, "But the head of Christ is God.". Similar evidence has been collected also concerning the Holy Spirit, of
which those who have discussed the subject before ourselves have most
fully availed themselves, that He too is God, and not a creature. But if not
a creature, then not only God (for men likewise are called gods), but also
very God; and therefore absolutely equal with the Father and the Son,
and in the unity of the Trinity consubstantial and co-eternal. But that the
Holy Spirit is not a creature is made quite plain by that passage above all
others, where we are commanded not to serve the creature, but the
Creator;7 not in the sense in which we are commanded to "serve" one
another by love, which is in Greek δουλεύειν, but in that in which God
alone is served, which is in Greek λατρεύειν. From whence they are called