be able to rejoice in you greatly. How do you say, "That your glorying may
abound"? I may glory the more when you make progress.
"Through my presence with you again." What then! Did he come to them?
Search ye whether he came.
Ver. 27. "Only let your manner of life be worthy of the Gospel of Christ."
Do you see, how all that he has said, tends to turn them to this one thing,
advancement in virtue? "Only let your manner of life be worthy of the Gospel of
Christ." What means this word "only," but that this, and nought else, is the only
thing we should seek? If we have this, nothing grievous will befall us. "That
whether I come and see you, or be absent, I may hear of your state." This he
says not as if he had changed his purpose, and no longer meant to visit them. But
if this come to pass, he says, even though absent, I am able to rejoice. "If," that
is, "I hear that you stand fast in one spirit, with one soul." This is what above all
things unites believers, and maintains love unbroken, "that they may be one."
[John 17:11] For a "kingdom divided against itself shall not stand." [Mark 3:24]
For this cause he everywhere counsels his disciples much to be of one mind.
And Christ says, "By this shall all men know that you are My disciples, if you
love one another." [John 13:35] That is, do not look with expectation toward me,
and therefore slumber, as waiting for my coming, and then, when you see me not
coming faint. For even from report I can receive pleasure likewise.
What means, "In one spirit"? By the same gift of grace, viz. that of concord,
and zeal; for the Spirit is one, and he shows it; for then are we able to stand in
"one soul," also, when we all have "one Spirit." See how the word "one" is used
for concord. See how their souls being many are called one. Thus was it of old.
"For they were all," it is written, "of one heart and of one soul. Striving together
for the faith of the Gospel." [Acts 4:32] Does he say, striving together for each
other, as though the faith did strive? For did they wrestle against each other? But
help each other, he says, in your striving for the faith of the Gospel.
Ver. 28. "And in nothing affrighted by the adversaries; which is for them an
evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation."

Well said he, "affrighted," this is what befalls us from our enemies, they
only frighten. "In nothing" therefore, he says, whatever happens, whether
dangers— whether plots. For this is the part of those who stand upright; the
enemy can do nought but frighten only. Since it was likely that they should be
greatly troubled, when Paul suffered such numberless ills, he says, I exhort you
not only not to be shaken, but not to be affrighted, yea rather to despise them
heartily; for if you are thus affected, you will straightway, by this means, make
evident at once their destruction, and your salvation. For when they see, that
with their innumerable plots they are unable to frighten you, they will take it as a
proof of their own destruction. For when the persecutors prevail not over the
persecuted, the plotters over the objects of their plots, the powerful over those
subject to their power, will it not be self-evident, that their perdition is at hand,
that their power is nought, that their part is false, that their part is weak? "And
this," he says, "comes from God."
Ver. 29. "For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe
in Him, but also to suffer in his behalf."
Again does he teach them moderation of spirit by referring all to God, and
saying that sufferings in behalf of Christ are of grace, the gift of grace, a free
gift. Be not then ashamed of the gift of grace, for it is more wonderful than the
power of raising the dead, or working miracles; for there I am a debtor, but here I
have Christ for my debtor. Wherefore ought we not only not to be ashamed, but
even to rejoice, in that we have this gift. Virtues he calls gifts, yet not in like sort
as other things, for those are entirely of God, but in these we have a share. But
since even here the greatest part is of God, he ascribes it entirely to Him, not to
overturn our free will, but to make us humble and rightly disposed.
Ver. 30. "Having the same conflict which you saw in me"; i.e. you have also
an example. Here again he raises them up, by showing them that everywhere
their conflicts were the same with his, their struggles were the same with his,
both severally, and in that they united with him in bearing trials. He said not, you
have heard, but "ye saw," for he strove too at Philippi. Truly this is an exceeding