voluntary poverty, since men neither can nor will succour a great multitude of poor.
Moreover independence of spirit is particularly requisite for perfect virtue: otherwise
men easily become partakers in other people's sins, either by expressly consenting to
them, or by palliating or dissembling them. But this method of life is a great drawback to
such independence, for a man cannot but shrink from offending one by whose
patronage he lives. Moreover the necessity of exposing one's necessities to others, and
begging relief, renders mendicants objects of contempt and dislike, whereas persons
who take up a perfect life ought to be reverenced and loved. But if any one will praise
the practice of begging as conducive to humility, he seems to talk altogether
unreasonably. For the praise of humility consists in despising earthly exaltation, such as
comes of riches, honours, fame, but not in despising loftiness of virtue, for in that
respect we ought to be magnanimous. That then would be a blameworthy humility, for
the sake of which any one should do anything derogatory to loftiness of virtue. But the
practice of begging is so derogatory, as well because it is more virtuous to give than to
receive, as also because there is a look of filthy lucre about it.
Reply. There is no impropriety in him being supported by the alms of others, who has
abandoned his own possessions for the sake of something that turns to the profit of
others. Were this not so, human society could not go on. If every one busied himself
only about his own affairs, there would be no one to minister to the general advantage.
The best thing then for human society (hominum societati) is that they who neglect the
care of their own interests to serve the general advantage, should be supported by
those whose advantage they serve. Therefore do soldiers live on pay provided by
others, and civil rulers are provided for out of the common fund. But they who embrace
voluntary poverty to follow Christ, certainly abandon what they have to serve the
common advantage, enlightening the people by wisdom, learning and example, or
sustaining them by their prayer and intercession. Hence there is nothing base in their
living on what they get from others, seeing that they make a greater return, receiving
temporals and helping others in spirituals. Hence the Apostle says: Let your abundance
in temporals supply their want, that their abundance in spirituals also may supply your
want (2 Cor. viii, 14: cf. Rom. xv, 27). For he who abets another becomes a partner in
his work, whether for good or evil. By their example other men become less attached to
riches, seeing them abandon riches altogether for the sake of perfection. And the less
one loves riches, the more ready will he be to make distribution of his riches in other's
need: hence they who embrace voluntary poverty are useful to other poor people,
provoking the rich to works of mercy by word and example. Nor do they lose their liberty
of spirit for the little they receive from others for their sustenance. A man does not lose
his independence except for things that become predominant in his affections: for things
that a man despises, if they are given to him, he does not lose his liberty. Nor is there
any unseemliness in their exposing their necessities, and asking what they need either
for themselves or others. The Apostles are read to have done so (2 Cor. viii, ix). Such
begging does not render men contemptible, if it is done moderately, for necessaries, not
for superfluities, without importunity, and with due regard to the conditions of the
persons asked, and place and time. There is no shadow of disgrace about such
begging, though there would be, if it were done with importunity or without discretion.