the wretchedness of the man. But some one will say again, "And if it had been
good if he had never been born, wherefore did He suffer both this man, and all
the wicked, to come into the world?" When you ought to blame the wicked, for
that having the power not to become such as they are, they have become wicked,
you leave this, and busiest yourself, and art curious about the things of God;
although knowing that it is not by necessity that any one is wicked.
"But the good only should be born," he would say, "and there were no need
of hell, nor punishment, nor vengeance, nor trace of vice, but the wicked should
either not be born at all, or being born should straightway depart."
First then, it were well to repeat to you the saying of the apostle, "Nay but,
O man, who are you that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to
Him that formed it, Why have You made me thus?"
But if you still demandest reasons, we would say this, that the good are
more admired for being among the bad; because their long-suffering and great
self-command is then most shown. But you take away the occasion of their
wrestlings, and conflicts, by saying these things. "What then, in order that these
may appear good, are others punished?" says he. God forbid, but for their own
wickedness. For neither because they were brought into the world did they
become wicked, but on account of their own wickedness; wherefore also they
are punished. For how should they fail to be deserving of punishment, seeing
they have so many teachers of virtue, and gain nothing therefrom. For like as the
noble and good are worthy of double honor, because they both became good, and
took no hurt from the wicked; so also the worthless deserve twofold punishment,
both because they became wicked, when they might have become good (they
show it who have become such), and because they gained nothing from the
good.
But let us see what says this wretched man, when convicted by his Master.
What then says he? "Is it I, Rabbi?" [Matthew 26:25] And why did he not ask
this from the beginning? He thought to escape knowledge by its being said, "one
of you;" but when He had made him manifest, he ventured again to ask,

confiding in the clemency of his Master, that He would not convict him.
3. O blindness! Whereunto has it led him? Such is covetousness, it renders
men fools and senseless, yea reckless, and dogs instead of men, or rather even
more fierce than dogs, and devils after being dogs. This man at least received
unto him the devil even when plotting against him, but Jesus, even when doing
him good, he betrayed, having already become a devil in will. For such does the
insatiable desire of gain make men, out of their mind, frenzy-smitten, altogether
given up to gain, as was the case even with Judas.
But how do Matthew and the other evangelists say, that, when he made the
agreement touching the treason, then the devil seized him; but John, that "after
the sop Satan entered into him." [John 13:27] And John himself knew this, for
further back he says, "The devil having now put into the heart of Judas, that he
should betray Him." How then does he say, "After the sop Satan entered into
him?" Because he enters not in suddenly, nor at once, but makes much trial first,
which accordingly was done here also. For after having tried him in the
beginning, and assailed him quietly, after that he saw him prepared to receive
him, he thenceforth wholly breathed himself into him, and completely got the
better of him.
But how, if they were eating the passover, did they eat it contrary to the
law? For they should not have eaten it, sitting down to their meat.
[Exodus 12:11] What then can be said? That after eating it, they then sat down to
the banquet.
But another evangelist says, that on that evening He not only ate the
passover, but also said, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with
you," [Luke 22:15] that is, on that year. For what reason? Because then the
salvation of the world was to be brought about, and the mysteries to be
delivered, and the subjects of sorrow to be done away with by His death; so
welcome was the cross to Him. But nothing softened the savage monster, nor
moved, nor shamed him. He pronounced him wretched, saying, "Woe to that
man." He alarmed him again, saying, "It were good for him if he had not been