his endeavour and earnest desire to prove above all things that He had the same
authority as the Father.
8. Let us then carefully hold fast all these things, both those which were
spoken yesterday and the day before that, and let us beseech God that they may
abide immoveably in our heart, and let us contribute zeal on our side, and
constantly meet in this place. For in this way we shall preserve the truths which
have been formerly spoken, and we shall add others to our store; and if any of
them slip from our memory through the lapse of time we shall easily be able to
recover them by the aid of continual teaching. And not only will the doctrines
abide sound and uncorrupt but our course of life will have the benefit of much
diligent care and we shall be able to pass through this present state of existence
with pleasure and cheerfulness. For whatever kind of suffering is oppressing our
soul when we come here will easily be got rid of: seeing that now also Christ is
present, and he who approaches Him with faith will readily receive healing from
Him. Suppose some one is struggling with perpetual poverty, and at a loss for
necessary food, and often goes to bed hungry, if he has come in here, and heard
Paul saying that he passed his time in hunger and thirst and nakedness, and that
he experienced this not on one or two or three days, but constantly (this at least
is what he indicates when he says "up to the present hour we both hunger and
thirst and are naked"), [1 Corinthians 4:11] he will receive ample consolation,
learning by means of these words that God has not permitted him to be in
poverty because He hated him or abandoned him: for if this were the effect of
hatred, He would not have permitted it in the case of Paul who was of all men
especially dear to Him: but He permitted it out of His tender love and
providential care, and by way of conducting him to a higher degree of spiritual
wisdom. Has some other man a body which is beset with disease and countless
sufferings? The condition of these paralytics may be an ample source of
consolation and besides these the blessed and brave disciple of Paul who was
continually suffering from disorders, and never had any respite from prolonged
infirmity, even as Paul also said "Use a little wine for your stomach's sake and

your frequent infirmities," [1 Timothy 5:23] where he does not speak merely of
infirmities as such. Or another having been subjected to false accusation has
acquired a bad reputation with the public, and this is continually vexing and
gnawing his soul: he enters this place and hears "Blessed are you when men shall
reproach you and say all manner of evil against you falsely: rejoice ye and be
exceeding glad for great is your reward in Heaven:" [Matthew 5:11-12] then he
will lay aside all despondency and receive every kind of pleasure: for it is
written "leap for joy, and be exceeding glad when men cast out your name as
evil." [Luke 6:22-23] In this manner then God comforts those that are evil
spoken of, and them that speak evil He puts in fear after another manner saying
"every evil word which men shall speak they shall give an account thereof
whether it be good or evil." [Matthew 12:36]
Another perhaps has lost a little daughter or a son, or one of his kinsfolk,
and he also having come here listens to Paul groaning over this present life and
longing to see that which is to come, and oppressed by his sojourn in this world,
and he will go away with a sufficient remedy for his grief when he has heard him
say "Now concerning them that are asleep I would not have you ignorant
brethren that you sorrow not even as others who have no hope."
[1 Thessalonians 4:13] He did not say concerning the dying, but "concerning
them that are asleep" proving that death is a sleep. As then if we see any one
sleeping we are not disturbed or distressed, expecting that he will certainly get
up: even so when we see any one dead, let us not be disturbed or dejected for
this also is a sleep, a longer one indeed, but still a sleep. By giving it the name of
slumber He comforted the mourners and overthrew the accusation of the
unbelievers. If you mourn immoderately over him who has departed you will be
like that unbeliever who has no hope of a resurrection. He indeed does well to
mourn, inasmuch as he cannot exercise any spiritual wisdom concerning things
to come: but thou who hast received such strong proofs concerning the future
life, why do you sink into the same weakness with him? Therefore it is written
"now concerning them that are asleep we would not have you ignorant that you