SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether those who are guilty of simony are

fittingly punished by being deprived of what they have
acquired by simony?
Objection 1: It would seem that those who are guilty of simony are
not fittingly punished by being deprived of what they have acquired
by simony. Simony is committed by acquiring spiritual things in
return for a remuneration. Now certain spiritual things cannot be lost
when once acquired, such as all characters that are imprinted by a
consecration. Therefore it is not a fitting punishment for a person to
be deprived of what he has acquired simoniacally.
Objection 2: Further, it sometimes happens that one who has
obtained the episcopate by simony commands a subject of his to
receive orders from him: and apparently the subject should obey, so
long as the Church tolerates him. Yet no one ought to receive from
him that has not the power to give. Therefore a bishop does not lose
his episcopal power, if he has acquired it by simony.
Objection 3: Further, no one should be punished for what was done
without his knowledge and consent, since punishment is due for sin
which is voluntary, as was shown above (FS, Question 74, Articles
1,2; FS, Question 77, Article 7). Now it happens sometimes that a
person acquires something spiritual, which others have procured for
him without his knowledge and consent. Therefore he should not be
punished by being deprived of what has been bestowed on him.
Objection 4: Further, no one should profit by his own sin. Yet, if a
person who has acquired an ecclesiastical benefice by simony, were
to restore what he has received, this would sometimes turn to the
profit of those who had a share in his simony; for instance, when a
prelate and his entire chapter have consented to the simony.
Therefore that which has been acquired by simony ought not always
to be restored.
Objection 5: Further, sometimes a person obtains admission to a
monastery by simony, and there takes the solemn vow of profession.
But no one should be freed from the obligation of a vow on account
of a fault he has committed. Therefore he should not be expelled
from the monastic state which he has acquired by simony.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.7.

Objection 6: Further, in this world external punishment is not
inflicted for the internal movements of the heart, whereof God alone
is the judge. Now simony is committed in the mere intention or will,
wherefore it is defined in reference to the will, as stated above
(Article 1, ad 2). Therefore a person should not always be deprived of
what he has acquired by simony.
Objection 7: Further, to be promoted to greater dignity is much less
than to retain that which one has already received. Now sometimes
those who are guilty of simony are, by dispensation, promoted to
greater dignity. Therefore they should not always be deprived of
what they have received.
On the contrary, It is written (I, qu. i, cap. Si quis Episcopus): "He
that has been ordained shall profit nothing from his ordination or
promotion that he has acquired by the bargain, but shall forfeit the
dignity or cure that he has acquired with his money."
I answer that, No one can lawfully retain that which he has acquired
against the owner's will. For instance, if a steward were to give some
of his lord's property to a person, against his lord's will and orders,
the recipient could not lawfully retain what he received. Now Our
Lord, Whose stewards and ministers are the prelates of churches,
ordered spiritual things to be given gratis, according to Mt. 10:8,
"Freely have you received, freely give." Wherefore whosoever
acquires spiritual things in return for a remuneration cannot lawfully
retain them. Moreover, those who are guilty of simony, by either
selling or buying spiritual things, as well as those who act as gobetween, are sentenced to other punishments, namely, infamy and
deposition, if they be clerics, and excommunication if they be
laymen, as stated qu. i, cap. Si quis Episcopus [Qu. iii, can. Si quis
praebendas].
Reply to Objection 1: He that has received a sacred Order
simoniacally, receives the character of the Order on account of the
efficacy of the sacrament: but he does not receive the grace nor the
exercise of the Order, because he has received the character by
stealth as it were, and against the will of the Supreme Lord.
Wherefore he is suspended, by virtue of the law, both as regards
himself, namely, that he should not busy himself about exercising
his Order, and as regards others, namely, that no one may
communicate with him in the exercise of his Order, whether his sin
be public or secret. Nor may he reclaim the money which he basely