greatness which He begat: therefore the Son is also called greatness in
respect to Himself; therefore He is also called, in like manner, power, and
wisdom, and word, and image. But what can be more absurd than that He
should be called image in respect to Himself? Or if image and word are
not the very same with power and wisdom, but the former are spoken
relatively, and the latter in respect to self, not to another; then we get to
this, that the Father is not wise with that wisdom which He begat,
because He Himself cannot be spoken relatively to it, and it cannot be
spoken relatively to Him. For all things which are said relatively are said
reciprocally; therefore it remains that even in essence the Son is spoken
of relatively to the Father. But from this is educed a most unexpected
sense: that essence itself is not essence, or at least that, when it is called
essence, not essence but something relative is intimated. As when we
speak of a master, essence is not intimated, but a relative which has
reference to a slave; but when we speak of a man, or any such thing which
is said in respect to self not to something else, then essence is intimated.
Therefore when a man is called a master, man himself is essence, but he
is called master relatively; for he is called man in respect to himself, but
master in respect to his slave. But in regard to the point from which we
started, if essence itself is spoken relatively, essence itself is not essence.
Add further, that all essence which is spoken of relatively, is also
something, although the relation be, taken away; as e.g. in the case of a
man who is a master, and a man who is a slave, and a horse that is a beast
of burden, and money that is a pledge, the man, and the horse, and the
money are spoken in respect to themselves, and are substances or
essences; but master, and slave, and beast of burden, and pledge, are
spoken relatively to something. But if there were not a man, that is, some
substance, there would be none who could be called relatively a master;
and if there were no horse having a certain essence, there would be
nothing that could be called relatively a beast of burden; so if money were
not some kind of substance, it could not be called relatively a pledge.
Wherefore, if the Father also is not something in respect to Himself then
there is no one at all that can be spoken of relatively to something. For it
is not as it is with color. The color of a thing is referred to the thing
colored, and color is not spoken at all in reference to substance, but is
always of something that is colored; but that thing of which it is the color,
even if it is referred to color in respect to its being colored, is yet, in

respect to its being a body, spoken of in respect to substance. But in no
way may we think, in like manner, that the Father cannot be called
anything in respect to His own substance, but that whatever He is called,
He is called in relation to the Son; while the same Son is spoken of both
in respect to His own substance and in relation to the Father, when He is
called great greatness, and powerful power, plainly in respect to Himself,
and the greatness and power of the great and powerful Father, by which
the Father is great and powerful. It is not so; but both are substance, and
both are one substance. And as it is absurd to say that whiteness is not
white, so is it absurd to say that wisdom is not wise; and as whiteness is
called white in respect to itself, so also wisdom is called wise in respect to
itself. But the whiteness of a body is not an essence, since the body itself
is the essence, and that is a quality of it; and hence also a body is said
from that quality to be white, to which body to be is not the same thing as
to be white. For the form in it is one thing, and the color another; and
both are not in themselves, but in a certain bulk, which bulk is neither
form nor color, but is formed and colored. True wisdom is both wise, and
wise in itself. And since in the case of every soul that becomes wise by
partaking of wisdom, if it again becomes foolish, yet wisdom in itself
remains; nor when that soul was changed into folly is the wisdom
likewise so changed; therefore wisdom is not in him who becomes wise by
it, in the same manner as whiteness is in the body which is by it made
white. For when the body has been changed into another color, that
whiteness will not remain, but will altogether cease to be. But if the
Father who begat wisdom is also made wise by it, and to be is not to Him
the same as to be wise, then the Son is His quality, not His offspring; and
there will no longer be absolute simplicity in the Godhead. But far be it
from being so, since in truth in the Godhead is absolutely simple essence,
and therefore to be is there the same as to be wise. But if to be is there the
same as to be wise, then the Father is not wise by that wisdom which He
begat; otherwise He did not beget it, but it begat Him. For what else do
we say when we say, that to Him to be is the same as to be wise, unless
that He is by that whereby He is wise? Wherefore, that which is the cause
to Him of being wise, is itself also the cause to Him that He is; and
accordingly, if the wisdom which He begat is the cause to Him of being
wise, it is also the cause to Him that He is; and this cannot be the case,
except either by begetting or by creating Him. But no one ever said in any