it is of God?
But these very words are favorable to the Law, and how they are so, shall be
hence manifest. Let us attend accurately to his very words. He said not, The Law
is loss: but "I counted it loss." But when he spoke of gain, he said not, I counted
them, but "they were gain." But when he spoke of loss he said, "I counted": and
this rightly; for the former was naturally so, but the latter became so, from my
opinion. "What then? Is it not so?" says he. It is loss for Christ.
And how has the law become gain? And it was not counted gain, but was
so. For consider how great a thing it was, to bring men, brutalized in their nature,
to the shape of men. If the law had not been, grace would not have been given.
Wherefore? Because it became a sort of bridge; for when it was impossible to
mount on high from a state of great abasement, a ladder was formed. But he who
has ascended has no longer need of the ladder; yet he does not despise it, but is
even grateful to it. For it has placed him in such a position, as no longer to
require it. And yet for this very reason, that he does not require it, it is just that
he should acknowledge his obligation, for he could not fly up. And thus is it with
the Law, it has led us up on high; wherefore it was gain, but for the future we
esteem it loss. How? Not because it is loss, but because grace is far greater. For
as a poor man, that was in hunger, as long as he has silver, escapes hunger, but
when he finds gold, and it is not allowable to keep both, considers it loss to
retain the former, and having thrown it away, takes the gold coin; so also here;
not because the silver is loss, for it is not; but because it is impossible to take
both at once, but it is necessary to leave one. Not the Law then is loss, but for a
man to cleave to the Law, and desert Christ. Wherefore it is then loss when it
leads us away from Christ. But if it sends us on to Him, it is no longer so. For
this cause he says "loss for Christ"; if for Christ, it is not so naturally. But why
does not the Law suffer us to come to Christ? For this very cause, he tells us,
was it given. And Christ is the fulfilling of the Law, and Christ is the end of the
Law. It does suffer us if we will. "For Christ is the end of the Law." He who
obeys the Law, leaves the Law itself. It suffers, if we take heed to it, but if we do

not take heed, it suffers not. "Yea verily, and I have counted all things but loss."
Why, he means, do I say this of the Law? Is not the world good? Is not the
present life good? But if they draw me away from Christ, I count these things
loss. Why? "for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord." For
when the sun has appeared, it is loss to sit by a candle: so that the loss comes by
comparison, by the superiority of the other. You see that Paul makes a
comparison from superiority, not from diversity of kind; for that which is
superior, is superior to somewhat of like nature to itself. So that he shows the
connection of that knowledge by the same means, by which he draws the
superiority from the comparison. "For whom I suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them dung, that I may gain Christ." It is not yet manifest, whether he
speaks of the Law, for it is likely that he applies it to the things of this world. For
when he says, "the things which were gain to me, those I have counted loss for
Christ; yea verily," he adds, "I count all things loss." Although he said all things,
yet it is things present; and if you wish it to be the Law too, not even so is it
insulted. For dung comes from wheat, and the strength of the wheat is the dung, I
mean, the chaff. But as the dung was useful in its former state, so that we gather
it together with the wheat, and had there been no dung, there would have been
no wheat, thus too is it with the Law.
Do you see, how everywhere he calls it "loss," not in itself, but for Christ.
"Yea verily, and I count all things but loss." Wherefore again? "For the
excellency of the knowledge (of Him), for whom I suffered the loss of all things."
Again, "wherefore too I count all things to be loss, that I may gain Christ."
See how, from every point, he lays hold of Christ as his foundation, and
suffers not the Law to be anywhere exposed, or receive a blow, but guards it on
every side. "And that I may be found in Him, not having a righteousness of my
own, even that which is of the Law." If he who had righteousness, ran to this
other righteousness because his own was nothing, how much rather ought they,
who have it not, to run to Him? And he well said, "a righteousness of my own,"
not that which I gained by labor and toil, but that which I found from grace. If