FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.3.

that if from a finite magnitude a continual subtraction be made in the
same quantity, it will at last be entirely destroyed, for instance if from
any finite length I continue to subtract the length of a span. If,
however, the subtraction be made each time in the same proportion,
and not in the same quantity, it may go on indefinitely, as, for
instance, if a quantity be halved, and one half be diminished by half,
it will be possible to go on thus indefinitely, provided that what is
subtracted in each case be less than what was subtracted before.
But this does not apply to the question at issue, since a subsequent
sin does not diminish the good of nature less than a previous sin,
but perhaps more, if it be a more grievous sin.
We must, therefore, explain the matter otherwise by saying that the
aforesaid inclination is to be considered as a middle term between
two others: for it is based on the rational nature as on its root, and
tends to the good of virtue, as to its term and end. Consequently its
diminution may be understood in two ways: first, on the part of its
rood, secondly, on the part of its term. In the first way, it is not
diminished by sin, because sin does not diminish nature, as stated
above (Article 1). But it is diminished in the second way, in so far as
an obstacle is placed against its attaining its term. Now if it were
diminished in the first way, it would needs be entirely destroyed at
last by the rational nature being entirely destroyed. Since, however,
it is diminished on the part of the obstacle which is place against its
attaining its term, it is evident that it can be diminished indefinitely,
because obstacles can be placed indefinitely, inasmuch as man can
go on indefinitely adding sin to sin: and yet it cannot be destroyed
entirely, because the root of this inclination always remains. An
example of this may be seen in a transparent body, which has an
inclination to receive light, from the very fact that it is transparent;
yet this inclination or aptitude is diminished on the part of
supervening clouds, although it always remains rooted in the nature
of the body.
Reply to Objection 1: This objection avails when diminution is made
by subtraction. But here the diminution is made by raising obstacles,
and this neither diminishes nor destroys the root of the inclination,
as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: The natural inclination is indeed wholly
uniform: nevertheless it stands in relation both to its principle and to
its term, in respect of which diversity of relation, it is diminished on
the one hand, and not on the other.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.3.

Reply to Objection 3: Even in the lost the natural inclination to virtue
remains, else they would have no remorse of conscience. That it is
not reduced to act is owing to their being deprived of grace by Divine
justice. Thus even in a blind man the aptitude to see remains in the
very root of his nature, inasmuch as he is an animal naturally
endowed with sight: yet this aptitude is not reduced to act, for the
lack of a cause capable of reducing it, by forming the organ requisite
for sight.