barriers until they have got their charioteer; so Christ did not suffer these to
appear in the field before the descent of the Spirit, that they might not be in a
condition to be easily defeated and taken captive by the many. Nor was this the
only reason, but also there were many in Jerusalem who should believe. And
then again that it might not be said, that leaving their own acquaintance, they had
gone to make a parade among strangers, therefore among those very men who
had put Christ to death do they exhibit the proofs of His Resurrection, among
those who had crucified and buried Him, in the very town in which the
iniquitous deed had been perpetrated; thereby stopping the mouths of all foreign
objectors. For when those even who had crucified Him appear as believers,
clearly this proved both the fact of the crucifixion and the iniquity of the deed,
and afforded a mighty evidence of the Resurrection. Furthermore, lest the
Apostles should say, How shall it be possible for us to live among wicked and
bloody men, they so many in number, we so few and contemptible, observe how
He does away their fear and distress, by these words, "But wait for the promise
of the Father, which you have heard of Me." [Acts 1:4] You will say, When had
they heard this? When He said, "It is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go
not away, the Comforter will not come unto you." [John 16:7] And again, "I will
pray the Father, and He shall send you another Comforter, that He may abide
with you." [John 14:16]
But why did the Holy Ghost come to them, not while Christ was present,
nor even immediately after his departure, but, whereas Christ ascended on the
fortieth day, the Spirit descended "when the day of Pentecost," that is, the
fiftieth, "was fully come?" [Acts 2:1] And how was it, if the Spirit had not yet
come, that He said, "Receive the Holy Ghost?" [John 20:22] In order to render
them capable and meet for the reception of Him. For if Daniel fainted at the sight
of an Angel [Daniel 8:17], much more would these when about to receive so
great a grace. Either this then is to be said, or else that Christ spoke of what was
to come, as if come already; as when He said, "Tread ye upon serpents and
scorpions, and over all the power of the devil." [Luke 10:19] But why had the

Holy Ghost not yet come? It was fit that they should first be brought to have a
longing desire for that event, and so receive the grace. For this reason Christ
Himself departed, and then the Spirit descended. For had He Himself been there,
they would not have expected the Spirit so earnestly as they did. On this account
neither did He come immediately after Christ's Ascension, but after eight or nine
days. It is the same with us also; for our desires towards God are then most
raised, when we stand in need. Accordingly, John chose that time to send his
disciples to Christ when they were likely to feel their need of Jesus, during his
own imprisonment. Besides, it was fit that our nature should be seen in heaven,
and that the reconciliation should be perfected, and then the Spirit should come,
and the joy should be unalloyed. For, if the Spirit being already come, Christ had
then departed, and the Spirit remained; the consolation would not have been so
great as it was. For in fact they clung to Him, and could not bear to part with
Him; wherefore also to comfort them He said, "It is expedient for you that I go
away." [John 16:7] On this account He also waits during those intermediate
days, that they might first despond for awhile, and be made, as I said, to feel
their need of Him. and then reap a full and unalloyed delight. But if the Spirit
were inferior to the Son, the consolation would not have been adequate; and how
could He have said, "It is expedient for you?" For this reason the greater matters
of teaching were reserved for the Spirit, that the disciples might not imagine Him
inferior.
Consider also how necessary He made it for them to abide in Jerusalem, by
promising that the Spirit should be granted them. For lest they should again flee
away after His Ascension, by this expectation, as by a bond, He keeps them to
that spot. But having said, "Wait for the promise of the Father, which you have
heard of Me," He then adds, "For John truly baptized with water, but you shall
be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence." (v. 4-5.) For now indeed
He gives them to see the difference there was between Him and John, plainly,
and not as heretofore in obscure hints; for in fact He had spoken very obscurely,
when He said, "Notwithstanding, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is