"the judgment," and by "hell," He added other sayings again in harmony with the
former, saying thus:
"If you bring your gift to the altar, and there remember that your brother
has anything against you; leave there your gift before the altar, and go away;
first be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift."
[Matthew 5:23-24]
O goodness! O exceeding love to man! He makes no account of the honor
due unto Himself, for the sake of our love towards our neighbor; implying that
not at all from any enmity, nor out of any desire to punish, had He uttered those
former threatenings, but out of very tender affection. For what can be milder
than these sayings? "Let my service," says he, "be interrupted, that your love
may continue; since this also is a sacrifice, your being reconciled to your
brother." Yea, for this cause He said not, "after the offering," or "before the
offering;" but, while the very gift lies there, and when the sacrifice is already
beginning, He sends you to be reconciled to your brother; and neither after
removing that which lies before us, nor before presenting the gift, but while it
lies in the midst, He bids you hasten there.
With what motive then does He command so to do, and wherefore? These
two ends, as it appears to me, He is hereby shadowing out and providing for.
First, as I have said, His will is to point out that He highly values charity, and
considers it to be the greatest sacrifice: and that without it He does not receive
even that other; next, He is imposing such a necessity of reconciliation, as
admits of no excuse. For whoso has been charged not to offer before he be
reconciled, will hasten, if not for love of his neighbor, yet, that this may not lie
unconsecrated, to run unto him who has been grieved, and do away the enmity.
For this cause He has also expressed it all most significantly, to alarm and
thoroughly to awaken him. Thus, when He had said, "Leave your gift," He
stayed not at this, but added, "before the altar" (by the very place again causing
him to shudder); "and go away." And He said not merely, "Go away," but He
added, "first, and then come and offer your gift." By all these things making it

manifest, that this table receives not them that are at enmity with each other.
Let the initiated hear this, as many as draw near in enmity: and let the
uninitiated hear too: yea, for the saying has some relation to them also. For they
too offer a gift and a sacrifice: prayer, I mean, and almsgiving. For as to this also
being a sacrifice, hear what the prophet says: "A sacrifice of praise will glorify
me;" and again, "Sacrifice to God a sacrifice of praise;" and, "The lifting up of
mine hands is an evening sacrifice." So that if it be but a prayer, which you are
offering in such a frame of mind, it were better to leave your prayer, and become
reconciled to your brother, and then to offer your prayer.
For to this end were all things done: to this end even God became man, and
took order for all those works, that He might set us at one.
And whereas in this place He is sending the wrong doer to the sufferer, in
His prayer He leads the sufferer to the wrong doer, and reconciles them. For as
there He says, "Forgive men their debts;" so here, "If he has ought against you,
go your way unto him."
Or rather, even here too He seems to me to be sending the injured person:
and for some such reason He said not, "Reconcile yourself to your brother," but,
"Be thou rec onciled." And while the saying seems to pertain to the aggressor,
the whole of it really pertains to him that is aggrieved. Thus, "If you are
reconciled to him," says Christ, "through your love to him you will have me also
propitious, and will be able to offer your sacrifice with great confidence. But if
you are still irritated, consider that even I readily command that which is mine to
be lightly esteemed, that you may become friends; and let these thoughts be
soothing to your anger."
And He said not, When you have suffered any of the greater wrongs, then
be reconciled; but, "Though it be some trifle that he has against you." And He
added not, "Whether justly or unjustly;" but merely, "If he has ought against
you." For though it be justly, not even in that case ought thou to protract the
enmity; since Christ also was justly angered with us, yet nevertheless He gave
Himself for us to be slain, "not imputing those trespasses." [2 Corinthians 5:19]