tender love towards Christ; for he will not have the sufferings to be his own, but
His, through desire of conciliating these persons to Him. And what things I
suffer, I suffer, he says, on His account: not to me, therefore, express your
gratitude, but to him, for it is He Himself who suffers. Just as if one, when sent
to a person, should make request to another, saying, I beseech you, go for me to
this person, then the other should say, "it is on his account I am doing it." So that
He is not ashamed to call these sufferings also his own. For He did not only die
for us, but even after His death He is ready to be afflicted for your sakes. He is
eagerly and vehemently set upon showing that He is even now exposed to peril
in His own Body for the Church's sake, and he aims at this point, namely, you
are not brought unto God by us, but by Him, even though we do these things, for
we have not undertaken a work of our own, but His. And it is the same as if there
were a band which had its allotted leader to protect it, and it should stand in
battle, and then when he had gone, his lieutenant should succeed to his wounds
until the battle were brought to a close.
Next, that for His sake also he does these things, hearken: "For His Body's
sake," he says, assuredly meaning to say this: "I pleasure not you, but Christ: for
what things He should have suffered, I suffer instead of Him." See how many
things he establishes. Great, he shows, is the claim upon their love. As in his
second Epistle to the Corinthians, he wrote, saying, "he committed unto us the
ministry of reconciliation" [2 Corinthians 5:20]; and again, "We are ambassadors
on behalf of Christ; as though God were entreating by us." So also here he says,
"For his sake I suffer," that he may the more draw them to Him. That is, though
He who is your debtor is gone away, yet I repay. For, on this account he also
said, "that which is lacking," to show that not even yet does he consider Him to
have suffered all. "For your sake," he says, and even after His death He suffers;
seeing that still there remains a deficiency. The same thing he does in another
way in the Epistle to the Romans, saying, "Who also makes intercession for us"
[Romans 8:34], showing that He was not satisfied with His death alone, but even
afterwards He does countless things.

He does not then say this to exalt himself, but through a desire to show that
Christ is even yet caring for them. And he shows what he says to be credible, by
adding, "for His Body's sake." For that so it is, and that there is no unlikelihood
in it, is plain from these things being done for His body's sake. Look how He has
knitted us unto Himself. Why then introduce Angels between? "Whereof I was
made," he says, "a minister." Why introduce Angels besides? "I am a minister."
Then he shows that he had himself done nothing, albeit he is a minister. "Of
which I was made," says he, "a minister, according to the dispensation of God
which is given me to youward, to fulfill the word of God." "The dispensation."
Either he means, He so willed that after His own departure we should succeed to
the dispensation, in order that you might not feel as deserted, (for it is Himself
that suffers, Himself that is ambassador;) or he means this, namely, me who was
more than all a persecutor, for this end He permitted to persecute, that in my
preaching I might gain belief; or by "dispensation" he means, that He required
not deeds, nor actions, nor good works, but faith and baptism. For you would not
otherwise have received the word. "For you," he says, "to fulfill the word of
God." He speaks of the Gentiles, showing that they were yet wavering, by the
expression, "fulfill." For that the cast-away Gentiles should have been able to
receive such lofty doctrines was not of Paul, but of the dispensation of God; "for
I never could have had the power," he says. Having shown that which is greater,
that his sufferings are Christ's, he next subjoins what is more evident, that this
also is of God, "to fulfill His word in you." And he shows here covertly, that this
too is of dispensation, that it is spoken to you now, when you are able to hear it,
and comes not of neglect, but to the end ye may receive it. For God does not all
things on a sudden, but uses condescension because of His plenteous love
toward man. And this is the reason why Christ came at this time, and not of old.
And He shows in the Gospel, that for this reason He sent the servants first, that
they might not proceed to kill the Son. For if they did not reverence the Son,
even when He came after the servants, much less would they had He come
sooner; if they gave no heed to the lesser commandments, how would they to the