because in any voluntary agent, short of God, there may be sin in his will, if we consider
him as left to his own nature, possibly one of the higher angels, or even the very highest
of all, committed a sin in his will. And this is probable enough, that the sinner was
highest of them all: for he would not have made his own good estate the final end of his
acquiescence, had not his goodness been very perfect. Some of the lower angels then
of their own will may have subordinated their good to [thrown in their lot with] that
leader, and so have withdrawn their allegiance from God, and sinned as he did: while
others, observing due regard to God in the motion of their will, rightly withdrew from
their subordination to the sinner, although he was higher than they in the order of
nature.
This is the difference between man and a pure spirit, that in the one being of man there
are several appetitive faculties, one subordinate to another: this is not the case in pure
spirits, although one of them is under another. But in man, however the inferior appetite
may swerve from due subordination, any sin that occurs occurs in his will. As then it
would be a sin in pure spirits for any inferior amongst them to swerve from due
subordination to a superior, while that superior remained in subordination to God; so in
the one person of man sin may occur in two ways: in one way by the human will not
subordinating its own good to God, and that sin man has in common with the pure spirit;
in another way by the good of the lower appetite not being regulated according to the
higher, as when the pleasures of the flesh, to which the concupiscible appetite tends,
are willed not in accordance with reason; and this sin does not occur in pure spirits.

CHAPTERS CVIII, CX--Arguments seeming to prove that Sin is impossible to Spirits,
with Solutions of the same
ARG. 1. Every other cognitive faculty but the understanding makes use of living bodily
organs. In pure spirits therefore it is impossible for there to be any cognitive faculty but
the understanding; and whatever they take cognisance of, they have understanding of.

absolutely. But in pure spirits there is no such composition, no diversity of things good
for them; nay, all their good is intellectual. Hence it seems they are incapable of sin in
the will.
Reply. The angel who sinned did not go after any other good than the one good that
was proper to him: but his sin lay in this, that he dropped the higher good to which he
should have subordinated himself. As we sin by pursuing the lower goods of the body
away from the order of reason, so the devil sinned by not referring his own excellence to
the excellence of God.
Arg. 6. In us, sin of the will arises out of excess or defect, while virtue lies in the mean
between them. But pure spirits can pursue only intellectual good things, in which things
no excess is possible, for of themselves they are in the mean between excess and
defect, as truth is in the mean between two errors.
Reply. The devil passed the mean of virtue inasmuch as he did not submit himself to a
superior order; and thus he gave himself more than his due, and to God less than His
due.