That you may therefore with confidence draw near to God, receive not
wrath, when it comes in upon you, and desires to be with you, but drive it away
like a mad dog.
For so Paul too commanded: his phrase being, "lifting up holy hands
without wrath and disputing." [1 Timothy 2:8] Dishonor not then your tongue,
for how will it entreat for you, when it has lost its proper confidence? But adorn
it with gentleness, with humility, make it worthy of the God who is entreated, fill
it with blessing, with much almsdoing. For it is possible even with words to do
alms. "For a word is a better thing than a gift," [Sirach 18:16] and "answer the
poor man peaceably with meekness." [Sirach 4:8] And all the rest of your time
too adorn it with the rehearsing of the laws of God; "Yea, let all your
communication be in the law of the Most High." [Sirach 9:15]
Having thus adorned ourselves, let us come to our King, and fall at His
knees, not with the body only, but also with the mind. Let us consider whom we
are approaching, and on whose behalf, and what we would accomplish. We are
drawing near unto God, whom the seraphim behold and turn away their faces,
not bearing His brightness; at sight of whom the earth trembles. We draw near
unto God, "who dwells in the light, which no man can approach unto."
[1 Timothy 6:16] And we draw near unto Him for deliverance from hell, for
remission of sins, for escape from those in tolerable punishments, for attaining to
the Heavens, and to the good things that are there. Let us, I say, fall down before
Him both in body and in mind, that He may raise us up when we are down; let us
converse with all gentleness and meekness.
And who is so wretched and miserable, one may say, as not to become
gentle in prayer? He that prays with an imprecation, and fills himself with wrath,
and cries out against his enemies.
6. Nay, if you will accuse, accuse yourself. If you will whet and sharpen
your tongue, let it be against your own sins. And tell not what evil another has
done to you, but what you have done to yourself; for this is most truly an evil;
since no other will really be able to injure you, unless thou injure yourself.

Wherefore, if you desire to be against them that wrong you, approach as against
yourself first; there is no one to hinder; since by coming into court against
another, you have but the greater injury to go away with.
And what injury at all have you really to mention? That such an one
insulted and spoiled you by violence, and encompassed you with dangers? Nay,
this is receiving not injury, but if we be sober, the very greatest benefit; the
injured being he that did such things, not he that suffered them. And this is more
than any one thing the cause of all our evils, that we do not so much as know at
all who is the injured, and who the injurious person. Since if we knew this well,
we should not ever injure ourselves, we should not pray against another, having
learned that it is impossible to suffer ill of another. For not to be spoiled, but to
spoil, is an evil. Wherefore, if you have spoiled, accuse yourself; but if you have
been spoiled, rather pray for him that spoiled you, because he has done you the
greatest good. For although the intent of the doer was not such, yet you have
received the greatest benefit, if you have endured it nobly. For him, both men,
and the laws of God declare to be wretched, but you, the injured party, they
crown, and proclaim your praise.
For so if any one sick of a fever had violently taken from any other a vessel
containing water, and had had his fill of his pernicious desire, we should not say
that the despoiled had been injured, but the spoiler; for he has aggravated his
fever, and made his disease more grievous. Now in this way I bid you reason
concerning him also that loves wealth and money. For he too, having a far worse
fever than the other, has by this rapine fanned the flame in himself.
Again, were some madman to snatch a sword from any one, and destroy
himself, which again is the injured? He that has been robbed, or the robber? It is
quite clear, he that did the robbery.
Well then, in the case of seizing property also, let us give the same suffrage.
For what a sword is to a madman, much the same is wealth to a covetous man;
nay, it is even a worse thing. For the madman, when he has taken the sword, and
thrust it through himself, is both delivered from his madness, and has no second