moulding of every other part; not even a whole year would suffice for such a
disquisition.
9. For this reason, here dismissing this subject; and having given to the
laborious and studious an opportunity, by what has been said, of going over
likewise the other parts of Creation; we shall now direct our discourse to another
point which is itself also demonstrative of God's providence. What then is this
second point? It is, that when God formed man, he implanted within him from
the beginning a natural law. And what then was this natural law? He gave
utterance to conscience within us; and made the knowledge of good things, and
of those which are the contrary, to be self-taught. For we have no need to learn
that fornication is an evil thing, and that chastity is a good thing, but we know
this from the first. And that you may learn that we know this from the first, the
Lawgiver, when He afterwards gave laws, and said, "You shall not kill,"
[Exodus 20:13] did not add, "since murder is an evil thing," but simply said,
"You shall not kill;" for He merely prohibited the sin, without teaching. How was
it then when He said, "You shall not kill," that He did not add, "because murder
is a wicked thing." The reason was, that conscience had taught this beforehand;
and He speaks thus, as to those who know and understand the point. Wherefore
when He speaks to us of another commandment, not known to us by the dictate
of consciences He not only prohibits, but adds the reason. When, for instance,
He gave commandment respecting the Sabbath; "On the seventh day you shall
do no work;" He subjoined also the reason for this cessation. What was this?
"Because on the seventh day God rested from all His works which He had begun
to make." [Exodus 20:10] And again; "Because thou were a servant in the land
of Egypt." [Deuteronomy 21:18] For what purpose then I ask did He add a
reason respecting the Sabbath, but did no such thing in regard to murder?
Because this commandment was not one of the leading ones. It was not one of
those which were accurately defined of our conscience, but a kind of partial and
temporary one; and for this reason it was abolished afterwards. But those which
are necessary and uphold our life, are the following; "You shall not kill; You shall

not commit adultery; You shall not steal." On this account then He adds no
reason in this case, nor enters into any instruction on the matter, but is content
with the bare prohibition.
10. And not only from thence, but from another consideration also, I will
endeavour to show you how man was self-taught with respect to the knowledge
of virtue. Adam sinned the first sin; and after the sin straightway hid himself; but
if he had not known he had been doing something wrong, why did he hide
himself? For then there were neither letters, nor law, nor Moses. Whence then
does he recognise the sin, and hide himself? Yet not only does he so hide
himself, but when called to account, he endeavours to lay the blame on another,
saying, "The woman, whom You gave me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat."
And that woman again transfers the accusation to another, viz. the serpent.
Observe also the wisdom of God; for when Adam said, "I heard Your voice, and
I was afraid, for I was naked, and I hid myself," God does not at once convict
him of what he had done, nor say, "Why have you eaten of the tree?" But how?
"Who told you," He asks, "that you were naked, unless you have eaten of that
Tree of which alone I commanded you not to eat?" He did not keep silence, nor
did He openly convict him. He did not keep silence, that He might call him forth
to the confession of his crime. He did not convict him openly, lest the whole
might come from Himself, and the man should so be deprived of that pardon
which is granted us from confession. Therefore he did not declare openly the
cause from whence this knowledge sprung, but he carried on the discourse in the
form of interrogation, leaving the man himself to come to the confession.
11. Again, in the case of Cain and Abel, the same proceeding is observable.
For, in the first place, they set apart the fruits of their own labours to God. For
we would show not from his sin only, but also from his virtue, that man was
capable of knowing both these things. Wherefore that man knew sin to be an evil
thing, Adam manifested; and that he knew that virtue was a good thing, Abel
again made evident. For without having learned it from any one, without having
heard any law promulgated respecting the first fruits, but having been taught