SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.2.

shall . . . be content with the oblation of tithes, which I have
separated for their uses and necessities." Again, there were other
tithes of which we read (Dt. 14:22,23): "Every year thou shalt set
aside the tithes of all thy fruits, that the earth bringeth forth year by
year; and thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God in the place which
He shall choose." And there were yet other tithes, of which it is
written (Dt. 14:28): "The third year thou shalt separate another tithe
of all things that grow to thee at that time, and shalt lay it up within
thy gates. And the Levite that hath no other part nor possession with
thee, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are
within thy gates, shall . . . eat and be filled." Now during the time of
grace men are not bound to pay the second and third tithes. Neither
therefore are they bound to pay the first.
Objection 5: Further, a debt that is due without any time being fixed
for its payment, must be paid at once under pain of sin. Accordingly
if during the time of grace men are bound, under necessity of
precept, to pay tithes in those countries where tithes are not paid,
they would all be in a state of mortal sin, and so would also be the
ministers of the Church for dissembling. But this seems
unreasonable. Therefore during the time of grace men are not bound
under necessity of precept to pay tithes.
On the contrary, Augustine [Append. Serm. cclxxcii], whose words
are quoted 16, qu. i [Can. Decimae], says: "It is a duty to pay tithes,
and whoever refuses to pay them takes what belongs to another."
I answer that, In the Old Law tithes were paid for the sustenance of
the ministers of God. Hence it is written (Malach. 3:10): "Bring all the
tithes into My store-house that there may be meat in My house."
Hence the precept about the paying of tithes was partly moral and
instilled in the natural reason; and partly judicial, deriving its force
from its divine institution. Because natural reason dictates that the
people should administer the necessaries of life to those who
minister the divine worship for the welfare of the whole people even
as it is the people's duty to provide a livelihood for their rulers and
soldiers and so forth. Hence the Apostle proves this from human
custom, saying (1 Cor. 9:7): "Who serveth as a soldier at any time at
his own charge? Who planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the fruit
thereof?" But the fixing of the proportion to be offered to the
ministers of divine worship does not belong to the natural law, but
was determined by divine institution, in accordance with the
condition of that people to whom the law was being given. For they

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.2.

were divided into twelve tribes, and the twelfth tribe, namely that of
Levi, was engaged exclusively in the divine ministry and had no
possessions whence to derive a livelihood: and so it was
becomingly ordained that the remaining eleven tribes should give
one-tenth part of their revenues to the Levites [Num. 18:21] that the
latter might live respectably; and also because some, through
negligence, would disregard this precept. Hence, so far as the tenth
part was fixed, the precept was judicial, since all institutions
established among this people for the special purpose of preserving
equality among men, in accordance with this people's condition, are
called "judicial precepts." Nevertheless by way of consequence
these institutions foreshadowed something in the future, even as
everything else connected with them, according to 1 Cor. 12, "All
these things happened to them in figure." In this respect they had
something in common with the "ceremonial precepts," which were
instituted chiefly that they might be signs of the future. Hence the
precept about paying tithes foreshadowed something in the future.
For ten is, in a way, the perfect number (being the first numerical
limit, since the figures do not go beyond ten but begin over again
from one), and therefore he that gave a tenth, which is the sign of
perfection, reserving the nine other parts for himself, acknowledged
by a sign that imperfection was his part, and that the perfection
which was to come through Christ was to be hoped for from God. Yet
this proves it to be, not a ceremonial but a judicial precept, as stated
above.
There is this difference between the ceremonial and judicial precepts
of the Law, as we stated above (FS, Question 104, Article 3), that it is
unlawful to observe the ceremonial precepts at the time of the New
Law, whereas there is no sin in keeping the judicial precepts during
the time of grace although they are not binding. Indeed they are
bound to be observed by some, if they be ordained by the authority
of those who have power to make laws. Thus it was a judicial precept
of the Old Law that he who stole a sheep should restore four sheep
(Ex. 22:1), and if any king were to order this to be done his subjects
would be bound to obey. In like manner during the time of the New
Law the authority of the Church has established the payment of tithe;
thus showing a certain kindliness, lest the people of the New Law
should give less to the ministers of the New Testament than did the
people of the Old Law to the ministers of the Old Testament; for the
people of the New Law are under greater obligations, according to
Mt. 5:20, "Unless your justice abound more than that of the Scribes
and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven," and,