FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.53, C.3.

greater or a smaller number of things.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument would hold, if the essence itself
of a habit were nowise subject to decrease. This we do not say; but
that a certain decrease in the essence of a habit has its origin, not in
the habit, but in its subject.
Reply to Objection 3: No matter how we take an accident, its very
notion implies dependence on a subject, but in different ways. For if
we take an accident in the abstract, it implies relation to a subject,
which relation begins in the accident and terminates in the subject:
for "whiteness is that whereby a thing is white." Accordingly in
defining an accident in the abstract, we do not put the subject as
though it were the first part of the definition, viz. the genus; but we
give it the second place, which is that of the difference; thus we say
that "simitas" is "a curvature of the nose." But if we take accidents in
the concrete, the relation begins in the subject and terminates in the
concrete, the relation begins in the subject and terminates at the
accident: for "a white thing" is "something that has whiteness."
Accordingly in defining this kind of accident, we place the subject as
the genus, which is the first part of a definition; for we say that a
"simum" is a "snub-nose." Accordingly whatever is befitting an
accident on the part of the subject, but is not of the very essence of
the accident, is ascribed to that accident, not in the abstract, but in
the concrete. Such are increase and decrease in certain accidents:
wherefore to be more or less white is not ascribed to whiteness but
to a white thing. The same applies to habits and other qualities; save
that certain habits and other qualities; save that certain habits
increase or diminish by a kind of addition, as we have already clearly
explained (Question 52, Article 2).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.53, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a habit is corrupted or diminished

through mere cessation from act?
Objection 1: It would seem that a habit is not corrupted or
diminished through mere cessation from act. For habits are more
lasting than passion-like qualities, as we have explained above
(Question 49, Article 2, ad 3; Question 50, Article 1). But passion-like
qualities are neither corrupted nor diminished by cessation from act:
for whiteness is not lessened through not affecting the sight, nor
heat through ceasing to make something hot. Therefore neither are
habits diminished or corrupted through cessation from act.
Objection 2: Further, corruption and diminution are changes. Now
nothing is changed without a moving cause. Since therefore
cessation from act does not imply a moving cause, it does not
appear how a habit can be diminished or corrupted through
cessation from act.
Objection 3: Further, the habits of science and virtue are in the
intellectual soul which is above time. Now those things that are
above time are neither destroyed nor diminished by length of time.
Neither, therefore, are such habits destroyed or diminished through
length of time, if one fails for long to exercise them.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Long. et Brev. Vitae ii)
that not only "deception," but also "forgetfulness, is the corruption
of science." Moreover he says (Ethic. viii, 5) that "want of intercourse
has dissolved many a friendship." In like manner other habits of
virtue are diminished or destroyed through cessation from act.
I answer that, As stated in Phys. vii, text. 27, a thing is a cause of
movement in two ways. First, directly; and such a thing causes
movement by reason of its proper form; thus fire causes heat.
Secondly, indirectly; for instance, that which removes an obstacle. It
is in this latter way that the destruction or diminution of a habit
results through cessation from act, in so far, to wit, as we cease from
exercising an act which overcame the causes that destroyed or
weakened that habit. For it has been stated (Article 1) that habits are
destroyed or diminished directly through some contrary agency.
Consequently all habits that are gradually undermined by contrary
agencies which need to be counteracted by acts proceeding from