## Homily 11 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 5:11
Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we persuade men but we are made
manifest unto God; and I hope that we are made manifest also in your
consciences.
Knowing therefore, he says, these things, that terrible seat of judgment, we
do every thing so as not to give you a handle nor offense, nor any false suspicion
of evil practice against us. Do you see the strictness of life, and zeal of a
watchful soul? 'For we are not only open to accusation,' he says 'if we commit
any evil deed; but even if we do not commit, yet are suspected, and having it in
our power to repel the suspicion, brave it, we are punished.'

2 Corinthians 5:12
"We are not again commending ourselves unto you, but speak as giving you
occasion of glorying in our behalf."
See how he is continually obviating the suspicion of appearing to praise
himself. For nothing is so offensive to the hearers as for any one to say great and
marvellous things about himself. Since then he was compelled in what he said to
fall upon that subject, he uses a corrective, saying, 'we do this for your sakes, not
for ours, that you may have somewhat to glory of, not that we may.' And not
even this absolutely, but because of the false Apostles. Wherefore also he added,
"To answer them that glory in appearance, and not in heart." Do you see how he
has detached them from them, and drawn them to himself; having shown that
even the Corinthians themselves are longing to get hold of some occasion,
whereby they may have it in their power to speak on their behalf and to defend
them unto their accusers. For, says he, 'we say these things not that we may
boast, but that you may have wherein to speak freely on our behalf;' which is the
language of one testifying to their great love: 'and not that you may boast
merely: but that you may not be drawn aside.' But this he does not say explicitly,
but manages his words otherwise and in a gentler form, and without dealing
them a blow, saying,
"That ye may have somewhat to glory towards those which glory in
appearance." But neither this does he bid them do absolutely, when no cause
exists, but when they extol themselves; for in all things he looks out for the
fitting occasion. He does not then do this in order to show himself to be
illustrious, but to stop those men who were using the thing improperly and to the
injury of these. But what is "in appearance?" In what is seen, in what is for
display. For of such sort were they, doing every thing out of a love of honor,
while they were both empty inwardly and wore indeed an appearance of piety

and of venerable seeming, but of good works were destitute.

2 Corinthians 5:13
2. "For whether we are beside ourselves, it is to God; or whether we are of
sober mind, it is unto you."
And if, says he, we have uttered any great thing, (for this is what he here
calls being beside himself, as therefore in other places also he calls it folly [2
Corinthians 11:1, 17, 21]) for God's sake we do this, lest ye thinking us to be
worthless should despise us and perish; or if again any modest and lowly thing,
it is for your sakes that you may learn to be lowly-minded. Or else, again, he
means this. If any one thinks us to be mad, we seek for our reward from God, for
Whose sake we are of this suspected; but if he thinks us sober, let him reap the
advantage of our soberness. And again, in another way. Does any one say we are
mad? For God's sake are we in such sort mad. Wherefore also he subjoins;