provides the matter, and in whose womb the child is begotten. So
too the godparent who in place of the Church offers and raises the
candidate for Baptism and holds the candidate for Confirmation
contracts spiritual relationship.
Reply to Objection 2: He contracts spiritual relationship not by
reason of the instruction it is his duty to give, but on account of the
spiritual birth in which he co-operates.
Reply to Objection 3: A person who is not baptized cannot raise
anyone from the sacred font, since he is not a member of the Church
whom the godparent in Baptism represents: although he can baptize,
because he is a creature of God Whom the baptizer represents. And
yet he cannot contract a spiritual relationship, since he is void of
spiritual life to which man is first born by receiving Baptism.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether spiritual relationship passes from

husband to wife?
Objection 1: It would seem that spiritual relationship does not pass
from husband to wife. For spiritual and bodily union are disparate
and differ generically. Therefore carnal union which is between
husband and wife cannot be the means of contracting a spiritual
relationship.
Objection 2: Further, the godfather and godmother have more in
common in the spiritual birth that is the cause of spiritual
relationship, than a husband, who is godfather, has with his wife.
Now godfather and godmother do not hereby contract spiritual
relationship. Therefore neither does a wife contract a spiritual
relationship through her husband being godfather to someone.
Objection 3: Further, it may happen that the husband is baptized,
and his wife not, for instance when he is converted from unbelief
without his wife being converted. Now spiritual relationship cannot
be contracted by one who is not baptized. Therefore it does not
always pass from husband to wife.
Objection 4: Further, husband and wife together can raise a person
from the sacred font, since no law forbids it. If therefore spiritual
relationship passed from husband to wife, it would follow that each
of them is twice godfather or godmother of the same individual:
which is absurd.
On the contrary, Spiritual goods are more communicable than bodily
goods. But the bodily consanguinity of the husband passes to his
wife by affinity. Much more therefore does spiritual relationship.
I answer that, A may become co-parent with B in two ways. First, by
the act of another (B), who baptizes A's child, or raises him in
Baptism. In this way spiritual relationship does not pass from
husband to wife, unless perchance it be his wife's child, for then she
contracts spiritual relationship directly, even as her husband.
Secondly, by his own act, for instance when he raises B's child from
the sacred font, and thus spiritual relationship passes to the wife if
he has already had carnal knowledge of her, but not if the marriage
be not yet consummated, since they are not as yet made one flesh: