## Homily 7 on Hebrews

Hebrews 4:11-13
"Let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the
same example of unbelief. For the word of God is quick [i.e. living] and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, neither is there any creature that is not
manifest in His sight, but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of Him
with whom we have to do."
1. Faith is indeed great and brings salvation, and without it, it is not
possible ever to be saved. It suffices not however of itself to accomplish this, but
there is need of a right conversation also. So that on this account Paul also
exhorts those who had already been counted worthy of the mysteries; saying,
"Let us labor to enter into that rest." "Let us labor" (he says), Faith not sufficing,
the life also ought to be added thereto, and our earnestness to be great; for truly
there is need of much earnestness too, in order to go up into Heaven. For if they
who suffered so great distress in the Wilderness, were not counted worthy of [the
promised] land, and were not able to attain [that] land, because they murmured
and because they committed fornication: how shall we be counted worthy of
Heaven, if we live carelessly and indolently? We then have need of much
earnestness.
And observe, the punishment does not extend to this only, the not entering
in (for he said not, "Let us labor to enter into the rest," lest we fail of so great
blessings), but he added what most of all arouses men. What then is this? "Lest
any man fall, after the same example of unbelief." What means this? It means
that we should have our mind, our hope, our expectation, yonder, lest we should

fail. For that [otherwise] we shall fail, the example shows, "lest [&c.] after the
same," he says.
2. In the next place, lest hearing [the words] "after the same [example],"
you should think that the punishment is the same, hear what he adds; "For the
Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and
pierces even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart." In these
words he shows that He, the Word of God, wrought the former things also, and
lives, and has not been quenched.
Do not then when hearing the Word, think of it lightly. For "He is sharper,"
he says, "than a sword." Observe His condescension; and hence consider why
the prophets also needed to speak of saber and bow and sword. "If you turn not,"
it is said, "He will whet His sword, He has bent His bow and made it ready."
[Psalm 7:12] For if now, after so long a time, and after their being perfected, He
cannot smite down by the name of the Word alone, but needs these expressions
in order to show the superiority [arising] from the comparison [of the Gospel
with the law]: much more then [of old].
"Piercing," he says, "even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit." What
is this? He hinted at something more fearful. Either that He divides the spirit
from the soul, or that He pierces even through them disembodied, not as a sword
through bodies only. Here he shows, that the soul also is punished, and that it
thoroughly searches out the most inward things, piercing wholly through the
whole man.
"And is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, neither is there
any creature that is not manifest in His sight." In these words most of all he
terrified them. For do not (he says) be confident if you still stand fast in the
Faith, but without full assurance. He judges the inner heart, for there He passes
through, both punishing and searching out.
And why speak I of men? He says. For even if you speak of Angels, of
Archangels, of the Cherubim, of the Seraphim, even of any "creature"