could obtain anything, would be more efficacious than all the
petitions of the Church here below. Now if the suffrages of the
Church here below for some one in purgatory were to be multiplied,
he would be wholly delivered from punishment. Since then the saints
in heaven pray for those who are in purgatory on the same account
as for us, if they obtain anything for us, their prayers would deliver
entirely from punishment those who are in purgatory. But this is not
true because, then the Church's suffrages for the dead would be
unnecessary.
On the contrary, It is written (2 Macc. 15:14): "This is he that prayeth
much for the people, and for all the holy city, Jeremias the prophet of
God": and that his prayer was granted is clear from what follows (2
Macc. 15:15): "Jeremias stretched forth his right hand, and gave to
Judas a sword of gold, saying: Take this holy sword, a gift from
God," etc.
Further, Jerome says (Ep. contra Vigilant.): "Thou sayest in thy
pamphlets, that while we live, we can pray for one another, but that
when we are dead no one's prayer for another will be heard": and
afterwards he refutes this in the following words: "If the apostles and
martyrs while yet in the body can pray for others, while they are still
solicitous for themselves, how much more can they do so when the
crown, the victory, the triumph is already theirs!"
Further, this is confirmed by the custom of the Church, which often
asks to be assisted by the prayers of the saints.
I answer that, The saints are said to pray for us in two ways. First, by
"express" prayer, when by their prayers they seek a hearing of the
Divine clemency on our behalf: secondly, by "interpretive" prayer,
namely by their merits which, being known to God, avail not only
them unto glory, but also us as suffrages and prayers, even as the
shedding of Christ's blood is said to ask pardon for us. In both ways
the saints' prayers considered in themselves avail to obtain what
they ask, yet on our part they may fail so that we obtain not the fruit
of their prayers, in so far as they are said to pray for us by reason of
their merits availing on our behalf. But in so far as they pray for us
by asking something for us in their prayers, their prayers are always
granted, since they will only what God wills, nor do they ask save for
what they will to be done; and what God wills is always fulfilled--unless we speak of His "antecedent" will, whereby "He wishes all
men to be saved" [FP, Question 19, Article 6, ad 1]. For this will is not

always fulfilled; wherefore no wonder if that also which the saints
will according to this kind of will be not fulfilled sometimes.
Reply to Objection 1: This prayer of the martyrs is merely their desire
to obtain the robe of the body and the fellowship of those who will be
saved, and their consent to God's justice in punishing the wicked.
Hence a gloss on Apoc. 6:11, "How long, O Lord," says: "They desire
an increase of joy and the fellowship of the saints, and they consent
to God's justice."
Reply to Objection 2: The Lord speaks there of Moses and Samuel
according to their state in this life. For we read that they withstood
God's anger by praying for the people. And yet even if they had been
living at the time in question, they would have been unable to placate
God towards the people by their prayers, on account of the
wickedness of this same people: and it is thus that we are to
understand this passage.
Reply to Objection 3: This dispute among the good angels does not
mean that they offered contradictory prayers to God, but that they
submitted contrary merits on various sides to the Divine inquiry,
with a view of God's pronouncing sentence thereon. This, in fact, is
what Gregory says (Moral. xvii) in explanation of the aforesaid words
of Daniel: "The lofty spirits that are set over the nations never fight in
behalf of those that act unjustly, but they justly judge and try their
deeds. And when the guilt or innocence of any particular nation is
brought into the debate of the court above, the ruling spirit of that
nation is said to have won or lost in the conflict. Yet the supreme will
of their Maker is victorious over all, for since they have it ever before
their eyes, they will not what they are unable to obtain," wherefore
neither do they seek for it. And consequently it is clear that their
prayers are always heard.
Reply to Objection 4: Although the saints are not in a state to merit
for themselves, when once they are in heaven, they are in a state to
merit for others, or rather to assist others by reason of their previous
merit: for while living they merited that their prayers should be heard
after their death.
Or we may reply that prayer is meritorious on one count, and
impetratory on another. For merit consists in a certain equation of
the act to the end for which it is intended, and which is given to it as