SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: The gratuitous graces are ascribed to the Holy
Ghost as their first principle: yet He works grace of this kind in men
by means of the angels.
Reply to Objection 3: The work of the instrument is ascribed to the
principal agent by whose power the instrument acts. And since a
minister is like an instrument, prophetic revelation, which is
conveyed by the ministry of the angels, is said to be Divine.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a natural disposition is requisite for

prophecy?
Objection 1: It would seem that a natural disposition is requisite for
prophecy. For prophecy is received by the prophet according to the
disposition of the recipient, since a gloss of Jerome on Amos 1:2,
"The Lord will roar from Sion," says: "Anyone who wishes to make a
comparison naturally turns to those things of which he has
experience, and among which his life is spent. For example, sailors
compare their enemies to the winds, and their losses to a shipwreck.
In like manner Amos, who was a shepherd, likens the fear of God to
that which is inspired by the lion's roar." Now that which is received
by a thing according to the mode of the recipient requires a natural
disposition. Therefore prophecy requires a natural disposition.
Objection 2: Further, the considerations of prophecy are more lofty
than those of acquired science. Now natural indisposition hinders
the considerations of acquired science, since many are prevented by
natural indisposition from succeeding to grasp the speculations of
science. Much more therefore is a natural disposition requisite for
the contemplation of prophecy.
Objection 3: Further, natural indisposition is a much greater obstacle
than an accidental impediment. Now the considerations of prophecy
are hindered by an accidental occurrence. For Jerome says in his
commentary on Matthew [Origen, Hom. vi in Num.] that "at the time
of the marriage act, the presence of the Holy Ghost will not be
vouchsafed, even though it be a prophet that fulfils the duty of
procreation." Much more therefore does a natural indisposition
hinder prophecy; and thus it would seem that a good natural
disposition is requisite for prophecy.
On the contrary, Gregory says in a homily for Pentecost (xxx in Ev.):
"He," namely the Holy Ghost, "fills the boy harpist and makes him a
Psalmist; He fills the herdsman plucking wild figs, and makes him a
prophet." Therefore prophecy requires no previous disposition, but
depends on the will alone of the Holy Ghost, of Whom it is written (1
Cor. 12:2): "All these things, one and the same Spirit worketh,
dividing to every one according as He will."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), prophecy in its true and

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.4.