SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.4.

Dionysius declares (Coel. Hier. vii). But the bestowal of benefits is an
act of charity towards others. Therefore we ought to be most
beneficent towards those who are most closely connected with us.
Now one man's connection with another may be measured in
reference to the various matters in which men are engaged together;
(thus the intercourse of kinsmen is in natural matters, that of fellowcitizens is in civic matters, that of the faithful is in spiritual matters,
and so forth): and various benefits should be conferred in various
ways according to these various connections, because we ought in
preference to bestow on each one such benefits as pertain to the
matter in which, speaking simply, he is most closely connected with
us. And yet this may vary according to the various requirements of
time, place, or matter in hand: because in certain cases one ought,
for instance, to succor a stranger, in extreme necessity, rather than
one's own father, if he is not in such urgent need.
Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord did not absolutely forbid us to invite
our friends and kinsmen to eat with us, but to invite them so that
they may invite us in return, since that would be an act not of charity
but of cupidity. The case may occur, however, that one ought rather
to invite strangers, on account of their greater want. For it must be
understood that, other things being equal, one ought to succor those
rather who are most closely connected with us. And if of two, one be
more closely connected, and the other in greater want, it is not
possible to decide, by any general rule, which of them we ought to
help rather than the other, since there are various degrees of want as
well as of connection: and the matter requires the judgment of a
prudent man.
Reply to Objection 2: The common good of many is more Godlike
than the good of an individual. Wherefore it is a virtuous action for a
man to endanger even his own life, either for the spiritual or for the
temporal common good of his country. Since therefore men engage
together in warlike acts in order to safeguard the common weal, the
soldier who with this in view succors his comrade, succors him not
as a private individual, but with a view to the welfare of his country
as a whole: wherefore it is not a matter for wonder if a stranger be
preferred to one who is a blood relation.
Reply to Objection 3: A thing may be due in two ways. There is one
which should be reckoned, not among the goods of the debtor, but
rather as belonging to the person to whom it is due: for instance, a

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.4.

man may have another's goods, whether in money or in kind, either
because he has stolen them, or because he has received them on
loan or in deposit or in some other way. In this case a man ought to
pay what he owes, rather than benefit his connections out of it,
unless perchance the case be so urgent that it would be lawful for
him to take another's property in order to relieve the one who is in
need. Yet, again, this would not apply if the creditor were in equal
distress: in which case, however, the claims on either side would
have to be weighed with regard to such other conditions as a
prudent man would take into consideration, because, on account of
the different particular cases, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ix, 2),
it is impossible to lay down a general rule.
The other kind of due is one which is reckoned among the goods of
the debtor and not of the creditor; for instance, a thing may be due,
not because justice requires it, but on account of a certain moral
equity, as in the case of benefits received gratis. Now no benefactor
confers a benefit equal to that which a man receives from his
parents: wherefore in paying back benefits received, we should give
the first place to our parents before all others, unless, on the other
side, there be such weightier motives, as need or some other
circumstance, for instance the common good of the Church or state.
In other cases we must take to account the connection and the
benefit received; and here again no general rule can laid down.
Reply to Objection 4: Parents are like superiors, and so a parent's
love tends to conferring benefits, while the children's love tends to
honor their parents. Nevertheless in a case of extreme urgency it
would be lawful to abandon one's children rather than one's parents,
to abandon whom it is by no means lawful, on account of the
obligation we lie under towards them for the benefits we have
received from them, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. iii, 14).