otherwise contemptible through her life and manners? I praise the custom, that
virgins attend to do honor to their fellow; matrons attend to do honor to her who
is made one of their order. Rightly has this been ordered. For these are two
companies, one of virgins, the other of the married; the one are giving her up, the
other receiving her. The bride is between them, neither virgin, nor wife, for she
is coming forth from those, and entering into the fellowship of these. But those
harlots, what mean they? They ought to hide their faces when marriage is
celebrated; they ought to be dug into the earth, (for harlotry is the corruption of
marriage,) but we introduce them at our marriages. And, when you are engaged
in any work, you count it ill-omened to speak even a syllable of what is adverse
to it; for instance, when you sow, when you draw off the wine from your vats,
you would not, even if asked, utter a syllable about vinegar; but here, where the
object is chasteness, introduce ye the vinegar? For such is an harlot. When you
are preparing sweet ointment, you suffer nought ill-scented to be near. Marriage
is a sweet ointment. Why then do you introduce the foul stench of the dunghill
into the preparation of your ointment? What do you say? Shall the virgin dance,
and yet feel no shame before her fellow? For she ought to have more gravity
than the other; she has at least come forth from the [nurse's] arm, and not from
the palæstra. For the virgin ought not to appear publicly at all at a marriage.
Do you see not how in kings' houses, the honored are within, about the
king, the unhonored without? Do thou too be within about the bride. But remain
in the house in chasteness, expose not your virginity. Either company is standing
by, the one to show of what sort she is whom they are giving up, the other in
order that they may guard her. Why do you disgrace the virgin estate? For if you
are such as this, the same will the bridegroom suspect her to be. If you wish to
have men in love with you, this is the part of saleswomen, green-grocers, and
handicrafts-people. Is not this a shame? To act unseemly is a shame even though
it be a king's daughter. For does her poverty stand in the way? Or her course of
life? Even if a virgin be a slave, let her abide in modesty. "For in Christ Jesus
there can be neither bond nor free." [Galatians 3:28]

What? Is marriage a theater? It is a mystery and a type of a mighty thing;
and even if you reverence not it, reverence that whose type it is. "This mystery,"
says he, "is great, but I speak in regard of Christ and of the Church." [Ephesians
5:32] It is a type of the Church, and of Christ, and do you introduce harlots at it?
If then, says one, neither virgins dance, nor the married, who is to dance? No
one, for what need is there of dancing? In the Grecian mysteries there are
dancings, but in ours, silence and decency, modesty, and bashfulness. A great
mystery is being celebrated: forth with the harlots! Forth with the profane! How
is it a mystery? They come together, and the two make one. Wherefore is it that
at his entrance indeed, there was no dancing, no cymbals, but great silence, great
stillness; but when they come together, making not a lifeless image, nor yet the
image of anything upon earth, but of God Himself, and after his likeness, you
introduce so great an uproar, and disturbest those that are there, and puttest the
soul to shame, and confoundest it? They come, about to be made one body. See
again a mystery of love! If the two become not one, so long as they continue
two, they make not many, but when they have come into oneness, they then
make many. What do we learn from this? That great is the power of union. The
wise counsel of God at the beginning divided the one into two; and being
desirous of showing that even after division it remains still one, He suffered not
that the one should be of itself enough for procreation. For he is not one who is
not yet [united, ] but the half of one; and it is evident from this, that he begets no
offspring, as was the case also beforetime. Do you see the mystery of marriage?
He made of one, one; and again, having made these two, one, He so makes one,
so that now also man is produced of one. For man and wife are not two men, but
one Man. And this may be confirmed from many sources; for instance, from
James, from Mary the Mother of Christ, from the words, "He made them male
and female." [Genesis 1:27] If he be the head, and she the body, how are they
two? Therefore the one holds the rank of a disciple, the other of a teacher, the
one of a ruler, the other of a subject. Moreover, from the very fashioning of her
body, one may see that they are one, for she was made from his side, and they