reproach in the flesh. Nor do they stop even here, but add to these offenses
others still more monstrous; for not only do they elect unworthy men, but
actually expel those who are well qualified. As if it were necessary to ruin the
safety of the Church on both sides, or as if the former provocation were not
sufficient to kindle the wrath of God, they have contrived yet another not less
pernicious. For I consider it as atrocious to expel the useful men as to force in
the useless. And this in fact takes place, so that the flock of Christ is unable to
find consolation in any direction, or draw its breath freely. Now do not such
deeds deserve to be punished by ten thousand thunder-bolts, and a hell-fire hotter
than that with which we are threatened [in Holy Scripture]? Yet these monstrous
evils are borne with by Him who wills not the death of a sinner, that he may be
converted and live. And how can one sufficiently marvel at His lovingkindness,
and be amazed at His mercy? They who belong to Christ destroy the property of
Christ more than enemies and adversaries, yet the good Lord still deals gently
with them, and calls them to repentance. Glory be to You, O Lord! Glory to You!
How vast is the depth of Your lovingkindness! How great the riches of Your
forbearance! Men who on account of Your name have risen from insignificance
and obscurity to positions of honor and distinction, use the honor they enjoy
against Him who has bestowed it, do deeds of outrageous audacity, and insult
holy things, rejecting and expelling men of zeal in order that the wicked may
ruin everything at their pleasure in much security, and with the utmost
fearlessness. And if you would know the causes of this dreadful evil, you will
find that they are similar to those which were mentioned before; for they have
one root and mother, so to say— namely, envy; but this is manifested in several
different forms. For one we are told is to be struck out of the list of candidates,
because he is young; another because he does not know how to flatter; a third
because he has offended such and such a person; a fourth lest such and such a
man should be pained at seeing one whom he has presented rejected, and this
man elected; a fifth because he is kind and gentle; a sixth because he is
formidable to the sinful; a seventh for some other like reason; for they are at no

loss to find as many pretexts as they want, and can even make the abundance of
a man's wealth an objection when they have no other. Indeed they would be
capable of discovering other reasons, as many as they wish, why a man ought
not to be brought suddenly to this honor, but gently and gradually. And here I
should like to ask the question, "What, then, is the prelate to do, who has to
contend with such blasts? How shall he hold his ground against such billows?
How shall he repel all these assaults?"
For if he manages the business upon upright principles, all those who are
enemies and adversaries both to him and to the candidates do everything with a
view to contention, provoking daily strife, and heaping infinite scorn upon the
candidates, until they have got them struck off the list, or have introduced their
own favorites. In fact it is just as if some pilot had pirates sailing with him in his
ship, perpetually plotting every hour against him, and the sailors, and marines.
And if he should prefer favor with such men to his own salvation, accepting
unworthy candidates, he will have God for his enemy in their stead; and what
could be more dreadful than that? And yet his relations with them will be more
embarrassing than formerly, as they will all combine with each other, and
thereby become more powerful than before. For as when fierce winds coming
from opposite directions clash with one another, the ocean, hitherto calm,
becomes suddenly furious and raises its crested waves, destroying those who are
sailing over it, so also when the Church has admitted corrupt men, its once
tranquil surface is covered with rough surf and strewn with shipwrecks.
16. Consider, then, what kind of man he ought to be who is to hold out
against such a tempest, and to manage skillfully such great hindrances to the
common welfare; for he ought to be dignified yet free from arrogance,
formidable yet kind, apt to command yet sociable, impartial yet courteous,
humble yet not servile, strong yet gentle, in order that he may contend
successfully against all these difficulties. And he ought to bring forward with
great authority the man who is properly qualified for the office, even if all should
oppose him, and with the same authority to reject the man who is not so