God.
10. After this do we not feel shame, and hide our faces, at seeing that
righteous man for twenty years persevering and not desisting; we ourselves after
a first or second petition often fainting and indignant? And yet he indeed had in
large measure liberty of speech towards God, and all the same he felt no
discontent at the delay of the giving, but remained patient, whereas we, laden
with countless sins, living with an evil conscience, displaying no good will
towards the Master; if we are not heard before having spoken, are bewildered,
impatiently recoil, desist from asking— on this account we always retire with
empty hands. Who has for twenty years besought God for one thing, as this
righteous man did? Or rather who for twenty months only? Yesterday I was
saying that they are many who pray with slackness, and yawning, and stretching
themselves, and continually shifting their attitude, and indulging in every
carelessness in their prayers— but today I have found also another damage
attaching itself to their prayers more destructive than that one. For many,
throwing themselves prostrate, and striking the ground with their forehead, and
pouring forth hot tears, and groaning bitterly from the heart and stretching out
their hands, and displaying much earnestness, employ this warmth and
forwardness against their own salvation. For it is not on behalf of their own sins
that they beseech God; nor are they asking forgiveness of the offenses committed
by them; but they are exerting this earnestness against their enemies entirely,
doing just the same thing as if one, after whetting his sword, were not to use the
weapon against his enemies, but to thrust it through his own throat. So these also
use their prayers not for the remission of their own sins, but about revenge on
their enemies; which is to thrust the sword against themselves. This too the
wicked one has devised, in order that on all sides we may destroy ourselves, both
through slackness and through earnestness. For the one class by their
carelessness in their prayers exasperate God, by displaying contempt through
their slackness; and the others, when they display earnestness, display the
earnestness on the other hand against their own salvation. "A certain person," he

(the devil) says, "is slack: that is sufficient for me with a view to his obtaining
nothing; this man is earnest and thoroughly aroused; what then must be done to
accomplish the same result? I cannot slacken his earnestness, nor throw him into
carelessness; I will contrive his destruction in the other way. How so? I will
manage that he use his earnestness for transgressing the law:" (for the praying
against one's personal enemies is a transgression of law). "He shall depart
therefore not only having gained nothing by his earnestness, but also having
endured the hurt which is greater than that caused through slackness." Such as
these are the injuries of the devil: the one sort he destroys through their
remissness; and the other through their earnestness itself, when it is shown not
according to God's laws.
11. But it is also worth hearing the very words of their prayer, and how the
words are of a puerile mind; of how infantile a soul. I am ashamed in truth when
about to repeat them; but it is absolutely necessary to repeat them, and to imitate
that coarse tongue. What then are the words? "Avenge me of my enemies, show
them that I too have God (on my side)." They do not then learn, man, that we
have God, when we are indignant and angry and impatient; but when we are
gentle and meek and subdued, and practise all love of wisdom. So also God said,
"Let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father who is in the heavens." [Matthew 5:16] Perceivest thou not that it is
an insult to God, the making a request to God against your enemies? And how is
it an insult? One will say. Because He Himself said, "pray for your enemies;"
and brought in this divine law. When therefore you claim that the legislator
should relax his own laws; and callest upon him to legislate in opposition to
himself; and supplicatest him who had forbidden you to pray against your
enemies to hear you praying against your enemies; you are not praying in doing
this, nor calling upon him; but you are insulting the lawgiver, and acting with
drunken violence towards him, who is sure to give to you the good things which
result from prayer. And how is it possible to be heard when praying, tell me,
when you exasperate him who is sure to hear? For by doing these things you are