For I am wont to measure the amount of the teaching not by the multitude of the
words spoken, but by the disposition of the audience. For he who meets with a
disgusted audience, even if he abridge his teaching, seems to be vexatious, but
he who meets with eager, and wide-awake, and attentive hearers, though he
extend his discourse to some length, not even thus fulfils their desire.
But since it happens that there are in so great a congregation, certain weak
ones, unable to follow the length of the discourse, I wish to suggest this to them,
that they should hear and receive, as much as they can, and having received
enough should retire: There is no one who forbids, or compels them to remain
beyond their natural strength. Let them not however necessitate the abridgement
of the discourse before the time and the proper hours. You are replete, but your
brother still hungers. You are drunk with the multitude of the things spoken, but
your brother is still thirsty. Let him then not distress your weakness, compelling
you to receive more than your own power allows: nor do thou vex his zeal by
preventing him from receiving all that he can take in.
2. This also happens at secular feasts. Some indeed are more quickly
satisfied, some more tardily, and neither do these blame those, nor do they
condemn these. But there indeed to withdraw more quickly is praiseworthy, but
here to withdraw more quickly is not praiseworthy, but excusable. There to leave
off more slowly, is culpable and faulty, here to withdraw more tardily, brings the
greatest commendation, and good report. Pray why is this? Because there indeed
the tardiness arises from greediness, but here the endurance, and patience are
made up of spiritual desire and divine longing.
But enough of preamble. And we will proceed hereupon to that business
which remained over to us from that day. What then was that which was then
spoken? That all men had one speech, just as also they had one nature, and no
one was different in speech, or in tongue. Whence then comes so great a
distinction in speech? From the carelessness of those who received the gift—of
both of which matters we then spoke, showing both the lovingkindness of the
Master through this unity of speech, and the senselessness of the servants

through their distinction of speech. For he indeed foreseeing that we should
waste the gift nevertheless gave it: and they to whom it was entrusted, waxed
evil over their charge. This is then one way of explanation, not that God wrested
the gift from us but that we wasted what had been given. Then next after that,
that we received afterwards gifts greater than those lost. In place of temporal toil
he honoured us with eternal life. In place of thorns and thistles he prepared the
fruit of the Spirit to grow in our souls. Nothing was more insignificant than man,
and nothing became more honoured than man. He was the last item of the
reasonable creation. But the feet became the head, and by means of the firstfruits, were raised to the royal throne. For just as some generous and opulent
man who has seen some one escape from shipwreck and only able to save his
bare body from the waves, cradles him in his hands, and casts about him a bright
garment, and conducts him to the highest honours; so also God has done in the
case of our nature. Man cast aside all that he had, his right to speak freely, his
communion with God, his sojourn in Paradise, his unclouded life, and as from a
shipwreck, went forth bare. But God received him and straightway clothed him,
and taking him by the hand gradually conducted him to heaven. And yet the
shipwreck was quite unpardonable. For this tempest was due entirely not to the
force of the winds, but to the carelessness of the sailor.
And yet God did not look at this, but had compassion for the magnitude of
the calamity, and him who had suffered shipwreck in harbour, he received as
lovingly as if he had undergone this in the midst of the open sea. For to fall in
Paradise is to undergo shipwreck in harbour. Why so? Because when no sadness,
or care, or labours, or toil, or countless waves of desire assaulted our nature, it
was upset and it fell. And as the miscreants who sail the sea, often bore through
the ship with a small iron tool, and let in the whole sea to the ship from below;
so accordingly then, when the Devil saw the ship of Adam, that is his soul, full
of many good things, he came and bored it through with his mere voice, as with
some small iron tool, and emptied him of all his wealth and sank the ship itself.
But God made the gain greater than the loss, and brought our nature to the royal