John 14:10
"Do you not believe that I am in the Father?"
That is, "I am seen in that Essence."
"The words that I speak, I speak not of Myself,"
Do you see the exceeding nearness, and the proof of the one Essence?
"The Father that dwells in Me, He does the works."
How, beginning with words, does He come to works? For that which
naturally followed was, that He should say, "the Father speaks the words." But
He puts two things here, both concerning doctrine and miracles. Or it may have
been because the words also were works. How then does He them? In another
place He says, "If I do not the works of My Father, believe Me not." [John 10:37]
How then says He here that the Father does them? To show this same thing, that
there is no interval between the Father and the Son. What He says is this: "The
Father would not act in one way, and I in another." Indeed in another place both
He and the Father work; "My Father works hitherto, and I work" [John 5:17];
showing in the first passage the unvaryingness of the works, in the second the
identity. And if the obvious meaning of the words denotes humility, marvel not;
for after having first said, "Do you not believe?" He then spoke thus, showing
that He so modeled His words to bring him to the faith; for He walked in their
hearts.

John 14:11
"Believe that I am in the Father and the Father in Me."
"You ought not, when you hear of 'Father' and 'Son,' to seek anything else
to the establishing of the relationship as to Essence, but if this is not sufficient to
prove to you the Condignity and Consubstantiality, you may learn it even from
the works." Had the, "he that has seen Me, has seen My Father," been used with
respect to works, He would not afterwards have said,
"Or else believe Me for the very works' sake." And then to show that He is
not only able to do these things, but also other much greater than these, He puts
them with excess. For He says not, "I can do greater things than these," but,
what was much more wonderful, "I can give to others also to do greater things
than these."

John 14:12
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believes in Me, the works that I do shall he
do also; and greater works than these shall he do, because I go to the Father."
That is, "it now remains for you to work miracles, for I go away." Then
when He had accomplished what His argument intended, He says,

John 14:13
"Whatsoever you shall ask in My Name, that will I do, that the Father may be
glorified in Me."
Do you see again that it is He who does it? "I," says He, "will do it"; not, "I
will ask of the Father," but, "that the Father may be glorified in Me." In another
place He said, "God shall glorify Him in Himself" [John 13:32], but here, "He
shall glorify the Father"; for when the Son shall appear with great power, He
who begot shall be glorified. But what is, "in My Name"? That which the
Apostles said, "In the Name of Jesus Christ, arise and walk." [Acts 3:6] For all
the miracles which they did He wrought in them, and "the hand of the Lord was
with them." [Acts 11:21]