distempers arise from excess; and when the elements thereof leave their proper
limits, and go on beyond moderation, then all these countless diseases are
generated, and grievous kinds of death. Somewhat of the same kind one may see
take place with respect to the soul likewise.
8. Let us therefore cut away excess, and drinking the salutary medicine of
moderation, let us abide in our proper temperament, and give careful heed to our
prayers. Though we receive not, let us persevere that we may receive; and if we
do receive, then because we have received. For it is not at all His wish to defer
giving, but by such delay He is contriving for us to persevere. With this intent
He does also lengthen out what is good for us better than we do, and loves us
more ardently than those who gave us birth. And let both these considerations be
a charm for us to chant to ourselves in every terror that occurs, that so we may
quell our despondency, and in all things glorify Him, who on our behalf does and
orders all, even God.
For so we shall both easily repulse all hostile devices, and attain unto the
incorruptible crowns: by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom be unto the Father glory, might, and honor, together with the
Holy Ghost, now, and always, even for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 11 on Matthew

Matt. III. 7.
"But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his
baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee
from the wrath to come?"
How then does Christ say, that they did not believe John? [Luke 20:5]
Because this was not believing, to decline receiving Him whom he preached. For
so they thought they regarded their prophets and their lawgiver, nevertheless He
said they had not regarded them, forasmuch as they received not Him, that was
foretold by them. "For if you had believed Moses," says He, "ye would have
believed Me." [John 5:46] And after this again, being asked by Christ, "The
baptism of John, whence is it?" [Matthew 21:25-26] they said, "If we shall say,
Of earth, we fear the people; if we shall say, From heaven, He will say unto us,
How then did ye not believe him?"
So that from all these things it is manifest that they came indeed and were
baptized, yet they did not abide in the belief of that which was preached. For
John also points out their wickedness, by their sending unto the Baptist, and
saying, "Are you Elias? Are you Christ?" wherefore he also added, "they which
were sent were of the Pharisees." [John 1:24]
"What then? Were not the multitudes also of this same mind"? One may say.
Nay, the multitudes in simplicity of mind had this suspicion, but the Pharisees,
wishing to lay hold of Him. For since it was acknowledged that Christ comes out
of the village of David, and this man was of the tribe of Levi, they laid a snare
by the question, in order that if he should say any such thing they might quickly
come upon him. This at any rate he has declared by what follows; for on his not
acknowledging any of the things which they expected, even so they take hold of
him, saying, "Why do you baptize then, if you be not the Christ?" [John 1:25]