"I cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers."
What is your prayer, and what your entreaty? It is
"That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto
you a spirit of wisdom and revelation." Two things he requires them to
understand, as it is their duty to understand them; to what blessings they are
called, and how they have been released from their former state. He says,
however, himself, that these points are three. How then are they three? In order
that we may understand touching the things to come; for from the good things
laid up for us, we shall know His ineffable and surpassing riches, and from
understanding who we were, and how we believed, we shall know His power
and sovereignty, in turning again to Himself those who had been so long time
estranged from Him, "For the weakness of God is stronger than men." [1
Corinthians 1:25] Inasmuch as it is by the self-same power by which He raised
Christ from the dead, that He has also drawn us to Himself. Nor is that power
limited to the resurrection, but far exceeds it.
Ver. 21, 22. "And made Him to sit at His right hand, in the Heavenly places,
far above all rule and authority, and power and dominion, and every name that
is named: and He put all things in subjection under His feet, and gave Him to be
Head over all things to the Church, which is His body, the fullness of Him that
fills all in all."
Vast indeed are the mysteries and secrets of which He has made us
partakers. And these it is not possible for us to understand otherwise than by
being partakers of the Holy Ghost, and by receiving abundant grace. And it is for
this reason that Paul prays. "The Father of glory," that is, He that has given us
vast blessings, for he constantly addresses Him according to the subject he is
upon, as, for instance, when he says, "The Father of mercies and God of all
comfort." [2 Corinthians 1:3] And, again, the Prophet says, "The Lord is my
strength and my might." [Psalm 18:1]
"The Father of glory."
He has no name by which he may represent these things, and on all

occasions calls them "glory," which is in fact, with us, the name and appellation
of every kind of magnificence. Mark, he says, the Father of glory; [cf.Acts 7:2]
but of Christ the God. What then? Is the Son inferior to the glory? No, there is
no one, not even a maniac, would say so.
"May give unto you,"
That is, may raise and wing your understanding, for it is not possible
otherwise to understand these things. "For the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him." [1 Corinthians
2:14] So then, there is need of spiritual "wisdom," that we may perceive things
spiritual, that we may see things hidden. That Spirit "reveals" all things. He is
going to set forth the mysteries of God. Now the knowledge of the mysteries of
God, the Spirit alone comprehends, who also searches the deep things of Him. It
is not said, "that Angel, or Archangel, or any other created power, may give,"
that is, confer upon you a spiritual gift. And if this be of revelation, then is the
discovery of arguments consequently vain. For he that has learned God, and
knows God, shall no longer dispute concerning any thing. He will not say, This
is impossible, and That is possible, and How did the other thing come to pass? If
we learn God, as we ought to know Him; if we learn God from Him from whom
we ought to learn Him, that is from the Spirit Himself; then shall we no longer
dispute concerning any thing. And hence it is that he says,
"Having the eyes of your heart enlightened in the knowledge of Him."
He that has learned what God is, will have no misgiving about His
promises, and disbelief about what has been already brought to pass. He prays,
then, that there may be given them "a spirit of wisdom and revelation." Yet still
he also establishes it, as far as he can himself, by arguments, and from "already"
existing facts. For, whereas he was about to mention some things which had
already come to pass, and others which had not as yet happened; he makes those
which have been brought to pass, a pledge of those which have not: in some such
way, I mean, as this,
"That you may know," says he, "what is the hope of His calling."