fit for the reception of perfect reason? If, then, he obtains form in mere earthly and animal men, he
can no longer be said to be after the likeness of angels whom they call lights, but [after the likeness]
of those men who are here below. For he will not possess in that case the likeness and appearance
of angels, but of those souls in whom also he receives shape; just as water when poured into a vessel
takes the form of that vessel, and if on any occasion it happens to congeal in it, it will acquire the
form of the vessel in which it has thus been frozen, since souls themselves possess the figure of
the body [in which they dwell]; for they themselves have been adapted to the vessel [in which they
exist], as I have said before. If, then, that seed [referred to] is here solidified and formed into a
definite shape, it will possess the figure of a man. and not the form of the angels. How is it possible,
therefore, that that seed should be after images of the angels, seeing it has obtained a form after the
likeness of men? Why, again, since it was of a spiritual nature, had it any need of descending into
flesh? For what is carnal stands in need of that which is spiritual, if indeed it is to be saved, that
in it it may be sanctified and cleared from all impurity, and that what is mortal may be swallowed
up by immortality; but that which is spiritual has no need whatever of those things which are
here below. For it is not we who benefit it, but it that improves us.
7. Still more manifestly is that talk of theirs concerning their seed proved to be false, and that
in a way which must be evident to every one, by the fact that they declare those souls which have
received seed from the Mother to be superior to all others; wherefore also they have been honoured
by the Demiurge, and constituted princes, and kings, and priests. For if this were true, the high
priest Caiaphas, and Annas, and the rest of the chief priests, and doctors of the law, and rulers of
the people, would have been the first to believe in the Lord, agreeing as they did with respect to
that relationship; and even before them should have been Herod the king. But since neither he, nor
the chief priests, nor the rulers, nor the eminent of the people, turned to Him [in faith], but, on the
contrary, those who sat begging by the highway, the deaf, and the blind, while He was rejected and
despised by others, according to what Paul declares, "For ye see your calling, brethren, that there
are not many wise men among you, not many noble, not many mighty; but those things of the world
which were despised hath God chosen." Such souls, therefore, were not superior to others on
account of the seed deposited in them, nor on this account were they honoured by the Demiurge.
of a definite form,—an opinion entertained by not a few of the ancients. [And, before we censure them, let us reflect whether
their perceptions of "the carnal mind" as differing from the spirit of a man, may not account for it. 1 Thess. v. 23.]
Delitzsch, but may I entreat the reader who has not studied it to do so before dismissing the ideas of Irenæus on such topics. A
translation has been provided for English readers, by the Messrs. T. & T. Clark of Edinburgh, 1867.]
the principles of the heretics, to belong to the favoured "seed," and should therefore have eagerly have welcomed the Lord. Or
the meaning may be, "hurrying together to that relationship," that is, to the relationship secured by faith in Christ.