FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.2.

principle of its act, so that it not only acts, but acts for an end. On
the other hand, if a thing has no knowledge of the end, even though
it have an intrinsic principle of action or movement, nevertheless the
principle of acting or being moved for an end is not in that thing, but
in something else, by which the principle of its action towards an
end is not in that thing, but in something else, by which the principle
of its action towards an end is imprinted on it. Wherefore such like
things are not said to move themselves, but to be moved by others.
But those things which have a knowledge of the end are said to
move themselves because there is in them a principle by which they
not only act but also act for an end. And consequently, since both
are from an intrinsic principle, to wit, that they act and that they act
for an end, the movements of such things are said to be voluntary:
for the word "voluntary" implies that their movements and acts are
from their own inclination. Hence it is that, according to the
definitions of Aristotle, Gregory of Nyssa, and Damascene [See
Objection 1], the voluntary is defined not only as having "a principle
within" the agent, but also as implying "knowledge." Therefore, since
man especially knows the end of his work, and moves himself, in his
acts especially is the voluntary to be found.
Reply to Objection 1: Not every principle is a first principle.
Therefore, although it is essential to the voluntary act that its
principle be within the agent, nevertheless it is not contrary to the
nature of the voluntary act that this intrinsic principle be caused or
moved by an extrinsic principle: because it is not essential to the
voluntary act that its intrinsic principle be a first principle. Yet again
it must be observed that a principle of movement may happen to be
first in a genus, but not first simply: thus in the genus of things
subject to alteration, the first principle of alteration is a heavenly
body, which is nevertheless, is not the first mover simply, but is
moved locally by a higher mover. And so the intrinsic principle of the
voluntary act, i.e. the cognitive and appetitive power, is the first
principle in the genus of appetitive movement, although it is moved
by an extrinsic principle according to other species of movement.
Reply to Objection 2: New movements in animals are indeed
preceded by a motion from without; and this in two respects. First, in
so far as by means of an extrinsic motion an animal's senses are
confronted with something sensible, which, on being apprehended,
moves the appetite. Thus a lion, on seeing a stag in movement and
coming towards him, begins to be moved towards the stag.
Secondly, in so far as some extrinsic motion produces a physical

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.2.