THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.85, C.4.

offenses committed against another, just as retribution does, only
that compensation is on the part of the offender, as when he makes
satisfaction, whereas retribution is on the part of the person
offended against. Each of these belongs to the matter of justice,
because each is a kind of commutation. Wherefore it is evident that
penance, as a virtue, is a part of justice.
It must be observed, however, that according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. v, 6) a thing is said to be just in two ways, simply and
relatively. A thing is just simply when it is between equals, since
justice is a kind of equality, and he calls this the politic or civil just,
because all citizens are equal, in the point of being immediately
under the ruler, retaining their freedom. But a thing is just relatively
when it is between parties of whom one is subject to the other, as a
servant under his master, a son under his father, a wife under her
husband. It is this kind of just that we consider in penance.
Wherefore the penitent has recourse to God with a purpose of
amendment, as a servant to his master, according to Ps. 122:2:
"Behold, as the eyes of servants are on the hands of their
masters . . . so are our eyes unto the Lord our God, until He have
mercy on us"; and as a son to his father, according to Lk. 15:21:
"Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee"; and as a
wife to her husband, according to Jer. 3:1: "Thou hast prostituted
thyself to many lovers; nevertheless return to Me, saith the Lord."
Reply to Objection 1: As stated in Ethic. v, 1, justice is a virtue
towards another person, and the matter of justice is not so much the
person to whom justice is due as the thing which is the subject of
distribution or commutation. Hence the matter of penance is not
God, but human acts, whereby God is offended or appeased;
whereas God is as one to whom justice is due. Wherefore it is
evident that penance is not a theological virtue, because God is not
its matter or object.
Reply to Objection 2: The mean of justice is the equality that is
established between those between whom justice is, as stated in
Ethic. v. But in certain cases perfect equality cannot be established,
on account of the excellence of one, as between father and son, God
and man, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 14), wherefore in such
cases, he that falls short of the other must do whatever he can. Yet
this will not be sufficient simply, but only according to the
acceptance of the higher one; and this is what is meant by ascribing
excess to penance.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.85, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: As there is a kind of commutation in favors,
when, to wit, a man gives thanks for a favor received, so also is there
commutation in the matter of offenses, when, on account of an
offense committed against another, a man is either punished against
his will, which pertains to vindictive justice, or makes amends of his
own accord, which belongs to penance, which regards the person of
the sinner, just as vindictive justice regards the person of the judge.
Therefore it is evident that both are comprised under commutative
justice.
Reply to Objection 4: Although penance is directly a species of
justice, yet, in a fashion, it comprises things pertaining to all the
virtues; for inasmuch as there is a justice of man towards God, it
must have a share in matter pertaining to the theological virtues, the
object of which is God. Consequently penance comprises faith in
Christ's Passion, whereby we are cleansed of our sins, hope for
pardon, and hatred of vice, which pertains to charity. Inasmuch as it
is a moral virtue, it has a share of prudence, which directs all the
moral virtues: but from the very nature of justice, it has not only
something belonging to justice, but also something belonging to
temperance and fortitude, inasmuch as those things which cause
pleasure, and which pertain to temperance, and those which cause
terror, which fortitude moderates, are objects of commutative
justice. Accordingly it belongs to justice both to abstain from
pleasure, which belongs to temperance, and to bear with hardships,
which belongs to fortitude.