Ex. iii. 8.

These words are an interpolation: it is supposed they have been carelessly repeated from the preceding quotation of Isaiah.

long halt ye between two opinions?3346 If the Lord be God, follow Him." And again, at the
burnt-offering, he thus addresses the idolatrous priests: "Ye shall call upon the name of your gods,
and I will call on the name of the Lord my God; and the Lord that will hearken by fire, He is
God." Now, from the fact of the prophet having said these words, he proves that these gods which
were reputed so among those men, are no gods at all. He directed them to that God upon whom he
believed, and who was truly God; whom invoking, he exclaimed, "Lord God of Abraham, God of
Isaac, and God of Jacob, hear me to-day, and let all this people know that Thou art the God of
Israel."
4. Wherefore I do also call upon thee, Lord God of Abraham, and God of Isaac, and God of
Jacob and Israel, who art the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the God who, through the abundance
of Thy mercy, hast had a favour towards us, that we should know Thee, who hast made heaven and
earth, who rulest over all, who art the only and the true God, above whom there is none other God;
grant, by our Lord Jesus Christ, the governing power of the Holy Spirit; give to every reader of this
book to know Thee, that Thou art God alone, to be strengthened in Thee, and to avoid every heretical,
and godless, and impious doctrine.
5. And the Apostle Paul also, saying, "For though ye have served them which are no gods; ye
now know God, or rather, are known of God," has made a separation between those that were
not [gods] and Him who is God. And again, speaking of Antichrist, he says, "who opposeth and
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped." He points out here those
who are called gods, by such as know not God, that is, idols. For the Father of all is called God,
and is so; and Antichrist shall be lifted up, not above Him, but above those which are indeed called
gods, but are not. And Paul himself says that this is true: "We know that an idol is nothing, and
that there is none other God but one. For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven
or in earth; yet to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we through Him;
and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by Him." For he has made a distinction,
and separated those which are indeed called gods, but which are none, from the one God the Father,
from whom are all things, and, he has confessed in the most decided manner in his own person,
one Lord Jesus Christ. But in this [clause], "whether in heaven or in earth," he does not speak of
the formers of the world, as these [teachers] expound it; but his meaning is similar to that of Moses,

Literally, "In both houghs," in ambabus suffraginibus.
have occurred through carelessness of the translator.