brought it about by means of Ialdabaoth (who knew not what he did), that emissions of two men
took place, the one from the barren Elizabeth, and the other from the Virgin Mary.
12. And since she herself had no rest either in heaven or on earth, she invoked her mother to
assist her in her distress. Upon this, her mother, the first woman, was moved with compassion
towards her daughter, on her repentance, and begged from the first man that Christ should be sent
to her assistance, who, being sent forth, descended to his sister, and to the besprinkling of light.
When he recognised her (that is, the Sophia below), her brother descended to her, and announced
his advent through means of John, and prepared the baptism of repentance, and adopted Jesus
beforehand, in order that on Christ descending he might find a pure vessel, and that by the son of
that Ialdabaoth the woman might be announced by Christ. They further declare that he descended
through the seven heavens, having assumed the likeness of their sons, and gradually emptied them
of their power. For they maintain that the whole besprinkling of light rushed to him, and that Christ,
descending to this world, first clothed his sister Sophia [with it], and that then both exulted in the
mutual refreshment they felt in each other's society: this scene they describe as relating to bridegroom
and bride. But Jesus, inasmuch as he was begotten of the Virgin through the agency of God, was
wiser, purer, and more righteous than all other men: Christ united to Sophia descended into him,
and thus Jesus Christ was produced.
13. They affirm that many of his disciples were not aware of the descent of Christ into him; but
that, when Christ did descend on Jesus, he then began to work miracles, and heal, and announce
the unknown Father, and openly to confess himself the son of the first man. The powers and the
father of Jesus were angry at these proceedings, and laboured to destroy him; and when he was
being led away for this purpose, they say that Christ himself, along with Sophia, departed from
him into the state of an incorruptible Æon, while Jesus was crucified. Christ, however, was not
forgetful of his Jesus, but sent down a certain energy into him from above, which raised him up
again in the body, which they call both animal and spiritual; for he sent the mundane parts back
again into the world. When his disciples saw that he had risen, they did not recognise him—no,
not even Jesus himself, by whom he rose again from the dead. And they assert that this very great
error prevailed among his disciples, that they imagined he had risen in a mundane body, not knowing
that "flesh and blood do not attain to the kingdom of God."
14. They strove to establish the descent and ascent of Christ, by the fact that neither before his
baptism, nor after his resurrection from the dead, do his disciples state that he did any mighty works,
not being aware that Jesus was united to Christ, and the incorruptible Æon to the Hebdomad; and
they declare his mundane body to be of the same nature as that of animals. But after his resurrection
he tarried [on earth] eighteen months; and knowledge descending into him from above, he taught
what was clear. He instructed a few of his disciples, whom he knew to be capable of understanding
so great mysteries, in these things, and was then received up into heaven, Christ sitting down at the
text of the New Testament.