Septuagint]
So that you should safely guard them from intermixing themselves, not only
with friends, but even with servants. For the harm done to the free is
incalculable, when we place over them corrupt slaves. For if when enjoying all
the benefit of a father's affection and wisdom, they can with difficulty be
preserved safe throughout; when we hand them over to the unscrupulousness of
servants, they use them like enemies, thinking that they will prove milder
masters to them, when they have made them perfect fools, and weak, and worthy
of no respect.
More then than all other things together, let us attend seriously to this. "I
have loved," says he," those that love your law." [Psalm 119:165, not exact] This
man then let us too emulate, and such let us love. And that the young may
further be taught chastity, let them hear the Prophet, saying, "My loins are filled
with illusions" [Psalm 38:7, Septuagint]; and again let them hear him saying,
"You will utterly destroy every one that goes a whoring from You." [Psalm 73:27,
Septuagint] And, that one ought to restrain the belly, let them hear again, "And
slew," he says, "the more part of them while the meat was yet in their mouths."
[Psalm 78:30, Septuagint] And that they ought to be above bribes, "If riches
become abundant, set [not] your heart upon them" [Psalm 62:10]; and that they
ought to keep glory in subjection, "Nor shall his glory descend together after
him." [Psalm 49:17] And not to envy the wicked, "Be not envious against them
that work unrighteousness." [Psalm 37:1] And to count power as nothing, "I saw
the ungodly in exceeding high place, and lifting himself up as the cedars of
Libanus, and I passed by, and lo! He was not." [Psalm 37:35] And to count these
present things as nothing, "They counted the people happy, that are in such a
case; happy are the people, whose helper is the Lord their God." [Psalm 144:15,
Septuagint] That we do not sin without notice, but that there is a retribution,
"for," he says, "You shall render to every man according to his works." [Psalm
62:12, Septuagint] But why does he not so requite them day by day? "God is a
judge," he says, "righteous, and strong, and longsuffering." [Psalm 7:11] That

lowliness of mind is good, "Lord," he says, "my heart is not lifted up" [Psalm
131:1]: that pride is evil, "Therefore," he said, "pride took hold on them wholly"
[Psalm 73:6, Septuagint]; and again, "The Lord resists the proud"; and again,
"Their injustice shall come out as of fatness." That almsgiving is good, "He has
dispersed, he has given to the needy, his righteousness endures for ever."
[Proverbs 3:34] And that to pity is praiseworthy, "He is a good man that pities,
and lends." [Psalm 73:7, Septuagint] And you will find there many more
doctrines than these, full of true philosophy; such as, that one ought not to speak
evil, "Him that privily slanders his neighbor, him did I chase from me." [Psalm
112:9]
What is the hymn of those above? The Faithful know. What say the
cherubim above? What say the Angels? "Glory to God in the highest." [Psalm
112:5] Therefore after the psalmody come the hymns, as a thing of more
perfection. "With psalms," he says, "with hymns, with spiritual songs, with grace
singing in your hearts to God." [Psalm 101:5, Septuagint] He means either this,
that God because of grace has given us these things; or, with the songs in grace;
or, admonishing and teaching one another in grace; or, that they had these gifts
in grace; or, it is an epexegesis and he means, from the grace of the Spirit.
"Singing in your hearts to God." Not simply with the mouth, he means, but with
heedfulness. For this is to "sing to God," but that to the air, for the voice is
scattered without result. Not for display, he means. And even if you be in the
market-place, you can collect yourself, and sing unto God, no one hearing you.
For Moses also in this way prayed, and was heard, for He says, "Why do you cry
unto Me?" [Exodus 14:15] albeit he said nothing, but cried in thought—
wherefore also God alone heard him— with a contrite heart. For it is not
forbidden one even when walking to pray in his heart, and to dwell above.
Ver. 17. "And whatsoever you do," he says, "in word or in deed, do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him."
For if we thus do, there will be nothing polluted, nothing unclean, wherever
Christ is called on. If you eat, if you drink, if you marry, if you travel, do all in