and destitute of the fruit of fasting. The Publican fasted not; and yet he was
accepted in preference to him who had fasted; in order that you may learn that
fasting is unprofitable, except all other duties follow with it. The Ninevites
fasted, and won the favour of God. [Jonah 3:10] The Jews, fasted too, and
profited nothing, nay, they departed with blame. Since then the danger in fasting
is so great to those who do not know how they ought to fast, we should learn the
laws of this exercise, in order that we may not "run uncertainly," nor "beat the
air," nor while we are fighting contend with a shadow. Fasting is a medicine; but
a medicine, though it be never so profitable, becomes frequently useless owing
to the unskilfulness of him who employs it. For it is necessary to know,
moreover, the time when it should be applied, and the requisite quantity of it;
and the temperament of body that admits it; and the nature of the country, and
the season of the year; and the corresponding diet; as well as various other
particulars; any of which, if one overlooks, he will mar all the rest that have been
named. Now if, when the body needs healing, such exactness is required on our
part, much more ought we, when our care is about the soul, and we seek to heal
the distempers of the mind, to look, and to search into every particular with the
utmost accuracy.
9. Let us see then how the Ninevites fasted, and how they were delivered
from that wrath— "Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything,"
[Jonah 3:7] says (the prophet). What do you say? Tell me— must even the
irrational things fast, and the horses and the mules be covered with sackcloth?
"Even so," he replies. For as when, at the decease of some rich man, the relatives
clothe not only the men servants and maid servants, but the horses also with
sackcloth, and give orders that they should follow the procession to the
sepulchre, led by their grooms; thus signifying the greatness of the calamity, and
inviting all to pity; thus also, indeed, when that city was about to be destroyed,
even the irrational nature was enveloped in sackcloth, and subjected to the yoke
of fasting. "It is not possible," says he, "that irrational creatures should learn the
wrath of God by means of reason; let them be taught by means of fasting, that

this stroke is of divine infliction. For if the city should be overturned, not only
would it be one common sepulchre for us, the dwellers therein, but for these
likewise. Inasmuch then as these would participate in the punishment, let them
also do so in the fast." But there was yet another thing which they aimed at in
this act, which the prophets also are wont to do. For these, when they see some
dreadful chastisement proceeding from heaven, and those who are to be
punished without anything to say for themselves—laden with shame—unworthy
of the least pardon or excuse:— not knowing what to do, nor from whence they
may procure an advocacy for the condemned, they have recourse to the things
irrational; and describing their death in tragical fashion, they make intercession
by them, putting forward as a plea their pitiable and mournful destruction. When
therefore, aforetime, famine had seized upon the Jews, and a great drought
oppressed their country, and all things were being consumed, one of the prophets
spoke thus, "The young heifers leaped in their stalls; the herds of oxen wept,
because there was no pasture; all the cattle of the field looked upward to You,
because the streams of waters were dried up." [Joel 1:17] Another prophet
bewailing the evils of drought again speaks to this effect: "The hinds calved in
the fields and forsook it, because there was no grass. The wild asses stood in the
forests; they snuffed up the wind like a dragon; their eyes did fail, because there
was no grass." [Jeremiah 14:5] Moreover, you have heard Joel saying today,
"Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet;—
the infants that suck the breast." For what reason, I ask, does he call so immature
an age to supplication? Is it not plainly for the very same reason? For since all
who have arrived at the age of manhood, have inflamed and provoked God's
wrath, let the age, says he, which is devoid of transgressions supplicate Him who
is provoked.
10. But, as I said before, we may see what it was that dissolved such
inexorable wrath. Was it, forsooth, fasting only and sackcloth? We say not so;
but the change of their whole life. Whence does this appear? From the very
language of the prophet. For he who has discoursed of the wrath of God, and of