THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.6.

And the reason of this is that, just as on the part of the matter, as far
as the essentials of the sacrament are concerned, any water will
suffice, so, on the part of the minister, any man is competent.
Consequently, an unbaptized person can baptize in a case of
urgency. So that two unbaptized persons may baptize one another,
one baptizing the other and being afterwards baptized by him: and
each would receive not only the sacrament but also the reality of the
sacrament. But if this were done outside a case of urgency, each
would sin grievously, both the baptizer and the baptized, and thus
the baptismal effect would be frustrated, although the sacrament
itself would not be invalidated.
Reply to Objection 1: The man who baptizes offers but his outward
ministration; whereas Christ it is Who baptizes inwardly, Who can
use all men to whatever purpose He wills. Consequently, the
unbaptized can baptize: because, as Pope Nicolas I says, "the
Baptism is not theirs," i.e. the baptizers', "but His," i.e. Christ's.
Reply to Objection 2: He who is not baptized, though he belongs not
to the Church either in reality or sacramentally, can nevertheless
belong to her in intention and by similarity of action, namely, in so
far as he intends to do what the Church does, and in baptizing
observes the Church's form, and thus acts as the minister of Christ,
Who did not confine His power to those that are baptized, as neither
did He to the sacraments.
Reply to Objection 3: The other sacraments are not so necessary as
Baptism. And therefore it is allowable that an unbaptized person
should baptize rather than that he should receive other sacraments.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether several can baptize at the same time?

Objection 1: It seems that several can baptize at the same time. For
unity is contained in multitude, but not "vice versa." Wherefore it
seems that many can do whatever one can but not "vice versa": thus
many draw a ship which one could draw. But one man can baptize.
Therefore several, too, can baptize one at the same time.
Objection 2: Further, it is more difficult for one agent to act on many
things, than for many to act at the same time on one. But one man
can baptize several at the same time. Much more, therefore, can
many baptize one at the same time.
Objection 3: Further, Baptism is a sacrament of the greatest
necessity. Now in certain cases it seems necessary for several to
baptize one at the same time; for instance, suppose a child to be in
danger of death, and two persons present, one of whom is dumb,
and the other without hands or arms; for then the mutilated person
would have to pronounce the words, and the dumb person would
have to perform the act of baptizing. Therefore it seems that several
can baptize one at the same time.
On the contrary, Where there is one agent there is one action. If,
therefore, several were to baptize one, it seems to follow that there
would be several baptisms: and this is contrary to Eph. 4:5: "one
Faith, one Baptism."
I answer that, The Sacrament of Baptism derives its power
principally from its form, which the Apostle calls "the word of
life" (Eph. 5:26). Consequently, if several were to baptize one at the
same time, we must consider what form they would use. For were
they to say: "We baptize thee in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost," some maintain that the sacrament of
Baptism would not be conferred, because the form of the Church
would not be observed, i.e. "I baptize thee in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost." But this reasoning is
disproved by the form observed in the Greek Church. For they might
say: "The servant of God, N . . ., is baptized in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost," under which form the Greeks
receive the sacrament of Baptism: and yet this form differs far more
from the form that we use, than does this: "We baptize thee."