THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.5.

is released from the debt of punishment according to the measure of
his share in the power of Christ's Passion. Now in Baptism man
shares the Power of Christ's Passion fully, since by water and the
Spirit of Christ, he dies with Him to sin, and is born again in Him to a
new life, so that, in Baptism, man receives the remission of all debt
of punishment. In Penance, on the other hand, man shares in the
power of Christ's Passion according to the measure of his own acts,
which are the matter of Penance, as water is of Baptism, as stated
above (Question 84, Articles 1,3). Wherefore the entire debt of
punishment is not remitted at once after the first act of Penance, by
which act the guilt is remitted, but only when all the acts of Penance
have been completed.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the remnants of sin are removed when a

mortal sin is forgiven?
Objection 1: It would seem that all the remnants of sin are removed
when a mortal sin is forgiven. For Augustine says in De Poenitentia
[De vera et falsa Poenitentia]: "Our Lord never healed anyone
without delivering him wholly; for He wholly healed the man on the
Sabbath, since He delivered his body from all disease, and his soul
from all taint." Now the remnants of sin belong to the disease of sin.
Therefore it does not seem possible for any remnants of sin to
remain when the guilt has been pardoned.
Objection 2: Further, according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv), "good is
more efficacious than evil, since evil does not act save in virtue of
some good." Now, by sinning, man incurs the taint of sin all at once.
Much more, therefore, by repenting, is he delivered also from all
remnants of sin.
Objection 3: Further, God's work is more efficacious than man's.
Now by the exercise of good human works the remnants of contrary
sins are removed. Much more, therefore, are they taken away by the
remission of guilt, which is a work of God.
On the contrary, We read (Mk. 8) that the blind man whom our Lord
enlightened, was restored first of all to imperfect sight, wherefore he
said (Mk. 8:24): "I see men, as it were trees, walking"; and afterwards
he was restored perfectly, "so that he saw all things clearly." Now
the enlightenment of the blind man signifies the delivery of the
sinner. Therefore after the first remission of sin, whereby the sinner
is restored to spiritual sight, there still remain in him some remnants
of his past sin.
I answer that, Mortal sin, in so far as it turns inordinately to a
mutable good, produces in the soul a certain disposition, or even a
habit, if the acts be repeated frequently. Now it has been said above
(Article 4) that the guilt of mortal sin is pardoned through grace
removing the aversion of the mind from God. Nevertheless when that
which is on the part of the aversion has been taken away by grace,
that which is on the part of the inordinate turning to a mutable good
can remain, since this may happen to be without the other, as stated
above (Article 4). Consequently, there is no reason why, after the