And again, another thing, not less than those mentioned, was added to make
the change difficult. For besides the custom and the dangers, these precepts
were both more burdensome, and those from which they withdrew men were
easy and light. For their call was from fornication unto chastity; from love of life
unto sundry kinds of death; from drunkenness unto fasting; from laughter unto
tears and compunction; from covetousness unto utter indigence; from safety unto
dangers: and throughout all they required the strictest circumspection. For,
"Filthiness," [Ephesians 5:4] says he, "and foolish talking, and jesting, let it not
proceed out of your mouth." And these things they spoke unto those who knew
nothing else than how to be drunken and serve their bellies; who celebrated
feasts made up of nothing but of "filthiness" and laughter and all manner of
revellings ([κωμῳδίας ἁπάσης].) So that not only from the matter pertaining to
severity of life were the doctrines burthensome, but also from their being spoken
unto men who had been brought up in careless ease, and "filthiness," and
"foolish talking," and laughter and revellings. For who among those who had
lived in these things, when he heard, [Matthew 10:38] "If a man take not up his
cross and follow Me, he is not worthy of Me;" and, [Matthew 10:34] "I came not
to send peace but a sword, and to set a man at variance with his father, and the
daughter at variance with her mother," would not have felt himself chilled all
over ([ἐνάρκησε])? And who, when he heard, "If a man bid not farewell to home
and country and possessions, he is not worthy of Me," would not have hesitated,
would not have refused? And yet there were men, who not only felt no chill,
neither shrunk away when they heard these things, but ran to meet them and
rushed upon the hardships, and eagerly caught at the precepts enjoined. Again, to
be told, "For every idle word we shall give account;" [Matthew 12:36] and,
"whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her as soon as seen;" [Matthew 5:28] and, "whosoever is angry without cause
shall fall into hell;"— which of the men of that day would not these things have
frightened off? And yet all came running in, and many even leaped over the
boundaries of the course. What then was their attraction? Was it not, plainly, the

power of Him who was preached? For suppose that the case were not as it is, but
just contrary , that this side was the other, and the other this; would it have been
easy, let me ask, to hold fast and to drag on those who resisted? We cannot say
so. So that in every way that power is proved divine which wrought so
excellently. Else how, tell me, did they prevail with the frivolous and the
dissolute, urging them toward the severe and rough course of life?
17. Well; such was the nature of the precepts. But let us see whether the
doctrine was attractive. Nay, in this respect also there was enough to frighten
away the unbelievers. For what said the preachers? That we must worship the
crucified, and count Him as God, who was born of a Jewish woman. Now who
would have been persuaded by these words, unless divine power had led the
way? That indeed He had been crucified and buried, all men knew; but that He
had risen again and ascended, no one save the Apostles had seen.
But, you will say, they excited them by promises and deceived them by an
empty sound of words. Nay, this very topic most particularly shows (even apart
from all that has been said) that our doctrines are no deceit. For all its hardships
took place here, but its consolations they were to promise after the resurrection.
This very thing then, for I repeat it, shows that our Gospel is divine. For why did
no one of the believers say, "I close not with this, neither do I endure it? Thou
threatenest me with hardships here, and the good things you promise after the
resurrection. Why, how is it plain that there will be a resurrection? Which of the
departed has returned? Which of those at rest has risen again? Which of these
has said what shall be after our departure hence?" But none of these things
entered into their minds; rather they gave up their very lives for the Crucified. So
that this bare fact was more than anything a proof of great power; first, their
working conviction at once, touching matters so important, in persons that had
never in their lives before heard of any such thing; secondly, that they prevailed
on them to take the difficulties upon trial, and to account the blessings as matter
of hope. Now if they had been deceivers they would have done the contrary:
their good things they would have promised as of this world [ἐντεῦθεν], so John