dispensation has come under the compulsion of law, on account of its high
excellence? But nevertheless it is cast out, when it has not almsgiving. But if
virgins are cast out, because they have not this in due abundance, who will be
able without this to obtain pardon? There is no man, but he must quite of
necessity perish, who has not this.
For, if in worldly matters no man lives for himself, but artisan, and soldier,
and husbandman, and merchant, all of them contribute to the common good, and
to their neighbor's advantage; much more ought we to do this in things spiritual.
For this is most properly to live: since he at least who is living for himself only,
and overlooking all others, is useless, and is not so much as a human being, nor
of our race.
What then, you would say, if I neglect my own interests, while seeking after
the good of the rest? It is not possible, for one who seeks after the good of the
rest to overlook his own; for he who seeks after the good of the rest pains no
man, but pities all, helps them to the utmost of his powers; will rob no man, will
covet the goods of no man, will not steal, will not bear false witness; will abstain
from all wickedness, will apply himself to all virtue, and will pray for his
enemies, and do good to them that plot against him, and will neither revile any,
nor speak ill of them, though he hear from them ten thousand evil things; but
will speak the words of the apostle: "Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is
offended, and I burn not?" [2 Corinthians 11:29] But when looking to our own
good, it is not quite sure that the good of the rest will follow.
By all which things being persuaded that it is not possible for one to be
saved, who has not looked to the common good, and seeing this man that was
cut asunder, and him that buried his talent, let us choose this way, that we may
also attain unto eternal life, unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, world without
end. Amen.

## Homily 78 on Matthew

Matt. XXV. 1-30.
"Then shall the kingdom of Heaven," He says, "be likened unto ten virgins,
which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. But five of them
were wise, and the other five foolish, which took not," He says, "oil."
"Then, while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at
midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom comes, go out to meet
Him. And the five arose, and being in perplexity, said to the wise, Give us of your
oil. But they consented not, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and
you; go to them that sell, and buy."
"And while they had gone for this, the bridegroom came, and those went in;
but these came afterwards, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But He answered and
said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for you know not the
day, nor the hour."
" Then He spoke again another parable. A man travelling into a far
country, called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods; to one five
talents, to another two, to another one, to every man according to his several
ability, and took his journey. Then, when the two had brought him the double, he
that had been entrusted with the one talent brought it alone, and being blamed
says, I knew that you are a hard man, reaping where you have not sown, and
gathering where you have not scattered; and I was afraid, and hid your talent;
lo! There you have that is yours. His Lord answered and said, Thou wicked
servant, you knew that I reap where I have not sown, and gather where I have
not scattered: you ought therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and
then at my coming I might have received my own with usury. Take therefore the
talent from him, and give it to him that has ten talents. For to him that has shall
be given, and he shall have more abundantly; but from him that has not, shall be