speakings, slanders, perils, cares, plots, to be hated of all, to be abhorred of all,
even of the very persons that seem to flatter us. For as good men are admired not
by the good only but even by the wicked; so bad men, not the good only, but also
the worthless, hate. And in proof that this is true, I would gladly ask of the
covetous, whether they do not feel painfully one toward another; and account
such more their enemies than those that have done them the greatest wrong;
whether they do not also accuse themselves, whether they do not account the
thing an affront, if any one brings this reproach upon them. For indeed this is an
extreme reproach, and a sure proof of much wickedness; for if you dost not
endure to despise wealth, of what will you ever get the better? Of lust, or of the
mad desire of glory, or anger, or of wrath? And how would any be persuaded of
it? For as to lust, and anger, and wrath, many impute it even to the temperament
of the flesh, and to this do students of medicine refer the excesses thereof; and
him that is of a more hot and languid temperament, they affirm to be more
lustful; but him that runs out into a drier kind of ill temperament, eager, and
irritable, and wrathful. But with respect to covetousness, no one ever heard of
their having said any such thing. So entirely is the pest the effect of mere
remissness, and of a soul past feeling.
Therefore, I beseech you, let us give diligence to amend all such things, and
to give an opposite direction to the passions that come upon us in every age. But
if in every part of our life we sail past the labors of virtue, everywhere
undergoing shipwrecks; when we have arrived at the harbor destitute of spiritual
freight, we shall undergo extreme punishment. For our present life is an
outstretched ocean. And as in the sea here, there are different bays exposed to
different tempests, and the Ægean is difficult because of the winds, the
Tyrrhenian strait because of the confined space, the Charybdis that is by Africa
because of the shallows, the Propontis, which is without the Euxine sea, on
account of its violence and currents, the parts without Cadiz because of the
desolation, and tracklessness, and unexplored places therein, and other portions
for other causes; so also is it in our life.

And the first sea to view is that of our childish days, having much
tempestuousness, because of its folly, its facility, because it is not steadfast.
Therefore also we set over it guides and teachers, by our diligence adding what
is wanting to nature, even as there by the pilot's skill.
After this age succeeds the sea of the youth, where the winds are violent as
in the Ægean, lust increasing upon us. And this age especially is destitute of
correction; not only because he is beset more fiercely, but also because his faults
are not reproved, for both teacher and guide after that withdraw. When therefore
the winds blow more fiercely, and the pilot is more feeble, and there is no helper,
consider the greatness of the tempest.
After this there is again another period of life, that of men, in which the
cares of the household press upon us, when there is a wife, and marriage, and
begetting of children, and ruling of a house, and thick falling showers of cares.
Then especially both covetousness flourishes and envy.
When then we pass each part of our life with shipwrecks, how shall we
suffice for the present life? How shall we escape future punishment. For when
first in the earliest age we learn nothing healthful, and then in youth we do not
practise sobriety, and when grown to manhood do not get the better of
covetousness, coming to old age as to a hold full of bilgewater, and as having
made the barque of the soul weak by all these shocks, the planks being
separated, we shall arrive at that harbor, bearing much filth instead of spiritual
merchandise, and to the devil we shall furnish laughter, but lamentation to
ourselves, and bring upon ourselves the intolerable punishments.
That these things may not be, let us brace ourselves up on every side, and,
withstanding all our passions, let us cast out the lust of wealth, that we may also
attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.