FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.2.

declare something in two ways. First, absolutely: and this intimation
is expressed by a verb in the indicative mood, as when one person
says to another: "This is what you should do." Sometimes, however,
the reason intimates something to a man by moving him thereto; and
this intimation is expressed by a verb in the imperative mood; as
when it is said to someone: "Do this." Now the first mover, among
the powers of the soul, to the doing of an act is the will, as stated
above (Question 9, Article 1). Since therefore the second mover does
not move, save in virtue of the first mover, it follows that the very
fact that the reason moves by commanding, is due to the power of
the will. Consequently it follows that command is an act of the
reason, presupposing an act of the will, in virtue of which the reason,
by its command, moves (the power) to the execution of the act.
Reply to Objection 1: To command is to move, not anyhow, but by
intimating and declaring to another; and this is an act of the reason.
Reply to Objection 2: The root of liberty is the will as the subject
thereof; but it is the reason as its cause. For the will can tend freely
towards various objects, precisely because the reason can have
various perceptions of good. Hence philosophers define the free-will
as being "a free judgment arising from reason," implying that reason
is the root of liberty.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument proves that command is an act
of reason not absolutely, but with a kind of motion as stated above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether command belongs to irrational animals?

Objection 1: It would seem that command belongs to irrational
animals. Because, according to Avicenna, "the power that
commands movement is the appetite; and the power that executes
movement is in the muscles and nerves." But both powers are in
irrational animals. Therefore command is to be found in irrational
animals.
Objection 2: Further, the condition of a slave is that of one who
receives commands. But the body is compared to the soul as a slave
to his master, as the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 2). Therefore the body
is commanded by the soul, even in irrational animals, since they are
composed of soul and body.
Objection 3: Further, by commanding, man has an impulse towards
an action. But impulse to action is to be found in irrational animals,
as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 22). Therefore command is to
be found in irrational animals.
On the contrary, Command is an act of reason, as stated above
(Article 1). But in irrational animals there is no reason. Neither,
therefore, is there command.
I answer that, To command is nothing else than to direct someone to
do something, by a certain motion of intimation. Now to direct is the
proper act of reason. Wherefore it is impossible that irrational
animals should command in any way, since they are devoid of
reason.
Reply to Objection 1: The appetitive power is said to command
movement, in so far as it moves the commanding reason. But this is
only in man. In irrational animals the appetitive power is not,
properly speaking, a commanding faculty, unless command be taken
loosely for motion.
Reply to Objection 2: The body of the irrational animal is competent
to obey; but its soul is not competent to command, because it is not
competent to direct. Consequently there is no ratio there of
commander and commanded; but only of mover and moved.