John 12:20
"And there were certain of the Greeks that came up to worship at the Feast."
Being now near to become proselytes, they were at the Feast. When
therefore the report concerning Him was imparted to them, they say,

John 12:21
"We would see Jesus."
Philip gives place to Andrew as being before him, and communicates the
matter to him. But neither does he at once act with authority; for he had heard
that saying, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles" [Matthew 10:5]: therefore
having communicated with the disciple, he refers the matter to his Master. For
they both spoke to Him. But what says He?

John 12:23-24
"The hour has come, that the Son of Man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, Except a grain of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides alone."
What is, "The hour has come"? He had said, "Go not into the way of the
Gentiles," (thus cutting away all excuse of ignorance from the Jews,) and had
restrained the disciples. When therefore the Jews continued disobedient, and the
others desired to come to Him, "Now," says He, "it is time to proceed to My
Passion, since all things are fulfilled. For if we were to continue to wait for those
who are disobedient and not admit these who even desire to come, this would be
unbefitting our tender care." Since then He was about to allow the disciples to
go to the Gentiles after the Crucifixion, and beheld them springing on before, He
said, "It is time to proceed to the Cross." For He would not allow them to go
sooner, that it might be for a testimony unto them. Until that by their deeds the
Jews rejected Him, until they crucified Him, He said not, "Go and make
disciples of all nations" [Matthew 28:19], but, "Go not into the way of the
Gentiles" [Matthew 10:5], and, "I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel" [Matt 15:24], and, "It is not meet to take the children's bread
and give it unto dogs." [Matthew 15:26] But when they hated Him, and so hated
as to kill Him, it was superfluous to persevere while they repulsed Him. For they
refused Him, saying, "We have no king but Cæsar." [John 19:15] So that at
length He left them, when they had left Him. Therefore He says, "How often
would I have gathered your children together, and you would not?" [Matthew
23:37]
What is, "Except a grain of grain fall into the ground and die"? He speaks
of the Cross, for that they might not be confounded at seeing, that just when
Greeks also came to Him, then He was slain, He says to them, "This very thing
specially causes them to come, and shall increase the preaching of Me." Then
since He could not so well persuade them by words, He goes about to prove this

from actual experience, telling them that this is the case with grain; it bears the
more fruit when it has died. "Now," says He, "if this be the case with seeds, much
more with Me." But the disciples understood not what was spoken. Wherefore
the Evangelist continually puts this, as making excuse for their flight afterwards.
This same argument Paul also has raised when speaking of the Resurrection.
3. What sort of excuse then will they have who disbelieve the Resurrection,
when the action is practiced each day, in seeds, in plants, and in the case of our
own generation? For first it is necessary that the seed die, and that then the
generation take place. But, in short, when God does anything, reasonings are of
no use; for how did He make us out of those things that were not? This I say to
Christians, who assert that they believe the Scriptures; but I shall also say
something else drawn from human reasonings. Of men some live in vice, others
in virtue; and of those who live in vice, many have attained to extreme old age in
prosperity, many of the virtuous after enduring the contrary. When then shall
each receive his deserts? At what season? "Yea," says some one, "but there is no
resurrection of the body." They hear not Paul, saying, "This corruptible must put
on incorruption." [1 Corinthians 15:53] He speaks not of the soul, for the soul is
not corrupted; moreover, "resurrection" is said of that which fell, and that which
fell was the body. But why will you have it that there is no resurrection of the
body? Is it not possible with God? But this it were utter folly to say. Is it
unseemly? Why is it unseemly, that the corruptible which shared the toil and
death, should share also the crowns? For were it unseemly, it would not have
been created at the beginning, Christ would not have taken the flesh again. But
to show that He took it again and raised it up, hear what He says: "Reach hither
your fingers" [John 20:27]; and, "Behold, a spirit has not bones and sinews."
[Luke 24:39] But why did He raise Lazarus again, if it would have been better to
rise without a body? Why does He this, classing it as a miracle and a benefit?
Why did He give nourishment at all? Be not therefore deceived by the heretics,
beloved: for there is a Resurrection and there is a Judgment, but they deny these
things, who desire not to give account of their actions. For this Resurrection