and in theology we will not let ourselves be diverted to play with imaginations, but will
consider simply form.

2. Which form, indeed...

### St. Thomas' Commentary

Boethius has previously set forth the doctrine of the Catholic faith regarding the unity of the
Trinity, and indicated the reason of this belief. Now he intends to proceed to an investigation of
the aforesaid doctrine. Since, according to the opinion of the Philosopher in II Metaph., inquiry
into the method of a science ought to precede science itself, he therdore divides this section into
two parts. In the first place Boethius points out the method proper for this kind of inquiry, which
is concerned with divine things. In the second place he proceeds, according to the method he has
indicated, to inquire into the proposition determined upon, where he says, "Which form, indeed."

The first part is again divided into two sections: first. he indicates the necessity of making clear
the method of investigation. Secondly, he shows that the method of the present inquiry is
suitable, saying: "Speculative science may be divided into three kinds." Therefore he says:
"Wherefore it is certain that this is the doctrine of the Catholic faith regarding the unity of the
Trinity, and the nature of that unity without difference."

Thereupon, he says by way of exhortation, "Let us now begin," that is, let us inquire more

deeply, carrying our investigation to an examination of the intimate principle of things and of
truth which is, as it were, veiled and hidden away from view. And that method which he deems
fitting is indicated by the words: "Let us now begin a careful consideration of each several point,
as far as it can be grasped and understood," that is, according to the mode by which.
understanding and apprehension are possible. Moreover, he uses the two words ("grasped" and
"understood") because the method of any investigation ought to be in harmony both with things
and with us. For if it is not suited to the matter, things will not be understood; and if it is not
suited to us, we shall not be able to apprehend the matter; for example, divine things are such by
their very nature that they cannot be known except by intellect. Wherefore, if anyone wished to
follow another way and to use imagination instead, he would not be able to understand anything
of them as a result of his consideration, because truths, of this kind are not thus to be known. But
if, on the other hand, one wished to know divine things so as to see them in themselves, and to
comprehend them with the same certitude with which sensible things or mathematical
demonstrations are comprehended, this too would be impossible; even things which are, in
themselves, understandable in this way cannot be perfectly grasped because of the weakness of
our intellect.