as those between whom the betrothal is arranged do not demur
when they reach the proper age, whence they are understood to
consent to what others have done.
Reply to Objection 2: Some say that the boy of whom Gregory tells
this story was not lost, and that he did not sin mortally; and that this
vision was for the purpose of making the father sorrowful, for he had
sinned in the boy through failing to correct him. But this is contrary
to the express intention of Gregory, who says (Dial. iv) that "the
boy's father having neglected the soul of his little son, fostered no
little sinner for the flames of hell." Consequently it must be said that
for a mortal sin it is sufficient to give consent to something present,
whereas in a betrothal the consent is to something future; and
greater discretion of reason is required for looking to the future than
for consenting to one present act. Wherefore a man can sin mortally
before he can bind himself to a future obligation.
Reply to Objection 3: Regarding the age for the marriage contract a
disposition is required not only on the part of the use of reason, but
also on the part of the body, in that it is necessary to be of an age
adapted to procreation. And since a girl becomes apt for the act of
procreation in her twelfth year, and a boy at the end of his second
seven years, as the Philosopher says (De Hist. Anim. vii), whereas
the age is the same in both for attaining the use of reason which is
the sole condition for betrothal, hence it is that the one age is
assigned for both as regards betrothal, but not as regards marriage.
Reply to Objection 4: This agreeableness in regard to boys under the
age of seven does not result from the perfect use of reason, since
they are not as yet possessed of complete self-control; it results
rather from the movement of nature than from any process of
reason. Consequently, this agreeableness does not suffice for
contracting a betrothal.
Reply to Objection 5: In this case, although the second contract does
not amount to marriage, nevertheless the parties show that they
ratify their former promise; wherefore the first contract is confirmed
by the second.
Reply to Objection 6: Those who row a boat act by way of one cause,
and consequently what is lacking in one can be supplied by another.
But those who make a contract of betrothal act as distinct persons,

since a betrothal can only be between two parties; wherefore it is
necessary for each to be qualified to contract, and thus the defect of
one is an obstacle to their betrothal, nor can it be supplied by the
other.
Reply to Objection 7: It is true that in the matter of betrothal if the
contracting parties are close upon the age of seven, the contract of
betrothal is valid, since, according to the Philosopher (Phys. ii, 56),
"when little is lacking it seems as though nothing were lacking."
Some fix the margin at six months. but it is better to determine it
according to the condition of the contracting parties, since the use
of reason comes sooner to some than to others.