Now he is not saying this with reference to the unbelievers only, for many
of the faithful, no less than unbelievers, hold fast by wickedness; nay, some far
more. Therefore to these also it is necessary to exclaim, "Awake, thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall shine upon you." To these it is
fitting to say this also, "God is not the God of the dead, but of the living."
[Matthew 22:32] If then he is not the God of the dead, let us live.
Now there are some who say that the words, "the covetous man is an
idolater," are hyperbolical. However, the statement is not hyperbolical, it is true.
How, and in what way? Because the covetous man apostatizes from God, just as
the idolater does. And lest you should imagine this is a bare assertion, there is a
declaration of Christ which says, "You cannot serve God and Mammon."
[Matthew 6:24] If then it is not possible to serve God and Mammon, they who
serve Mammon have thrown themselves out of the service of God; and they who
have denied His sovereignty, and serve lifeless gold, it is plain enough that they
are idolaters. "But I never made an idol," a man will say, "nor set up an altar,
nor sacrificed sheep, nor poured libations of wine; no, I came into the church,
and lifted up my hands to the Only-begotten Son of God; I partake of the
mysteries, I communicate in prayer, and in everything else which is a Christian's
duty. How then," he will say, "am I a worshiper of idols?" Yes, and this is the
very thing which is the most astonishing of all, that when you have had
experience, and hast "tasted" the lovingkindness of God, and "hast seen that the
Lord is gracious" [Psalm 34:8], you should abandon Him who is gracious, and
take to yourself a cruel tyrant, and should pretend to be serving Him, while in
reality you have submitted yourself to the hard and galling yoke of covetousness.
You have not yet told me of your own duty done, but only of your Master's gifts.
For tell me, I beseech you, whence do we judge of a soldier? Is it when he is on
duty guarding the king, and is fed by him, and called the king's own, or is it
when he is minding his own affairs and interests? To pretend to be with him, and
to be attentive to his interests, while he is advancing the cause of the enemy, we
declare to be worse than if he breaks away from the king's service, and joins the

enemy. Now then you are doing despite to God, just as an idolater does, not with
your own mouth singly, but with the ten thousands of those whom you have
wronged. Yet you will say, "an idolater he is not." But surely, whenever they
say, "Oh! That Christian, that covetous fellow," then not only is he himself
committing outrage by his own act, but he frequently forces those also whom he
has wronged to use these words; and if they use them not, this is to be set to the
account of their reverence.
Do we not see that such is the fact? What else is an idolater? Or does not he
too worship passions, oftentimes not mastering his passions? I mean, for
example, when we say that the pagan idolater worships idols, he will say, "No,
but it is Venus, or it is Mars." And if we say, Who is this Venus? The more
modest among them will say, It is pleasure. Or what is this Mars? It is wrath.
And in the same way do you worship Mammon. If we say, Who is this
Mammon? It is covetousness, and this you are worshiping. "I worship it not,"
you will say. Why not? Because thou dost not bow yourself down? Nay, but as it
is, you are far more a worshiper in your deeds and practices; for this is the higher
kind of worship. And that you may understand this, look in the case of God; who
more truly worship Him, they who merely stand up at the prayers, or they who
do His will? Clearly enough, these latter. The same also is it with the worshipers
of Mammon; they who do his will, they truly are his worshipers. However, they
who worship the passions are oftentimes free from the passions. One may see a
worshiper of Mars oftentimes governing his wrath. But this is not true of you;
you make yourself a slave to your passion.
Yes, but you slay no sheep? No, you slay men, reasonable souls, some by
famine, others by blasphemies. Nothing can be more frenzied than a sacrifice
like this. Who ever beheld souls sacrificed? How accursed is the altar of
covetousness! When you pass by this idol's altar here, you shall see it reeking
with the blood of bullocks and goats; but when you shall pass by the altar of
covetousness, you shall see it breathing the shocking odor of human blood.
Stand here before it in this world, and you shall see, not the wings of birds