No to selfishness and spiritual sloth

81. At a time when we most need a missionary dynamism which will bring salt and light to the
world, many lay people fear that they may be asked to undertake some apostolic work and they
seek to avoid any responsibility that may take away from their free time. For example, it has
become very difficult today to find trained parish catechists willing to persevere in this work for
some years. Something similar is also happening with priests who are obsessed with protecting
their free time. This is frequently due to the fact that people feel an overbearing need to guard their
personal freedom, as though the task of evangelization was a dangerous poison rather than a
joyful response to God’s love which summons us to mission and makes us fulfilled and productive.
Some resist giving themselves over completely to mission and thus end up in a state of paralysis
and acedia.

82. The problem is not always an excess of activity, but rather activity undertaken badly, without
adequate motivation, without a spirituality which would permeate it and make it pleasurable. As a
result, work becomes more tiring than necessary, even leading at times to illness. Far from a
content and happy tiredness, this is a tense, burdensome, dissatisfying and, in the end,
unbearable fatigue. This pastoral acedia can be caused by a number of things. Some fall into it
because they throw themselves into unrealistic projects and are not satisfied simply to do what
they reasonably can. Others, because they lack the patience to allow processes to mature; they
want everything to fall from heaven. Others, because they are attached to a few projects or vain

dreams of success. Others, because they have lost real contact with people and so depersonalize
their work that they are more concerned with the road map than with the journey itself. Others fall
into acedia because they are unable to wait; they want to dominate the rhythm of life. Today’s
obsession with immediate results makes it hard for pastoral workers to tolerate anything that
smacks of disagreement, possible failure, criticism, the cross.

83. And so the biggest threat of all gradually takes shape: “the gray pragmatism of the daily life of
the Church, in which all appears to proceed normally, while in reality faith is wearing down and
degenerating into small-mindedness”. A tomb psychology thus develops and slowly transforms
Christians into mummies in a museum. Disillusioned with reality, with the Church and with
themselves, they experience a constant temptation to cling to a faint melancholy, lacking in hope,
which seizes the heart like “the most precious of the devil’s potions”. Called to radiate light and
communicate life, in the end they are caught up in things that generate only darkness and inner
weariness, and slowly consume all zeal for the apostolate. For all this, I repeat: Let us not allow
ourselves to be robbed of the joy of evangelization!