THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.5.

concludes, "For ever and ever." Or the priest secretly pronounces
some of the words as a token that regarding Christ's Passion the
disciples acknowledged Him only in secret.
Reply to Objection 7: The efficacy of the sacramental words can be
hindered by the priest's intention. Nor is there anything unbecoming
in our asking of God for what we know He will do, just as Christ (Jn.
17:1,5) asked for His glorification.
But the priest does not seem to pray there for the consecration to be
fulfilled, but that it may be fruitful in our regard, hence he says
expressively: "That it may become 'to us' the body and the blood."
Again, the words preceding these have that meaning, when he says:
"Vouchsafe to make this oblation blessed," i.e. according to
Augustine (Paschasius, De Corp. et Sang. Dom. xii), "that we may
receive a blessing," namely, through grace; "'enrolled,' i.e. that we
may be enrolled in heaven; 'ratified,' i.e. that we may be incorporated
in Christ; 'reasonable,' i.e. that we may be stripped of our animal
sense; 'acceptable,' i.e. that we who in ourselves are displeasing,
may, by its means, be made acceptable to His only Son."
Reply to Objection 8: Although this sacrament is of itself preferable
to all ancient sacrifices, yet the sacrifices of the men of old were
most acceptable to God on account of their devotion. Consequently
the priest asks that this sacrifice may be accepted by God through
the devotion of the offerers, just as the former sacrifices were
accepted by Him.
Reply to Objection 9: The priest does not pray that the sacramental
species may be borne up to heaven; nor that Christ's true body may
be borne thither, for it does not cease to be there; but he offers this
prayer for Christ's mystical body, which is signified in this
sacrament, that the angel standing by at the Divine mysteries may
present to God the prayers of both priest and people, according to
Apoc. 8:4: "And the smoke of the incense of the prayers of the saints
ascended up before God, from the hand of the angel." But God's
"altar on high" means either the Church triumphant, unto which we
pray to be translated, or else God Himself, in Whom we ask to share;
because it is said of this altar (Ex. 20:26): "Thou shalt not go up by
steps unto My altar, i.e. thou shalt make no steps towards the
Trinity." Or else by the angel we are to understand Christ Himself,
Who is the "Angel of great counsel" (Is. 9:6: Septuagint), Who unites
His mystical body with God the Father and the Church triumphant.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.5.

And from this the mass derives its name [missa]; because the priest
sends [mittit] his prayers up to God through the angel, as the people
do through the priest. or else because Christ is the victim sent
[missa] to us: accordingly the deacon on festival days "dismisses"
the people at the end of the mass, by saying: "Ite, missa est," that is,
the victim has been sent [missa est] to God through the angel, so
that it may be accepted by God.