THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.50, C.2.

the likeness of sin---that is, to its penalty---He might set us the
example of dying to sin spiritually. Hence it is written (Rm. 6:10):
"For in that He died to sin, He died once, but in that He liveth, He
liveth unto God: so do you also reckon that you are dead to sin, but
alive unto God." Fifthly, that by rising from the dead, and manifesting
His power whereby He overthrew death, He might instill into us the
hope of rising from the dead. Hence the Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:12):
"If Christ be preached that He rose again from the dead, how do
some among you say, that there is no resurrection from the dead?"
Reply to Objection 1: Christ is the fountain of life, as God, and not as
man: but He died as man, and not as God. Hence Augustine [Vigilius
Tapsensis] says against Felician: "Far be it from us to suppose that
Christ so felt death that He lost His life inasmuch as He is life in
Himself; for, were it so, the fountain of life would have run dry.
Accordingly, He experienced death by sharing in our human feeling,
which of His own accord He had taken upon Himself, but He did not
lose the power of His Nature, through which He gives life to all
things."
Reply to Objection 2: Christ did not suffer death which comes of
sickness, lest He should seem to die of necessity from exhausted
nature: but He endured death inflicted from without, to which He
willingly surrendered Himself, that His death might be shown to be a
voluntary one.
Reply to Objection 3: One opposite does not of itself lead to the
other, yet it does so indirectly at times: thus cold sometimes is the
indirect cause of heat: and in this way Christ by His death brought
us back to life, when by His death He destroyed our death; just as he
who bears another's punishment takes such punishment away.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.50, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the Godhead was separated from the

flesh when Christ died?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Godhead was separated from the
flesh when Christ died. For as Matthew relates (27:46), when our
Lord was hanging upon the cross He cried out: "My God, My God,
why hast Thou forsaken Me?" which words Ambrose, commenting
on Lk. 23:46, explains as follows: "The man cried out when about to
expire by being severed from the Godhead; for since the Godhead is
immune from death, assuredly death could not be there, except life
departed, for the Godhead is life." And so it seems that when Christ
died, the Godhead was separated from His flesh.
Objection 2: Further, extremes are severed when the mean is
removed. But the soul was the mean through which the Godhead
was united with the flesh, as stated above (Question 6, Article 1).
Therefore since the soul was severed from the flesh by death, it
seems that, in consequence, His Godhead was also separated from
it.
Objection 3: Further, God's life-giving power is greater than that of
the soul. But the body could not die unless the soul quitted it.
Therefore, much less could it die unless the Godhead departed.
On the contrary, As stated above (Question 16, Articles 4,5), the
attributes of human nature are predicated of the Son of God only by
reason of the union. But what belongs to the body of Christ after
death is predicated of the Son of God---namely, being buried: as is
evident from the Creed, in which it is said that the Son of God "was
conceived and born of a Virgin, suffered, died, and was buried."
Therefore Christ's Godhead was not separated from the flesh when
He died.
I answer that, What is bestowed through God's grace is never
withdrawn except through fault. Hence it is written (Rm. 11:29): "The
gifts and the calling of God are without repentance." But the grace of
union whereby the Godhead was united to the flesh in Christ's
Person, is greater than the grace of adoption whereby others are
sanctified: also it is more enduring of itself, because this grace is
ordained for personal union, whereas the grace of adoption is
referred to a certain affective union. And yet we see that the grace of