And "ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods." O! What "full assurance
of faith"! [Hebrews 10:22] Then he also sets forth the motive, not only consoling
them for their struggles, but also that they might not be shaken from the Faith.
When ye saw your property plundered (he means) ye endured; for already ye
saw Him who is invisible, as visible: which was the effect of genuine faith, and
you showed it forth by your deeds themselves.
Well then, the plundering was perhaps from the force of the plunderers, and
no man could prevent it; so that as yet it is not clear, that you endured the
plundering for the faith's sake. (Although this too is clear. For it was in your
power if you chose, not to be plundered, by not believing.) But ye did what is far
greater than this; the enduring such things even "with joy"; which was altogether
, and worthy of those noble souls, who rejoiced when scourged. For, it says,
"they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for the Name." [Acts 5:41] But he that endures "with
joy," shows that he has some reward, and that the affair is no loss but a gain.
Moreover the expression "ye took" shows their willing endurance, because,
he means, you chose and accepted.
"Knowing" (he says) "that you have for yourselves in heaven a better and
an enduring substance"; instead of saying, firm, not perishing like this.

Hebrews 10:35
3. In the next place, having praised them, he says, [Hebrews 10:35] "Cast
not away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of reward."
What do you mean? He did not say, 'you have cast it away, and recover it': but,
which tended more to strengthen them, "you have it," he says. For to recover
again that which has been cast away, requires more labor: but not to lose that
which is held fast does not. But to the Galatians he says the very opposite: "My
children of whom I travail in birth again, till Christ be formed in you" [Galatians
4:19]; and with reason; for they were more supine, whence they needed a sharper
word; but these were more faint-hearted, so that they rather needed what was
more soothing.
"Cast not away therefore" (he says) "your confidence," so that they were in
great confidence towards God. "Which has" (he says) "great recompense of
reward." "And when shall we receive them (some one might say)? Behold! All
things on our part have been done." Therefore he anticipated them on their own
supposition, saying in effect, If you know that you have in heaven a better
substance, seek nothing here.
"For you have need of patience," not of any addition [to your labors], that
you may continue in the same state, that you may not cast away what has been
put into your hands. You need nothing else, but so to stand as you have stood,
that when you come to the end, you may receive the promise.