THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: A double capability may be remarked in human
nature: one, in respect of the order of natural power, and this is
always fulfilled by God, Who apportions to each according to its
natural capability; the other in respect to the order of the Divine
power, which all creatures implicitly obey; and the capability we
speak of pertains to this. But God does not fulfil all such capabilities,
otherwise God could do only what He has done in creatures, and this
is false, as stated above (FP, Question 105, Article 6). But there is no
reason why human nature should not have been raised to something
greater after sin. For God allows evils to happen in order to bring a
greater good therefrom; hence it is written (Rm. 5:20): "Where sin
abounded, grace did more abound." Hence, too, in the blessing of
the Paschal candle, we say: "O happy fault, that merited such and so
great a Redeemer!"
Reply to Objection 4: Predestination presupposes the foreknowledge
of future things; and hence, as God predestines the salvation of
anyone to be brought about by the prayers of others, so also He
predestined the work of the Incarnation to be the remedy of human
sin.
Reply to Objection 5: Nothing prevents an effect from being revealed
to one to whom the cause is not revealed. Hence, the mystery of the
Incarnation could be revealed to the first man without his being foreconscious of his fall. For not everyone who knows the effect knows
the cause.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether God became incarnate in order to take

away actual sin, rather than to take away original sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that God became incarnate as a remedy
for actual sins rather than for original sin. For the more grievous the
sin, the more it runs counter to man's salvation, for which God
became incarnate. But actual sin is more grievous than original sin;
for the lightest punishment is due to original sin, as Augustine says
(Contra Julian. v, 11). Therefore the Incarnation of Christ is chiefly
directed to taking away actual sins.
Objection 2: Further, pain of sense is not due to original sin, but
merely pain of loss, as has been shown (FS, Question 87, Article 5).
But Christ came to suffer the pain of sense on the Cross in
satisfaction for sins---and not the pain of loss, for He had no defect
of either the beatific vision or fruition. Therefore He came in order to
take away actual sin rather than original sin.
Objection 3: Further, as Chrysostom says (De Compunctione Cordis
ii, 3): "This must be the mind of the faithful servant, to account the
benefits of his Lord, which have been bestowed on all alike, as
though they were bestowed on himself alone. For as if speaking of
himself alone, Paul writes to the Galatians 2:20: 'Christ . . . loved me
and delivered Himself for me.'" But our individual sins are actual
sins; for original sin is the common sin. Therefore we ought to have
this conviction, so as to believe that He has come chiefly for actual
sins.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 1:29): "Behold the Lamb of God,
behold Him Who taketh away the sins of the world."
I answer that, It is certain that Christ came into this world not only to
take away that sin which is handed on originally to posterity, but
also in order to take away all sins subsequently added to it; not that
all are taken away (and this is from men's fault, inasmuch as they do
not adhere to Christ, according to Jn. 3:19: "The light is come into
the world, and men loved darkness rather than the light"), but
because He offered what was sufficient for blotting out all sins.
Hence it is written (Rm. 5:15-16): "But not as the offense, so also the
gift . . . For judgment indeed was by one unto condemnation, but
grace is of many offenses unto justification."