blood, and the more another blood is added the less there is of the
old. And because there are four elements, each of which is the more
easily mixed with another, according as it is more rarefied it follows
that at the first admixture the identity of blood disappears as regards
the first element which is most subtle; at the second admixture, as
regards the second element; at the third, as to the third element; at
the fourth, as to the fourth element. Thus after the fourth generation
it is fitting for the carnal union to be repeated.
Reply to Objection 1: Even as God does not join together those who
are joined together against the Divine command, so does He not join
together those who are joined together against the commandment of
the Church, which has the same binding force as a commandment of
God.
Reply to Objection 2: Matrimony is not only a sacrament but also
fulfills an office; wherefore it is more subject to the control of the
Church's ministers than baptism which is a sacrament only: because
just as human contracts and offices are controlled by human laws,
so are spiritual contracts and offices controlled by the law of the
Church.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the tie of consanguinity is natural, it
is not natural that consanguinity forbid carnal intercourse, except as
regards certain degrees, as stated above (Article 3). Wherefore the
Church's commandment does not cause certain people to be kin or
not kin, because they remain equally kin at all times: but it makes
carnal intercourse to be lawful or unlawful at different times for
different degrees of consanguinity.
Reply to Objection 4: The reasons assigned are given as indicating
aptness and congruousness rather than causality and necessity.
Reply to Objection 5: The reason for the impediment of
consanguinity is not the same at different times: wherefore that
which it was useful to allow at one time, it was beneficial to forbid at
another.
Reply to Objection 6: A commandment does not affect the past but
the future. Wherefore if the fifth degree which is now allowed were to
be forbidden at any time, those in the fifth degree who are married
would not have to separate, because no impediment supervening to

marriage can annul it; and consequently a union which was a
marriage from the first would not be made incestuous by a
commandment of the Church. In like manner, if a degree which is
now forbidden were to be allowed, such a union would not become a
marriage on account of the Church's commandment by reason of the
former contract, because they could separate if they wished.
Nevertheless, they could contract anew, and this would be a new
union.
Reply to Objection 7: In prohibiting the degrees of consanguinity the
Church considers chiefly the point of view of affection. And since the
reason for affection towards one's brother's son is not less but even
greater than the reasons for affection towards one's father's brother,
inasmuch as the son is more akin to the father than the father to the
son (Ethic. viii, 12), therefore did the Church equally prohibit the
degrees of consanguinity in uncles and nephews. On the other hand
the Old Law in debarring certain persons looked chiefly to the
danger of concupiscence arising from cohabitation; and debarred
those persons who were in closer intimacy with one another on
account of their living together. Now it is more usual for a niece to
live with her uncle than an aunt with her nephew: because a
daughter is more identified with her father, being part of him,
whereas a sister is not in this way identified with her brother, for she
is not part of him but is born of the same parent. Hence there was
not the same reason for debarring a niece and an aunt.