law; but He would undoubtedly have endeavoured by all means to bring down a greater one than
this from the perfect Father, so as not to make use of that which had been given by the God of the
law. And Paul in like manner declares, "Love is the fulfilling of the law:" and [he declares] that
when all other things have been destroyed, there shall remain "faith, hope, and love; but the greatest
of all is love;" and that apart from the love of God, neither knowledge avails anything, nor
the understanding of mysteries, nor faith, nor prophecy, but that without love all are hollow and
vain; moreover, that love makes man perfect; and that he who loves God is perfect, both in this
world and in that which is to come. For we do never cease from loving God; but in proportion as
we continue to contemplate Him, so much the more do we love Him.
3. As in the law, therefore, and in the Gospel [likewise], the first and greatest commandment
is, to love the Lord God with the whole heart, and then there follows a commandment like to it, to
love one's neighbour as one's self; the author of the law and the Gospel is shown to be one and the
same. For the precepts of an absolutely perfect life, since they are the same in each Testament, have
pointed out [to us] the same God, who certainly has promulgated particular laws adapted for each;
but the more prominent and the greatest [commandments], without which salvation cannot [be
attained], He has exhorted [us to observe] the same in both.
4. The Lord, too, does not do away with this [God], when He shows that the law was not derived
from another God, expressing Himself as follows to those who were being instructed by Him, to
the multitude and to His disciples: "The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses' seat. All, therefore,
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say,
and do not. For they bind heavy burdens, and lay them upon men's shoulders; but they themselves
will not so much as move them with a finger." He therefore did not throw blame upon that law
which was given by Moses, when He exhorted it to be observed, Jerusalem being as yet in safety;
but He did throw blame upon those persons, because they repeated indeed the words of the law,
yet were without love. And for this reason were they held as being unrighteous as respects God,
and as respects their neighbours. As also Isaiah says: "This people honoureth Me with their lips,
but their heart is far from Me: howbeit in vain do they worship Me, teaching the doctrines and the
commandments of men." He does not call the law given by Moses commandments of men, but
the traditions of the elders themselves which they had invented, and in upholding which they made
the law of God of none effect, and were on this account also not subject to His Word. For this is
what Paul says concerning these men: "For they, being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going
about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of