Amen.

Homily 65 on the Gospel of John
John 11:49-50
"And one of them, Caiaphas, being the High Priest that same year, said unto
them, You know nothing at all, nor consider that it is expedient that one man
should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not," etc.
1. " The heathen are stuck fast in the destruction which they made; in the
trap which they hid is their foot taken." [Psalm 9:15, Septuagint] This has been
the case with the Jews. They said that they would kill Jesus, lest the Romans
should come and take away their place and nation; and when they had killed
Him, these things happened unto them, and when they had done that by doing
which they thought to escape, they yet did not escape. He who was slain is in
Heaven, and they who slew have for their portion hell. Yet they did not consider
these things; but what? "They desired," It says, "from that day forth to kill Him"
[John 11:53], for they said, "The Romans will come, and will take away our
nation; and a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being High Priest that year, said,"
(being more shameless than the rest,) "You know nothing." What the others made
matter of doubt, and put forth in the way of deliberation, this man cried aloud,
shamelessly, openly, audaciously. For what says he? "You know nothing, nor
consider that it is expedient that one man should die, and that the whole nation
perish not."

John 11:51
"And this spoke he not of himself, but being High Priest he prophesied."
Do you see how great is the force of the High Priest's authority? Or, since
he had in any wise been deemed worthy of the High Priesthood, although
unworthy thereof, he prophesied, not knowing what he said; and the grace
merely made use of his mouth, but touched not his accursed heart. Indeed many
others have foretold things to come, although unworthy to do so, as
Nebuchadnezzar, Pharaoh, Balaam; and the reason of all is evident. But what he
says is of this kind. "You still sit quiet, you give heed but carelessly to this matter,
and know not how to despise one man's safety for the sake of the community."
See how great is the power of the Spirit; from an evil imagination It was able to
bring forth words full of marvelous prophecy. The Evangelist calls the Gentiles
"children of God," from what was about to be: as also Christ Himself says,
"Other sheep I have" [John 10:16], so calling them from what should afterwards
come to pass.
But what is, "being High Priest that year"? This matter as well as the rest
had become corrupt; for from the time that offices became matters of purchase,
they were no longer priests for the whole period of their lives, but for a year.
Notwithstanding, even in this state of things the Spirit was still present. But
when they lifted up their hands against Christ, then It left them, and removed to
the Apostles. This the rending of the veil declared, and the voice of Christ which
said, "Behold, your house is left unto you desolate." [Matthew 23:38] And
Josephus, who lived a short time after, says, that certain Angels who yet
remained with them, (to see) if they would alter their ways, left them. While the
vineyard stood, all things went on; but when they had slain the Heir, no longer
so, but they perished. And God having taken it from the Jews, as a glorious
garment from an unprofitable son, gave it to right-minded servants of the
Gentiles, leaving the others desolate and naked. It was, moreover, no small thing