SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.155, C.4.

Reply to Objection 2: Mere knowledge does not suffice to cure the
incontinent man, for he needs the inward assistance of grace which
quenches concupiscence, besides the application of the external
remedy of admonishment and correction, which induce him to begin
to resist his desires, so that concupiscence is weakened, as stated
above (Question 142, Article 2). By these same means the
intemperate man can be cured. But his curing is more difficult, for
two reasons. The first is on the part of reason, which is corrupt as
regards the estimate of the last end, which holds the same position
as the principle in demonstrations. Now it is more difficult to bring
back to the truth one who errs as to the principle; and it is the same
in practical matters with one who errs in regard to the end. The other
reason is on the part of the inclination of the appetite: for in the
intemperate man this proceeds from a habit, which is difficult to
remove, whereas the inclination of the incontinent man proceeds
from a passion, which is more easily suppressed.
Reply to Objection 3: The eagerness of the will, which increases a
sin, is greater in the intemperate man than in the incontinent, as
explained above. But the eagerness of concupiscence in the
sensitive appetite is sometimes greater in the incontinent man,
because he does not sin except through vehement concupiscence,
whereas the intemperate man sins even through slight
concupiscence and sometimes forestalls it. Hence the Philosopher
says (Ethic. vii, 7) that we blame more the intemperate man,
"because he pursues pleasure without desiring it or with calm," i.e.
slight desire. "For what would he have done if he had desired it with
passion?"

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.155, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the incontinent in anger is worse than

the incontinent in desire?
Objection 1: It would seem that the incontinent in anger is worse
than the incontinent in desire. For the more difficult it is to resist the
passion, the less grievous, apparently is incontinence: wherefore the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 7): "It is not wonderful, indeed it is
pardonable if a person is overcome by strong and overwhelming
pleasures or pains." Now, "as Heraclitus says, it is more difficult to
resist desire than anger" [Ethic. ii. 3]. Therefore incontinence of
desire is less grievous than incontinence of anger.
Objection 2: Further, one is altogether excused from sin if the
passion be so vehement as to deprive one of the judgment of
reason, as in the case of one who becomes demented through
passion. Now he that is incontinent in anger retains more of the
judgment of reason, than one who is incontinent in desire: since
"anger listens to reason somewhat, but desire does not" as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. vii, 6). Therefore the incontinent in anger
is worse than the incontinent in desire.
Objection 3: Further, the more dangerous a sin the more grievous it
is. Now incontinence of anger would seem to be more dangerous,
since it leads a man to a greater sin, namely murder, for this is a
more grievous sin than adultery, to which incontinence of desire
leads. Therefore incontinence of anger is graver than incontinence of
desire.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 6) that
"incontinence of anger is less disgraceful than incontinence of
desire."
I answer that, The sin of incontinence may be considered in two
ways. First, on the part of the passion which occasions the downfall
of reason. In this way incontinence of desire is worse than
incontinence of anger, because the movement of desire is more
inordinate than the movement of anger. There are four reasons for
this, and the Philosopher indicates them, Ethic. vii, 6: First, because
the movement of anger partakes somewhat of reason, since the
angry man tends to avenge the injury done to him, and reason
dictates this in a certain degree. Yet he does not tend thereto