arteries, and blood, and a sample, as one might say, of the whole lump—so
likewise with regard to the Scriptures; in each portion of what is there stated, one
may see the connection with the whole clearly appearing. Whereas, if they were
in discord, neither could this have been pointed out, and the doctrine itself had
long since been brought to nought: "for every kingdom," says He, "divided
against itself shall not stand." But now even in this shines forth the might of the
Spirit, namely, in that it prevailed on these men, engaged as they were in those
things which are more necessary and very urgent, to take no hurt at all from
these little matters.
Now, where each one was abiding, when he wrote, it is not right for us to
affirm very positively.
But that they are not opposed to each other, this we will endeavor to prove,
throughout the whole work. And thou, in accusing them of disagreement, art
doing just the same as if you were to insist upon their using the same words and
forms of speech.
9. And I do not yet say, that those likewise who glory greatly in rhetoric and
philosophy, having many of them written many books touching the same
matters, have not merely expressed themselves differently, but have even spoken
in opposition to one another (for it is one thing to speak differently and another
to speak at variance); none of these things do I say. Far be it from me to frame
our defense from the frenzy of those men, neither am I willing out of falsehood
to make recommendations for the truth.
But this I would be glad to inquire: how were the differing accounts
believed? How did they prevail? How was it that, while saying opposite things,
they were admired, were believed, were celebrated everywhere in the world?
And yet the witnesses of what they said were many, and many too were the
adversaries and enemies thereof. For they did not write these things in one
corner and bury them, but everywhere, by sea and by land, they unfolded them
in the ears of all, and these things were read in the presence of enemies, even as
they are now, and none of the things which they said offended any one. And very

naturally, for it was a divine power that pervaded all, and made it to prosper with
all men.
10. For if it had not been so, how could the publican, and the fisherman,
and the unlearned, have attained to such philosophy? For things, which they that
are without have never been able to imagine, no not in a dream, are by these men
with great certainty both published and made convincing, and not in their lives
only, but even after death: neither to two men, nor twenty men, nor an hundred,
nor a thousand, nor ten thousand, but to cities, nations, and people, both to land
and sea, in the land both of Greeks and barbarians, both inhabited and desert;
and all concerning things far beyond our nature. For leaving the earth, all their
discourse is concerning the things in heaven, while they bring in unto us another
principle of life, another manner of living: both wealth and poverty, freedom and
slavery, life and death, our world and our polity, all changed.
Not like Plato, who composed that ridiculous Republic, or Zeno, or if there
be any one else that has written a polity, or has framed laws. For indeed,
touching all these, it has been made manifest by themselves, that an evil spirit,
and some cruel demon at war with our race, a foe to modesty, and an enemy to
good order, oversetting all things, has made his voice be heard in their soul.
When, for example, they make their women common to all, and stripping virgins
naked in the Palæstra, bring them into the gaze of men; and when they establish
secret marriages, mingling all things together and confounding them, and
overturning the limits of nature, what else is there to say? For that these their
sayings are all inventions of devils, and contrary to nature, even nature herself
would testify, not tolerating what we have mentioned; and this, though they write
not amidst persecutions, nor dangers, nor fightings, but in all security and
freedom, and deck it out with many ornaments from many sources. But these
doctrines of the fishermen, chased as they were, scourged and in jeopardy, both
learned and unlearned, both bond and free, both kings and private soldiers, both
barbarians and Greeks, have received with all good will.
11. And you can not say, that it was because these things were trifling and