THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.5.

itself bestowed on man unto salvation by the sacrament of visible
matter; and this is referred to in the words, "I confirm thee with the
chrism of salvation." The third is the sign which is given to the
combatant, as in a bodily combat: thus are soldiers marked with the
sign of their leaders. And to this refer the words, "I sign thee with the
sign of the cross," in which sign, to wit, our King triumphed (cf. Col.
2:15).
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Article 2, ad 1), sometimes
the effect of this sacrament, i.e. the fulness of the Holy Ghost, was
given through the ministry of the apostles, under certain visible
signs, wrought miraculously by God, Who can bestow the
sacramental effect, independently of the sacrament. In these cases
there was no need for either the matter or the form of this sacrament.
On the other hand, sometimes they bestowed this sacrament as
ministers of the sacraments. And then, they used both matter and
form according to Christ's command. For the apostles, in conferring
the sacraments, observed many things which are not handed down
in those Scriptures that are in general use. Hence Dionysius says at
the end of his treatise on the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy (chap. vii): "It
is not allowed to explain in writing the prayers which are used in the
sacraments, and to publish their mystical meaning, or the power
which, coming from God, gives them their efficacy; we learn these
things by holy tradition without any display," i.e. secretly. Hence the
Apostle, speaking of the celebration of the Eucharist, writes (1 Cor.
11:34): "The rest I will set in order, when I come."
Reply to Objection 2: Holiness is the cause of salvation. Therefore it
comes to the same whether we say "chrism of salvation" or "of
sanctification."
Reply to Objection 3: Baptism is the regeneration unto the spiritual
life, whereby man lives in himself. And therefore in the baptismal
form that action alone is expressed which refers to the man to be
sanctified. But this sacrament is ordained not only to the
sanctification of man in himself, but also to strengthen him in his
outward combat. Consequently not only is mention made of interior
sanctification, in the words, "I confirm thee with the chrism of
salvation": but furthermore man is signed outwardly, as it were with
the standard of the cross, unto the outward spiritual combat; and
this is signified by the words, "I sign thee with the sign of the cross."
But in the very word "baptize," which signifies "to cleanse," we can

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.5.

understand both the matter, which is the cleansing water, and the
effect, which is salvation. Whereas these are not understood by the
word "confirm"; and consequently they had to be expressed.
Again, it has been said above (Question 66, Article 5, ad 1) that the
pronoun "I" is not necessary to the Baptismal form, because it is
included in the first person of the verb. It is, however, included in
order to express the intention. But this does not seem so necessary
in Confirmation, which is conferred only by a minister of excellence,
as we shall state later on (Article 11).