It can be said that from Mary the Church also learns her own motherhood: she recognizes
the maternal dimension of her vocation, which is essentially bound to her sacramental
nature, in "contemplating Mary's mysterious sanctity, imitating her charity and faithfully
fulfilling the Father's will." If the Church is the sign and instrument of intimate union
with God, she is so by reason of her motherhood, because, receiving life from the Spirit,
she "generates" sons and daughters of the human race to a new life in Christ. For, just as
Mary is at the service of the mystery of the Incarnation, so the Church is always at the
service of the mystery of adoption to sonship through grace.

Likewise, following the example of Mary, the Church remains the virgin faithful to her
spouse: The Church herself is a virgin who keeps whole and pure the fidelity she has
pledged to her Spouse." For the Church is the spouse of Christ, as is clear from the
Pauline Letters (cf. Eph. 5:21-33; 2 Cor. 11:2), and from the title found in John: "bride of
the Lamb" (Rev. 21:9). If the Church as spouse "keeps the fidelity she has pledged to
Christ," this fidelity, even though in the Apostle's teaching it has become an image of
marriage (cf. Eph. 5:23-33), also has value as a model of total self-giving to God in
celibacy "for the kingdom of heaven," in virginity consecrated to God (cf. Mt. 19:11-12;
2 Cor. 11:2). Precisely such virginity, after the example of the Virgin of Nazareth, is the
source of a special spiritual fruitfulness: it is the source of motherhood in the Holy Spirit.

But the Church also preserves the faith received from Christ. Following the example of
Mary, who kept and pondered in her heart everything relating to her divine Son (cf. Lk.
2:, 51), the Church is committed to preserving the word of God and investigating its
riches with discernment and prudence, in order to bear faithful witness to it before all
mankind in every age.

44. Given Mary's relationship to the Church as an exemplar, the Church is close to her
and seeks to become like her: "Imitating the Mother of her Lord, and by the power of the
Holy Spirit, she preserves with virginal purity an integral faith, a firm hope, and a sincere
charity." Mary is thus present in the mystery of the Church as a model. But the
Church's mystery also consists in generating people to a new and immortal life: this is her
motherhood in the Holy Spirit. And here Mary is not only the model and figure of the

Church; she is much more. For, "with maternal love she cooperates in the birth and
development" of the sons and daughters of Mother Church. The Church's motherhood is
accomplished not only according to the model and figure of the Mother of God but also
with her "cooperation." The Church draws abundantly from this cooperation, that is to
say from the maternal mediation which is characteristic of Mary, insofar as already on
earth she cooperated in the rebirth and development of the Church's sons and daughters,
as the Mother of that Son whom the Father "placed as the first-born among many
brethren."