the Altar, as stated above (Sent. iv, D, 10, Question 1, Article 1, ad 5;
TP, Question 77, Article 5).
Reply to Objection 2: The Philosopher's argument is that for the
same reason one part might permeate another. But this permeation
of the parts of a glorified body into one another is impossible, as
stated above. Therefore the objection does not prove.
Reply to Objection 3: A body is seen because it acts on the sight: but
that it does or does not act on the sight causes no change in the
body. Hence it is not unfitting, if it can be seen when it will, and not
seen when it will [TP, Question 55, Article 4]. On the other hand,
being in a place is not an action proceeding from a body by reason
of its quantity, as being seen is by reason of its color. Consequently
the comparison fails.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the glorified body, by reason of its

subtlety, will be impalpable?
Objection 1: It would seem that the glorified body, by reason of its
subtlety, is impalpable. For Gregory says (Hom. xxv in Evang.):
"What is palpable must needs be corruptible." But the glorified body
is incorruptible. Therefore it is impalpable.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is palpable resists one who handles
it. But that which can be in the same place with another does not
resist it. Since then a glorified body can be in the same place with
another body, it will not be palpable.
Objection 3: Further, every palpable body is tangible. Now every
tangible body has tangible qualities in excess of the qualities of the
one touching it. Since then in the glorified bodies the tangible
qualities are not in excess but are reduced to a supreme degree of
equality, it would seem that they are impalpable.
On the contrary, our Lord rose again with a glorified body; and yet
His body was palpable, as appears from Lk. 24:39: "Handle, and see;
for a spirit hath not flesh and bones." Therefore the glorified bodies
also will be palpable.
Further, this is the heresy of Eutychius, Bishop of Constantinople, as
Gregory states (Moral. xxiv): for he said that in the glory of the
resurrection our bodies will be impalpable.
I answer that, Every palpable body is tangible, but not conversely.
For every body is tangible that has qualities whereby the sense of
touch has a natural aptitude to be affected: wherefore air, fire, and
the like are tangible bodies: but a palpable body, in addition to this,
resists the touch; wherefore the air which never resists that which
passes through it, and is most easily pierced, is tangible indeed but
not palpable. Accordingly it is clear that a body is said to be palpable
for two reasons, namely on account of its tangible qualities, and on
account of its resisting that which touches it, so as to hinder it from
piercing it. And since the tangible qualities are hot and cold and so
forth, which are not found save in heavy and light bodies, which
through being contrary to one another are therefore corruptible, it
follows that the heavenly bodies, which by their nature are