becoming exasperated, and the others not supplying such persons so readily as
formerly, he with good reason now offered this prayer for them, saying, "Give
you peace at all times." For this is what is sought, that they may ever have it. "In
every way," says he. What is, "in every"? So that they may have no occasion of
contention from any quarter. For everywhere peace is a good thing, even towards
those who are without. For hear him elsewhere saying, "If it be possible, as much
as in you lies, be at peace with all men." [Romans 12:18] For nothing is so
conducive to the right performance of the things which we wish, as to be
peaceable and undisturbed, and to be flee from all hatred, and to have no enemy.
"The Lord be with you all."
Ver. 17, 18. "The salutation of me Paul with my own hand, which is the
token in every Epistle: so I write. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all."
This he says that he writes in every Epistle, that no one may be able to
counterfeit them, his subscription being subjoined as a great token. And he calls
the prayer a salutation, showing that everything they then did was spiritual; even
when it was proper to offer salutation, the thing was attended with advantage;
and it was prayer, not merely a symbol of friendship. With this he began, and
with it he ended, guarding with strong walls what he had said elsewhere, and
laying safe foundations, he brought it also to a safe end. "Grace be unto you and
peace," he says; and again, "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
Amen." This the Lord also promised, saying to His disciples, "Lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world." [Matthew 28:20] But this takes place
when we are willing. For He will not be altogether with us, if we place ourselves
at a distance. "I will be with you," He says, "always." Let us not therefore drive
away grace. He tells us to withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly.
This was then a great evil, to be separated from the whole body of the brethren.
By this indeed he punishes all, as elsewhere in his Epistle to the Corinthians he
said, "With such a one no, not to eat." [1 Corinthians 5:11] But now the majority
do not think this a great evil. But all things are confounded and corrupted. With

adulterers, with fornicators, with covetous persons, we mix freely, and as a
matter of course. If we ought to withdraw ourselves from one who was only
supported in idleness, how much more from the others. And that you may know
how fearful a thing it was to be separated from the company of the brethren, and
what advantage it produces to those who receive reproof with a right mind, hear
how that man, who was puffed up with sin, who had proceeded to the extreme of
wickedness, who had committed such fornication as is not named even among
the heathens, who was insensible of his wound— for this is the excess of
perversion— he after all, though such an one, was so bent down and humbled
that Paul said, "Sufficient to such a one is this punishment which was inflicted by
the many. Wherefore confirm your love toward him." [2 Corinthians 2:6-8] For as
a member separated from the rest of the body, so was he at that time.
But the cause, and that from which this was then so terrible, was, because
even the being with them was thought by them a great blessing. For like men
who inhabit one house, and are under one father, and partake of one table, so did
they then dwell in every Church. How great an evil therefore was it to fall from
so great love! But now it is not even thought to be a great evil, because neither is
it considered any great thing when we are united with one another. What was
then in the order of punishment, this, on account of the great coldness of love,
now takes place even apart from punishment, and we withdraw from one another
causelessly, and from coldness. For it is the cause of all evils that there is no
love. This has dissolved all ties, and has disfigured all that was venerable and
splendid in the Church, in which we ought to have gloried.
Great is the confidence of the Teacher, when from his own good actions he
is entitled to reprove his disciples. Wherefore also Paul said, "For yourselves
know how you ought to imitate us." [2 Thessalonians 3:7] And he ought to be a
Teacher more of life than of the word. And let no one think that this is said from
a spirit of boasting. For it was as reduced to necessity that he spoke it, and with a
view to general advantage. "For we behaved not ourselves," he says, "disorderly
among you." From this do you not see his humility, in that he calls it, "for