1. But there are some who say that Jesus was merely a receptacle of Christ, upon whom the
Christ, as a dove, descended from above, and that when He had declared the unnameable Father
He entered into the Pleroma in an incomprehensible and invisible manner: for that He was not
comprehended, not only by men, but not even by those powers and virtues which are in heaven,
and that Jesus was the Son, but that Christ was the Father, and the Father of Christ, God; while
others say that He merely suffered in outward appearance, being naturally impassible. The
Valentinians, again, maintain that the dispensational Jesus was the same who passed through Mary,
upon whom that Saviour from the more exalted [region] descended, who was also termed Pan,
because He possessed the names (vocabula) of all those who had produced Him; but that [this
latter] shared with Him, the dispensational one, His power and His name; so that by His means
death was abolished, but the Father was made known by that Saviour who had descended from
above, whom they do also allege to be Himself the receptacle of Christ and of the entire Pleroma;
confessing, indeed, in tongue one Christ Jesus, but being divided in [actual] opinion: for, as I have
already observed, it is the practice of these men to say that there was one Christ, who was produced
by Monogenes, for the confirmation of the Pleroma; but that another, the Saviour, was sent [forth]
for the glorification of the Father; and yet another, the dispensational one, and whom they represent
as having suffered, who also bore [in himself] Christ, that Saviour who returned into the Pleroma.
I judge it necessary therefore to take into account the entire mind of the apostles regarding our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to show that not only did they never hold any such opinions regarding Him; but,
still further, that they announced through the Holy Spirit, that those who should teach such doctrines
were agents of Satan, sent forth for the purpose of overturning the faith of some, and drawing them
away from life.
2. That John knew the one and the same Word of God, and that He was the only begotten, and
that He became incarnate for our salvation, Jesus Christ our Lord, I have sufficiently proved from
the word of John himself. And Matthew, too, recognising one and the same Jesus Christ, exhibiting
his generation as a man from the Virgin, even as God did promise David that He would raise up
from the fruit of his body an eternal King, having made the same promise to Abraham a long time
previously, says: "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham." Then, that he might free our mind from suspicion regarding Joseph, he says: "But
version. The apodosis does not occur till the words, "I judge it necessary," are reached.

The Latin text has "Christum." which is supposed to be an erroneous reading. See also book ii. c. xii. s. 6.