THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.5.

was circumcised, professed to embrace that faith; whether, being an
adult, he made profession for himself, or, being a child, someone
else made profession for him. Hence, too, the Apostle says (Rm.
4:11), that Abraham "received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
justice of the faith": because, to wit, justice was of faith signified: not
of circumcision signifying. And since Baptism operates
instrumentally by the power of Christ's Passion, whereas
circumcision does not, therefore Baptism imprints a character that
incorporates man in Christ, and bestows grace more copiously than
does circumcision; since greater is the effect of a thing already
present, than of the hope thereof.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument would prove if justice were of
circumcision otherwise than through faith in Christ's Passion.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as before the institution of circumcision,
faith in Christ to come justified both children and adults, so, too,
after its institution. But before, there was no need of a sign
expressive of this faith; because as yet believers had not begun to
be united together apart from unbelievers for the worship of one
God. It is probable, however, that parents who were believers offered
up some prayers to God for their children, especially if these were in
any danger. Or bestowed some blessing on them, as a "seal of
faith"; just as the adults offered prayers and sacrifices for
themselves.
Reply to Objection 3: There was an excuse for the people in the
desert failing to fulfil the precept of circumcision, both because they
knew not when the camp was removed, and because, as Damascene
says (De Fide Orth. iv) they needed no distinctive sign while they
dwelt apart from other nations. Nevertheless, as Augustine says
(Questions. in Josue vi), those were guilty of disobedience who
failed to obey through contempt.
It seems, however, that none of the uncircumcised died in the desert,
for it is written (Ps. 104:37): "There was not among their tribes one
that was feeble": and that those alone died in the desert, who had
been circumcised in Egypt. If, however, some of the uncircumcised
did die there, the same applies to them as to those who died before
the institution of circumcision. And this applies also to those
children who, at the time of the Law, died before the eighth day.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.5.

Reply to Objection 4: Original sin was taken away in circumcision, in
regard to the person; but on the part of the entire nature, there
remained the obstacle to the entrance of the kingdom of heaven,
which obstacle was removed by Christ's Passion. Consequently,
before Christ's Passion not even Baptism gave entrance to the
kingdom. But were circumcision to avail after Christ's Passion, it
would give entrance to the kingdom.
Reply to Objection 5: When adults were circumcised, they received
remission not only of original, but also of actual sin: yet not so as to
be delivered from all debt of punishment, as in Baptism, in which
grace is conferred more copiously.