that are without: "(I was) a slave, Epictetus by name, a cripple in body, for
poverty a very Irus, and a friend of the Immortals." For how, I would ask, can it
be otherwise, but that the soul of the rich must teem with evils; folly, vainglory,
numberless lusts, anger and passion, covetousness, iniquity, and what not? So
that even for philosophy, the former is more congenially ([ἐ] [πιτηδεία])
disposed than the latter. By all means seek to ascertain which is the more
pleasant: for this I see is the point everywhere discussed, whether such an one
has the more enjoyable way of life. And yet even as regards this, we need not be
in doubt; for to be near to health, is also to have much enjoyment. But whether
of the two, I would ask, is best disposed ([ἐ] [πιτήδειος]) to the matter now in
hand, that which we will needs carry into accomplishment— our law, I mean—
the poor man or the rich? Whether of them will be apt to swear? The man who
has children to be provoked with, the man who has his covenants with
innumerable parties, or the man who is concerned to apply for just a loaf of
bread or a garment? This man has not even need of oaths, should he wish, but
always lives free from cares of business; nay, more, it is often seen that he who
is disciplined to swear not at all, will also despise riches; and one shall see in his
whole behavior his ways all branching off from this one good habit, and leading
to meekness, to contempt of riches, to piety, to subduedness of soul, to
compunction of heart. Then let us not be indolent, my beloved, but let us again
show great earnestness: they who have succeeded, that they may keep the
success achieved, that they be not easily caught by the receding wave, nor the
refluent tide carry them back again [they too who are yet behindhand, that they
may be raised up again, and strive to make up that which is wanting. And
meanwhile let those who have succeeded, help those who have not been able to
do the same]: and by reaching out their hands, as they would to men struggling
in the deep water, receive them into the haven of no-swearing ([ἀ] [νωμοσίας]).
For it is indeed a haven of safety, to swear not at all: whatever storms burst upon
us, to be in no danger of sinking there: be it anger, be it insult, be it passion, be it
what it may, the soul is stayed securely; yea, though one have vented some

chance word or other that ought not, and had been better not, to be spoken, yet
he has laid himself under no necessity, no law. (Supra, Hom. ix. §5. ad. Pop.
Ant. viii. §3.) See what Herod did for his oath's sake: he cut off the head of the
Fore-runner. "But because of his oaths," it says, "and because of them which sat
at meat with him" [Mark 6:26], he cut off the head of the Prophet. Think what
the tribes had to suffer for their oath in the matter of the tribe of Benjamin
[Judges 21:5-10]: what Saul had to suffer for his oath [1 Samuel 14:24, etc.]. For
Saul indeed perjured himself, but Herod did what was even worse than perjury,
he committed murder. Joshua again— you know how it fared with him, for his
oath in the matter of the Gibeonites. [Joshua 9] For it is indeed a snare of Satan,
this swearing. Let us burst the cords; let us bring ourselves into a condition in
which it will be easy (not to swear); let us break loose from every entanglement,
and from this snare of Satan. Let us fear the command of the Lord: let us settle
ourselves in the best of habits: that, making progress, and having achieved this
and the rest of the commandments, we may obtain those good things which are
promised to them that love Him, through the grace and loving-kindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be
glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.