5. If that which stands first is done away with, everything consequent upon it is likewise put
aside: but what is first intelligible about a thing is its quiddity; hence that which a thing is, is said
to be the proper object of the intellect (III De anima); and what is serves as a medium of
demonstrating whether it exists, and all the other conditions of the thing. But concerning God,
we are unable to know what He is, as Damascene says. Therefore, we can know nothing of God.

#### Sed contra

But on the contrary is the saying of Rom. 1:20: "For the invisible things of Him, from the
creation of the worla, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made: His eternal
power also and divinity."

According to Jer. 9:24: "But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth
Me"; but this would be empty glory unless we were able to know Him; therefore we can know
God.

Nothing is loved unless it is known, as is evident from Augustine (II De Trinitate); but we are
commanded to love God; therefore we are capable of knowing Him, since the impossible is not
enjoined by precept.

Response. I answer: It must be said that there is a twofold way in which anything is known.
One manner is through its proper form, as the eye sees a stone through the species of the stone.
Another way is through some other form similar to it, as a cause is known through the similitude
of its effect, just as man is known through the form of his image.

Moreover, through its own form a thing is also known in two ways. One way is the following:
when knowledge is through the form which is the thing itself, as with God who eternally knows
His own essence, and as an angel knows itself. According to another mode, knowledge is
through a form which is other than the thing: either when the form has been abstracted from a
thingÑin which case the form is more immaterial than the thing itself, as is the form of a stone
abstracted from the stone itselfÑ or when the form is impressed on the intellect by a thing, as
occurs when the thing is more immaterial than the similitude by which it is known; thus, as
Avicenna says, we know intellectual beings through their impression in us.

Therefore, since our intellect has, in our present state of wayfaring, a determined relation to
forms abstracted from sensible things (since it is dependent upon phantasms in the same way as
sight is upon colors, as is said in III De anima), it cannot know God in this life through that
form which is His essence; though it is in this way that He is known by the blessed in heaven.

No similitude, however, of whatever kind impressed by Him upon the human intellect, would
suffice to make His essence known, since He infinitely transcends every created form;
consequently God cannot be made accessible to the mind through created forms, as Augustine
says. Nor, in this present state, can God become known to us even through the species of things
which are purely intelligible, which have in a certain way a likeness to Him, because our intellect
is connaturally related to phantasms, as has been said. Therefore it remains certain that it is only
through the forms of His effects that He is known.