5. In glowing iron, the fire and the iron are simultaneous; but each is a body; therefore it is
possible for two bodies to be in the same place at the same time.

6. Elements in a compound are not corrupted; otherwise a compound would not follow the
motion of a dominant element; but all four elements are bodies and are simultaneously in every
part of the compound; therefore it is possible for two bodies to be simultaneously in the same
place.

7. The fact that two bodies are not simultaneously in one place does not occur by reason of the
matter of the bodies, since to matter in itself there is no due place; nor does it occur because of
the form, for the same reason; nor is it because of dimension, since dimensions do not fill up
place, as is evident from the fact that certain philosophers are accustomed to say that the place
where there are only dimensions is a vacuum. Therefore this characteristic of a body must arise
only from certain posterior accidents, which are not altogether common and which can be
separated from the body; and so it seems that two bodies could be simultaneously in the same
place.

8. According to the astrologers who follow Ptolemy, the six bod?es of the planets move in
epicycles, which are circles intersecting the spheres extrinsic to the planets. Therefore it must be
that a body of a planet at some time would arrive at the place of section. But it cannot be said that
at that place there is any vacuum, since nature does not suffer this; nor that the substance of the
spheres is divisible, so that it might be thought of as giving way when the planetary body had
reached it, as air gives way to a stone, for the heavens are most solid, being formed, as it were, of
molten brass, as is said in Job, 37:18. Therefore it must be that the body of the planet is
simultaneously in the same place as the body of the sphere; and so Boethius falsely says that two
bodies cannot occupy one and the same place.

#### Sed contra

On the contrary is the fact that if two bodies are in one and the same place, they are the same in
nature and in every respect; but any body, however large, can be divided into small bodies of any

qqantity, according to any number; therefore, it would follow that in the very smallest place there
would be contained the largest body, a thing which appears to be absurd.

Again, it is impossible for there to be many straight lines between two given points. But this
would follow if two bodies could be in the same place. For then, given two points in two
opposite parts of space, there will be between them two straight lines assigned corporeally to two
places. Now, it cannot be said that between these two points there will be no lines at all, or that a
line of one location would be greater than the other, or that there could be any one line apart from
those corporeally located between the two points of given location, for in that case the two lines
would not be in a subject. Therefore it is impossible for two bodies to be simultaneously in the
same place.