an attention to things of this sort. For "you ought," He says, "to have put My
money to the exchangers." [Matthew 25:27] And therefore though there be
nobody that listens to it, let us do our part, and show that there is nothing
superfluous, nothing added at random in the Scriptures. For if these names had
no use, they would not then have been added to the Epistle, nor would Paul have
written what he has written. But there are some even so low-minded, and empty,
and unworthy of Heaven, as not to think that names only, but whole books of the
Bible are of no use, as Leviticus, Joshua, and more besides. And in this way
many of the simple ones have been for rejecting the Old Testament, and
advancing on in the way, that results from this evil habit of mind, have likewise
pruned away many parts of the New Testament also. But of these men, as
intoxicated and living to the flesh, we do not make much account. But if any be a
lover of wisdom, and a friend to spiritual entertainments, let him be told that
even the things which seem to be unimportant in Scripture, are not placed there
at random and to no purpose, and that even the old laws have much to profit us.
For it says, "All these things are types (A.V. ensamples) and are written for our
instruction." [1 Corinthians 10:11] Wherefore to Timothy too he says, "Give
heed to reading, to exhortation" [1 Timothy 4:13], so urging him to the reading
of the old books, though he was a man with so great a spirit in him, as to be able
to drive out devils, and to raise the dead. Let us now keep on with the subject in
hand. "Salute my well-beloved Epenetus." It is worth learning from this how he
distributes to each the different praises. For this praise is no slight one, but even
very great, and a proof of great excellence in him, that Paul should hold him
beloved, Paul who had no idea of loving by favor, and not by cool judgment.
Then another encomium comes, "Who is the first-fruits of Achaia." For what he
means is, either that he leaped forward before any one else, and became a
believer (and this were no slight praise), or that he displayed more religious
behavior than any other. And on this account after saying, "who is the first-fruits
of Achaia," he does not hold his peace, but to prevent your suspecting it to be a
glory of the world's, he added, "unto Christ." Now if in civil matters, he that is

first seems to be great and honorable, much more so in these. As then it was
likely that they were of low extraction, he speaks of the true noble birth and
preëminency, and gives him his honors from this. And he says, that he "is the
first-fruits," not of Corinth only, but of the whole nation, as having become as it
were a door, and an entrance to the rest. And to such, the reward is no small one.
For such an one will reap much recompense also from the achievements of
others, in that he too contributed much toward them by beginning.
Ver. 6. "Greet Mary, who bestowed much labor on us."
How is this? A woman again is honored and proclaimed victorious! Again
are we men put to shame. Or rather, we are not put to shame only, but have even
an honor conferred upon us. For an honor we have, in that there are such women
among us, but we are put to shame, in that we men are left so far behind by
them. But if we come to know whence it comes, that they are so adorned, we too
shall speedily overtake them. Whence then is their adorning? Let both men and
women listen. It is not from bracelets, or from necklaces, nor from their eunuchs
either, and their maid-servants, and gold-broidered dresses, but from their toils in
behalf of the truth. For he says, "who bestowed much labor on us," that is, not on
herself only, nor upon her own advancement, (see p. 520) (for this many women
of the present day do, by fasting, and sleeping on the floor), but upon others also,
so carrying on the race Apostles and Evangelists ran. In what sense then does he
say, "I suffer not a woman to teach?" [1 Timothy 2:12] He means to hinder her
from publicly coming forward [1 Corinthians 14:35], and from the seat on the
bema, not from the word of teaching. Since if this were the case, how would he
have said to the woman that had an unbelieving husband, "How do you know, O
woman, if you shall save your husband?" [1 Corinthians 7:16] Or how came he
to suffer her to admonish children, when he says, but "she shall be saved by
child-bearing if they continue in faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety?"
[1 Timothy 2:15] How came Priscilla to instruct even Apollos? It was not then to
cut in sunder private conversing for advantage that he said this, but that before
all, and which it was the teacher's duty to give in the public assembly; or again,