FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.5.

approach and withdrawal.
Reply to Objection 2: Despair does not regard evil as such;
sometimes however it regards evil accidentally, as making the
difficult good impossible to obtain. But it can arise from the mere
excess of good.
Reply to Objection 3: Despair implies not only privation of hope, but
also a recoil from the thing desired, by reason of its being esteemed
impossible to get. Hence despair, like hope, presupposes desire;
because we neither hope for nor despair of that which we do not
desire to have. For this reason, too, each of them regards the good,
which is the object of desire.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether experience is a cause of hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that experience is not a cause of hope.
Because experience belongs to the cognitive power; wherefore the
Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 1) that "intellectual virtue needs
experience and time." But hope is not in the cognitive power, but in
the appetite, as stated above (Article 2). Therefore experience is not
a cause of hope.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 13) that "the old
are slow to hope, on account of their experience"; whence it seems
to follow that experience causes want of hope. But the same cause is
not productive of opposites. Therefore experience is not a cause of
hope.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (De Coel. ii, 5) that "to
have something to say about everything, without leaving anything
out, is sometimes a proof of folly." But to attempt everything seems
to point to great hopes; while folly arises from inexperience.
Therefore inexperience, rather than experience, seems to be a cause
of hope.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 8) "some are
hopeful, through having been victorious often and over many
opponents": which seems to pertain to experience. Therefore
experience is a cause of hope.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the object of hope is a
future good, difficult but possible to obtain. Consequently a thing
may be a cause of hope, either because it makes something possible
to a man: or because it makes him think something possible. In the
first way hope is caused by everything that increases a man's power;
e.g. riches, strength, and, among others, experience: since by
experience man acquires the faculty of doing something easily, and
the result of this is hope. Wherefore Vegetius says (De Re Milit. i):
"No one fears to do that which he is sure of having learned well."
In the second way, hope is caused by everything that makes man
think that he can obtain something: and thus both teaching and
persuasion may be a cause of hope. And then again experience is a
cause of hope, in so far as it makes him reckon something possible,