off such corruption by food. Among those things which corrupt the
body from without, the chief seems to be an atmosphere of unequal
temperature; and to such corruption a remedy is found in an
atmosphere of equable nature. In paradise both conditions were
found; because, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 11): "Paradise
was permeated with the all pervading brightness of a temperate,
pure, and exquisite atmosphere, and decked with ever-flowering
plants." Whence it is clear that paradise was most fit to be a dwellingplace for man, and in keeping with his original state of immortality.
Reply to Objection 1: The empyrean heaven is the highest of
corporeal places, and is outside the region of change. By the first of
these two conditions, it is a fitting abode for the angelic nature: for,
as Augustine says (De Trin. ii), "God rules corporeal creatures
through spiritual creatures." Hence it is fitting that the spiritual
nature should be established above the entire corporeal nature, as
presiding over it. By the second condition, it is a fitting abode for the
state of beatitude, which is endowed with the highest degree of
stability. Thus the abode of beatitude was suited to the very nature
of the angel; therefore he was created there. But it is not suited to
man's nature, since man is not set as a ruler over the entire
corporeal creation: it is a fitting abode for man in regard only to his
beatitude. Wherefore he was not placed from the beginning in the
empyrean heaven, but was destined to be transferred thither in the
state of his final beatitude.
Reply to Objection 2: It is ridiculous to assert that any particular
place is natural to the soul or to any spiritual substances, though
some particular place may have a certain fitness in regard to
spiritual substances. For the earthly paradise was a place adapted to
man, as regards both his body and his soul---that is, inasmuch as in
his soul was the force which preserved the human body from
corruption. This could not be said of the other animals. Therefore, as
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 11): "No irrational animal inhabited
paradise"; although, by a certain dispensation, the animals were
brought thither by God to Adam; and the serpent was able to
trespass therein by the complicity of the devil.
Reply to Objection 3: Paradise did not become useless through
being unoccupied by man after sin, just as immortality was not
conferred on man in vain, though he was to lose it. For thereby we
learn God's kindness to man, and what man lost by sin. Moreover,
some say that Enoch and Elias still dwell in that paradise.

Reply to Objection 4: Those who say that paradise was on the
equinoctial line are of opinion that such a situation is most
temperate, on account of the unvarying equality of day and night;
that it is never too cold there, because the sun is never too far off;
and never too hot, because, although the sun passes over the heads
of the inhabitants, it does not remain long in that position. However,
Aristotle distinctly says (Meteor. ii, 5) that such a region is
uninhabitable on account of the heat. This seems to be more
probable; because, even those regions where the sun does not pass
vertically overhead, are extremely hot on account of the mere
proximity of the sun. But whatever be the truth of the matter, we
must hold that paradise was situated in a most temperate situation,
whether on the equator or elsewhere.