those of whom we stand in need, we are compelled to stoop to. But if we restrain
ourselves we shall no longer be regarded as criminals, but he knows that we pay
him obedience from the fear of God, not for what is given by him. For now,
when that he confers great favors on us, whatever honor he receives, he thinks he
has not received all [that is due to him]: but then, though he obtain but a little, he
will account it a favor he does not reproach, nor will he be himself compelled to
overreach on your account.
13. For what is more unreasonable, than to provide golden ornaments, to be
worn in baths, and in market places? However, in baths and in market places it is
perhaps no wonder, but that a woman should come into Church so decked out is
very ridiculous. For, for what possible reason does she come in here wearing
golden ornaments, she who ought to come in that she may hear [the precept]
"that they adorn not themselves with gold, nor pearls, nor costly array"? [1
Timothy 2:9] With what object then, O woman, do you come? Is it indeed to
fight with Paul, and show that even if he repeat these things ten thousand times
you regard them not? Or is it as wishing to put us your teachers to shame as
discoursing on these subjects in vain? For tell me; if any heathen and unbeliever,
after he has heard the passage read where the blessed Paul says these things,
having a believing wife, sees that she makes much account of beautifying
herself, and puts on ornaments of gold, that she may come into Church and hear
Paul charging [the women] that they adorn themselves, neither with "gold" [1
Timothy 2:9], nor with "pearls," nor with "costly array," will he not indeed say
to himself, when he sees her in her little room, putting on these things, and
arranging them beautifully, "Why is my wife staying within in her little room?
Why is she so slow? Why is she putting on her golden ornaments? Where has she
to go to? Into the Church? For what purpose? To hear? 'not with costly array';"
will he not smile, will he not burst out into laughter? will he not think our
religion a mockery and a deceit? Wherefore, I beseech [you], let us leave golden
ornaments to processions, to theaters, to signs on the shops. But let not the image
of God be decked out with these things: let the gentlewoman be adorned with

gentility, and gentility is the absence of pride, and of boastful display.
Nay even if you wish to obtain glory from men, you will obtain it thus. For
we shall not wonder so much that the wife of a rich man wears gold and silk (for
this is the common practice of them all), as when she is dressed in a plain and
simple garment made merely of wool. This all will admire, this they will
applaud. For in that adorning indeed of ornaments of gold and of costly apparel,
she has many to share with her. And if she surpass one, she is surpassed by
another. Yea, even if she surpass all, she must yield the palm to the Empress
herself. But in the other case, she outdoes all, even the Emperor's wife herself.
For she alone in wealth, has chosen the [dress] of the poor. So that even if we
desire glory, here too the glory is greater.
14. I say this not only to widows, and to the rich; for here the necessity of
widowhood seems to cause this: but to those also who have a husband.
But, you say, I do not please my husband [if I dress plainly]. It is not your
husband you wish to please, but the multitude of poor women; or rather not to
please them, but to make them pine [with envy], and to give them pain, and
make their poverty greater. How many blasphemies are uttered because of you!
'Let there be no poverty' (say they). 'God hates the poor.' 'God loves not those in
poverty.' For that it is not your husband whom you wish to please, and for this
reason you deck yourself out, you make plain to all by what you yourself doest.
For as soon as you have passed over the threshold of your chamber, thou
immediately puttest off all, both the robes, and the golden ornaments, and the
pearls; and at home of all places thou dost not wear them.
But if you really wishest to please your husband, there are ways of pleasing
him, by gentleness, by meekness, by propriety. For believe me, O woman, even
if your husband be infinitely debased, these are the things which will more
effectually win him, gentleness, propriety, freedom from pride and
expensiveness and extravagance. For even if you devise ten thousand such
things, you will not restrain the profligate. And this they know who have had
such husbands. For however you may beautify yourself, he being a profligate