report of all I say, we shall readily pay you down the whole; for thus the
instructions, charitably afforded on your part, will make up to them for their
absence; and you will hear me the more attentively, knowing that you must
necessarily give an account of these things to others. In order then that our
subject may be made the clearer, let us take it up and repeat it from the
beginning. We were enquiring, then, the other day, On what account the
Scriptures were delivered after so many years. For this Book was delivered
neither in the time of Adam, nor of Noah, nor of Abraham, but in that of Moses.
And I hear many who say, that if the Book was profitable, it ought to have been
delivered from the very beginning; but if it was useless, it ought not to have been
delivered afterwards. But this is an obsolete argument; for it is not quite true that
anything which is profitable ought to have been delivered from the beginning,
nor if anything was delivered from the beginning, is it quite necessary that the
same should continue afterwards. For example; Milk is useful, yet it is not
always given; but it is given to us only when we are children; and solid food is
useful; but no one ever gives it us in the beginning of our life, but when we have
passed out of the age of childhood. Again, the summer season is useful; but it
does not show itself constantly; and the winter season is advantageous; yet this
too makes room for others. What then? Do they say that the Scriptures are not
useful? I reply; they are most useful and most necessary. And if so useful, for
what reason then, say they, were they not delivered to us from the beginning? It
was because God was desirous of instructing the nature of man, not by letters,
but by things. But what does the expression "by things" signify? By means of the
Creation itself.
4. Observe then, how the Apostle, alighting upon this same topic, and
directing himself to those very Greeks who said, that they had not from the
beginning learned the knowledge of God from the Scriptures, frames his answer.
Having said that, "the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness;" [Romans 1:18] when he saw that he was met by an objection;

and that many would still enquire, from whence the Gentiles knew the truth of
God, he goes on to add, "Because that which may be known of God is manifest in
them." But how is it manifest in them? How were they able to know God, and
who has showed? Declare this. "God," says he, "has showed it unto them." In
what manner? By the sending of what kind of prophet? What evangelist? What
kind of teacher? If the holy Scriptures were not yet given. "The invisible things
of Him," says he, "from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even His eternal Power and Godhead."
[Romans 1:20] But what he means is just this, He has placed His Creation in the
midst, before the eyes of all men; in order that they may guess at the Creator
from His works; which, indeed, another writer has referred to; "For from the
greatness and beauty of the creatures, proportionably the Maker of them is
seen." [Wisdom 13:5] Do you see the greatness? Marvel at the power of Him
that made it! Do you see the beauty? Be astonished at the wisdom which adorned
it! This it was which the prophet signified when he said, "The heavens declare
the glory of God." How then, tell me, do they declare it? Voice they have none;
mouth they possess not; no tongue is theirs! How then do they declare? By
means of the spectacle itself. For when you see the beauty, the breadth, the
height, the position, the form, the stability thereof during so long a period;
hearing as it were a voice, and being instructed by the spectacle, you adore Him
who created a body so fair and strange! The heavens may be silent, but the sight
of them emits a voice, that is louder than a trumpet's sound; instructing us not by
the ear, but through the medium of the eyes; for the latter is a sense which is
more sure and more distinct than the former.
5. For if God had given instruction by means of books, and of letters, he
who knew letters would have learned what was written; but the illiterate man
would have gone away without receiving any benefit from this source, unless
some one else had introduced him to it; and the wealthy man would have
purchased the Bible, but the poor man would not have been able to obtain it.
Again, he who knew the language that was expressed by the letters, might have