up again commendation with your censures. And seeing that this proceeding
considered in itself cannot be matter of praise, (for it is not commendable to
keep house with a damsel that is a virgin;) let the purpose of him who does so be
your topic for effecting this; and say, "I know indeed that you do it for God's
sake, and that the desolation and unprotected state of that poor woman met your
eye, and caused you to stretch out your hand to her." And although he may not
be doing it with this intention, do thou speak so; and after this add what follows
also; again excusing yourself and saying, "These things I speak not to direct but
to remind you. You do it for God's sake; I too know that. But let us see whether
another evil be not produced thereby. And if there be none, keep her in your
house, and cling to this excellent purpose. There is no one to hinder you. But if
any mischief arise from hence exceeding the advantage, let us take care, I
beseech you, lest while we are earnest to comfort one soul, we put a stumblingblock in the way of ten thousand." And do not add immediately the punishments
due to those who give offense, but take his own testimony also, saying, You have
no need to learn these things from me: you yourself know, 'if any one offend one
of these little ones,' how great a penalty is threatened. And thus, having
sweetened your speech and smoothed down his wrath, apply the medicine of
your correction. And should he again urge her forlorn condition, do not thou
even so expose his pretence, but say to him, "Let nothing of this sort make you
afraid: you will have an ample plea, the offense given to others: since not for
indifference, but in care towards them, did you cease from this your purpose."
And let the matter of your advice be brief, for there is no need of much
teaching; but let the expressions of forbearance on the other hand be many and
close upon one another. And continually have thou recourse to the topic of love;
throwing into shade the painfulness of what you say, and giving him his full
power, and saying, "This is what I for my part advise and recommend; but about
taking the advice you are only judge: for I do not compel and force you, but
submit the whole thing to your own discretion."
If we so manage our reproof, we shall easily be able in correct those in

error: even as what we now do is surely more like the conduct of wild beasts or
irrational creatures than of men. For if any persons now perceive any one
committing errors of this kind, with the person himself they do not at all confer,
but themselves, like silly old women who have drunk too much, whisper with
another. And the saying, "Get love for nothing, but do not get hatred for
nothing," has not here any place in their opinion. But, when they have a fancy to
speak evil, they mind not being "hated for nothing," rather I should say, "being
punished;" since it is not hatred alone that is hereby produced, but also
punishment. But when there is need of correction, they allege both this, and
innumerable other pretexts. Whereas then would be the time to think of these
things, when you speak evil, when you calumniate. I mean the saying, "Be not
hated for nothing," and "I can do nothing," and "it is no care of mine." But as
things are, in the former case, you are vehemently and idly curious, and carest
not for hatred and ills innumerable; but when you should be taking thought for
the salvation of your brother, then it is your pleasure to be a sort of unofficious,
inoffensive person. And yet from evil speaking arises hatred both on God's part
and on men's; and this is no great care to you: but by giving advice privately, and
reproofs of that kind, both he and God will be made your friends. And even
should he hate you, God goes on loving you the rather on this account. Nay, in
fact, not even so will he hate you, as when his hatred came from your evil
speaking: but in that case he will avoid you as a foe and an enemy, whereas now
he will consider you more venerable than any father. And if he apparently take it
ill, inwardly and privately he will feel much obliged to you.
7. Bearing in mind these things therefore let us have a care of our own
members, and not sharpen the tongue against one another, nor speak words
"which may do hurt, " undermining the fame of our neighbor, and as in war and
battle, giving and receiving blows. For what after all is the good of fasting or
watching, when the tongue is drunken, and feasts itself at a table more unclean
than of dog's flesh; when it is grown ravening after blood, and pours out filth,
and makes the mouth a channel of a sewer, nay rather something more