gained! What honor then will he not obtain, when the Distributor of the prizes
shall come! He was among foreigners, "a stranger and a sojourner" [Hebrews
11:13], and thus is he admired: what good will he not enjoy, when he is among
his own? Now "our life is hid with Christ in God" [Colossians 3:3]; yet he who
is dead works more and is more honored than the living. When that our life shall
come, what will he not participate? What will he not attain?
On this account God made him enjoy these honors, not because he wanted
them. For if when in the body he despised popular glory, much more will he
despise it now that he is delivered from the body. Nor only on this account has
He caused him to enjoy honor, but that those who disbelieve the future may be
convinced from the present. I say that when the Resurrection shall be, Paul will
come with the King of Heaven, and will enjoy infinite blessings. But the
unbeliever will not be convinced. Let him believe then from the present. The
tent-maker is more illustrious, more honored than the king. No emperor of Rome
ever enjoyed so great honor. The emperor is cast out, and lies, no one knows
where. The tent-maker occupies the midst of the city, as if he were a king, and
living. From these things believe, even with respect to the future. If he enjoys so
great honor here, where he was persecuted and banished, what will he not be
when he shall come hereafter? If when he was a tent-maker, he was so
illustrious, what will he be when he shall come rivaling the beams of the sun? If
in so much meanness he overcame such magnificence, to whom, at his coming,
will he not be superior? Can we avoid the conclusion? Who is not moved by the
fact, that a tent-maker became more honorable than the most honored of kings?
If here things happen so beyond the course of nature, much more will it be so
hereafter. If you will not believe the future, O man, believe the present. If you
will not believe invisible things, believe things that are seen: or rather believe
things which are seen, for so you will believe things which are invisible. But if
you will not, we may fitly say with the Apostle, "We are pure from your blood"
[Acts 20:26]: for we have testified to you of all things, and have left out nothing
that we should have said. Blame yourselves therefore, and to yourselves will you

impute the punishment of Hell. But let us, my beloved children, be imitators of
Paul, not in his faith only, but in his life, that we may attain to heavenly glory,
and trample upon that glory that is here. Let not any things present attract us. Let
us despise visible things, that we may obtain heavenly things, or rather may
through these obtain the others, but let it be our aim preeminently to obtain
those, of which God grant that we may be all accounted worthy, through the
grace and lovingkindness, etc.