On the contrary, The power in the semen is to the animal seminally
generated, as the power in the elements of the world is to animals
produced from these elements---for instance by putrefaction. But in
the latter animals the soul is produced by the elemental power,
according to Gn. 1:20: "Let the waters bring forth the creeping
creatures having life." Therefore also the souls of animals seminally
generated are produced by the seminal power.
I answer that, Some have held that the sensitive souls of animals are
created by God (Question 65, Article 4). This opinion would hold if
the sensitive soul were subsistent, having being and operation of
itself. For thus, as having being and operation of itself, to be made
would needs be proper to it. And since a simple and subsistent thing
cannot be made except by creation, it would follow that the sensitive
soul would arrive at existence by creation.
But this principle is false---namely, that being and operation are
proper to the sensitive soul, as has been made clear above
(Question 75, Article 3): for it would not cease to exist when the body
perishes. Since, therefore, it is not a subsistent form, its relation to
existence is that of the corporeal forms, to which existence does not
belong as proper to them, but which are said to exist forasmuch as
the subsistent composites exist through them.
Wherefore to be made is proper to composites. And since the
generator is like the generated, it follows of necessity that both the
sensitive soul, and all other like forms are naturally brought into
existence by certain corporeal agents that reduce the matter from
potentiality to act, through some corporeal power of which they are
possessed.
Now the more powerful an agent, the greater scope its action has:
for instance, the hotter a body, the greater the distance to which its
heat carries. Therefore bodies not endowed with life, which are the
lowest in the order of nature, generate their like, not through some
medium, but by themselves; thus fire by itself generates fire. But
living bodies, as being more powerful, act so as to generate their
like, both without and with a medium. Without a medium---in the
work of nutrition, in which flesh generates flesh: with a medium---in
the act of generation, because the semen of the animal or plant
derives a certain active force from the soul of the generator, just as
the instrument derives a certain motive power from the principal
agent. And as it matters not whether we say that something is moved

by the instrument or by the principal agent, so neither does it matter
whether we say that the soul of the generated is caused by the soul
of the generator, or by some seminal power derived therefrom.
Reply to Objection 1: The sensitive soul is not a perfect selfsubsistent substance. We have said enough (Question 25, Article 3)
on this point, nor need we repeat it here.
Reply to Objection 2: The generating power begets not only by its
own virtue but by that of the whole soul, of which it is a power.
Therefore the generating power of a plant generates a plant, and that
of an animal begets an animal. For the more perfect the soul is, to so
much a more perfect effect is its generating power ordained.
Reply to Objection 3: This active force which is in the semen, and
which is derived from the soul of the generator, is, as it were, a
certain movement of this soul itself: nor is it the soul or a part of the
soul, save virtually; thus the form of a bed is not in the saw or the
axe, but a certain movement towards that form. Consequently there
is no need for this active force to have an actual organ; but it is
based on the (vital) spirit in the semen which is frothy, as is attested
by its whiteness. In which spirit, moreover, there is a certain heat
derived from the power of the heavenly bodies, by virtue of which
the inferior bodies also act towards the production of the species as
stated above (Question 115, Article 3, ad 2). And since in this (vital)
spirit the power of the soul is concurrent with the power of a
heavenly body, it has been said that "man and the sun generate
man." Moreover, elemental heat is employed instrumentally by the
soul's power, as also by the nutritive power, as stated (De Anima ii,
4).
Reply to Objection 4: In perfect animals, generated by coition, the
active force is in the semen of the male, as the Philosopher says (De
Gener. Animal. ii, 3); but the foetal matter is provided by the female.
In this matter, the vegetative soul exists from the very beginning, not
as to the second act, but as to the first act, as the sensitive soul is in
one who sleeps. But as soon as it begins to attract nourishment,
then it already operates in act. This matter therefore is transmuted
by the power which is in the semen of the male, until it is actually
informed by the sensitive soul; not as though the force itself which
was in the semen becomes the sensitive soul; for thus, indeed, the
generator and generated would be identical; moreover, this would be
more like nourishment and growth than generation, as the