SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.156, C.2.

man is provoked to inflict a too severe punishment, while it belongs
directly to clemency to mitigate punishment, and this might be
prevented by excessive anger.
Consequently meekness, in so far as it restrains the onslaught of
anger, concurs with clemency towards the same effect; yet they
differ from one another, inasmuch as clemency moderates external
punishment, while meekness properly mitigates the passion of
anger.
Reply to Objection 1: Meekness regards properly the desire itself of
vengeance; whereas clemency regards the punishment itself which
is applied externally for the purpose of vengeance.
Reply to Objection 2: Man's affections incline to the moderation of
things that are unpleasant to him in themselves. Now it results from
one man loving another that he takes no pleasure in the latter's
punishment in itself, but only as directed to something else, for
instance justice, or the correction of the person punished. Hence
love makes one quick to mitigate punishment ---and this pertains to
clemency---while hatred is an obstacle to such mitigation. For this
reason Tully says that "the mind provoked to hatred" that is to
punish too severely, "is restrained by clemency," from inflicting too
severe a punishment, so that clemency directly moderates not
hatred but punishment.
Reply to Objection 3: The vice of anger, which denotes excess in the
passion of anger, is properly opposed to meekness, which is directly
concerned with the passion of anger; while cruelty denotes excess
in punishing. Wherefore Seneca says (De Clementia ii, 4) that "those
are called cruel who have reason for punishing, but lack moderation
in punishing." Those who delight in a man's punishment for its own
sake may be called savage or brutal, as though lacking the human
feeling that leads one man to love another.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.156, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether both clemency and meekness are

virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that neither clemency nor meekness is a
virtue. For no virtue is opposed to another virtue. Yet both of these
are apparently opposed to severity, which is a virtue. Therefore
neither clemency nor meekness is a virtue.
Objection 2: Further, "Virtue is destroyed by excess and
defect" [Ethic. ii, 2]. But both clemency and meekness consist in a
certain decrease; for clemency decreases punishment, and
meekness decreases anger. Therefore neither clemency nor
meekness is a virtue.
Objection 3: Further, meekness or mildness is included (Mt. 5:4)
among the beatitudes, and (Gal. 5:23) among the fruits. Now the
virtues differ from the beatitudes and fruits. Therefore they are not
comprised under virtue.
On the contrary, Seneca says (De Clementia ii, 5): "Every good man
is conspicuous for his clemency and meekness." Now it is virtue
properly that belongs to a good man, since "virtue it is that makes its
possessor good, and renders his works good also" (Ethic. ii, 6).
Therefore clemency and meekness are virtues.
I answer that, The nature of moral virtue consists in the subjection of
appetite to reason, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. i, 13). Now
this is verified both in clemency and in meekness. For clemency, in
mitigating punishment, "is guided by reason," according to Seneca
(De Clementia ii, 5), and meekness, likewise, moderates anger
according to right reason, as stated in Ethic. iv, 5. Wherefore it is
manifest that both clemency and meekness are virtues.
Reply to Objection 1: Meekness is not directly opposed to severity;
for meekness is about anger. On the other hand, severity regards the
external infliction of punishment, so that accordingly it would seem
rather to be opposed to clemency, which also regards external
punishing, as stated above (Article 1). Yet they are not really
opposed to one another, since they are both according to right
reason. For severity is inflexible in the infliction of punishment when
right reason requires it; while clemency mitigates punishment also