all the creation; the Son of God being made the Son of man, that through Him we may receive
the adoption,—humanity sustaining, and receiving, and embracing the Son of God. Wherefore
Mark also says: "The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; as it is written in
the prophets." Knowing one and the same Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was announced by the
prophets, who from the fruit of David's body was Emmanuel, "the messenger of great counsel of
the Father;" through whom God caused the day-spring and the Just One to arise to the house of
David, and raised up for him an horn of salvation, "and established a testimony in Jacob;" as
David says when discoursing on the causes of His birth: "And He appointed a law in Israel, that
another generation might know [Him,] the children which should he born from these, and they
arising shall themselves declare to their children, so that they might set their hope in God, and seek
after His commandments." And again, the angel said, when bringing good tidings to Mary: "He
shall he great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord shall give unto Him the
throne of His father David;" acknowledging that He who is the Son of the Highest, the same is
Himself also the Son of David. And David, knowing by the Spirit the dispensation of the advent
of this Person, by which He is supreme over all the living and dead, confessed Him as Lord, sitting
on the right hand of the Most High Father.
4. But Simeon also —he who had received an intimation from the Holy Ghost that he should
not see death, until first he had beheld Christ Jesus— taking Him, the first-begotten of the Virgin,
into his hands, blessed God, and said, "Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according
to Thy word: because mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast prepared before the
face of all people; a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel;" confessing
thus, that the infant whom he was holding in his hands, Jesus, born of Mary, was Christ Himself,
the Son of God, the light of all, the glory of Israel itself, and the peace and refreshing of those who
had fallen asleep. For He was already despoiling men, by removing their ignorance, conferring
upon them His own knowledge, and scattering abroad those who recognised Him, as Esaias says:
"Call His name, Quickly spoil, Rapidly divide." Now these are the works of Christ. He therefore
was Himself Christ, whom Simeon carrying [in his arms] blessed the Most High; on beholding

"Homine."

Ps. lxxviii. 5.

Isa. viii. 3.

whom the shepherds glorified God; whom John, while yet in his mother's womb, and He (Christ)
in that of Mary, recognising as the Lord, saluted with leaping; whom the Magi, when they had seen,
adored, and offered their gifts [to Him], as I have already stated, and prostrated themselves to the
eternal King, departed by another way, not now returning by the way of the Assyrians. "For before
the child shall have knowledge to cry, Father or mother, He shall receive the power of Damascus,
and the spoils of Samaria, against the king of the Assyrians;" declaring, in a mysterious manner
indeed, but emphatically, that the Lord did fight with a hidden hand against Amalek. For this
cause, too, He suddenly removed those children belonging to the house of David, whose happy lot
it was to have been born at that time, that He might send them on before into His kingdom; He,
since He was Himself an infant, so arranging it that human infants should be martyrs, slain, according
to the Scriptures, for the sake of Christ, who was born in Bethlehem of Judah, in the city of David.
5. Therefore did the Lord also say to His disciples after the resurrection, "O thoughtless ones,
and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken! Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into His glory?" And again does He say to them: "These are the words
which I spoke unto you while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which were written
in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning Me. Then opened He their
understanding, that they should understand the Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is written,
and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead, and that repentance for the
remission of sins be preached in His name among all nations." Now this is He who was born of
Mary; for He says: "The Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected, and crucified, and
on the third day rise again." The Gospel, therefore, knew no other son of man but Him who was
of Mary, who also suffered; and no Christ who flew away from Jesus before the passion; but Him
who was born it knew as Jesus Christ the Son of God, and that this same suffered and rose again,
as John, the disciple of the Lord, verifies, saying: "But these are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have eternal life in His
name,"—foreseeing these blasphemous systems which divide the Lord, as far as lies in their
power, saying that He was formed of two different substances. For this reason also he has thus
testified to us in his Epistle: "Little children, it is the last time; and as ye have heard that Antichrist
doth come, now have many antichrists appeared; whereby we know that it is the last time. They
went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued