regard with suspicion. Thus among other things they tremble at poverty: or
rather not at poverty only, but even at any trifling loss. Yea, and if they should
lose some little matter, those who are in want of necessary food do not so grieve
and bewail themselves as they. At least many of the rich have come even to the
halter, not enduring such ill fortune: and to be insulted also, and to be
despitefully used, seems to them so intolerable, that even because of this again
many have actually torn themselves from this present life. For to everything
wealth had made them soft, except to the waiting on it. Thus, when it commands
them to do service unto itself, they venture on murders, and stripes, and
revilings, and all shame. A thing which comes of the utmost wretchedness; to be
of all men most effeminate, where one ought to practise self-command, but
where more caution was required, in these cases again to become more
shameless and obstinate. Since in fact the same kind of thing befalls them, as one
would have to endure who had spent all his goods on unfit objects. For such an
one, when the time of necessary expenditure comes on, having nothing to supply
it, suffers incurable evils, forasmuch as all that he had has been ill spent
beforehand.
And as they that are on the stage, skilled in those wicked arts, do in them go
through many things strange and dangerous, but in other necessary and useful
things none so ridiculous as they; even so is it with these men likewise. For so
such as walk upon a stretched rope, making a display of so much courage,
should some great emergency demand daring or courage, they are not able,
neither do they endure even to think of such a thing. Just so they likewise that
are rich, daring all for money, for self-restraint's sake endure not to submit to
anything, be it small or great. And as the former practise both a hazardous and
fruitless business; even so do these undergo many dangers and downfalls, but
arrive at no profitable end. Yea, they undergo a twofold darkness, both having
their eyes put out by the perversion of their mind, and being by the deceitfulness
of their cares involved in a great mist. Wherefore neither can they easily so
much as see through it. For he that is in darkness, is freed from the darkness by

the mere appearance of the sun; but he that has his eyes mutilated not even when
the sun shines; which is the very case of these men: not even now that the Sun of
Righteousness has shone out, and is admonishing, do they hear, their wealth
having closed their eyes. And so they have a twofold darkness to undergo, part
from themselves, part from disregard to their teacher.
5. Let us then give heed unto Him exactly, that though late we may at length
recover our sight. And how may one recover sight? If you learn how you were
blinded. How then were you blinded? By your wicked desire. For the love of
money, like an evil humor which has collected upon a clear eyeball, has caused
the cloud to become thick.
But even this cloud may be easily scattered and broken, if we will receive
the beam of the doctrine of Christ; if we will hear Him admonishing us, and
saying, "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth."
"But," says one, "what avails the hearing to me, as long as I am possessed
by the desire?" Now in the first place, there will be power in the continual
hearing to destroy even the desire. Next, if it continue to possess you, consider
that this thing is not really so much as a desire. For what sort of desire is this, to
be in grievous bondage, and to be subject to a tyranny, and to be bound on all
sides, and to dwell in darkness, and to be full of turmoil, and to endure toils
without profit, and to keep your wealth for others, and often for your very
enemies? With what sort of desire do these things agree? Or rather of what flight
and aversion are they not worthy? What sort of desire, to lay up treasure in the
midst of thieves? Nay, if you dost at all desire wealth, remove it where it may
remain safe and unmolested. Since what you are now doing is the part of one
desiring, not riches, surely, but bondage, and affront, and loss, and continual
vexation. Yet thou, were any one among men on earth to show you a place
beyond molestation, though he lead you out into the very desert, promising
security in the keeping of your wealth—you are not slow nor backward; you
have confidence in him, and puttest out your goods there; but when it is God
instead of men who makes you this promise, and when He sets before you not