is the chain: of this, says he, the Lord will count me worthy, and I am in no wise
inquisitive about those things. Enough it is for me for every recompense, to
suffer evil for Christ's sake. Let Him but grant me to say, that "I fill up that
which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ:" [Colossians 1:24] and I ask nothing
further.
Peter also was counted worthy of this chain; for he, we read, was bound,
and delivered to soldiers, and was sleeping. [Acts 12:6] Yet he rejoiced and was
not diverted from his right mind and he fell into deep sleep which could not have
been, had he been in any great anxiety. However, he was sleeping, being
between two soldiers: and an Angel came unto him, and smote him on the side,
and raised him up. Now then, were any one to say to me, Which would you?
Would you be the Angel that struck Peter, or Peter that was delivered? I would
rather choose to be Peter, for whose sake even the Angel came, yea, I would that
I might enjoy those chains. And how is it, say ye, that, as being released from
great evils, he prays? Marvel not: he prays, because he is afraid lest he should
die; and of dying he is afraid, because he would fain have his life to be still a
subject for further sufferings. For hearken to what the blessed Paul himself also
says. [Philippians 1:23-24] "To depart, and to be with Christ, is very far better;"
"Yet to abide in the flesh is more needful for your sake." This he calls even a
favor where he writes, and says, "To you it has been granted, (as a favor [ἕ]
[χαρίσθη]) in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in Him, but also to suffer in
His behalf." [Philippians 1:29] So that this latter is greater than the other: for He
gave it of His free grace; verily, a favor it is, exceeding great, yea greater than
any one of those, greater than to make the sun and the moon stand still, than to
move the world! greater this than to have power over devils, or to cast out devils.
The devils grieve not so much at being cast out by the faith which we exert, as
when they behold us suffering any evil, and imprisoned for Christ's sake. For
this increases our boldness. Not for this is it a noble thing to be in bonds for
Christ's sake that it procures for us a kingdom; it is that it is done for Christ's
sake. Not for this do I bless those bonds, for that they conduct on to Heaven; it is

because they are worn for the sake of the Lord of Heaven. How great a boast to
know that he was bound for Christ's sake! How great a happiness, how high an
honor, how illustrious a distinction! Fain would I ever be dwelling on these
subjects. Fain would I cling to this chain. Fain would I, though in reality I have
not the power, yet still in idea, bind this chain round my soul by a temper like
his.
"The foundations of the prison-house," we read, "were shaken" where Paul
was bound, "and every one's bands were loosed." [Acts 16:26] Beholdest thou
then in bonds a nature that can dissolve bonds themselves? For as the Lord's
death put death itself to death, so also did Paul's bonds loose the men in bonds,
shake the house of bondage, open the doors. Yet is not this the natural effect of
bonds, but the very reverse; it is to keep him that is bound in safety, not to open
for him the prison walls. No, of bonds then in general this is not the nature, but
of those bonds which are for Christ's sake, it is. "The jailor fell down before Paul
and Silas." [Acts 16:29] And yet neither is this again the effect of chains in
general, to lay the binders at the feet of the bound: no, but, on the contrary, to put
these last under the hands of the former. Whereas here, the man who was free
was under the feet of the man who had been bound. The binder was beseeching
him whom he had bound to release him from his fear. Tell me, was it not thou
that bound him? Did you not cast him into the inner prison? Did you not make
his feet fast in the stocks? Why do you tremble? Why are you troubled? Why do
you weep? Why have you drawn your sword? Never bound I, says he, anything
like this! I knew not that the prisoners of Christ had power so mighty as this.
What do you say? They received power to open Heaven, and should they not be
able to open a prison? They loosed them that were bound by evil spirits, and was
a piece of iron likely to conquer them? You know not the men. And therefore
also were thou pardoned. That prisoner is Paul, whom all the Angels reverence.
He is Paul, whose very handkerchiefs and napkins cast out devils, and chase
diseases to flight. And sure the bond which is of the devil is adamantine, and far
more indissoluble than iron; for this indeed binds the soul, the other only the