one to hate what he does not know, as to love what he does not know, we
will not withstand what is true; but it must be understood that it is not
the same thing to say he loves to know things unknown, as to say he loves
things unknown. For it is possible that a man may love to know things
unknown; but it is not possible that he should love things unknown. For
the word to know is not placed there without meaning; since he who loves
to know things unknown, does not love the unknown things themselves,
but the knowing of them. And unless he knew what knowing means, no
one could say confidently, either that he knew or that he did not know.
For not only he who says I know, and says so truly, must needs know
what knowing is; but he also who says, I do not know, and says so
confidently and truly, and knows that he says so truly, certainly knows
what knowing is; for he both distinguishes him who does not know from
him who knows, when he looks into himself, and says truly I do not
know; and whereas he knows that he says this truly, whence should he
know it, if he did not know what knowing is?

### CHAP. 2.—NO ONE AT ALL LOVES THINGS UNKNOWN.

4. No studious person, then, no inquisitive person, loves things he does
not know, even while he is urgent with the most vehement desire to know
what he does not know. For he either knows already generically what he
loves, and longs to know it also in some individual or individuals, which
perhaps are praised, but not yet known to him; and he pictures in his
mind an imaginary form by which he may be stirred to love. And whence
does he picture this, except from those things which he has already
known? And yet perhaps he will not love it, if he find that form which was
praised to be unlike that other form which was figured and in thought
most fully known to his mind. And if he has loved it, he will begin to love
it from that time when he learned it; since a little before, that form which
was loved was other than that which the mind that formed it had been
wont to exhibit to itself. But if he shall find it similar to that form which
report had proclaimed, and to be such that he could truly say I was
already loving thee; yet certainly not even then did he love a form he did
not know, since he had known it in that likeness. Or else we see
somewhat in the species of the eternal reason, and therein love it; and
when this is manifested in some image of a temporal thing, and we

believe the praises of those who have made trial of it, and so love it, then
we do not love anything unknown, according to that which we have
already sufficiently discussed above. Or else, again, we love something
known, and on account of it seek something unknown; and so it is by no
means the love of the thing unknown that possesses us, but the love of the
thing known, to which we know the unknown thing belongs, so that we
know that too which we seek still as unknown; as a little before I said of
an unknown word. Or else, again, every one loves the very knowing itself,
as no one can fail to know who desires to know anything. For these
reasons they seem to love things unknown who wish to know anything
which they do not know, and who, on account of their vehement desire of
inquiry, cannot be said to be without love. But how different the case
really is, and that nothing at all can be loved which is not known, I think I
must have persuaded every one who carefully looks upon truth. But since
the examples which we have given belong to those who desire to know
something which they themselves are not, we must take thought lest
perchance some new notion appear, when the mind desires to know itself.