the contrary qualities from which the mixture results. Therefore the
form of a mixed body does not return in identity.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 19:26): "In my flesh I shall see God
my Saviour," where he is speaking of the vision after the
resurrection, as appears from the preceding words: "In the last day I
shall rise out of the earth." Therefore the selfsame body will rise
again.
Further, the Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 27): "Resurrection is
the second rising of that which has fallen." But the body which we
have now fell by death. Therefore it will rise again the same
identically.
I answer that, on this point the philosophers erred and certain
modern heretics err. For some of the philosophers allowed that
souls separated from bodies are reunited to bodies, yet they erred in
this in two ways. First, as to the mode of reunion, for some held the
separated soul to be naturally reunited to a body by the way of
generation. Secondly, as to the body to which it was reunited, for
they held that this second union was not with the selfsame body that
was laid aside in death, but with another, sometimes of the same,
sometimes of a different species. Of a different species when the
soul while existing in the body had led a life contrary to the ordering
of reason: wherefore it passed after death from the body of a man
into the body of some other animal to whose manner of living it had
conformed in this life, for instance into the body of a dog on account
of lust, into the body of a lion on account of robbery and violence,
and so forth---and into a body of the same species when the soul has
led a good life in the body, and having after death experienced some
happiness, after some centuries began to wish to return to the body;
and thus it was reunited to a human body.
This opinion arises from two false sources. The first of these is that
they said that the soul is not united to the body essentially as form
to matter, but only accidentally, as mover to the thing moved, [FP,
Question 76, Article 1] or as a man to his clothes. Hence it was
possible for them to maintain that the soul pre-existed before being
infused into the body begotten of natural generation, as also that it is
united to various bodies. The second is that they held intellect not to
differ from sense except accidentally, so that man would be said to
surpass other animals in intelligence, because the sensitive power is
more acute in him on account of the excellence of his bodily

complexion; and hence it was possible for them to assert that man's
soul passes into the soul of a brute animal, especially when the
human soul has been habituated to brutish actions. But these two
sources are refuted by the Philosopher (De Anima ii, 1), and in
consequence of these being refuted, it is clear that the above
opinion is false.
In like manner the errors of certain heretics are refuted. Some of
them fell into the aforesaid opinions of the philosophers: while
others held that souls are reunited to heavenly bodies, or again to
bodies subtle as the wind, as Gregory relates of a certain Bishop of
Constantinople, in his exposition of Job 19:26, "In my flesh I shall
see my God," etc. Moreover these same errors of heretics may be
refuted by the fact that they are prejudicial to the truth of
resurrection as witnessed to by Holy Writ. For we cannot call it
resurrection unless the soul return to the same body, since
resurrection is a second rising, and the same thing rises that falls:
wherefore resurrection regards the body which after death falls
rather than the soul which after death lives. And consequently if it be
not the same body which the soul resumes, it will not be a
resurrection, but rather the assuming of a new body.
Reply to Objection 1: A comparison does not apply to every
particular, but to some. For in the sowing of grain, the grain sown
and the grain that is born thereof are neither identical, nor of the
same condition, since it was first sown without a husk, yet is born
with one: and the body will rise again identically the same, but of a
different condition, since it was mortal and will rise in immortality.
Reply to Objection 2: The soul rising again and the soul living in this
world differ, not in essence but in respect of glory and misery, which
is an accidental difference. Hence it follows that the body in rising
again differs, not in identity, but in condition, so that a difference of
bodies corresponds proportionally to the difference of souls.
Reply to Objection 3: That which is understood as though it were in
matter before its form remains in matter after corruption, because
when that which comes afterwards is removed that which came
before may yet remain. Now, as the Commentator observes on the
First Book of Physics and in De Substantia Orbis, in the matter of
things subject to generation and corruption, we must presuppose
undeterminate dimensions, by reason of which matter is divisible, so
as to be able to receive various forms in its various parts. Wherefore