to the poor, an advantage that is beyond all comparison. So, no matter how hard it may happen to be, holy poverty should be accepted voluntarily. But really it is not hard; rather it is the cause of great delight in him who embraces it willingly. Even Seneca 9 says that the poor man laughs with greater ease because he has no cares to upset him, a truth which daily experience shows us in the instance of the wayside beggar. If you were to observe the satisfaction in his life, you would see that he is more cheerful than the great merchants, magistrates, princes, and other persons of distinction. If this is true of people who are not poor by choice, what shall we say of those who are poor because they choose to be? For, neither possessing nor loving anything earthly which they could lose, they enjoy a peace that is imperturbable and a tranquility that is supreme. On the other hand, riches are, for those who possess them, like the sea that is tossed by the storm. Moreover, these voluntary poor, through the peace and security of their conscience, enjoy an uninterrupted cheerfulness which is like an endless banquet. They prepare themselves in a very special way by this very poverty, for heavenly consolations usually abound in the servants of God in proportion as they lack an abundance of the goods and the comforts of earth; if they know how to fill themselves with Christ, He will make up for everything and will occupy, in their hearts, the vacancy left by all else. But I must not pursue this further. Let what I have said suffice for your consolation and mine to encourage us to love holy poverty, remembering that the excellence, advantage, and joy I have mentioned belong only to that poverty which is lived and willingly embraced, not to the poverty that is accepted because it cannot be avoided. I will add only this, that those who love poverty should, as occasion offers, love her retinue which consists of poor meals, poor clothes, poor sleeping accommodations, and to be held of little account. Whoever loves poverty and is unwilling to feel want, or any of its effects, would be a very finicky poor man and would give the impression of one who loved the name rather than the reality, of one who loved in words rather than in the depth of his heart. That is all for the present, except to ask our Lord, our Master and true model of spiritual poverty, to grant us all the gift of this precious heritage, which He bestows on His brothers and coheirs to the end that the spiritual riches of His grace abound in us, and at the end, the ineffable riches of His glory. Amen.

From Rome, August 6, 1547.

1 Juan Alfonso de Polanco was born in Burgos, Spain, on December 24, 1517, and entered the Society in Rome in 1541. In 1542 he was sent to Padua for his studies, where he was ordained in1546. He was called to Rome in early 1547 to be Ignatius' secretary, and held that office throughout Ignatius' lifetime. He was also secretary for Diego Laínez and Francisco de Borja when each became general. Polanco died in Rome on December 20, 1576. 2 Ribadeneira's letter may be found in Epistolae Mixtae (MHSI ) 5:649-651. 3 Santini was a native of Lucca, Italy, who entered the Society about 1547, perhaps in Padua, but after a short time had to leave to attend to family affairs. 4 See In Vigilia Nativitatis Domini , serm. 1, #5 in Sancti Bernardi opera 4:201. 5 See Sermo 345 ( PL 39:1520). 6 Ovid, De remedio amoris , v. 749. 7 Lucan, Pharsalia, 1, 165-166. 8 The Constitutions of the Society of Jesus exhort: "All should love poverty as a mother" (Part III, c. 1, #25) and "poverty is like a bulwark of religious institutes which preserves them in their existence and discipline and defends them from many enemies" (Part X, 5). 9 See Epistulae ad Lucilium, 80, 6.