throne. Wherefore Paul cries out and says, "He raised us up with him, and made
us to sit with him, on his right hand in the heavenly places, that in the ages to
come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness towards us."
What dost thou say? the thing has already happened and has an end, and dost
thou say "in order that he might show to the ages to come?" Has he not shown?
He has already shown, but not to all men, but to me who am faithful, but the
unbelieving has not yet seen the wonder. But then, in that day the whole nature
of man will come forward, and will wonder at that which has been done, but
especially will it be more manifest to us. For we believe even now; but hearing
and sight do not put a wonder before us in the same way, but just as in the case
of kings when we hear of the purple robe, and the diadem, and the golden
raiment, and the royal throne, we wonder indeed, but experience this in greater
degree when the curtains are drawn aside and we see him seated on the lofty
judgment seat. So also in the case of the Only-Begotten, when we see the
curtains of heaven drawn aside, and the King of angels descending thence, and
with his body-guard of the heavenly hosts, then we perceive the wonder to be
greater from our sight of it. For consider with me what it is to see our nature
borne upon the Cherubim, and the whole angelic force surrounding it.
3. But look, with me, too, at the wisdom of Paul, how many expressions he
seeks for, so as to present to us the lovingkindness of God. For he did not speak
merely the word grace, nor riches, but what did he say? "The exceeding riches of
his grace in kindness." But notwithstanding even so, he is below the mark; and
even as the slippery bodies when grasped by countless hands, escape our hold,
and slip through easily; so also are we unable to get hold of the lovingkindness
of God in whatever expressions we may try to grasp it, but the exceeding
magnitude of it baffles the feebleness of our utterances. And Paul therefore
experiencing this, and seeing the force of words defeated by its magnitude,
desists after saying one word: and what is this? "Thanks be to God for his
unspeakable gift." For neither speech, nor any mind is able to set forth the tender
care of God. On this account he then says that it is past finding out, and

elsewhere "The peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your
hearts."
But, as I was saying, these two ways of explanation are found in the
meantime: one indeed that God has not wrested the gift that we have lost; and
next, that the good things which have been given to us are even greater than
those which we have lost. And I wish also to mention a third too. What then is
the third? That even if he had not given the things after these, which were greater
than those we had lost, but had only taken away what had been given to us, as
we furnished the reason why, (for let this be added); even this is enough of itself
to show his tender care towards us. For not only to give, but also to take away
what was given, is a mark of the greatest lovingkindness, and, if you will, let us
lay bare the matter, in the case of Paradise. He gave Paradise. This of his own
tender care. We were seen to be unworthy of the gift. This of our own
senselessness. He took away the gift from those who became unworthy of it.
This came of his own goodness. And what kind of goodness is it, says one, to
take away the gift? Wait, and you shall fully hear. For think, what Cain would
have been, dwelling in Paradise after his bloodguiltiness. For if, when he was
expelled from that abode, if when condemned to toil and labour, and beholding
the threat of death hanging over his head, if seeing the calamity of his father
before his eyes, and holding the traces of the wrath of God still in his hands, and
encompassed with so great horrors, he lashed out into such great wickedness, as
to ignore nature, and to forget one born from the same birth pangs, and to slay
him who had done him no wrong, to lay hold on his brother's person, and to dye
his right hand with blood, and when God wanted him to be still, to refuse
submission and to affront his maker, to dishonour his parents; if this man had
continued to dwell in Paradise—look, into how great evil he would have rushed.
For if when so many restraints were laid upon him, he leapt with fatal leaps; and
if these walls were set at nought, whither would he not have precipitated
himself?
Wouldest thou learn too from the mother of this man, what a good result the