Egyptians, then He took the tribe of Levi in their stead. Afterwards, because the
number of the tribe was less than of the firstborn among the Jews, for them that
are wanting to make up the number, He commandeda shekel to be contributed:
and moreover a custom came thereby in force, that the firstborn should pay this
tribute.
Because then Christ was a firstborn child, and Peter seemed to be first of
the disciples, to him they come: their way being, as I suppose, to exact it in
every city; wherefore also in His native place they approached Him; for
Capernaum was accounted His native place.
And Him indeed they dared not approach, but Peter; nor him either with
much violence, but rather gently. For not as blaming, but as inquiring, they said,
'Does not your Master pay the didrachma?' For the right opinion of Him they had
not as yet, but as concerning a man, so did they feel; yet they rendered Him
some reverence and honor, because of the signs that went before.
2. What then says Peter? 'He says, Yea:' and to these indeed he said, that He
pays, but to Him he said it not, blushing perhaps to speak to Him of these things.
Wherefore that gentle one, well knowing as He did all things, prevented
him,'saying, What do you think, Simon? Of whom do the kings of the earth take
custom or tribute? Of their own sons, or of strangers;' and when he said 'of
strangers,' He replied, 'Then are the sons free.'
For lest Peter should suppose Him to say so, being told it by the others, He
prevents him, partly indicating what has been said, partly giving him leave to
speak freely, backward as he was to speak first of these things.
And what He says is like this, 'I am indeed free from paying tribute. For if
the kings of the earth take it not of their sons, but of their subjects; much more
ought I to be freed from this demand, I who am Son, not of an earthly king, but
of the King of Heaven, and myself a King.' Do you see how He has
distinguished the sons from them that are not sons? And if He were not a Son, to
no purpose has He brought in the example also of the kings. 'Yea,' one may say,
'He is a Son, but not truly begotten.' Then is He not a Son; and if not a Son, nor

truly begotten, neither does He belong to God, but to some other. But if He
belong to another, then neither has the comparison its proper force. For He is
discoursing not of the sons generally, but of the genuine sons, men's very own;
of them that share the kingdom with their parents.
Wherefore also in contradistinction He has mentioned the 'strangers;'
meaning by 'strangers,' such as are not born of them, but by 'their own,' those
whom they have begotten of themselves.
And I would have you mark this also; how the high doctrine, revealed to
Peter, He does hereby again confirm. And neither at this did He stop, but by His
very condescension declares this self-same truth; an instance of exceeding
wisdom.
For after thus speaking, He says, "But lest we should offend them, go thou
and cast an hook into the sea, and take up the fish that first comes up, and you
shall find therein a piece of money; that take, and give unto them for me and
you."
See how He neither declines the tribute, nor simply commands to pay it, but
having first proved Himself not liable to it, then He gives it: the one to save the
people, the other, those around Him, from offense. For He gives it not at all as a
debt, but as doing the best for their weakness. Elsewhere, however, He despises
the offense, when He was discoursing of meats, [Matthew 15:11] teaching us to
know at what seasons we ought to consider them that are offended, and at what
to disregard them.
And indeed by the very mode of giving He discloses Himself again. For
wherefore does He not command him to give of what they have laid up? That, as
I have said, herein also He might signify Himself to be God of all, and the sea
also to be under His rule. For He had indeed signified this even already, by His
rebuke, and by His commanding this same Peter to walk on the waves; but He
now again signifies the self-same thing, though in another way, yet so as to cause
herein great amazement. For neither was it a small thing, to foretell that the first,
who out of those depths should come in his way, would be the fish that would