in the sensitive part of the soul only, but rather in the body and soul
united: since the memorative power is the act of some organ. But the
intellect in itself is retentive of species, without the association of
any corporeal organ. Wherefore the Philosopher says (De Anima iii,
4) that "the soul is the seat of the species, not the whole soul, but the
intellect."
Reply to Objection 2: The condition of past may be referred to two
things---namely, to the object which is known, and to the act of
knowledge. These two are found together in the sensitive part, which
apprehends something from the fact of its being immuted by a
present sensible: wherefore at the same time an animal remembers
to have sensed before in the past, and to have sensed some past
sensible thing. But as concerns the intellectual part, the past is
accidental, and is not in itself a part of the object of the intellect. For
the intellect understands man, as man: and to man, as man, it is
accidental that he exist in the present, past, or future. But on the part
of the act, the condition of past, even as such, may be understood to
be in the intellect, as well as in the senses. Because our soul's act of
understanding is an individual act, existing in this or that time,
inasmuch as a man is said to understand now, or yesterday, or
tomorrow. And this is not incompatible with the intellectual nature:
for such an act of understanding, though something individual, is yet
an immaterial act, as we have said above of the intellect (Question
76, Article 1); and therefore, as the intellect understands itself,
though it be itself an individual intellect, so also it understands its
act of understanding, which is an individual act, in the past, present,
or future. In this way, then, the notion of memory, in as far as it
regards past events, is preserved in the intellect, forasmuch as it
understands that it previously understood: but not in the sense that
it understands the past as something "here" and "now."
Reply to Objection 3: The intelligible species is sometimes in the
intellect only in potentiality, and then the intellect is said to be in
potentiality. Sometimes the intelligible species is in the intellect as
regards the ultimate completion of the act, and then it understands
in act. And sometimes the intelligible species is in a middle state,
between potentiality and act: and then we have habitual knowledge.
In this way the intellect retains the species, even when it does not
understand in act.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the intellectual memory is a power

distinct from the intellect?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intellectual memory is distinct
from the intellect. For Augustine (De Trin. x, 11) assigns to the soul
memory, understanding, and will. But it is clear that the memory is a
distinct power from the will. Therefore it is also distinct from the
intellect.
Objection 2: Further, the reason of distinction among the powers in
the sensitive part is the same as in the intellectual part. But memory
in the sensitive part is distinct from sense, as we have said
(Question 78, Article 4). Therefore memory in the intellectual part is
distinct from the intellect.
Objection 3: Further, according to Augustine (De Trin. x, 11; xi, 7),
memory, understanding, and will are equal to one another, and one
flows from the other. But this could not be if memory and intellect
were the same power. Therefore they are not the same power.
On the contrary, From its nature the memory is the treasury or
storehouse of species. But the Philosopher (De Anima iii) attributes
this to the intellect, as we have said (Article 6, ad 1). Therefore the
memory is not another power from the intellect.
I answer that, As has been said above (Question 77, Article 3), the
powers of the soul are distinguished by the different formal aspects
of their objects: since each power is defined in reference to that
thing to which it is directed and which is its object. It has also been
said above (Question 59, Article 4) that if any power by its nature be
directed to an object according to the common ratio of the object,
that power will not be differentiated according to the individual
differences of that object: just as the power of sight, which regards
its object under the common ratio of color, is not differentiated by
differences of black and white. Now, the intellect regards its object
under the common ratio of being: since the passive intellect is that
"in which all are in potentiality." Wherefore the passive intellect is
not differentiated by any difference of being. Nevertheless there is a
distinction between the power of the active intellect and of the
passive intellect: because as regards the same object, the active
power which makes the object to be in act must be distinct from the