THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether anything can be generated from the

sacramental species?
Objection 1: It seems that nothing can be generated from the
sacramental species: because, whatever is generated, is generated
out of some matter: for nothing is generated out of nothing, although
by creation something is made out of nothing. But there is no matter
underlying the sacramental species except that of Christ's body, and
that body is incorruptible. Therefore it seems that nothing can be
generated from the sacramental species.
Objection 2: Further, things which are not of the same genus cannot
spring from one another: thus a line is not made of whiteness. But
accident and substance differ generically. Therefore, since the
sacramental species are accidents, it seems that no substance can
be generated from them.
Objection 3: Further, if any corporeal substance be generated from
them, such substance will not be without accident. Therefore, if any
corporeal substance be generated from the sacramental species,
then substance and accident would be generated from accident,
namely, two things from one, which is impossible. Consequently, it
is impossible for any corporeal substance to be generated out of the
sacramental species.
On the contrary, The senses are witness that something is generated
out of the sacramental species, either ashes, if they be burned,
worms if they putrefy, or dust if they be crushed.
I answer that, Since "the corruption of one thing is the generation of
another" (De Gener. i), something must be generated necessarily
from the sacramental species if they be corrupted, as stated above
(Article 4); for they are not corrupted in such a way that they
disappear altogether, as if reduced to nothing; on the contrary,
something sensible manifestly succeeds to them.
Nevertheless, it is difficult to see how anything can be generated
from them. For it is quite evident that nothing is generated out of the
body and blood of Christ which are truly there, because these are
incorruptible. But if the substance, or even the matter, of the bread
and wine were to remain in this sacrament, then, as some have

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.6.

maintained, it would be easy to account for this sensible object
which succeeds to them. But that supposition is false, as was stated
above (Question 75, Articles 2,4,8).
Hence it is that others have said that the things generated have not
sprung from the sacramental species, but from the surrounding
atmosphere. But this can be shown in many ways to be impossible.
In the first place, because when a thing is generated from another,
the latter at first appears changed and corrupted; whereas no
alteration or corruption appeared previously in the adjacent
atmosphere; hence the worms or ashes are not generated therefrom.
Secondly, because the nature of the atmosphere is not such as to
permit of such things being generated by such alterations. Thirdly,
because it is possible for many consecrated hosts to be burned or
putrefied; nor would it be possible for an earthen body, large enough
to be generated from the atmosphere, unless a great and, in fact,
exceedingly sensible condensation of the atmosphere took place.
Fourthly, because the same thing can happen to the solid bodies
surrounding them, such as iron or stone, which remain entire after
the generation of the aforesaid things. Hence this opinion cannot
stand, because it is opposed to what is manifest to our senses.
And therefore others have said that the substance of the bread and
wine returns during the corruption of the species, and so from the
returning substance of the bread and wine, ashes or worms or
something of the kind are generated. But this explanation seems an
impossible one. First of all, because if the substance of the bread
and wine be converted into the body and blood of Christ, as was
shown above (Question 75, Articles 2,4), the substance of the bread
and wine cannot return, except the body and blood of Christ be
again changed back into the substance of bread and wine, which is
impossible: thus if air be turned into fire, the air cannot return
without the fire being again changed into air. But if the substance of
bread or wine be annihilated, it cannot return again, because what
lapses into nothing does not return numerically the same. Unless
perchance it be said that the said substance returns, because God
creates anew another new substance to replace the first. Secondly,
this seems to be impossible, because no time can be assigned when
the substance of the bread returns. For, from what was said above
(Article 4; Question 76, Article 6, ad 3), it is evident that while the
species of the bread and wine remain, there remain also the body
and blood of Christ, which are not present together with the
substance of the bread and wine in this sacrament, according to