delicately." It is not of your own, but of other men's. Other men's, I say, because
such is your own choice: for God's will is that those things should be yours,
which have been entrusted unto you on behalf of your brethren. Now the things
which are not your own become yours, if you spend them upon others: but if you
spend on yourself unsparingly, your own things become no longer yours. For
since you use them cruelly, and sayest, "That my own things should be altogether
spent on my own enjoyment is fair:" therefore I call them not your own. For they
are common to you and your fellow-servants; just as the sun is common, the air,
the earth, and all the rest. For as in the case of the body, each ministration
belongs both to the whole body and to each several member; but when it is
applied to one single member only, it destroys the proper function of that very
member: so also it comes to pass in the case of wealth. And that what I say may
be made plainer; the food of the body which is given in common to the
members, should it pass into one member, even to that it turns out alien in the
end. For when it cannot be digested nor afford nourishment, even to that part, I
say, it turns out alien. But if it be made common, both that part and all the rest
have it as their own.
So also in regard of wealth. If you enjoy it alone, you too have lost it: for
you will not reap its reward. But if you possess it jointly with the rest, then will
it be more your own, and then will you reap the benefit of it. Do you see not that
the hands minister, and the mouth softens, and the stomach receives? Does the
stomach say, Since I have received, I ought to keep it all? Then do not thou I
pray, in regard to riches, use this language. For it belongs to the receiver to
impart. As then it is a vice in the stomach to retain the food and not to distribute
it, (for it is injurious to the whole body,) so it is a vice in those that are rich to
keep to themselves what they have. For this destroys both themselves and others.
Again, the eye receives all the light: but it does not itself alone retain it, but
enlightens the entire body. For it is not its nature to keep it to itself, so long as it
is an eye. Again, the nostrils are sensible of perfume; but they do not keep it all
to themselves, but transmit it to the brain, and affect the stomach with a sweet

savor, and by their means refresh the entire man. The feet alone walk; but they
move not away themselves only, but transfer also the whole body. In like manner
do thou, whatsoever you have been entrusted withal, keep it not to yourself
alone, since you are doing harm to the whole and to yourself more than all.
And not in the case of the limbs only may one see this occuring: for the
smith also, if he chose to impart of his craft to no one, ruins both himself and all
other crafts. Likewise the cordwainer, the husbandman, the baker, and everyone
of those who pursue any necessary calling; if he chose not to communicate to
anyone of the results of his art, will ruin not the others only but himself also with
them.
And why do I say, "the rich?" For the poor too, if they followed after the
wickedness of you who are covetous and rich, would injure you very greatly and
soon make you poor; yea rather, they would quite destroy you, were they in your
want unwilling to impart of their own: the tiller of the ground, (for instance,) of
the labor of his hands; the sailor, of the gain from his voyages; the soldier, of his
distinction won in the wars.
Wherefore if nothing else can, yet let this at least put you to shame, and do
you imitate their benevolence. Do you impart none of your wealth unto any?
Then should you not receive any thing from another: in which case, the world
will be turned upside down. For in every thing to give and receive is the
principle of numerous blessings: in seeds, in scholars, in arts. For if any one
desire to keep his art to himself, he subverts both himself and the whole course
of things. And the husbandman, if he bury and keep the seeds in his house, will
bring about a grievous famine. So also the rich man, if he act thus in regard of
his wealth, will destroy himself before the poor, heaping up the fire of hell more
grievous upon his own head.
8. Therefore as teachers, however many scholars they have, impart some of
their lore unto each; so let your possession be, many to whom you have done
good. And let all say, "such an one he freed from poverty, such an one from
dangers. Such an one would have perished, had he not, next to the grace of God,