The Latin text is here untranslateable. Grabe proposes to read, "una consonans melodia in nobis sentietur;" while Stieren
and others prefer to exchange !"#$%#&'!( for )#$%#&'!(.
reproduced in unceasing succession." Comp. Hippol., Philos., vii. 24.

Him. For our tongue, as being carnal, is not sufficient to minister to the rapidity of the human mind,
inasmuch as that is of a spiritual nature, for which reason our word is restrained within us, and
is not at once expressed as it has been conceived by the mind, but is uttered by successive efforts,
just as the tongue is able to serve it.
5. But God being all Mind, and all Logos, both speaks exactly what He thinks, and thinks exactly
what He speaks. For His thought is Logos, and Logos is Mind, and Mind comprehending all things
is the Father Himself. He, therefore, who speaks of the mind of God, and ascribes to it a special
origin of its own, declares Him a compound Being, as if God were one thing, and the original Mind
another. So, again, with respect to Logos, when one attributes to him the third place of production
from the Father; on which supposition he is ignorant of His greatness; and thus Logos has been far
separated from God. As for the prophet, he declares respecting Him, "Who shall describe His
generation?" But ye pretend to set forth His generation from the Father, and ye transfer the
production of the word of men which takes place by means of a tongue to the Word of God, and
thus are righteously exposed by your own selves as knowing neither things human nor divine.
6. But, beyond reason inflated [with your own wisdom], ye presumptuously maintain that ye
are acquainted with the unspeakable mysteries of God; while even the Lord, the very Son of God,
allowed that the Father alone knows the very day and hour of judgment, when He plainly declares,
"But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, neither the Son, but the Father only." If, then,
the Son was not ashamed to ascribe the knowledge of that day to the Father only, but declared what
was true regarding the matter, neither let us be ashamed to reserve for God those greater questions
which may occur to us. For no man is superior to his master. If any one, therefore, says to us,
"How then was the Son produced by the Father?" we reply to him, that no man understands that
production, or generation, or calling, or revelation, or by whatever name one may describe His
generation, which is in fact altogether indescribable. Neither Valentinus, nor Marcion, nor Saturninus,
nor Basilides, nor angels, nor archangels, nor principalities, nor powers [possess this knowledge],
but the Father only who begat, and the Son who was begotten. Since therefore His generation is
unspeakable, those who strive to set forth generations and productions cannot be in their right mind,
inasmuch as they undertake to describe things which are indescribable. For that a word is uttered
at the bidding of thought and mind, all men indeed well understand. Those, therefore, who have
excogitated [the theory of] emissions have not discovered anything great, or revealed any abstruse