(v. 19, 20, 21.) For this is justification in superabundance, not to flee from his
accusers, but to be ready to give account to all. "Of the resurrection of the dead,"
says he, "am I this day called in question." And not a word said he of what he
had to say, how they had conspired against him, had violently kept him, had laid
wait for him— for these matters are course spoken of by the tribune — but by
Paul, though there was danger, not so: no, he is silent, and only defends himself,
though he had very much to say. (b) "In which" (alms), says he, "they found me
in course of purifying in the Temple." Then how did he profane it? For it was not
the part of the same man both to purify himself and worship and come for this
purpose, and then to profane it. This has with it a surmise of the justice of his
cause, that he does not fall into a long discourse. And he gratifies the judge, I
suppose, by that also (namely, by), making his defence compendious: (d) seeing
that Tertullus before him did make a long harangue. (f) And this too is a proof of
mildness, that when one has much to say, in order not to be troublesome one
says but few words. (c) But let us look again at what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "Then the soldiers," etc. [Acts 23:31-33] (a) This also
made Paul famous in Cæsarea, his coming with so large a force.— "But," says
Tertullus, "that I be not further tedious," (e) showing that (Felix) does find him
tedious ([ἐ] [γκόπτεται]): "I beseech you," he does not say, Hear the matter, but,
"hear us of your clemency." [Acts 24:4] Probably it is to pay court, that he thus
lays out his speech. (g) "For having found this man, a pestilent fellow, and a
mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world" [Acts 24:5]: how
then, it might be said, if he did this elsewhere (and not here)? No, says he;
among us also he has profaned the Temple; "attempted," says he, "to profane it:"
but the how, he leaves untold. "Whom also we took." etc. "But the tribune," etc.
And while he thus exaggerates what relates to the tribune, see how he extenuates
the part of the accusers themselves. "We took him," he says, "and would have
judged him according to our Law." [Acts 24:6] He shows that it is a hardship to
them that they have to come to foreign tribunals, and that they would not have
troubled him had not the tribune compelled them, and that he, having no concern

in the matter, had seized the man by force: for in fact the wrongs done were
against us, and with us the tribunal ought to have been. For that this is the
meaning, see what follows: "with great violence" [Acts 24:7], he says. For this
conduct is violence. "From whom you may know." He neither dares to accuse
him (the tribune)— for the man was indulgent (forsooth)— nor does he wholly
pass it by. Then again, lest he should seem to be lying, he adduces Paul himself
as his own accuser. "From whom, by examining him, you may take knowledge of
all these things." [Acts 24:8] Next, as witnesses also of the things spoken, the
accusers, the same persons themselves both witnesses and accusers: "And the
Jews also assented," etc. [Acts 24:9] But Paul, "Forasmuch as I know that you
have been of many years a just judge." [Acts 24:10] Why then, he is no stranger
or alien or revolutionary person, seeing he had known the judge for many years.
And he does well to add the epithet "just," that he (Felix) might not look to the
chief priest, nor to the people, nor the accuser. See, how he did not let himself be
carried away into abuse, although there was strong provocation. "Believing," he
says, "that there will be a resurrection:" now a man who believed a resurrection,
would never have done such things— "which" (resurrection) "they themselves
also allow." [Acts 24:15] He does not say it of them, that they believe "all things
written in the Prophets:" it was he that believed them all, not they: but how
"all," it would require a long discourse to show. And he nowhere makes mention
of Christ. Here by saying, "Believing," he does (virtually) introduce what relates
to Christ; for the present he dwells on the subject of the resurrection, which
doctrine was common to them also, and removed the suspicion of any sedition.
And for the cause of his going up, "I came," he says, "to bring alms to my nation
and offerings." [Acts 24:17] How then should I have troubled those, for the
bringing offerings to whom I had come so long a journey? "Neither with
multitude, nor with tumult." [Acts 24:18] Everywhere he does away the charge
of sedition. And he also does well to challenge his accusers who were from Asia,
"Who ought to accuse before you," etc., but he does well also not to reject this
either; "or else," says he, "let these same here say. Touching the resurrection of