Matt. vii. 7.

climate, have they brought upon the earth? And again, in opposition to these, what heat or dryness
have they set over against them? or, what rivers have they made to flow? what fountains have they
brought forth? with what flowers and trees have they adorned this sublunary world? or, what
multitude of animals have they formed, some rational, and others irrational, but all adorned with
beauty? And who can enumerate one by one all the remaining objects which have been constituted
by the power of God, and are governed by His wisdom? or who can search out the greatness of that
God who made them? And what can be told of those existences which are above heaven, and which
do not pass away, such as Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, and Powers innumerable?
Against what one of these works, then, do they set themselves in opposition? What have they similar
to show, as having been made through themselves, or by themselves, since even they too are the
Workmanship and creatures of this [Creator]? For whether the Saviour or their Mother (to use their
own expressions, proving them false by means of the very terms they themselves employ) used
this Being, as they maintain, to make an image of those things which are within the Pleroma, and
of all those beings which she saw waiting upon the Saviour, she used him (the Demiurge) as being
[in a sense] superior to herself, and better fitted to accomplish her purpose through his
instrumentality; for she would by no means form the images of such important beings through
means of an inferior, but by a superior, agent.
4. For, [be it observed,] they themselves, according to their own declarations, were then existing,
as a spiritual conception, in consequence of the contemplation of those beings who were arranged
as satellites around Pandora. And they indeed continued useless, the Mother accomplishing nothing
through their instrumentality,—an idle conception, owing their being to the Saviour, and fit for
nothing, for not a thing appears to have been done by them. But the God who, according to them,
was produced, while, as they argue, inferior to themselves (for they maintain that he is of an animal
nature), was nevertheless the active agent in all things, efficient, and fit for the work to be done,
so that by him the images of all things were made; and not only were these things which are seen
formed by him, but also all things invisible, Angels, Archangels, Dominations, Powers, and
Virtues,—[by him, I say,] as being the superior, and capable of ministering to her desire. But it
seems that the Mother made nothing whatever through their instrumentality, as indeed they
themselves acknowledge; so that one may justly reckon them as having been an abortion produced
by the painful travail of their Mother. For no accoucheurs performed their office upon her, and
therefore they were cast forth as an abortion, useful for nothing, and formed to accomplish no work
of the Mother. And yet they describe themselves as being superior to Him by whom so vast and
admirable works have been accomplished and arranged, although by their own reasoning they are
found to be so wretchedly inferior!
5. It is as if there were two iron tools, or instruments, the one of which was continually in the
workman's hands and in constant use, and by the use of which he made whatever he pleased, and
displayed his art and skill, but the other of which remained idle and useless, never being called into