Reply to Objection 1: The fraud can indeed hurt the person who has
acted fraudulently, but it cannot be prejudicial to another person:
wherefore if the husband, to cheat his wife, surrender himself to be
another's slave, It will be to his own prejudice, through his losing the
inestimable good of freedom; whereas this can nowise be prejudicial
to the wife, and he is bound to pay her the debt when she asks, and
to do all that marriage requires of him for he cannot be taken away
from these obligations by his master's command.
Reply to Objection 2: In so far as slavery is opposed to marriage,
marriage is prejudicial to slavery, since the slave is bound then to
pay the debt to his wife, though his master be unwilling.
Reply to Objection 3: Although husband and wife are considered to
be on a par in the marriage act and in things relating to nature, to
which the condition of slavery does not extend, nevertheless as
regards the management of the household, and other such
additional matters the husband is the head of the wife and should
correct her, and not "vice versa." Hence the wife cannot surrender
herself to be a slave without her husband's consent.
Reply to Objection 4: This argument considers corruptible things;
and yet even in these there are many obstacles to generation that are
not capable of destroying what is already generated. But in things
which have stability it is possible to have an impediment which
prevents a certain thing from beginning to be, yet does not cause it
to cease to be; as instanced by the rational soul. It is the same with
marriage, which is a lasting tie so long as this life lasts.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether children should follow the condition of

their father?
Objection 1: It would seem that children should follow the condition
of their father. Because dominion belongs to those of higher rank.
Now in generating the father ranks above the mother. Therefore, etc.
Objection 2: Further, the being of a thing depends on the form more
than on the matter. Now in generation the father gives the form, and
the mother the matter (De Gener. Animal. ii, 4). Therefore the child
should follow the condition of the father rather than of the mother.
Objection 3: Further, a thing should follow that chiefly to which it is
most like. Now the son is more like the father than the mother, even
as the daughter is more like the mother. Therefore at least the son
should follow the father in preference, and the daughter the mother.
Objection 4: Further, in Holy Writ genealogies are not traced through
the women but through the men. Therefore the children follow the
father rather than the mother.
On the contrary, If a man sows on another's land, the produce
belongs to the owner of the land. Now the woman's womb in relation
to the seed of man is like the land in relation to the sower. Therefore,
etc.
Further, we observe that in animals born from different species the
offspring follows the mother rather that the father, wherefore mules
born of a mare and an ass are more like mares than those born of a
she-ass and a horse. Therefore it should be the same with men.
I answer that, According to civil law (XIX, ff. De statu hom. vii, cap.
De rei vendit.) the offspring follows the womb: and this is reasonable
since the offspring derives its formal complement from the father,
but the substance of the body from the mother. Now slavery is a
condition of the body, since a slave is to the master a kind of
instrument in working; wherefore children follow the mother in
freedom and bondage; whereas in matters pertaining to dignity as
proceeding from a thing's form, they follow the father, for instance in
honors, franchise, inheritance and so forth. The canons are in
agreement with this (cap. Liberi, 32, qu. iv, in gloss.: cap. Inducens,