But what is it "to agree?" He means either, "consent rather to suffer
wrong?" or, "so plead the cause, as if you were in the place of the other;" that
you may not corrupt justice by self-love, but rather, deliberating on another's
cause as your own, may so proceed to deliver your vote in this matter. And if this
be a great thing, marvel not; since with this view did He set forth all those His
blessings, that having beforehand smoothed and prepared the hearer's soul, he
might render it apter to receive all His enactments.
Now some say that He obscurely signifies the devil himself, under the name
of the adversary; and bids us have nothing of his, (for this, they say, is to "agree"
with him): no compromise being possible after our departure hence, nor anything
awaiting us, but that punishment, from which no prayers can deliver. But to me
He seems to be speaking of the judges in this world, and of the way to the court
of justice, and of this prison.
For after he had abashed men by higher things, and things future, he alarms
them also by such as are in this life. Which thing Paul also does, using both the
future and the present to sway his hearer: as when, deterring from wickedness,
he points out to him that is inclined to evil, the ruler armed: thus saying, "But if
you do that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain; for he is
a minister of God." [Romans 13:4] And again, enjoining us to be subject unto
him, he sets forth not the fear of God only, but the threatening also of the other
party, and his watchful care. "For you must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake." [Romans 5:5] Because the more irrational, as I
have already said, are wont to be sooner corrected by these things, things which
appear and are at hand. Wherefore Christ also made mention, not of hell only,
but also of a court of justice, and of being dragged there, and of the prison, and
of all the suffering there; by all these means destroying the roots of murder. For
he who neither reviles, nor goes to law, nor prolongs enmity, how will he ever
commit murder? So that from hence also it is evident, that in the advantage of
our neighbor stands our own advantage. For he that agrees with his adversary,
will benefit himself much more; becoming free, by his own act, from courts of

law, and prisons, and the wretchedness that is there.
14. Let us then be obedient to His sayings; let us not oppose ourselves, nor
be contentious; for first of all, even antecedently to their rewards, these
injunctions have their pleasure and profit in themselves. And if to the more part
they seem to be burdensome, and the trouble which they cause, great; have it in
your mind that you are doing it for Christ's sake, and the pain will be pleasant.
For if we maintain this way of reckoning at all times, we shall experience
nothing burdensome, but great will be the pleasure we reap from every quarter;
for our toil will no longer seem toil, but by how much it is enhanced, so much
the sweeter and pleasanter does it grow.
When therefore the custom of evil things, and the desire of wealth, keep on
bewitching you; do thou war against them with that mode of thinking which tells
us, "Great is the reward we shall receive, for despising the pleasure which is but
for a season;" and say to your soul; "Are you quite dejected because I defraud
you of pleasure? Nay, be of good cheer, for I am introducing you into Heaven.
You do it not for man's sake, but for God's. Be patient therefore a little while, and
you shall see how great is the gain. Endure for the present life, and you shall
receive an unspeakable confidence." For if we would thus discourse with our
own soul, and not only consider that which is burdensome in virtue, but take
account also of the crown that comes thereof, we shall quickly withdraw it from
all wickedness.
For if the devil, holding out pleasure for a season, but pain for ever, is yet
strong, and prevails; seeing our case is just the reverse in these matters, the labor
temporary, the pleasure and profit immortal, what plea shall we have, if we
follow not virtue after so great encouragement? Why, the object of our labors is
enough to set against all, and our clear persuasion that for God's sake we are
enduring all this. For if one having the king his debtor, thinks he has sufficient
security for all his life; consider how great will he be, who has made the
Gracious and Everlasting God a debtor to himself, for good deeds both small and
great. Do not then allege to me labors and sweats; for not by the hope only of the