THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.51, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ was buried in a becoming

manner?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was buried in an unbecoming
manner. For His burial should be in keeping with His death. But
Christ underwent a most shameful death, according to Wis. 2:20:
"Let us condemn Him to a most shameful death." It seems therefore
unbecoming for honorable burial to be accorded to Christ, inasmuch
as He was buried by men of position---namely, by Joseph of
Arimathea, who was "a noble counselor," to use Mark's expression
(Mk. 15:43), and by Nicodemus, who was "a ruler of the Jews," as
John states (Jn. 3:1).
Objection 2: Further, nothing should be done to Christ which might
set an example of wastefulness. But it seems to savor of waste that
in order to bury Christ Nicodemus came "bringing a mixture of myrrh
and aloes about a hundred pounds weight," as recorded by John
(19:39), especially since a woman came beforehand to anoint His
body for the burial, as Mark relates (Mk. 14:28). Consequently, this
was not done becomingly with regard to Christ.
Objection 3: Further, it is not becoming for anything done to be
inconsistent with itself. But Christ's burial on the one hand was
simple, because "Joseph wrapped His body in a clean linen cloth,"
as is related by Matthew (27:59), "but not with gold or gems, or silk,"
as Jerome observes: yet on the other hand there appears to have
been some display, inasmuch as they buried Him with fragrant
spices (Jn. 19:40). Consequently, the manner of Christ's burial does
not seem to have been seemly.
Objection 4: Further, "What things soever were written," especially
of Christ, "were written for our learning," according to Rm. 15:4. But
some of the things written in the Gospels touching Christ's burial in
no wise seem to pertain to our instruction---as that He was buried "in
a garden . . . "in a tomb which was not His own, which was "new,"
and "hewed out in a rock." Therefore the manner of Christ's burial
was not becoming.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 11:10): "And His sepulchre shall be
glorious."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.51, C.3.

I answer that, The manner of Christ's burial is shown to be seemly in
three respects. First, to confirm faith in His death and resurrection.
Secondly, to commend the devotion of those who gave Him burial.
Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i): "The Gospel mentions as
praiseworthy the deed of those who received His body from the
cross, and with due care and reverence wrapped it up and buried it."
Thirdly, as to the mystery whereby those are molded who "are buried
together with Christ into death" (Rm. 6:4).
Reply to Objection 1: With regard to Christ's death, His patience and
constancy in enduring death are commended, and all the more that
His death was the more despicable: but in His honorable burial we
can see the power of the dying Man, who, even in death, frustrated
the intent of His murderers, and was buried with honor: and thereby
is foreshadowed the devotion of the faithful who in the time to come
were to serve the dead Christ.
Reply to Objection 2: On that expression of the Evangelist (Jn. 19:40)
that they buried Him "as the manner of the Jews is to bury,"
Augustine says (Tract. in Joan. cxx): "He admonishes us that in
offices of this kind which are rendered to the dead, the custom of
each nation should be observed." Now it was the custom of this
people to anoint bodies with various spices in order the longer to
preserve them from corruption [Catena Aurea in Joan. xix].
Accordingly it is said in De Doctr. Christ. iii that "in all such things, it
is not the use thereof, but the luxury of the user that is at fault"; and,
farther on: "what in other persons is frequently criminal, in a divine
or prophetic person is a sign of something great." For myrrh and
aloes by their bitterness denote penance, by which man keeps Christ
within himself without the corruption of sin; while the odor of the
ointments expresses good report.
Reply to Objection 3: Myrrh and aloes were used on Christ's body in
order that it might be preserved from corruption, and this seemed to
imply a certain need (in the body): hence the example is set us that
we may lawfully use precious things medicinally, from the need of
preserving our body. But the wrapping up of the body was merely a
question of becoming propriety. And we ought to content ourselves
with simplicity in such things. Yet, as Jerome observes, by this act
was denoted that "he swathes Jesus in clean linen, who receives
Him with a pure soul." Hence, as Bede says on Mark 15:46: "The
Church's custom has prevailed for the sacrifice of the altar to be
offered not upon silk, nor upon dyed cloth, but on linen of the earth;