1 Corinthians 12:15
"If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it
therefore not of the body?"

1 Corinthians 12:16
"And if the ear shall say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is
it therefore not of the body?"
For if the one being made inferior and the other superior, does not allow
their being of the body, the whole is done away. Do not say therefore, "I am not
the body, because I am inferior." For the foot also has the inferior post, yet is it
of the body: for the being or not being part of the body, is not from the one lying
in this place and the other in that; (which is what constitutes difference of place;)
but from the being conjoined or separated. For the being or not being a body,
arises from the having been made one or not. But do thou, I pray, mark his
considerate way, how he applies their words to our members. For as he said
above, "These things have I in a figure transferred to myself and Apollos," [1
Corinthians 4:6] just so likewise here, to make his argument free from
invidiousness and acceptable, he introduces the members speaking: that when
they shall hear nature answering them, being thus convicted by experience
herself and by the general voice, they may have nothing further to oppose. "For
say, if you will," says he, "this very thing, murmur as you please, you cannot be
out of the body. For as the law of nature, so much more does the power of grace
guard all things and preserve them entire." And see how he kept to the rule of
having nothing superfluous; not working out his argument on all the members,
but on two only and these the extremes; having specified both the most
honorable of all, the eye, and the meanest of all, the feet. And he does not make
the foot to discourse with the eye, but with the hand which is mounted a little
above it; and the ear with the eyes. For because we are wont to envy not those
who are very far above us, but those who are a little higher, therefore he also
conducts his comparison thus.

1 Corinthians 12:17
"If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were
hearing, where were the smelling?"
Thus, because, having fallen upon the difference of the members, and
having mentioned feet, and hands, and eyes, and ears, he led them to the
consideration of their own inferiority and superiority: see how again he consoles
them, intimating that so it was expedient: and that their being many and diverse,
this especially causes them to be a body. But if they all were some one, they
would not be a body. Wherefore, he says, "If they were all one member, where
were the body?" This however, he mentions not till afterwards; but here he
points out also something more; that besides the impossibility of any one being a
body, it even takes away the being of the rest.
"For if the whole were hearing, where were the smelling," says he.
4. Then because after all they were yet disturbed: that which he had done
above, the same he does also now. For as there he first alleged the expediency to
comfort them and afterwards stopped their mouths, vehemently saying, "But all
these works the one and the same Spirit, dividing to each one man severally even
as He will:" so also here having stated reasons for which he showed that it was
profitable that all should so be, he refers the whole again to the counsel of God,
saying,