servants of the Crucified are more splendid than the palaces of kings; not for the
size and beauty of the buildings, (yet even in this they surpass them,) but, what is
far more, in the zeal of those who frequent them. For he that wears the purple
himself goes to embrace those tombs, and, laying aside his pride, stands begging
the saints to be his advocates with God, and he that has the diadem implores the
tent-maker and the fisherman, though dead, to be his patrons. Will you dare then,
tell me, to call the Lord of these dead; whose servants even after their decease
are the patrons of the kings of the world? And this one may see take place not in
Rome only, but in Constantinople also. For there also Constantine the Great, his
son considered he should be honoring with great honor, if he buried him in the
porch of the fisherman; and what porters are to kings in their palaces, that kings
are at the tomb to fisherman. And these indeed as lords of the place occupy the
inside, while the others as though but sojourners and neighbors were glad to
have the gate of the porch assigned them; showing by what is done in this world,
even to the unbelievers, that in the Resurrection the fisherman will be yet more
their superiors. For if here it is so in the burial [of each], much more will it in the
resurrection. And their rank is interchanged; kings assume that of servants and
ministers, and subjects the dignity of kings, yea rather a brighter still. And that
this is no piece of flattery, the truth itself demonstrates; for by those these have
become more illustrious. For far greater reverence is paid to these tombs than to
the other royal sepulchres; for there indeed is profound solitude, while here there
is an immense concourse. But if you will compare these tombs with the royal
palaces, here again the palm remains with them. For there indeed there are many
who keep off, but here many who invite and draw to them rich, poor, men,
women, bond, free; there, is much fear; here, pleasure unutterable. 'But,' says
one, 'it is a sweet sight to look on a king covered with gold and crowned, and
standing by his side, generals, commanders, captains of horse and foot,
lieutenants.' Well, but this of ours is so much grander and more awful that that
must be judged, compared with it, to be stage scenery and child's play. For the
instant you have stepped across the threshold, at once the place sends up your

thoughts to heaven, to the King above, to the army of the Angels, to the lofty
throne, to the unapproachable glory. And here indeed He has put in the ruler's
power, of his subjects to loose one, and bind another; but the bones of the saints
possess no such pitiful and mean authority, but that which is far greater. For they
summon demons and put them to the torture, and loose from those bitterest of all
bonds, them that are bound. What is more fearful than this tribunal? Though no
one is seen, though no one piles the sides of the demon, yet are there cries, and
tearings , lashes, tortures, burning tongues, because the demon cannot endure
that marvellous power. And they that once wore bodies, are victorious over
bodiless powers; [their] dust and bones and ashes rack those invisible natures.
And therefore in truth it is that none would ever travel abroad to see the palaces
of kings, but many kings and have often traveled to see this spectacle. For the
Martyries of the saints exhibit outlines and symbols of the judgment to come; in
that demons are scourged, men chastened and delivered. Do you see the power
of saints, even dead? Do you see the weakness of sinners, even living? Flee then
wickedness, that you may have power over such; and pursue virtue with all your
might. For if the case be thus here, consider what it will be in the world to come.
And as being evermore possessed with this love, lay hold on the life eternal;
whereunto may we all attain, through the grace and love towards men of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, might, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.