other essences of things, not as the common to the proper, as unity
is to numbers, or as the centre (of a circle) to the (radiating) lines;
but as perfect acts to imperfect; as if I were to compare man to
animal; or six, a perfect number, to the imperfect numbers contained
under it. Now it is manifest that by a perfect act imperfect acts can
be known not only in general, but also by proper knowledge; thus,
for example, whoever knows a man, knows an animal by proper
knowledge; and whoever knows the number six, knows the number
three also by proper knowledge.
As therefore the essence of God contains in itself all the perfection
contained in the essence of any other being, and far more, God can
know in Himself all of them with proper knowledge. For the nature
proper to each thing consists in some degree of participation in the
divine perfection. Now God could not be said to know Himself
perfectly unless He knew all the ways in which His own perfection
can be shared by others. Neither could He know the very nature of
being perfectly, unless He knew all modes of being. Hence it is
manifest that God knows all things with proper knowledge, in their
distinction from each other.
Reply to Objection 1: So to know a thing as it is in the knower, may
be understood in two ways. In one way this adverb "so" imports the
mode of knowledge on the part of the thing known; and in that sense
it is false. For the knower does not always know the object known
according to the existence it has in the knower; since the eye does
not know a stone according to the existence it has in the eye; but by
the image of the stone which is in the eye, the eye knows the stone
according to its existence outside the eye. And if any knower has a
knowledge of the object known according to the (mode of) existence
it has in the knower, the knower nevertheless knows it according to
its (mode of) existence outside the knower; thus the intellect knows
a stone according to the intelligible existence it has in the intellect,
inasmuch as it knows that it understands; while nevertheless it
knows what a stone is in its own nature. If however the adverb 'so'
be understood to import the mode (of knowledge) on the part of the
knower, in that sense it is true that only the knower has knowledge
of the object known as it is in the knower; for the more perfectly the
thing known is in the knower, the more perfect is the mode of
knowledge.
We must say therefore that God not only knows that all things are in
Himself; but by the fact that they are in Him, He knows them in their

own nature and all the more perfectly, the more perfectly each one is
in Him.
Reply to Objection 2: The created essence is compared to the
essence of God as the imperfect to the perfect act. Therefore the
created essence cannot sufficiently lead us to the knowledge of the
divine essence, but rather the converse.
Reply to Objection 3: The same thing cannot be taken in an equal
manner as the ratio of different things. But the divine essence excels
all creatures. Hence it can be taken as the proper ration of each thing
according to the diverse ways in which diverse creatures participate
in, and imitate it.