through Him." And in regard to Christ again, we must conceive of this in like
manner. For through Him the race of men was both produced out of nothing into
existence, and returned from error to truth. So that as to the phrase "of Whom," it
is not to be understood apart from Christ. For of Him, through Christ, were we
created.
6. Nor yet, if you observe, has he distributed the names as if belonging
exclusively, assigning to the Son the name Lord, and to the Father, God. For the
Scripture uses also often to interchange them; as when it says, [Psalm 110:1]
"The Lord says unto My Lord;" and again, [Psalm 65:8] "Wherefore God Your
God has appointed You;" and, [Romans 9:5] "Of Whom is Christ according to
the flesh, Who is God over all." And in many instances you may see these names
changing their places. Besides, if they were allotted to each nature severally, and
if the Son were not God, and God as the Father, yet continuing a Son: after
saying, "but to us there is but One God," it would have been superfluous, his
adding the word "Father," with a view to declare the Unbegotten. For the word
of God was sufficient to explain this, if it were such as to denote Him only.
And this is not all, but there is another remark to make: that if you say,
"Because it is said 'One God,' therefore the word God does not apply to the
Son;" observe that the same holds of the Son also. For the Son also is called
"One Lord," yet we do not maintain that therefore the term Lord applies to Him
alone. So then, the same force which the expression "One" has, applied to the
Son, it has also, applied to the Father. And as the Father is not thrust out from
being the Lord, in the same sense as the Son is the Lord, because He, the Son, is
spoken of as one Lord; so neither does it cast out the Son from being God, in the
same sense as the Father is God, because the Father is styled One God.
7. Now if any were to say, "Why did he make no mention of the Spirit?" our
answer might be this: His argument was with idolaters, and the contention was
about "gods many and lords many." And this is why, having called the Father,
God, he calls the Son, Lord. If now he ventured not to call the Father Lord
together with the Son, lest they might suspect him to be speaking of two Lords;

nor yet the Son, God, with the Father, lest he might be supposed to speak of two
Gods: why marvel at his not having mentioned the Spirit? His contest was, so
far, with the Gentiles: his point, to signify that with us there is no plurality of
Gods. Wherefore he keeps hold continually of this word, "One;" saying, "There
is no God but One; and, to us there is One God, and One Lord." From which it is
plain, that to spare the weakness of the hearers he used this mode of explanation,
and for this reason made no mention at all of the Spirit. For if it be not this,
neither ought he to make mention of the Spirit elsewhere, nor to join Him with
the Father and the Son. For if He be rejected from the Father and Son, much
more ought He not to be put in the same rank with them in the matter of
Baptism; where most especially the dignity of the Godhead appears and gifts are
bestowed which pertain to God alone to afford. Thus then I have assigned the
cause why in this place He is passed over in silence. Now do thou if this be not
the true reason, tell me, why He is ranked with Them in Baptism? But you can
not give any other reason but His being of equal honor. At any rate, when he has
no such constraint upon him, he puts Him in the same rank, saying thus: [2
Corinthians 13:14] "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God and
the Father, and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with you all:" and again, [2
Corinthians 12:4] "There are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit: and there
are diversities of administrations, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of
workings but the same God." But because now his speech was with Greeks and
the weaker sort of the converts from among Greeks, for this reason he husbands
it ([ταμιεύεται]) so far. And this is what the prophets do in regard of the Son; no
where making mention of Him plainly because of the infirmity of the hearers.