soul which will be in all, both men and women.
Reply to Objection 2: Woman is subject to man on account of the
frailty of nature, as regards both vigor of soul and strength of body.
After the resurrection, however, the difference in those points will be
not on account of the difference of sex, but by reason of the
difference of merits. Hence the conclusion does not follow.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the begetting of a woman is beside
the intention of a particular nature, it is in the intention of universal
nature, which requires both sexes for the perfection of the human
species. Nor will any defect result from sex as stated above (ad 2).

### ARTICLE 4. Whether all will rise again to animal life so as to

exercise the functions of nutrition and generation?
Objection 1: It would seem that they will rise again to the animal life,
or in other words that they will make use of the acts of the nutritive
and generative powers. For our resurrection will be conformed to
Christ's. But Christ is said to have ate after His resurrection (Jn. 21;
Lk. 24). Therefore, after the resurrection men will eat, and in like
manner beget.
Objection 2: Further, the distinction of sexes is directed to
generation; and in like manner the instruments which serve the
nutritive power are directed to eating. Now man will rise again with
all these. Therefore he will exercise the acts of the generative and
nutritive powers.
Objection 3: Further, the whole man will be beatified both in soul and
in body. Now beatitude or happiness, according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. i, 7), consists in a perfect operation. Therefore it must needs
be that all the powers of the soul and all the members should have
their respective acts after the resurrection. And so the same
conclusion follows as above.
Objection 4: Further, after the resurrection there will be perfect joy in
the blessed. Now such a joy includes all pleasures, since
"happiness" according to Boethius is "a state rendered perfect by
the accumulation of all goods" (De Consol. iii), and the perfect is that
which lacks nothing. Since then there is much pleasure in the act of
the generative and nutritive powers it would seem that such acts
belonging to animal life will be in the blessed, and much more in
others, who will have less spiritual bodies.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 22:30): "In the resurrection they
shall neither marry nor be married."
Further, generation is directed to supply the defect resulting from
death, and to the multiplication of the human race: and eating is
directed to make up for waste, and to increase quantity. But in the
state of the resurrection the human race will already have the
number of individuals preordained by God, since generation will
continue up to that point. In like manner each man will rise again in