larger? Not even this. Whence then are they so admired, save from fancy? For if
they are neither more beautiful, (for we shall find others more shining and more
white,) nor useful, nor stronger, whence came they to be so admired? Was it not
from mere fancy? Why then did God give them? They were not His gift, but it is
your own imagination that they are anything great. "How is it, then," he answers,
"that even the Scripture shows admiration of them?" So far it addresses itself to
your fancy. As a master too in talking to a child often admires the same object as
it does, when he desires to attract and engage it.
Why do you aim at finery in your clothing? He clothed you with a garment
and with sandals. But where is there any reason for these things? "The judgments
of God," he says, "are more to be desired than gold; yea than much fine gold."
[Psalm 19:10] These, beloved, are of no use. Had they been of use, he would not
have bidden us despise them. And for Holy Scripture, it speaks with reference to
our notion, and this too is an instance of God's lovingkindness. "Why then," he
asks, "did He give purple and the like?" These things are products of God's gift.
For He has willed by other things also to show forth His own riches. And He
gave you grain too by itself; but from this you make many things, cakes and
sweetmeats, of every sort and variety, having much enjoyment. Pleasure and
vainglory give rise to all these inventions. It pleased you to set them before
everything. For if a foreigner or a rustic, who was ignorant of the land, should
put the question, and, seeing your admiration, were to say, "Why do you admire
these?" What have you to say? That they are fair to look at? But not so. Let us
then give up such notions; let us lay hold of the things that are truly real. These
are not, but simply pass away, only flowing past like a river. Wherefore I charge
you, let us take our stand upon the rock, that we both escape being easily turned
about, and that we may obtain the good things to come, by the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 11 on Philippians

[Philippians 3:7-10]
"Howbeit what things were gain to me, these have I counted loss for Christ.
Yea verily, and I counted all things to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I suffered the loss of all things, and do count
them but dung, that I may gain Christ and be found in Him, not having a
righteousness of my own, even that which is of the law, but that which is through
faith in Christ, the righteousness which is of God."
In our contests with heretics, we must make the attack with minds in vigor,
that they may be able to give exact attention. I will therefore begin nay present
discourse where the last ended. And what was that? Having enumerated every
Jewish boast, both those from his birth, and those that were from choice, he
added, "Howbeit, what things were gain to me, these have I counted to be loss
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may gain Christ." Here
the heretics spring to their attack: for even this comes of the wisdom of the
Spirit, to suggest to them hopes of victory, that they may undertake the fight.
For if it had been spoken plainly, they would have acted here as they have
done in other places, they would have blotted out the words, they would have
denied the Scripture, when they were unable at all to look it in the face. But as in
the case of fishes, that which can take them is concealed so that they may swim
up, and does not lie open to view; this in truth has come to pass here too. The
Law, they say, is called "dung" by Paul, it is called "loss." He says, it was not
possible to gain Christ except I "suffered" this "loss." All these things induced
the heretics to accept this passage, thinking it to be favorable to them: but when
they had taken it, then did he enclose them on all sides with his nets. For what do
they themselves say? Lo! The Law is "loss," is "dung"; how then do ye say that