appeared in white garments, that they might reap the present glory; but thou not
even for the future glory's sake ceasest your woman's behavior and wailing.
But have you no heirs, nor any to succeed to your goods? And which would
you rather, that he should be heir of your possessions, or of Heaven? And which
did you desire, that he should succeed to the things that perish, which he must
have let go soon after, or to things that remain, and are immoveable? You had
him not for heir, but God had him instead of you; he became not joint-heir with
his own brethren, but he became "joint-heir with Christ."
"But to whom," says he, "are we to leave our garments, to whom our
houses, to whom our slaves and our lands?" To him again, and more securely
than if he lived; for there is nothing to hinder. For if barbarians burn the goods of
the departed together with them, much more were it a righteous thing for you to
send away with the dead what things he has: not to be turned to ashes, like those,
but to invest him with more glory; and that if he departed a sinner, it may do
away his sins; but if righteous, that it may become an increase of reward and
recompense.
But do you long to see him? Then live the same life with him, and you will
soon obtain that sacred vision.
And herewith consider this also, that though you should not hearken to us,
you will certainly yield to time. But no reward then for you; for the consolation
comes of the number of the days. Whereas if you are willing now to command
yourself, you will gain two very great points: first, you will deliver yourself from
the intervening ills, next, you will be crowned with the brighter crown from God.
For indeed neither almsgiving nor anything else is nearly so great as bearing
affliction meekly.
Bear in mind, that even the Son of God died: and He indeed for you, but
thou for yourself. And when He said, "If it be possible, let the cup pass from
me," [Matthew 26:39] and suffered pain, and was in agony, nevertheless He
shunned not the end, but underwent it, and that with its whole course of
exceeding woe. That is, He did by no means simply endure death, but the most

shameful death; and before His death, stripes; and before His stripes,
upbraidings, and jeers, and revilings; instructing you to bear all manfully. And
though He died, and put off His body, He resumed it again in greater glory,
herein also holding out to you good hopes. If these things be not a fable, lament
not. If you account these things to be sure, weep not; but if you dost weep, how
will you be able to persuade the Greek that you believe?
6. But even so does the event still appear intolerable to you? Well then, for
this very cause it is not meet to lament for him, for he is delivered from many
such calamities. Grudge not therefore against him, neither envy him: for to ask
death for yourself because of his premature end, and to lament for him that he
did not live to endure many such things, is rather the part of one grudging and
envying.
And think not of this, that he will no more return home: but that yourself
also art a little while after to go to him. Regard not this, that he returns here no
more, but that neither do these things that are seen remain such as they are, but
these too are being transformed. Yea, for heaven, and earth, and sea, and all, are
being put together afresh, and then shall you recover your child in greater glory.
And if indeed he departed a sinner, his wickedness is stayed; for certainly,
had God known that he was being converted, He would not have snatched him
away before his repentance: but if he ended his life righteous, he now possesses
all good in safety. Whence it is manifest that your tears are not of kindly
affection, but of unreasoning passion. For if you loved the departed, you should
rejoice and be glad that he is delivered from the present waves.
For what is there more, I pray you? What is there fresh and new? Do we not
see the same things daily revolving? Day and night, night and day, winter and
summer, summer and winter, and nothing more. And these indeed are ever the
same; but our evils are fresh, and newer. Would you then have him every day
drawing up more of these things, and abiding here, and sickening, and mourning,
and in fear and trembling, and enduring some of the ills of life, dreading others
lest he some time endure them? Since assuredly you can not say this, that one