suspicion. And this he has done yet more strongly than Christ. For Christ says,
"He that believes not is condemned already," but John says, "shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abides on him." With good cause; for it was a different
thing for a man to speak of himself and for another to speak of him. They would
have thought that Christ spoke often of these things from self-love, and that he
was a boaster; but John was clear from all suspicion. And if at a later time,
Christ also used stronger expressions, it was when they had begun to conceive an
exalted opinion of Him.

John 4:1-3
"When therefore Jesus knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized more disciples than John, (though Jesus Himself baptized not but His
disciples,) He left Judæa, and departed again into Galilee."
He indeed baptized not, but they who carried the news, desiring to excite
their hearers to envy, so reported. "Wherefore then 'departed' He?" Not from
fear, but to take away their malice, and to soften their envy. He was indeed able
to restrain them when they came against Him, but this He would not do
continually, that the Dispensation of the Flesh might not be disbelieved. For had
He often been seized and escaped, this would have been suspected by many;
therefore for the most part, He rather orders matters after the manner of a man.
And as He desired it to be believed that He was God, so also that, being God, He
bore the flesh; therefore even after the Resurrection, He said to the disciple,
"Handle Me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones" [Luke 24:39];
therefore also He rebuked Peter when he said, "Be it far from You, this shall not
be unto you." [Matthew 16:22] So much was this matter an object of care to
Him.
2. For this is no small part of the doctrines of the Church; it is the chief
point of the salvation wrought for us; by which all has been brought to pass, and
has had success, for it was thus that the bonds of death were loosed, sin taken
away, and the curse abolished, and ten thousand blessings introduced into our
life. And therefore He especially desired that the Dispensation should be
believed, as having been the root and fountain of innumerable goods to us.
Yet while acting thus in regard of His Humanity, He did not allow His
Divinity to be overcast. And so, after His departure He again employed the same
language as before. For He went not away into Galilee simply, but in order to
effect certain important matters, those among the Samaritans; nor did He
dispense these matters simply, but with the wisdom that belonged to Him, and so

as not to leave to the Jews any pretense even of a shameless excuse for
themselves. And to this the Evangelist points when he says,

John 4:4
"And He must needs go through Samaria."
Showing that He made this the by-work of the journey. Which also the
Apostles did; for just as they, when persecuted by the Jews, came to the Gentiles;
so also Christ, when the Jews drove Him out, then took the Samaritans in hand,
as He did also in the case of the Syrophenician woman. And this was done that
all defense might be cut away from the Jews, and that they might not be able to
say, "He left us, and went to the uncircumcised." And therefore the disciples
excusing themselves said, "It was necessary that the Word of God should first
have been spoken unto you; but seeing ye judge yourselves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles." [Acts 13:46] And He says again
Himself, "I am not come but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel" [Matthew
15:24]; and again, "It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to give it to
dogs." But when they drove Him away, they opened a door to the Gentiles. Yet
not so did He come to the Gentiles expressly, but in passing. In passing then,