blessings should of right render up your own peculiar praise: for He lighted up
the sun not for you alone, but also for all in common; but nevertheless thou for
your part hast it whole. For it was made so large for the common good; and yet
thou individually see it as large as all men have seen it; so that you owe a
thanksgiving as great as all together; and you ought to give thanks for what all
have in common and likewise for the virtue of others; for on account of others,
too, we receive many blessings: for had there been found in Sodom ten righteous
only, they had not suffered what they did. So then let us give thanks also for the
confidence of others [toward God]. For this custom is an ancient one, planted in
the Church from the beginning. Thus Paul also gives thanks for the Romans,
[Romans 1:8] for the Corinthians, [1 Corinthians 1:4] for the whole world, [1
Timothy 2:1] And tell me not, "The good work is none of mine;" for though it be
none of yours, yet even so ought thou to give thanks that your member is such an
one. And besides, by your acclamation you make it your own, and sharest in the
crown, and shall yourself also receive the gift. On this account it is that the laws
of the Church command prayer also to be thus made, and that not for the faithful
only, but also for the Catechumens. For the law stirs up the faithful to make
supplication for the uninitiated. For when the Deacon says , "Let us pray
earnestly for the Catechumens," he does no other than excite the whole
multitude of the faithful to pray for them; although the Catechumens are as yet
aliens. For they are not yet of the Body of Christ, they have not yet partaken of
the Mysteries, but are still divided from the spiritual flock. But if we ought to
intercede for these, much more for our own members. And even therefore he
says, "earnestly let us pray," that you should not disown them as aliens, that you
should not disregard them as strangers. For as yet they have not the appointed
prayer, which Christ brought in; as yet they have not confidence, but have need
of others' aid who have been initiated. For without the king's courts they stand,
far from the sacred precincts. Therefore they are even driven away while those
awful prayers are being offered. Therefore also he exhorts you to pray for them
that they may become members of you, that they may be no longer strangers and

aliens. For the words, "Let us pray," are not addressed to the priests alone, but
also to those that make up the people: for when he says, "Let us stand in order :
let us pray;" he exhorts all to the prayer.
7. Then beginning the prayer, he says, "That the all-pitying and merciful
God would listen to their prayers." For that you may not say, What shall we
pray? They are aliens, not yet united [to the body]. Whereby can I constrain the
regard of God? Whence can I prevail with Him to impart unto them mercy and
forgiveness? That you may not be perplexed with such questions as these, see
how he disentangles your perplexity, saying, "that the all-pitying and merciful
God." Heardest thou? "All-pitying God." Be perplexed no more. For the Allpitying pities all, both sinners and friends. Say not then, "How shall I approach
Him for them?" Himself will listen to their prayers. And the Catechumens'
prayer, what can it be but that they may not remain Catechumens? Next, he
suggests also the manner of the prayer. And what is this? "That He would open
the ears of their hearts;" for they are as yet shut and stopped up. "Ears," he says,
not these which be outward, but those of the understanding, "so as to hear 'the
things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart
of man.'" [1 Corinthians 2:9; Isaiah 54:4] For they have not heard the untold
mysteries; but they stand somewhere at a distance and far off from them; and
even if they should hear, they know not what is said; for those [mysteries] need
much understanding, not hearing only: and the inward ears as yet they have not:
wherefore also he next invokes for them a Prophet's gift, for the Prophet spoke
on this wise; "God gives me the tongue of instruction, that I should know how to
speak a word in season; for He opened my mouth; He gave to me betimes in the
morning; He granted me a hearing ear." [Isaiah 1:4. Septuagint] For as the
Prophets heard otherwise than the many, so also do the faithful than the
Catechumens. Hereby the Catechumen also is taught not to learn to hear these
things of men, (for He says, Call no man master upon the earth , but from above,
from heaven, "For they shall be all taught of God." [Isaiah 54:13]
Wherefore he says, "And instil into them the word of truth," so that it may