THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.9, C.2.

there should be another knowledge in Christ besides the Divine
knowledge, otherwise the soul of Christ would have been more
imperfect than the souls of the rest of men. Secondly, because, since
everything is on account of its operation, as stated De Coel. ii, 17,
Christ would have had an intellective soul to no purpose if He had
not understood by it; and this pertains to created knowledge.
Thirdly, because some created knowledge pertains to the nature of
the human soul, viz. that whereby we naturally know first principles;
since we are here taking knowledge for any cognition of the human
intellect. Now nothing natural was wanting to Christ, since He took
the whole human nature, as stated above (Question 5). And hence
the Sixth Council [Third Council of Constantinople, Act. 4]
condemned the opinion of those who denied that in Christ there are
two knowledges or wisdoms.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ knew all things with the Divine
knowledge by an uncreated operation which is the very Essence of
God; since God's understanding is His substance, as the
Philosopher proves (Metaph. xii, text. 39). Hence this act could not
belong to the human soul of Christ, seeing that it belongs to another
nature. Therefore, if there had been no other knowledge in the soul
of Christ, it would have known nothing; and thus it would have been
assumed to no purpose, since everything is on account of its
operation.
Reply to Objection 2: If the two lights are supposed to be in the same
order, the lesser is dimmed by the greater, as the light of the sun
dims the light of a candle, both being in the class of illuminants. But
if we suppose two lights, one of which is in the class of illuminants
and the other in the class of illuminated, the lesser light is not
dimmed by the greater, but rather is strengthened, as the light of the
air by the light of the sun. And in this manner the light of knowledge
is not dimmed, but rather is heightened in the soul of Christ by the
light of the Divine knowledge, which is "the true light which
enlighteneth every man that cometh into this world," as is written Jn.
1:9.
Reply to Objection 3: On the part of what are united we hold there is
a knowledge in Christ, both as to His Divine and as to His human
nature; so that, by reason of the union whereby there is one
hypostasis of God and man, the things of God are attributed to man,
and the things of man are attributed to God, as was said above
(Question 3, Articles 1,6). But on the part of the union itself we

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.9, C.2.

cannot admit any knowledge in Christ. For this union is in personal
being, and knowledge belongs to person only by reason of a nature.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.9, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ had the knowledge which the