you have trodden one rough, and steep, and laborious. And therefore you have
not attained unto the kingdom of heaven.
Why then, it is asked, did not Christ exercise His influence upon Plato, and
upon Pythagoras? Because the mind of Peter was much more philosophical than
their minds. They were in truth children shifted about on all sides by vain glory;
but this man was a philosopher, one apt to receive grace. If you laugh at these
words, it is no wonder; for those aforetime laughed, and said, the men were full
of new wine. But afterwards, when they suffered those bitter calamities,
exceeding all others in misery; when they saw their city falling in ruins, and the
fire blazing, and the walls hurled to the ground, and those manifold frantic
horrors, which no one can find words to express, they did not laugh then. And
you will laugh then, if you have the mind to laugh, when the time of hell is close
at hand, when the fire is kindled for your souls. But why do I speak of the
future? Shall I show you what Peter is, and what Plato, the philosopher? Let us
for the present examine their respective habits, let us see what were the pursuits
of each. The one wasted his time about a set of idle and useless dogmas, and
philosophical, as he says, that we may learn that the soul of our philosopher
becomes a fly. Most truly said, a fly! not indeed changed into one, but a fly must
have entered upon possession of the soul which dwelt in Plato; for what but a fly
is worthy of such ideas! The man was full of irony, and of jealous feelings
against every one else, as if he made it his ambition to introduce nothing useful,
either out of his own head or other people's. Thus he adopted the
metempsychosis from another, and from himself produced the Republic, in
which he enacted those laws full of gross turpitude. Let the women, he says, be
in common, and let the virgins go naked, and let them wrestle before the eyes of
their lovers, and let there also be common fathers, and let the children begotten
be common. But with us, not nature makes common fathers, but the philosophy
of Peter does this; as for that other, it made away with all paternity. For Plato's
system only tended to make the real father next to unknown, while the false one
was introduced. It plunged the soul into a kind of intoxication and filthy

wallowing. Let all, he says, have intercourse with the women without fear. The
reason why I do not examine the maxims of poets, is, that I may not be charged
with ripping up fables. And yet I am speaking of fables much more ridiculous
than even those. Where have the poets devised anything so portentous as this?
But (not to enter into the discussion of his other maxims), what say you to these
— when he equips the females with arms, and helmets, and greaves, and says
that the human race has no occasion to differ from the canine! Since dogs, he
says, the female and the male, do just the same things in common, so let the
women do the same works as the men, and let all be turned upside down. For the
devil has always endeavored by their means to show that our race is not more
honorable than that of brutes; and, in fact, some have gone to such a pitch of
([κενοδοξίας]) absurdity, as to affirm that the irrational creatures are endued with
reason. And see in how many various ways he has run riot in the minds of those
men! For whereas their leading men affirmed that our soul passes into flies, and
dogs, and brute creatures; those who came after them, being ashamed of this, fell
into another kind of turpitude, and invested the brute creatures with all rational
science, and made out that the creatures— which were called into existence on
our account— are in all respects more honorable than we! They even attribute to
them foreknowledge and piety. The crow, they say, knows God, and the raven
likewise, and they possess gifts of prophecy, and foretell the future; there is
justice among them, and polity, and laws. Perhaps you do not credit the things I
am telling you. And well may you not, nurtured as you have been with sound
doctrine; since also, if a man were fed with this fare, he would never believe that
there exists a human being who finds pleasure in eating dung. The dog also
among them is jealous, according to Plato. But when we tell them that these
things are fables, and are full of absurdity, 'You do not enter ([ἐ] [νοήσατε]) into
the higher meaning,' say they. No, we do not enter into this your surpassing
nonsense, and may we never do so: for it requires (of course! ) an excessively
profound mind, to inform me, what all this impiety and confusion would be at.
Are you talking, senseless men, in the language of crows, as the children are