applied this testimony to their habit of falsehood. Else why has he not added,
"For even a tomb, O king, of you, they made"? So that the Apostle has not said
this, but only that one had well said, "The Cretians are always liars." But it is
not only from hence that we are confident that Jupiter is not a God. From many
other arguments we are able to prove this, and not from the testimony of the
Cretans. Besides, he has not said, that in this they were liars. Nay and it is more
probable that they were deceived as to this point too. For they believed in other
gods, on which account the Apostle calls them liars.
And as to the question, why does he cite the testimonies of the Greeks? It is
because we put them most to confusion when we bring our testimonies and
accusations from their own writers, when we make those their accusers, who are
admired among themselves. For this reason he elsewhere quotes those words,
"To the Unknown God." For the Athenians, as they did not receive all their gods
from the beginning, but from time to time admitted some other, as those from the
Hyperboreans, the worship of Pan, and the greater and the lesser mysteries, so
these same, conjecturing that besides these there might be some other God, of
whom they were ignorant, that they might be duly devout to him also, erected to
him an altar, with this inscription, "To the Unknown God," thereby almost
implying, "if there might be some God unknown to them." He therefore said to
them, Him whom you have by anticipation acknowledged, I declare to you. But
those words, "We also are His offspring," are quoted from Aratus, who having
previously said, "Earth's paths are full of Jove, the sea is full"— adds, "For we
too are His offspring," in which I conceive he shows that we are sprung from
God. How then does Paul wrest what is said of Jupiter to the God of the
universe? He has not transferred to God what belongs to Jupiter. But what is
applicable to God, and was neither justly nor properly applied to Jupiter, this he
restores to God, since the name of God belongs to Him alone, and is not lawfully
bestowed upon idols.
And from what writers should he address them? From the Prophets? They
would not have believed them. Since with the Jews too he does not argue from

the Gospels, but from the Prophets. For this reason he says, "Unto the Jews I
became as a Jew, to them that are without law, as without law, to those that are
under the Law, as under the Law." [1 Corinthians 9:20-21] Thus does God too,
as in the case of the wise men, He does not conduct them by an Angel, nor a
Prophet, nor an Apostle, nor an Evangelist, but how? By a star. For as their art
made them conversant with these, He made use of such means to guide them. So
in the case of the oxen, that drew the ark. "If it goes up by the way of his own
coast, then He has done us this great evil" [1 Samuel 6:9], as their prophets
suggested. Do these prophets then speak the truth? No; but he refutes and
confounds them out of their own mouths. Again, in the case of the witch,
because Saul believed in her, he caused him to hear through her what was about
to befall him. Why then did Paul stop the mouth of the spirit, that said, "These
men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation"? [Acts 16:17] And why did Christ hinder the devils from speaking of
Him? In this case there was reason, since the miracles were going on. For here it
was not a star that proclaimed Him, but He Himself; and the demons again were
not worshipped ; for it was not an image that spoke, that it should be forbidden.
He also suffered Balaam to bless, and did not restrain him. Thus He everywhere
condescends.
And what wonder? For He permitted opinions erroneous, and unworthy of
Himself, to prevail, as that He was a body formerly, and that He was visible. In
opposition to which He says, "God is a Spirit." [John 4:24] Again, that He
delighted in sacrifices, which is far from His nature. And He utters words at
variance with His declarations of Himself, and many such things. For He
nowhere considers His own dignity, but always what will be profitable to us.
And if a father considers not his own dignity, but talks lispingly with his
children, and calls their meat and drink not by their Greek names, but by some
childish and barbarous words, much more does God. Even in reproving He
condescends, as when He speaks by the prophet, "Hath a nation changed their
gods?" [Jeremiah 2:11], and in every part of Scripture there are instances of His