by reason of its subtlety, will be able to be in the same place
together with another body.
On the contrary, Boethius says (De Trin. i): "Difference of accidents
makes distinction in number. For three men differ not in genus, nor
in species, but in their accidents. If we were to remove absolutely
every accident from them, still each one has a different place; and it
is quite conceivable that they should all occupy the same place."
Therefore if we suppose two bodies to occupy the same place, there
will be but one body numerically.
I answer that, It cannot be maintained that a glorified body, by
reason of its subtlety, is able to be in the same place with another
body, unless the obstacle to its being now in the same place with
another body be removed by that subtlety. Some say that in the
present state this obstacle is its grossness by virtue of which it is
able to occupy a place; and that this grossness is removed by the
gift of subtlety. But there are two reasons why this cannot be
maintained. First, because the grossness which the gift of subtlety
removes is a kind of defect, for instance an inordinateness of matter
in not being perfectly subject to its form. For all that pertains to the
integrity of the body will rise again in the body, both as regards the
matter and as regards the form. And the fact that a body is able to fill
a place belongs to it by reason of that which pertains to its integrity,
and not on account of any defect of nature. For since fulness is
opposed to vacancy, that alone does not fill a place, which being put
in a place, nevertheless leaves a place vacant. Now a vacuum is
defined by the Philosopher (Phys. iv, 6,7) as being "a place not filled
by a sensible body." And a body is said to be sensible by reason of
its matter, form, and natural accidents, all of which pertain to the
integrity of nature. It is also plain that the glorified body will be
sensible even to touch, as evidenced by the body of our Lord (Lk.
24:39): nor will it lack matter, or form, or natural accidents, namely
heat, cold, and so forth. Hence it is evident that the glorified body,
the gift of subtlety notwithstanding, will fill a place: for it would seem
madness to say that the place in which there will be a glorified body
will be empty. Secondly their aforesaid argument does not avail,
because to hinder the co-existence of a body in the same place is
more than to fill a place. For if we suppose dimensions separate
from matter, those dimensions do not fill a place. Hence some who
held the possibility of a vacuum, said that a vacuum is a place
wherein such like dimensions exist apart from a sensible body; and
yet those dimensions hinder another body from being together with

them in the same place. This is made clear by the Philosopher (Phys.
iv, 1,8; Metaph. ii, 2), where he considers it impossible for a
mathematical body, which is nothing but separate dimensions, to be
together with another natural sensible body. Consequently, granted
that the subtlety of a glorified body hindered it from filling a place,
nevertheless it would not follow that for this reason it is able to be in
the same place with another body, since the removal of the lesser
does not involve the removal of the greater.
Accordingly we must say that the obstacle to our body's being now
in the same place with another body can nowise be removed by the
gift of subtlety. For nothing can prevent a body from occupying the
same place together with another body, except something in it that
requires a different place: since nothing is an obstacle to identity,
save that which is a cause of distinction. Now this distinction of
place is not required by any quality of the body, because a body
demands a place, not by reason of its quality: wherefore if we
remove from a body the fact of its being hot or cold, heavy or light, it
still retains the necessity of the aforesaid distinction, as the
Philosopher proves (Phys. iv), and as is self-evident. In like manner
neither can matter cause the necessity of the aforesaid distinction,
because matter does not occupy a place except through its
dimensive quantity. Again neither does form occupy a place, unless
it have a place through its matter. It remains therefore that the
necessity for two bodies occupying each a distinct place results
from the nature of dimensive quantity, to which a place is essentially
befitting. For this forms part of its definition, since dimensive
quantity is quantity occupying a place. Hence it is that if we remove
all else in a thing from it, the necessity of this distinction is found in
its dimensive quantity alone. Thus take the example of a separate
line, supposing there to be two such lines, or two parts of one line,
they must needs occupy distinct places, else one line added to
another would not make something greater, and this is against
common sense. The same applies to surfaces and mathematical
bodies. And since matter demands place, through being the subject
of dimension, the aforesaid necessity results in placed matter, so
that just as it is impossible for there to be two lines, or two parts of a
line, unless they occupy distinct places, so is it impossible for there
to be two matters, or two parts of matter, without there be distinction
of place. And since distinction of matter is the principle of the
distinction between individuals, it follows that, as Boethius says (De
Trin.), "we cannot possibly conceive two bodies occupying one
place," so that this distinction of individuals requires this difference