in case the husband be believing and thoroughly furnished, able also to instruct
her. When she is the wiser, then he does not forbid her teaching and improving
him. And he does not say, who taught much, but "who bestowed much labor,"
because along with teaching ([τοὓ λόγου]) she performs other ministries besides,
those in the way of dangers, in the way of money, in the way of travels. For the
women of those days were more spirited than lions, sharing with the Apostles
their labors for the Gospel's sake. In this way they went travelling with them, and
also performed all other ministries. And even in Christ's day there followed Him
women, "which ministered unto Him of their substance" [Luke 8:3], and waited
upon the Teacher.
Ver. 7. "Salute Andronicus and Junia my kinsmen."
This also looks like an encomium. And what follows is much more so. And
what sort is this of? "And my fellow-prisoners." For this is the greatest honor, the
noble proclamation. And where was Paul a prisoner, that he should call them
"my fellow-prisoners?" A prisoner indeed he had not been, but he had suffered
things worse than prisoners, in being not an alien only to his country and his
family, but in wrestling with famine and continual death, and thousands of other
things. For of a prisoner the only misfortune is this, that he is separated from his
relations, and often has to be a slave instead of being free. But in this case one
may mention temptations thick as snow-flakes, which this blessed person
underwent by being carried and taken about, scourged, fettered, stoned,
shipwrecked, with countless people plotting against him. And captives indeed
have no further foe after they are led away, but they even experience great care
from those who have taken them. But this man was continually in the midst of
enemies, and saw spears on every side, and sharpened swords, and arrays, and
battles. Since then it was likely that these shared many dangers with him, he
calls them fellow-captives. As in another passage also, "Aristarchus my fellowprisoner." [Colossians 4:10] Then another praise besides. "Who are of note
among the Apostles." And indeed to be apostles at all is a great thing. But to be
even among these of note, just consider what a great encomium this is! But they

were of note owing to their works, to their achievements. Oh! How great is the
devotion ([φιλοσοφία]) of this woman, that she should be even counted worthy
of the appellation of apostle! But even here he does not stop, but adds another
encomium besides, and says, "Who were also in Christ before me."
For this too is a very great praise, that they sprang forth and came before
others. But let me draw your attention to the holy soul, how untainted it is by
vanity. For after glory such as his in kind and degree, he sets others before
himself, and does not hide from us the fact of his having come after them, nor is
ashamed of confessing this. And why are you surprised at his not being ashamed
of this, when he shuns not even to parade before men his former life, calling
himself "a blasphemer, and a persecutor?" [1 Timothy 1:13] Since then he was
not able to set them before others on this score, he looked out himself, who had
come in after others, and from this he did find means of bestowing a praise upon
them by saying, "Who were in Christ before me."
Ver. 8. "Greet Amplias my beloved."
Here again he passes encomiums upon his person by his love. For the love
of Paul was for God, carrying countless blessings with it. For if being loved by
the king is a great thing, what a great encomium must it be to be beloved by
Paul? For if he had not acquired great virtue, he would not have attracted his
love? Since as for those who live in vice and transgressions he is accustomed
([οἶδε]) not only to abstain from loving them, but even to anathematize them. As
when he says, "If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed" [1
Corinthians 16:22]; and, "If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that
you have received, let him be accursed." [Galatians 1:8]
Ver. 9. "Salute Urbane, my helper in the Lord."
This is a greater encomium than the other. For this even comprehends that.
"And Stachys, my beloved." This again is an honor of the same kind.
Ver. 10. "Salute Apelles, approved in Christ."
There is no praise like this, being unblamable, and giving no handle in the
things of God. For when he says, "approved in Christ," he includes the whole list