THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: As accidental difference makes a thing
"other" [alterum], so essential difference makes "another
thing" [aliud]. Now it is plain that the "otherness" which springs from
accidental difference may pertain to the same hypostasis or
suppositum in created things, since the same thing numerically can
underlie different accidents. But it does not happen in created things
that the same numerically can subsist in divers essences or natures.
Hence just as when we speak of "otherness" in regard to creatures
we do not signify diversity of suppositum, but only diversity of
accidental forms, so likewise when Christ is said to be one thing or
another thing, we do not imply diversity of suppositum or
hypostasis, but diversity of nature. Hence Gregory Nazianzen says in
a letter to Chelidonius (Ep. ci): "In the Saviour we may find one thing
and another, yet He is not one person and another. And I say 'one
thing and another'; whereas, on the contrary, in the Trinity we say
one Person and another (so as not to confuse the subsistences), but
not one thing and another."
Reply to Objection 2: Hypostasis signifies a particular substance,
not in every way, but as it is in its complement. Yet as it is in union
with something more complete, it is not said to be a hypostasis, as a
hand or a foot. So likewise the human nature in Christ, although it is
a particular substance, nevertheless cannot be called a hypostasis
or suppositum, seeing that it is in union with a completed thing, viz.
the whole Christ, as He is God and man. But the complete being with
which it concurs is said to be a hypostasis or suppositum.
Reply to Objection 3: In created things a singular thing is placed in a
genus or species, not on account of what belongs to its
individuation, but on account of its nature, which springs from its
form, and in composite things individuation is taken more from
matter. Hence we say that Christ is in the human species by reason
of the nature assumed, and not by reason of the hypostasis.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether after the Incarnation the Person or

Hypostasis of Christ is composite?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Person of Christ is not
composite. For the Person of Christ is naught else than the Person
or hypostasis of the Word, as appears from what has been said
(Article 2). But in the Word, Person and Nature do not differ, as
appears from FP, Question 39, Article 1. Therefore since the Nature
of the Word is simple, as was shown above (FP, Question 3, Article
7), it is impossible that the Person of Christ be composite.
Objection 2: Further, all composition requires parts. But the Divine
Nature is incompatible with the notion of a part, for every part
implicates the notion of imperfection. Therefore it is impossible that
the Person of Christ be composed of two natures.
Objection 3: Further, what is composed of others would seem to be
homogeneous with them, as from bodies only a body can be
composed. Therefore if there is anything in Christ composed of the
two natures, it follows that this will not be a person but a nature; and
hence the union in Christ will take place in the nature, which is
contrary to Article 2.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 3,4,5), "In the
Lord Jesus Christ we acknowledge two natures, but one hypostasis
composed from both."
I answer that, The Person or hypostasis of Christ may be viewed in
two ways. First as it is in itself, and thus it is altogether simple, even
as the Nature of the Word. Secondly, in the aspect of person or
hypostasis to which it belongs to subsist in a nature; and thus the
Person of Christ subsists in two natures. Hence though there is one
subsisting being in Him, yet there are different aspects of
subsistence, and hence He is said to be a composite person,
insomuch as one being subsists in two.
And thereby the solution to the first is clear.
Reply to Objection 2: This composition of a person from natures is
not so called on account of parts, but by reason of number, even as
that in which two things concur may be said to be composed of