## Homily 18 on Matthew

Matthew 5:38-40.
" You have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth. But I say unto you, that you resist not the evil: but whosoever shall smite
you on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue you at
the law, and take away your coat, let him have your cloak also."
Do you see that it was not of an eye that He was speaking before, when He
made the law to pluck out the offending eye, but of him who by his friendship is
harming us, and casting us into the gulf of destruction? For He who in this place
uses so great strength of expression, and who, not even when another is plucking
out your eye, permits you to strike out his; how should He have made it a law to
strike out one's own?
But if any one accuses the ancient law, because it commands such
retaliation, he seems to me very unskillful in the wisdom that becomes a
legislator, and ignorant of the virtue of opportunities, and the gain of
condescension. For if he considered who were the hearers of these sayings, and
how they were disposed, and when they received this code of laws, he will
thoroughly admit the wisdom of the Lawgiver, and will see that it is one and the
same, who made both those laws and these, and who wrote each of them
exceeding profitably, and in its due season. Yes, for if at the beginning He had
introduced these high and most weighty commandments, men would not have
received either these, or the others; but now ordaining them severally in their due
time, He has by the two corrected the whole world.
And besides, He commanded this, not that we might strike out one another's
eyes, but that we might keep our hands to ourselves. For the threat of suffering
has effectually restrained our inclination to be doing.
And thus in fact He is silently dropping seed of much self-restraint, at least

in that He commands to retaliate with just the same acts. Yet surely he that began
such transgression were worthy of a greater punishment, and this the abstract
nature of justice demands. But forasmuch as He was minded to mingle mercy
also with justice, He condemns him whose offenses were very great to a
punishment less than his desert: teaching us even while we suffer to show forth
great consideration.
Having therefore mentioned the ancient law, and recognized it all, He
signifies again, that it is not our brother who has done these deeds, but the evil
one. For this cause he has also subjoined, "But I say unto you, that you resist not
the evil one." He did not say, "resist not your brother," but "the evil one,"
signifying that on his motion men dare so to act; and in this way relaxing and
secretly removing most of our anger against the aggressor, by transferring the
blame to another.
"What then?" it is said, "ought we not to resist the evil one?" Indeed we
ought, but not in this way, but as He has commanded, by giving one's self up to
suffer wrongfully; for thus shall you prevail over him. For one fire is not
quenched by another, but fire by water. And to show you that even under the old
law he that suffered rather prevails, that he it is who wins the crown; examine
just what is done, and you will see that his advantage is great. For as he that has
begun with unjust acts, will have himself destroyed the eyes of both, his
neighbor's and his own (wherefore also he is justly hated of all, and ten thousand
accusations are aimed at him): so he that has been injured, even after his equal
retaliation, will have done nothing horrible. Wherefore also he has many to
sympathize with him, as being clear from that offense even after he has
retaliated. And though the calamity be equal to both parties, yet the sentence
passed on it is not equal, either with God, or with men. It should seem then, that
neither is the calamity equal in the end.
Now whereas at the beginning He said, "he that is angry with his brother
without a cause," and "he that calls him fool shall be in danger of hell fire," here
He requires yet more entire self-restraint, commanding him that suffers ill not