to delay and lose time in stripping it, and not to give them that were so disposed
opportunity to awake and seize them. Especially when it was myrrh, a drug that
adheres so to the body, and cleaves to the clothes, whence it was not easy to take
the clothes off the body, but they that did this needed much time, so that from
this again, the tale of the theft is improbable.
What? Did they not know the rage of the Jews? And that they would vent
their anger on them? And what profit was it at all to them, if He had not risen
again?
So these men, being conscious that they had made up all this tale, gave
money, and said, "Say ye these things, and we will persuade the governor." For
they desire that the report should be published, fighting in vain against the truth;
and by their endeavors to obscure it, by these even against their will they
occasioned it to appear clearly. For indeed even this establishes the resurrection,
the fact I mean of their saying, that the disciples stole Him. For this is the
language of men confessing, that the body was not there. When therefore they
confess the body was not there, but the stealing it is shown to be false and
incredible, by their watching by it, and by the seals, and by the timidity of the
disciples, the proof of the resurrection even hence appears incontrovertible.
Nevertheless, these shameless and audacious men, although there were so
many things to stop their mouths, "Say ye," these are their words, "and we will
persuade, and will secure you." Do you see all depraved? Pilate, for he was
persuaded? The soldiers? The Jewish people? But marvel not, if money
prevailed over soldiers. For if with His disciple it showed its might to be so
great, much more with these.
"And this saying is commonly reported," it is said, "until this day." Do you
see again the disciples' love of truth, how they are not ashamed of saying even
this, that such a report prevailed against them.
"Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, and some worshipped,
and some when they saw Him doubted."
This seems to me to be the last appearance in Galilee, when He sent them

forth to baptize. And if "some doubted," herein again admire their truthfulness,
how they conceal not even their shortcomings up to the last day. Nevertheless,
even these are assured by their sight.
What then says He unto them, when He sees them? "All power is given unto
me in heaven and on earth." Again He speaks to them more after the manner of
man, for they had not yet received the spirit, which was able to raise them on
high. "Go, make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you;" giving the one charge with a view to
doctrine, the other concerning commandments. And of the Jews He makes no
mention, neither brings forward what had been done, nor upbraids Peter with his
denial, nor any one of the others with their flight, but having put into their hands
a summary of the doctrine, that expressed by the form of baptism, commands
them to pour forth over the whole world.
After that, because he had enjoined on them great things, to raise their
courage, He says, "Lo! I am with you always, even unto the end of the world."
[Matthew 28:20] Do you see His own proper power again? Do you see how
those other things also were spoken for condescension? And not with those men
only did He promise to be, but also with all that believe after them. For plainly
the apostles were not to remain here unto "the end of the world;" but he speaks
to the believers as to one body. For tell me not, says He, of the difficulty of the
things: for "I am with you," who make all things easy. This He said to the
prophets also in the Old Testament continually, as well to Jeremiah objecting his
youth, [Jeremiah 1:6, 8] as to Moses and Ezekiel shrinking from the office, "I am
with you," this here also to these men. And mark, I pray you, the excellence of
these, for the others, when sent to one nation, often excused themselves, but
these said nothing of the sort, though sent to the world. And He reminds them
also of the consummation, that He may draw them on more, and that they may
look not at the present dangers only, but also at the good things to come that are
without end.