comes humbleness of mind, and from this, longsuffering. "Forbearing," he says,
"one another," that is, passing things over. And see, how he has shown it to be
nothing, by calling it a "complaint," and saying, "even as Christ forgave you."
Great is the example! And thus he always does; he exhorts them after Christ.
"Complaint," he calls it. In these words indeed he showed it to be a petty matter;
but when he has set before us the example, he has persuaded us that even if we
had serious charges to bring, we ought to forgive. For the expression, "Even as
Christ," signifies this, and not this only, but also with all the heart; and not this
alone, but that they ought even to love. For Christ being brought into the midst,
brings in all these things, both that even if the matters be great, and even if we
have not been the first to injure, even if we be of great, they of small account,
even if they are sure to insult us afterwards, we ought to lay down our lives for
them, (for the words, "even as," demand this;) and that not even at death only
ought one to stop, but if possible, to go on even after death.
Ver. 14. "And above all these things put on love, which is the bond of
perfectness."
Do you see that he says this? For since it is possible for one who forgives,
not to love; yea, he says, you must love him too, and he points out a way
whereby it becomes possible to forgive. For it is possible for one to be kind, and
meek, and humbleminded, and longsuffering, and yet not affectionate. And
therefore, he said at the first, "A heart of compassion," both love and pity. "And
above all these things, love, which is the bond of perfectness." Now what he
wishes to say is this; that there is no profit in those things, for all those things fall
asunder, except they be done with love; this it is which clenches them all
together; whatsoever good thing it be you mention, if love be away, it is nothing,
it melts away. And it is as in a ship, even though her rigging be large, yet if there
be no girding ropes, it is of no service; and in an house, if there be no tie beams,
it is the same; and in a body, though the bones be large, if there be no ligaments,
they are of no service. For whatsoever good deeds any may have, all do vanish
away, if love be not there. He said not that it is the summit, but what is greater,

"the bond"; this is more necessary than the other. For "summit" indeed is an
intensity of perfectness, but "bond" is the holding fast together of those things
which produce the perfectness; it is, as it were, the root.
Ver. 15. "And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also you
were called in one body; and be thankful."
"The peace of God." This is that which is fixed and steadfast. If on man's
account indeed you have peace, it quickly comes to dissolution, but if on God's
account, never. Although he had spoken of love universally, yet again he comes
to the particular. For there is a love too which is immoderate; for instance, when
out of much love one makes accusations without reason, and is engaged in
contentions, and contracts aversions. Not this, says he, not this do I desire; not
overdoing things, but as God made peace with you, so do ye also make it. How
made He peace? Of His own will, not having received anything of you. What is
this? "Let the peace of God rule in your hearts." If two thoughts are fighting
together, set not anger, set not spitefulness to hold the prize, but peace; for
instance, suppose one to have been insulted unjustly; of the insult are born two
thoughts, the one bidding him to revenge, the other to endure; and these wrestle
with one another: if the Peace of God stand forward as umpire, it bestows the
prize on that which bids endure, and puts the other to shame. How? By
persuading him that God is Peace, that He has made peace with us. Not without
reason he shows the great struggle there is in the matter. Let not anger, he says,
act as umpire, let not contentiousness, let not human peace, for human peace
comes of avenging, of suffering no dreadful ill. But not this do I intend, he says,
but that which He Himself left.
He has represented an arena within, in the thoughts, and a contest, and a
wrestling, and an umpire. Then again, exhortation, "to the which you were
called," he says, that is, for the which you were called. He has reminded them of
how many good things peace is the cause; on account of this He called you, for
this He called you, so as to receive a worthy prize. For wherefore made He us
"one body"? Was it not that she might rule? Was it not that we might have