forever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 39 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 15:11
Whether then it be I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed.
Having exalted the Apostles and abased himself, then again having exalted
himself above them that he might make out an equality: (for he did effect an
equality, when he showed that he had advantages over them as well as they over
him,) and having thereby proved himself worthy of credit; neither so does he
dismiss them, but again ranks himself with them, pointing out their concord in
Christ. Nevertheless he does it not so as that he should seem to have been tacked
on to them, but as himself also to appear in the same rank. For so it was
profitable for the Gospel. Wherefore also he was equally earnest, on the one
hand, that he might not seem to overlook them; on the other, that he might not be
on account of the honor paid to them held cheap by those that were under his
authority. Therefore he also now makes himself equal again, saying,
"Whether then it be I or they, so we preach." "From whomsoever," says he,
"ye choose to learn, learn; there is no difference between us." And he said not,
"if you will not believe me, believe them;" but while he makes himself worthy of
credit and says that he is of himself sufficient, he affirms the same also of them
by themselves. For the difference of persons took no effect, their authority being
equal. And in the Epistle to the Galatians he does this, taking them with him, not
as also standing in need of them, but saying indeed that even himself was
sufficient: "For they who were of repute imparted nothing to me:" [Galatians
2:6] nevertheless, even so I follow after agreement with them. "For they gave
unto me," says he, "their right hands." [Galatians 2:9] For if the credit of Paul
were always to depend on others and to be confirmed by testimony from others,
the disciples would hence have received infinite injury. It is not therefore to exalt

himself that he does this, but fearing for the Gospel. Wherefore also he here
says, making himself equal, "Whether it be I or they, so we preach."
Well did he say, "we preach," indicating his great boldness of speech. For
we speak not secretly, nor in a corner, but we utter a voice clearer than a trumpet.
And he said not, "we preached," but, "even now 'so we preach.'" "And so ye
believed." Here he said not, "ye believe," but, "ye believed." Because they were
shaken in mind, therefore he ran back to the former times, and proceeds to add
the witness from themselves.

1 Corinthians 15:12
2. "Now if Christ is preached that He has been raised from the dead, how
say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?"
Do you see how excellently he reasons, and proves the resurrection from
the fact of Christ's being raised, having first established the former in many
ways? "For both the prophets spoke of it," says he, "and the Lord Himself
showed it by His appearing, and we preach, and you believed;" weaving thus his
fourfold testimony; the witness of the prophets, the witness of the issue of
events, the witness of the apostles, the witness of the disciples; or rather a
fivefold. For this very cause too itself implies the resurrection; viz. his dying for
others' sins. If therefore this has been proved, it is evident that the other also
follows, viz. that the other dead likewise are raised. And this is why, as
concerning an admitted fact, he challenges and questions them, saying, "Now if
Christ has been raised, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of
the dead?"
Hereby also again abating the boldness of the gainsayers: in that he said
not, "how say, ye," but, "how say some among you." And neither does he bring a
charge against all nor declare openly the very persons whom he accuses, in order
not to make them more reckless: neither on the other hand does he conceal it
wholly, that he may correct them. For this purpose accordingly, separating them
from the multitude, he strips himself for the contest with them, by this both
weakening and confounding them, and holding the rest in their conflicts with
these firmer to the truth, nor suffering them to desert to those that were busy to
destroy them: he being in fact prepared to adopt a vehement mode of speech.
Further, lest they should say, "this indeed is clear and evident unto all that
Christ is raised, and none doubts it; this does not however necessarily imply the
other also, to wit, the resurrection of mankind:"— for the one was both before