the greater. For whereas, when he indicated their order, he placed the gift of
tongues last, this he now numbers first; by degrees, as I said, ascending to the
greater gifts. Thus having spoken of tongues, he proceeds immediately to
prophecy; and says;

1 Corinthians 13:2
"And if I have the gift of prophecy."
And this gift again with an excellency. For as in that case he mentioned not
tongues, but the tongues of all mankind, and as he proceeded, those of angels,
and then signified that the gift was nothing without love: so also here he
mentions not prophecy alone but the very highest prophecy: in having said, "If I
have prophecy," he added, "and know all mysteries and all knowledge;"
expressing this gift also with intensity.
Then after this also he proceeds to the other gifts. And again, that he might
not seem to weary them, naming each one of the gifts, he sets down the mother
and fountain of all, and this again with an excellency, thus saying, "And if I have
all faith." Neither was he content with this, but even that which Christ spoke of
as greatest, this also he added, saying, "so as to remove mountains and have not
love, I am nothing." And consider how again here also he lowers the dignity of
the tongues. For whereas in regard of prophecy he signifies the great advantage
arising from it, "the understanding mysteries, and having all knowledge;" and in
regard of faith, no trifling work, even "the removing mountains;" in respect of
tongues, on the other hand, having named the gift itself only, he quits it.
But do thou, I pray, consider this also, how in brief he comprehended all
gifts when he named prophecy and faith: for miracles are either in words or
deeds. And how does Christ say, that the least degree of faith is the being able to
remove a mountain? For as though he were speaking something very small, did
He express Himself when He said, "If you have faith as a grain of mustard-seed,
you shall say to this mountain, Remove, and it shall remove;" [Matthew 17:20]
whereas Paul says that this is "all faith." What then must one say? Since this was
a great thing, the removing a mountain, therefore also he mentioned it, not as
though "all faith" were only able to do this, but since this seemed to be great to

the grosser sort because of the bulk of the outward mass, from this also he extols
his subject. And what he says is this:
"If I have all faith, and can remove mountains, but have not love, I am
nothing."

1 Corinthians 13:3
8. "And if I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and if I give my body to be
burned, but have not love, it profits me nothing."
Wonderful amplification! For even these things too he states with another
addition: in that he said not, "if I give to the poor the half of my goods," or "two
or three parts," but, "though I give all my goods." And he said not, "give," but,
"distribute in morsels ," so that to the expense may be added the administering
also with all care.
But not even yet have I pointed out the whole of the excellency, until I
bring forward the testimonies of Christ which were spoken concerning
almsgiving and death. What then are His testimonies? To the rich man He says,
"If you would be perfect, sell what you have and give to the poor, and come,
follow me." [Matthew 19:21] And discoursing likewise of love to one's neighbor,
He says, "Greater love has no man than this, that a man may lay down his life
for his friends." [John 14:13] Whence it is evident, that even before God this is
greatest of all. But, "I declare," said Paul, that even if we should lay down life
for God's sake, and not merely lay it down, but so as even to be burned, (for this
is the meaning of, "if I give my body to be burned,") we shall have no great
advantage if we love not our neighbor. Well then, the saying that the gifts are of
no great profit without charity is no marvel: since our gifts are a secondary
consideration to our way of life. At any rate, many have displayed gifts, and yet
on becoming vicious have been punished: as those who "prophesied in His
name, and cast out many demons, and wrought many mighty works;" as Judas
the traitor: while others, exhibiting as believers a pure life, have needed nothing
else in order to their salvation. Wherefore, that the gifts should, as I said, require
this, is no marvel: but that an exact life even should avail nothing without it, this
is what brings the intensity of expression strongly out and causes great