Ver. 35. "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?"
And he does not say of God, so indifferent is it to him whether he mentions
the Name of Christ or of God. "Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?" Observe the blessed Paul's judgment.
For he does not mention the things that we are daily getting taken by, love of
money and desire of glory and the thraldom of anger, but things that are far more
enthralling than these, and of power to put a force upon nature itself, and to
wrench open the sternness of the resolution many times even against our will,
are what he puts down here, tribulations and distresses. For even if the things
mentioned are easy to tell up, still each single word has in it thousands of lines
of temptation. For when he says, tribulation, he mentions prisons and bonds, and
calumnies, and banishments, and all the other hardships, so in one word running
through an ocean of dangers without stint, and exhibiting to us, in fact by a
single word, all the evils that men meet with. Yet still he dares them all!
Wherefore he brings them forward in the shape of questions, as if it was
incontrovertible that nothing could move a person so beloved, and who had
enjoyed so much providence over him. Then that this might not seem as if he
had forgotten himself, he brings in the Prophet also, who declared this before, a
long while ago and says,
Ver. 36. "For Your sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as
sheep for the slaughter." [Psalm 43:22]
That is, we are exposed to all to be evil entreated of them. But yet against
so many and so great dangers and these recent horrors, the object of our conflicts
is given as a sufficient consolation, or rather not sufficient only, but even much
more. For it is not for men, nor for any other of the things of this life that we
suffer, but for the King (he says) of the universe. But this is not the only crown,
for he encircles them with another besides, and that varied and manifold. Since
then, as they were men they could not have deaths without number to undergo,
he shows that in this way the prize is none the less. For even if by nature it were
fated to die once, by choice God has granted us to suffer this every day, if we be

so minded. Whence it is plain that we shall depart with as many crowns as we
have lived days, or rather with many more. For it is possible in a day to die not
once alone or twice, but many times. For he who is always ready unto this, keeps
continually receiving a full reward. This then is what the Psalmist ([Προφήτης])
hints at, when he says, "all the day." And for this reason the Apostle also brought
him before them to rouse them up the more. For if, he means, those in the old
dispensation, who had the land as their reward, and the other things which come
to a close along with this life, did so look down upon the present life and the
temptations and dangers of it, what pardon should we find if we deal so
languidly after the promise of Heaven, and the Kingdom above, and its
unutterable blessings, so as not to come even up to the same measure as they?
And this he does not say indeed, but leaves it to his hearers' consciences, and is
satisfied with the quotation alone. He shows too that their bodies become a
sacrifice, and that we must not be disturbed or troubled at God having so ordered
it. And he exhorts them in other ways besides. For to prevent any from saying
that he is merely philosophizing here before having any experience of realities,
he adds, "we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter," meaning the daily deaths
of the Apostles. You see his courage and his goodness. For as they, he means,
when slaughtered make no resistance, so neither do we. But since the feebleness
of the mind of man, even after so great things, was afraid of the multitude of
temptations, see how he again rouses the hearer, and gives him a lofty and
exulting spirit, by saying,
Ver. 37. "Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him
that loved us."
For what is indeed wonderful is this, not that we are conquerors only, but
that we are so by the very things meant as plots against us. And we are not
merely conquerors, but we are "more than conquerors," that is, are so with ease,
without toil and labor. For without undergoing the real things, by only setting our
mind aright, we raise our trophies against our enemies. And with good reason.
For it is God that strives together with us. Do not then be doubtful, if though