15] And do you then entirely strip off her headdress? Do you see how you are
doing outrage to yourself? If indeed she makes her appearance to you with her
head bare, you call it an insult. And do you say that there is nothing shocking
when you bare it yourself? Then you will say, "What if she be not corrected?"
Chasten her then with the rod and with stripes. And yet how many failings have
you also yourself, and yet you are not corrected! These things I am saying not
for their sakes, but for the sake of you free-women, that you do nothing so
unworthy, nothing to disgrace you, that you do yourselves no wrong. If you will
learn this lesson in your household in dealing with your maid-servant, and not be
harsh but gentle and forbearing, much more will you be so in your behavior to
your husband. For she who, though having authority, does nothing of the sort,
will do it much less where there is a check. So that the discipline employed
about your maid-servants, will be of the greatest service to you in gaining the
goodwill of your husbands. "For with what measure ye mete," He says, "it shall
be measured unto you." [Matthew 7:2] Set a bridle upon your mouth. If you are
disciplined to bear bravely with a servant when she answers back, you will not
be annoyed with the insolence of an equal, and in being above annoyance, wilt
have attained to the highest philosophy. But some there are who add even oaths,
but there is nothing more shocking than a woman so enraged. But what again,
you will say, if she dress gaily? Why then, forbid this; you have my consent; but
check it by first beginning with yourself, not so much by fear as by example. Be
in everything yourself a perfect pattern.
"And let railing," says he, "be put away from you." Observe the progress of
mischief. Bitterness produces wrath, wrath anger, anger clamor, clamor railing,
that is, revilings; next from evil-speaking it goes on to blows, from blows to
wounds, from wounds to death. Paul, however, did not wish to mention any of
these, but only this, "let this," says he, "be put away from you, with all malice."
What is "with all malice"? It ends with this. For there are some, like those dogs
that bite secretly, which do not bark at all at those that come near them, nor are
angry, but which fawn, and display a gentle aspect; but when they catch us off

our guard, will fix their teeth in us. These are more dangerous than those that
take up open enmity. Now since there are men too that are dogs, who neither cry
out, nor fly in a passion, nor threaten us when they are offended, yet in secret are
weaving plots, and contriving ten thousand mischiefs, and revenging themselves
not in words but in deeds; he hints at these. Let those things be put away from
you, says he, "with all malice." Do not spare your words, and then revenge
yourself in acts. My purpose in chastising my tongue and curtailing its clamor, is
to prevent its kindling up a more violent blaze. But if you without any clamor art
doing the same thing, and art cherishing the fire and the live coals within, where
is the good of your silence? Do you not know that those conflagrations are the
most destructive of all which are fed within, and appear not to those that are
without? And that those wounds are the deadliest which never break out to the
surface; and those fevers the worst which burn up the vitals? So also is this anger
the most dangerous that preys upon the soul. But let this too be put away from
you, says he, "with all malice," of every kind and degree, great and little. Let us
then hearken to him, let us cast out all "bitterness and all malice," that we
"grieve not the Holy Spirit." Let us destroy all bitterness; let us cut it up by the
very roots. Nothing good, nothing healthful, can ever come from a bitter soul;
nothing but misfortunes, nothing but tears, nothing but weeping and wailing. Do
ye not see those beasts that roar or cry out, how we turn away from them; the
lion, for instance, and the bear? But not so from the sheep; for there is no
roaring, but a mild and gentle voice. And so again with musical instruments,
those which are loud and harsh are the most unpleasant to the ear, such as the
drum and trumpet; whereas those which are not so, but are soothing, these are
pleasant, as the flute and lyre and pipe. Let us then prepare our soul so as never
to cry aloud, and thus shall we be enabled also to gain the mastery over our
anger. And when we have cut out this, we ourselves shall be the first to enjoy the
calm, and we shall sail into that peaceful haven, which God grant we may all
attain, in Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, together with the Holy Ghost, be
unto the Father, glory, might, and honor, now, and ever, and throughout all ages.