And what did the disciples? Did they not observe the same law, being taken
to houses of the poor and lodged, one with a tanner, another with a tent-maker,
and with the seller of purple? For they inquired not after the splendor of the
house, but for the virtues of men's souls.
These therefore let us also emulate, hastening by the beauty of pillars and of
marbles, and seeking the mansions which are above; and let us tread under foot
all the pride here below with all love of money, and acquire a lofty mind. For if
we be sober-minded, not even this whole world is worthy of us, much less
porticoes and arcades. Wherefore, I beseech you, let us adorn our souls, let us fit
up this house which we are also to have with us when we depart; that we may
attain even to the eternal blessings, through the grace and mercy, etc.

## Homily 25 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 10:25
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat, asking no question for conscience
sake.
Having said that "they could not drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of the
devils," and having once for all led them away from those tables, by Jewish
examples, by human reasonings, by the tremendous Mysteries, by the rites
solemnized among the idols ; and having filled them with great fear; that he
might not by this fear drive again to another extreme, and they be forced,
exercising a greater scrupulosity than was necessary, to feel alarm, lest possibly
even without their knowledge there might come in some such thing either from
the market or from some other quarter; to release them from this strait, he says,
"Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, eat, asking no question." "For," says he, "if
you eat in ignorance and not knowingly, you are not subject to the punishment: it
being thenceforth a matter not of greediness, but of ignorance."
Nor does he free the man only from this anxiety, but also from another,
establishing them in thorough security and liberty. For he does not even suffer
them to "question;" i.e., to search and enquire, whether it be an idol-sacrifice or
no such thing; but simply to eat every thing which comes from the market, not
even acquainting one's self with so much as this, what it is that is set before us.
So that even he that eats, if in ignorance, may be rid of anxiety. For such is the
nature of those things which are not in their essence evil, but through the man's
intention make him unclean. Wherefore he says, "asking no question."

1 Corinthians 10:26
"For to the Lord belongs the earth and the fullness thereof." Not to the
devils. Now if the earth and the fruits and the beasts be all His, nothing is
unclean: but it becomes unclean otherwise, from our intention and our
disobedience. Wherefore he not only gave permission, but also,

1 Corinthians 10:27
"If one of them that believe not bids you," says he, "to a feast, and you are
disposed to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for
conscience sake."
See again his moderation. For he did not command and make a law that
they should withdraw themselves, yet neither did he forbid it. And again, should
they depart, he frees them from all suspicion. Now what may be the account of
this? That so great curiousness might not seem to arise from any fear and
cowardice. For he who makes scrupulous enquiry does so as being in dread: but
he who, on hearing the fact, abstains, abstains as out of contempt and hatred and
aversion. Wherefore Paul, purposing to establish both points, says, "Whatsoever
is set before you, eat."