Hebrews 12:14
2. "Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord." What he also said above, "Not forsaking the assembling of
yourselves together" [Hebrews 10:25], he hints at in this place also. For nothing
so especially makes persons easily vanquished and subdued in temptations, as
isolation. For, tell me, scatter a phalanx in war, and the enemy will need no
trouble, but will take them prisoners, coming on them separately, and thereby the
more helpless.
"Follow peace with all men, and holiness" (he says). Therefore with the
evil-doers as well? "If it be possible," he says, "as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men." [Romans 12:18] For your part (he means) "live
peaceably," doing no harm to religion: but in whatever you are ill-treated, bear it
nobly. For the bearing with evil is a great weapon in trials. Thus Christ also
made His disciples strong by saying, "Behold I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves,"
[Matthew 10:16] What dost Thou say? Are we "among wolves," and dost Thou
bid us to be "as sheep," and "as doves"? Yea, He says. For nothing so shames
him that is doing us evil, as bearing nobly the things which are brought upon us:
and not avenging ourselves either by word or by deed. This both makes us more
philosophical ourselves and procures a greater reward, and also benefits them.
But has such an one been insolent? Do thou bless [him]. See how much you will
gain from this: you have quenched the evil, you have procured to yourself a
reward, you have made him ashamed, and you have suffered nothing serious.
3. "Follow peace with all men, and holiness." What does he mean by
"holiness" ? Chaste, and orderly living in marriage. If any person is unmarried
(he says) let him remain pure, let him marry: or if he be married, let him not
commit fornication, but let him live with his own wife: for this also is "holiness."

How? Marriage is not "holiness," but marriage preserves the holiness which
[proceeds] from Faith, not permitting union with a harlot. For "marriage is
honorable" [Hebrews 13:4], not holy. Marriage is pure: it does not however also
give holiness, except by forbidding the defilement of that [holiness] which has
been given by our Faith.
"Without which" (he says) "no man shall see the Lord." Which he also says
in the [Epistle] to the Corinthians. "Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor
adulterers, nor idolaters, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor covetous persons, nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God." [1 Corinthians 6:9-10] For how
shall he who has become the body of a harlot, how shall he be able to be the
body of Christ?

Hebrews 12:15
4. "Looking diligently lest any man come short of the grace of God; lest any
root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled: lest
there be any fornicator or profane person." Do you see how everywhere he puts
the common salvation into the hands of each individual? "Exhorting one another
daily" (he says) "while it is called Today." [Hebrews 3:13] Do not then cast all
[the burden] on your teachers; do not [cast] all upon them who have the rule over
you: ye also (he means) are able to edify one another. Which also he said in
writing to the Thessalonians, "Edify one another, even as also ye do." [1
Thessalonians 5:11] And again, "Comfort one another with these words." [1
Thessalonians 4:18] This we also now exhort you.
5. If you be willing, you will have more success with each other than we
can have. For you both are with one another for a longer time, and you know
more than we of each other's affairs, and you are not ignorant of each other's
failings, and you have more freedom of speech, and love, and intimacy; and
these are no small [advantages] for teaching, but great and opportune
introductions for it: ye will be more able than we both to reprove and to exhort.
And not this only, but because I am but one, whereas you are many; and you will
be able, however many, to be teachers. Wherefore I entreat you, do not "neglect
this gift." [1 Timothy 4:14] Each one of you has a wife, has a friend, has a
servant, has a neighbor; let him reprove him, let him exhort him.
For how is it not absurd, with regard to [bodily] nourishment, to make
associations for messing together, and for drinking together, and to have a set
day whereon to club with one another, as they say, and to make up by the
association what each person being alone by himself fails short of— as for
instance, if it be necessary to go to a funeral, or to a dinner, or to assist a
neighbor in any matter— and not to do this for the purpose of instruction in