## Homily 76 on Matthew

Matt. XXIV. 16-18.
"Then let them which be in Judæa flee into the mountains. And let him that
is on the housetop not come down to take anything out of his house. Neither let
him which is in his field return back to take his clothes."
Having spoken of the ills that were to overtake the city, and of the trials of
the apostles, and that they should remain unsubdued, and should overrun the
whole world, He mentions again the Jews' calamities, showing that when the one
should be glorious, having taught the whole world, the others should be in
calamity.
And see how He relates the war, by the things that seem to be small setting
forth how intolerable it was to be. For, "Then," says He, "let them which be in
Judæa flee into the mountains." Then, When? When these things should be,
"when the abomination of desolation should stand in the holy place." Whence he
seems to me to be speaking of the armies. Flee therefore then, says He, for
thenceforth there is no hope of safety for you.
For since it had fallen out, that they often had recovered themselves in
grievous wars, as under Sennacherib, under Antiochus again (for when at that
time also, armies had come in upon them, and the temple had been seized
beforehand, the Maccabees rallying gave their affairs an opposite turn); in order
then that they might not now also suspect this, that there would be any such
change, He forbids them all thought of the kind. For it were well, says He, to
escape henceforth with one's naked body. Therefore them also that are on the
housetop, He suffers not to enter into the house to take their clothes, indicating
the evils to be inevitable, and the calamity without end, and that it must needs be
that he that was involved therein should surely perish. Therefore He adds also,
him that is in the field, saying, neither let this man turn back to take his clothes.

For if they that are in doors flee, much more they that are out of doors ought not
to take refuge within.
"Woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck,"
[Matthew 24:19] to the one because of their greater inertness, and because they
cannot flee easily, being weighed down by the burden of their pregnancy; to the
other, because they are held by the tie of feeling for their children, and cannot
save their sucklings. For money it is a light thing to despise, and an easy thing to
provide, and clothes; but the bonds of nature how could any one escape? How
could the pregnant woman become active? How could she that gives suck be
able to overlook that which she had borne?
Then, to show again the greatness of the calamity, He says, "Pray ye that
your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day. For then shall be
great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world until now,
neither shall be." [Matthew 24:20-21]
Do you see that His discourse is addressed to the Jews, and that He is
speaking of the ills that should overtake them? For the apostles surely were not
to keep the Sabbath day, neither to be there, when Vespasian did those things.
For indeed the most part of them were already departed this life. And if any was
left, he was dwelling then in other parts of the world.
But wherefore neither "in the winter, nor on the Sabbath day?" Not in the
winter, because of the difficulty arising from the season; not on the Sabbath day,
because of the absolute authority exercised by the law. For since they had need
of flight, and of the swiftest flight, but neither would the Jews dare to flee on the
Sabbath day, because of the law, neither in winter was such a thing easy;
therefore, "Pray ye," says He; "for then shall be tribulation, such as never was,
neither shall be."
And let not any man suppose this to have been spoken hyperbolically; but
let him study the writings of Josephus, and learn the truth of the sayings. For
neither can any one say, that the man being a believer, in order to establish
Christ's words, has exaggerated the tragical history. For indeed He was both a