intemperate, that of those who are of one mind for money, and for plunder's
sake, and for revels and drinking clubs, he clears it of all these, by saying,
"Abhor ([ἀ] [ποστυγοὕντες]) that which is evil." And he does not speak of
refraining from it, but of hating it, and not merely hating it, but hating it
exceedingly. For this word [ἀ] [πὸ] is often of intensive force with him, as where
he speaks of "earnest expectation, looking out for," (complete) "redemption." For
since many who do not evil things still have a desire after them, therefore he
says, "Abhor." For what he wants is to purify the thought, and that we should
have a mighty enmity, hatred and war against vice. For do not fancy, he means,
because I said, "Love one another," that I mean you to go so far as to coöperate
even in bad actions with one another; for the law that I am laying down is just
the reverse. Since it would have you an alien not from the action only, but even
from the inclination towards vice; and not merely an alien from this same
inclination, but to have an excessive aversion and hatred of it too. And he is not
content with only this, but he also brings in the practice of virtue. "Cleave to that
which is good."
He does not speak of doing only, but of being disposed too. For this the
command to "cleave to" it indicates. So God, when He knit the man to the
woman, said, "For he shall cleave to his wife." [Genesis 2:24] Then he mentions
reasons why we ought to love one another.
Ver. 10. "Be kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love."
You are brethren, he means, and have come of the same pangs. Hence even
on this head you ought to love one another. And this Moses said to those who
were quarrelling in Egypt, "You are brethren, why do ye wrong one to another?"
[Exodus 2:13] When then he is speaking of those without, he says, "If it be
possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men." [Romans 12:18]
But when he is speaking of his own, he says, "Be kindly affectioned one to
another with brotherly love." For in the other case he requires abstinence from
quarrelling, and hatred, and aversion: but here loving too, and not merely loving,
but the loving of relatives. For not only must one's "love be without

dissimulation," but intense also, and warm, and glowing. Because, to what
purpose would you love without fraud, and not love with warmth? Whence he
says, kindly affectioned one towards another, that is, be friends, and warm ones
too. Do not wait to be loved by another, but leap at it yourself, and be the first to
begin it. For so will you reap the wages of his love also. Having mentioned the
reason then why we ought to love one another, he tells us also the way in which
the affection may grow unchangeable. Whence he proceeds, "In honor
preferring one another." For this is the way that affection is produced, and also
when produced abides. And there is nothing which makes friends so much, as
the earnest endeavor to overcome one's neighbor in honoring him. For what he
had mentioned before comes of love, and love of honor, as honor does too of
love. Then that we may not honor only, he looks for something besides, when he
says,
Ver. 11. "Not backward in zeal."
For this also genders love when with honor we also show a readiness to
protect: as there is nothing that makes men beloved so much as honor and
forethought. For to love is not enough, but there must be this also: or rather this
also comes of loving, as also loving has its warmth from this, and they are
confirmative one of another. For there are many that love in mind, yet reach not
forth the hand. And this is why he uses every means to build up love. And how
are we to become "not backward in zeal?"
"Fervent in spirit." See how in every instance he aims after higher degrees;
for he does not say "give" only, but "with largeness;" nor "rule," but do it "with
diligence;" nor "show mercy," but do it "with cheerfulness;" nor "honor," but
"prefer one another;" nor "love," but do it "without dissimulation;" nor refrain
from "evil" things, but "hate" them; nor hold to "what is good," but "cleave" to
it; nor "love," but to do it "with brotherly affection;" nor be zealous, but be so
without backwardness; nor have the "Spirit," but have it "fervent," that is, that
you may be warm and awakened. For if you have those things aforesaid, you
will draw the Spirit to you. And if This abide with you, It will likewise make you