That is, Barbelos: comp. i. 29, 1.

express similar opinions. Those statements, again, which have been made with respect to the
emanations, and the Æons, and the [supposed state of] degeneracy, and the inconstant character of
their Mother, equally overthrow Basilides, and all who are falsely styled Gnostics, who do, in fact,
just repeat the same views under different names, but do, to a greater extent than the former,
transfer those things which lie outside of the truth to the system of their own doctrine. And the
remarks I have made respecting numbers will also apply against all those who misappropriate things
belonging to the truth for the support of a system of this kind. And all that has been said respecting
the Creator (Demiurge) to show that he alone is God and Father of all, and whatever remarks may
yet be made in the following books, I apply against the heretics at large. The more moderate and
reasonable among them thou wilt convert and convince, so as to lead them no longer to blaspheme
their Creator, and Maker, and Sustainer, and Lord, nor to ascribe His origin to defect and ignorance;
but the fierce, and terrible, and irrational [among them] thou wilt drive far from thee, that you may
no longer have to endure their idle loquaciousness.
2. Moreover, those also will be thus confuted who belong to Simon and Carpocrates, and if
there be any others who are said to perform miracles—who do not perform what they do either
through the power of God, or in connection with the truth, nor for the well-being of men, but for
the sake of destroying and misleading mankind, by means of magical deceptions, and with universal
deceit, thus entailing greater harm than good on those who believe them, with respect to the point
on which they lead them astray. For they can neither confer sight on the blind, nor hearing on the
deaf, nor chase away all sorts of demons—[none, indeed,] except those that are sent into others by
themselves, if they can even do so much as this. Nor can they cure the weak, or the lame, or the
paralytic, or those who are distressed in any other part of the body, as has often been done in regard
to bodily infirmity. Nor can they furnish effective remedies for those external accidents which may
occur. And so far are they from being able to raise the dead, as the Lord raised them, and the apostles
did by means of prayer, and as has been frequently done in the brotherhood on account of some
necessity—the entire Church in that particular locality entreating [the boon] with much fasting and
prayer, the spirit of the dead man has returned, and he has been bestowed in answer to the prayers
of the saints—that they do not even believe this can be possibly be done, [and hold] that the
resurrection from the dead is simply an acquaintance with that truth which they proclaim.
3. Since, therefore, there exist among them error and misleading influences, and magical illusions
are impiously wrought in the sight of men; but in the Church, sympathy, and compassion, and
stedfastness, and truth, for the aid and encouragement of mankind, are not only displayed without
fee or reward, but we ourselves lay out for the benefit of others our own means; and inasmuch as