FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.3.

Now human law is framed for a number of human beings, the
majority of whom are not perfect in virtue. Wherefore human laws do
not forbid all vices, from which the virtuous abstain, but only the
more grievous vices, from which it is possible for the majority to
abstain; and chiefly those that are to the hurt of others, without the
prohibition of which human society could not be maintained: thus
human law prohibits murder, theft and such like.
Reply to Objection 1: Audacity seems to refer to the assailing of
others. Consequently it belongs to those sins chiefly whereby one's
neighbor is injured: and these sins are forbidden by human law, as
stated.
Reply to Objection 2: The purpose of human law is to lead men to
virtue, not suddenly, but gradually. Wherefore it does not lay upon
the multitude of imperfect men the burdens of those who are already
virtuous, viz. that they should abstain from all evil. Otherwise these
imperfect ones, being unable to bear such precepts, would break out
into yet greater evils: thus it is written (Ps. 30:33): "He that violently
bloweth his nose, bringeth out blood"; and (Mt. 9:17) that if "new
wine," i.e. precepts of a perfect life, "is put into old bottles," i.e. into
imperfect men, "the bottles break, and the wine runneth out," i.e. the
precepts are despised, and those men, from contempt, break into
evils worse still.
Reply to Objection 3: The natural law is a participation in us of the
eternal law: while human law falls short of the eternal law. Now
Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 5): "The law which is framed for the
government of states, allows and leaves unpunished many things
that are punished by Divine providence. Nor, if this law does not
attempt to do everything, is this a reason why it should be blamed
for what it does." Wherefore, too, human law does not prohibit
everything that is forbidden by the natural law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether human law prescribes acts of all the

virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that human law does not prescribe acts
of all the virtues. For vicious acts are contrary to acts of virtue. But
human law does not prohibit all vices, as stated above (Article 2).
Therefore neither does it prescribe all acts of virtue.
Objection 2: Further, a virtuous act proceeds from a virtue. But virtue
is the end of law; so that whatever is from a virtue, cannot come
under a precept of law. Therefore human law does not prescribe all
acts of virtue.
Objection 3: Further, law is ordained to the common good, as stated
above (Question 90, Article 2). But some acts of virtue are ordained,
not to the common good, but to private good. Therefore the law does
not prescribe all acts of virtue.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that the law
"prescribes the performance of the acts of a brave man . . . and the
acts of the temperate man . . . and the acts of the meek man: and in
like manner as regards the other virtues and vices, prescribing the
former, forbidding the latter."
I answer that, The species of virtues are distinguished by their
objects, as explained above (Question 54, Article 2; Question 60,
Article 1; Question 62, Article 2). Now all the objects of virtues can
be referred either to the private good of an individual, or to the
common good of the multitude: thus matters of fortitude may be
achieved either for the safety of the state, or for upholding the rights
of a friend, and in like manner with the other virtues. But law, as
stated above (Question 90, Article 2) is ordained to the common
good. Wherefore there is no virtue whose acts cannot be prescribed
by the law. Nevertheless human law does not prescribe concerning
all the acts of every virtue: but only in regard to those that are
ordainable to the common good---either immediately, as when
certain things are done directly for the common good---or mediately,
as when a lawgiver prescribes certain things pertaining to good
order, whereby the citizens are directed in the upholding of the
common good of justice and peace.