THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.13.

Christ reached the highest measure of grace. Hence it is clear that
the grace of Christ cannot be increased on the part of grace. But
neither can it be increased on the part of the subject, since Christ as
man was a true and full comprehensor from the first instant of His
conception. Hence there could have been no increase of grace in
Him, as there could be none in the rest of the blessed, whose grace
could not increase, seeing that they have reached their last end. But
as regards men who are wholly wayfarers, their grace can be
increased not merely on the part of the form, since they have not
attained the highest degree of grace, but also on the part of the
subject, since they have not yet attained their end.
Reply to Objection 1: If we speak of mathematical quantity, addition
can be made to any finite quantity, since there is nothing on the part
of finite quantity which is repugnant to addition. But if we speak of
natural quantity, there may be repugnance on the part of the form to
which a determined quantity is due, even as other accidents are
determined. Hence the Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 41) that "there
is naturally a term of all things, and a fixed limit of magnitude and
increase." And hence to the quantity of the whole there can be no
addition. And still more must we suppose a term in the forms
themselves, beyond which they may not go. Hence it is not
necessary that addition should be capable of being made to Christ's
grace, although it is finite in its essence.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the Divine power can make
something greater and better than the habitual grace of Christ, yet it
could not make it to be ordained to anything greater than the
personal union with the Only-begotten Son of the Father; and to this
union, by the purpose of the Divine wisdom, the measure of grace is
sufficient.
Reply to Objection 3: Anyone may increase in wisdom and grace in
two ways. First inasmuch as the very habits of wisdom and grace are
increased; and in this way Christ did not increase. Secondly, as
regards the effects, i.e. inasmuch as they do wiser and greater
works; and in this way Christ increased in wisdom and grace even as
in age, since in the course of time He did more perfect works, to
prove Himself true man, both in the things of God, and in the things
of man.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.13.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.14.

### ARTICLE 13. Whether the habitual grace of Christ followed

after the union?
Objection 1: It would seem that the habitual grace did not follow after
the union. For nothing follows itself. But this habitual grace seems to
be the same as the grace of union; for Augustine says (De Praedest.
Sanct. xv): "Every man becomes a Christian from the beginning of
his belief, by the same grace whereby this Man from His beginning
became Christ"; and of these two the first pertains to habitual grace
and the second to the grace of union. Therefore it would seem that
habitual grace did not follow upon the union.
Objection 2: Further, disposition precedes perfection, if not in time,
at least in thought. But the habitual grace seems to be a disposition
in human nature for the personal union. Therefore it seems that the
habitual grace did not follow but rather preceded the union.
Objection 3: Further, the common precedes the proper. But habitual
grace is common to Christ and other men; and the grace of union is
proper to Christ. Therefore habitual grace is prior in thought to the
union. Therefore it does not follow it.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 42:1): "Behold my servant, I will
uphold Him . . . "and farther on: "I have given My Spirit upon Him";
and this pertains to the gift of habitual grace. Hence it remains that
the assumption of human nature to the unity of the Person preceded
the habitual grace of Christ.
I answer that, The union of the human nature with the Divine Person,
which, as we have said above (Question 2, Article 10; Question 6,
Article 6), is the grace of union, precedes the habitual grace of
Christ, not in order of time, but by nature and in thought; and this for
a triple reason: First, with reference to the order of the principles of
both. For the principle of the union is the Person of the Son
assuming human nature, Who is said to be sent into the world,
inasmuch as He assumed human nature; but the principle of habitual
grace, which is given with charity, is the Holy Ghost, Who is said to
be sent inasmuch as He dwells in the mind by charity. Now the
mission of the Son is prior, in the order of nature, to the mission of
the Holy Ghost, even as in the order of nature the Holy Ghost
proceeds from the Son, and love from wisdom. Hence the personal