evil at random, and putting a bridle on the lips of all calumniators. I mean,
whereas many suspect the good by reason of the bad, He by this saying has
deprived them of all excuse. "For you can not say, 'I am deceived and beguiled;'
since I have given you exactly this way of distinguishing them by their works,
having added the injunction to go to their actions, and not to confound all at
random."
9. Then forasmuch as He had not commanded to punish, but only to beware
of them, He, at once both to comfort those whom they vex, and to alarm and
change them, set up as a bulwark against them the punishment they should
receive at His hands, saying,
"Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the
fire." [Matthew 7:19]
Then, to make the saying less grievous, He added,
"Wherefore by their fruits you shall know them."
That He might not seem to introduce the threatening as His leading topic,
but to be stirring up their mind in the way of admonition and counsel.
Here He seems to me to be hinting at the Jews also, who were exhibiting
such fruits. Wherefore also He reminded them of the sayings of John, in the very
same terms delineating their punishment. For he too said the very same, making
mention to them of an "axe," and of a "tree cut down," and of "unquenchable
fire."
And though it appear indeed to be some single judgment, the being burnt
up, yet if one examine carefully, these are two punishments. For he that is burnt
is also cast of course out of God's kingdom; and this latter punishment is more
grievous than the other. Now I know indeed that many tremble only at hell, but I
affirm the loss of that glory to be a far greater punishment than hell. And if it be
not possible to exhibit it such in words, this is nothing marvellous. For neither do
we know the blessedness of those good things, that we should on the other hand
clearly perceive the wretchedness ensuing on being deprived of them; since Paul,
as knowing these things clearly, is aware, that to fall from Christ's glory is more

grievous than all. And this we shall know at that time, when we shall fall into the
actual trial of it.
But may this never be our case, O thou only-begotten Son of God, neither
may we ever have any experience of this irremediable punishment. For how
great an evil it is to fall from those good things, cannot indeed be accurately told:
nevertheless, as I may be able, I will labor and strive by an example to make it
clear to you, though it be but in some small degree.
Let us then imagine a wondrous child, having besides His virtue the
dominion of the whole world, and in all respects so virtuous, as to be capable of
bringing all men to the yearning of a father's affection. What theft do you think
the father of this child would not gladly suffer, not to be cast out of His society?
And what evil, small or great, would he not welcome, on condition of seeing and
enjoying Him? Now let us reason just so with respect to that glory also. For no
child, be he never so virtuous, is so desirable and lovely to a father, as the having
our portion in those good things, and "to depart and be with Christ."
[Philippians 1:23]
No doubt hell, and that punishment, is a thing not to be borne. Yet though
one suppose ten thousand hells, he will utter nothing like what it will be to fail of
that blessed glory, to be hated of Christ, to hear "I know you not,"
[Matthew 25:12] to be accused for not feeding Him when we saw Him an
hungered. [Matthew 25:42] Yea, better surely to endure a thousand thunderbolts,
than to see that face of mildness turning away from us, and that eye of peace not
enduring to look upon us. For if He, while I was an enemy, and hating Him, and
turning from Him, did in such wise follow after me, as not to spare even
Himself, but to give Himself up unto death: when after all this I do not
vouchsafe to Him so much as a loaf in His hunger, with what kind of eyes shall I
ever again behold Him?
But mark even here His gentleness; in that He does not at all speak of His
benefits, nor say, "You have despised Him that has done you so much good:"
neither does He say, "Me, who brought you from that which is not into being,