and pained at the same things as other people. For if any one who knew nothing
of the games were to see a boxer, having wounds upon him and wearing a
crown; he would think him in pain on account of the wounds, not understanding
the pleasure the crown would give him. And these therefore, because they know
what we suffer but do not know for what we suffer them, naturally suspect that
there is nought besides these; for they see indeed the wrestling and the dangers,
but not the prizes and the crowns and the subject of the contest. What then were
the "all things" which Paul possessed, when he said, "As having nothing, and yet
possessing all things?" Things temporal , things spiritual. For he whom the cities
received as an angel, for whom they would have plucked out their own eyes and
have given them to him, [Galatians 4:14-15] he for whom they laid down their
own necks, how had he not all things that were theirs? [Romans 16:4] But if you
desire to see the spiritual also, you will find him in these things also especially
rich. For he that was so dear to the King of all as even to share in unspeakable
things with the Lord of the angels, [2 Corinthians 12:4] how was not he more
opulent than all men, and had all things? Devils had not else been so subject to
him, suffering and disease had not so fled away.
5. And let us therefore, when we suffer anything for Christ's sake, not
merely bear it nobly but also rejoice. If we fast, let us leap for joy as if enjoying
luxury; if we be insulted, let us dance as if praised; if we spend, let us feel as if
gaining; if we bestow on the poor, let us count ourselves to receive: for he that
gives not thus will not give readily. When then you have a mind to scatter
abroad, look not at this only in almsgiving, but also in every kind of virtue,
compute not alone the severity of the toils, but also the sweetness of the prizes;
and before all the subjects of this wrestling, our Lord Jesus; and you will readily
enter upon the contest, and wilt live the whole time in pleasure. For nothing is
wont so to cause pleasure as a good conscience.
Therefore Paul indeed, though wounded every day, rejoiced and exulted;
but the men of this day, although they endure not a shadow even of what he did,
grieve and make lamentations from no other cause than that they have not a

mind full of heavenly philosophy. For, tell me, wherefore the lamentation?
Because you are poor, and in want of necessaries? Surely for this you ought
rather to make lamentation, [not] because you weep, not because you are poor,
but because you are mean-spirited; not because you have not money, but because
you prize money so highly. Paul died daily, yet wept not but even rejoiced; he
fought with continual hunger, yet grieved not but even gloried in it. And do you,
because you have not all the year's provisions stored up, grieve and beat
yourself? 'Yes,' he replies, 'for he had to care only for his own needs, while I
have besides to care for servants, and children, and wife.' Rather, he alone had
not to care for his own needs, but for the whole world's. And thou indeed [hast to
care] for one household, but he for those so many poor at Jerusalem, for those in
Macedonia, for those everywhere in poverty, for those who give to them no less
than for those who receive. For his care for the world was of a twofold nature,
both that they might not be destitute of necessaries, and that they might be rich
in spiritual things. And your famishing children distress not you so much as all
the concerns of the faithful did him. Why do I say, of the faithful? For neither
was he free from care for the unfaithful, but was so eaten up with it that he
wished even to become accursed for their sakes; but thou, were a famine to rage
ten thousand times over, wouldest never choose to die for any whomsoever. And
thou indeed carest for one woman, but he for the Churches throughout the world.
For he says, "My anxiety for all the Churches." [2 Corinthians 11:28] How long
then, O man, do you trifle, comparing yourself with Paul; and will not cease
from this your much meanness of spirit? For it behooves to weep, not when we
are in poverty but when we sin; for this is worthy of lamentations, as all the
other things are of ridicule even. 'But,' he says, 'this is not all that grieves me; but
that also such an one is in power, while I am unhonored and outcast.' And what
is this? For the blessed Paul too appeared to the many to be unhonored and an
outcast. 'But,' says he, 'he was Paul.' Plainly then not the nature of the things, but
your feebleness of spirit causes your desponding. Lament not therefore your
poverty, but yourself who art so minded, yea rather, lament not yourself, but