shows the power of the cause only by reason of the action, which proceeds from the
power and is terminated to the effect. But the nature of a cause is not known through its
effect except in so far as through its effect its power is known which follows upon its
nature. If then created things have no actions of their own productive of effects, it
follows that the nature of a created thing can never be known by its effect; and thus
there is withdrawn from us all investigation of natural science, in which demonstrations
are given principally through the effect.
Some Doctors of the Moorish Law are said to bring an argument to show that accidents
are not traceable to the action of bodies, the ground of the argument being this, that an
accident does not pass from subject to subject: hence they count it an impossibility for
heat to pass from a hot body to another body heated by it, but they say that all such
accidents are created by God. Now this is a ridiculous proof to assign of a body not
acting, to point to the fact that no accident passes from subject to subject. When it is
said that one hot body heats another, it is not meant that numerically the same heat,
which is in the heating body, passes to the body heated; but that by virtue of the heat,
which is in the heating body, numerically another heat comes to be in the heated body
actually, which was in it before potentially. For a natural agent does not transfer its own
form to another subject, but reduces the subject upon which it acts from potentiality to
actuality.

itself do nothing: It is a mere receptivity and channel of communication or transference
for the motion imparted by the Creator; it can hand about movement from particle to
particle, but it cannot originate or destroy any; and thus it is opposed to mind, the very
essence of which is thought or activity. Matter is inert extension, thought is ever
operative inextension, etc." See General Metaphysics, Stonyhurst Series, pp. 308-313.

## CHAPTER LXX--How the Same Effect is from God and from a Natural Agent
SOME find it difficult to understand how natural effects are attributable At once to God
and to a natural agent. For (Arg. 1) one action, it seems, cannot proceed from two
agents. If then the action, by which a natural effect is produced, proceeds from a natural
body, it does not proceed from God.
Arg. 2. When an action can be sufficiently done by one, it is superfluous to have it done
by more: we see that nature does not do through two instruments what she can do
through one. Since then the divine power is sufficient to produce natural effects, it is
superfluous to employ also natural powers for the production of those same effects. Or
if the natural power sufficiently produces its own effect, it is superfluous for the divine
power to act to the same effect.
Arg. 3. If God produces the whole natural effect, nothing of the effect is left for the
natural agent to produce.
Upon consideration, these arguments are not difficult.
Reply 1. The power of the inferior agent depends upon the power of the superior agent,
inasmuch as the superior agent gives to the inferior the power whereby it acts, or
preserves that power, or applies it to action; as a workman applies a tool to its proper
effect, frequently however without giving the tool the form whereby it acts, nor
preserving it, but merely giving it motion. The action therefore of the inferior agent must
proceed from that agent not merely through its own power, but through the power of all
superior agents, for it acts in virtue of them all. And as the ultimate and lowest agent
acts immediately, so is the power of the prime agent immediate in the production of the
effect. For the power of the lowest agent is not competent to produce the effect of itself,
but in power of the agent next above it; and the power of that agent is competent in
virtue of the agent above it; and thus the power of the highest agent proves to be of
itself productive of the effect, as the immediate cause, as we see in the principles of
mathematical demonstrations, of which the first principle is inimediate. As then it is
not absurd for the same action to be produced by an agent and the power of that agent,
so neither is it absurd for the same effect to be produced by an inferior agent and by
God, by both immediately, although in different manners.
Reply 2. Though a natural thing produces its own effect, it is not superfluous for God to
produce it, because the natural thing does not produce it except in the power of God.
Nor is it superfluous, while God can of Himself produce all natural effects, for them to be
produced by other causes: this is not from the insufficiency of God's power, but from the
immensity of His goodness, whereby He has wished to communicate His likeness to
creatures, not only in point of their being, but likewise in point of their being causes of
other things (Chap.XXI). Reply 3. When the same effect is attributed to a natural
cause and to the divine power, it is not as though the effect were produced partly by
God and partly by the natural agent: but the whole effect is produced by both, though in