intelligence can be but one; just as an abstract thing that subsists.
Consequently an angel's substance would neither be distinguished
from God's substance, which is His very act of understanding
subsisting in itself, nor from the substance of another angel.
Also, if the angel were his own act of understanding, there could
then be no degrees of understanding more or less perfectly; for this
comes about through the diverse participation of the act of
understanding.
Reply to Objection 1: When the active intellect is said to be its own
action, such predication is not essential, but concomitant, because,
since its very nature consists in act, instantly, so far as lies in itself,
action accompanies it: which cannot be said of the passive intellect,
for this has no actions until after it has been reduced to act.
Reply to Objection 2: The relation between "life" and "to live" is not
the same as that between "essence" and "to be"; but rather as that
between "a race" and "to run," one of which signifies the act in the
abstract, and the other in the concrete. Hence it does not follow, if
"to live" is "to be," that "life" is "essence." Although life is
sometimes put for the essence, as Augustine says (De Trin. x),
"Memory and understanding and will are one essence, one life": yet
it is not taken in this sense by the Philosopher, when he says that
"the act of the intellect is life."
Reply to Objection 3: The action which is transient, passing to some
extrinsic object, is really a medium between the agent and the
subject receiving the action. The action which remains within the
agent, is not really a medium between the agent and the object, but
only according to the manner of expression; for it really follows the
union of the object with the agent. For the act of understanding is
brought about by the union of the object understood with the one
who understands it, as an effect which differs from both.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether in the angel to understand is to exist?

Objection 1: It would seem that in the angel to understand is to exist.
For in living things to live is to be, as the Philosopher says (De
Anima ii, text. 37). But to "understand is in a sense to live" (De
Anima ii, text. 37). Therefore in the angel to understand is to exist.
Objection 2: Further, cause bears the same relation to cause, as
effect to effect. But the form whereby the angel exists is the same as
the form by which he understands at least himself. Therefore in the
angel to understand is to exist.
On the contrary, The angel's act of understanding is his movement,
as is clear from Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv). But to exist is not
movement. Therefore in the angel to be is not to understand.
I answer that, The action of the angel, as also the action of any
creature, is not his existence. For as it is said (Metaph. ix, text. 16),
there is a twofold class of action; one which passes out to
something beyond, and causes passion in it, as burning and cutting;
and another which does not pass outwards, but which remains
within the agent, as to feel, to understand, to will; by such actions
nothing outside is changed, but the whole action takes place within
the agent. It is quite clear regarding the first kind of action that it
cannot be the agent's very existence: because the agent's existence
is signified as within him, while such an action denotes something
as issuing from the agent into the thing done. But the second action
of its own nature has infinity, either simple or relative. As an example
of simple infinity, we have the act "to understand," of which the
object is "the true"; and the act "to will," of which the object is "the
good"; each of which is convertible with being; and so, to
understand and to will, of themselves, bear relation to all things, and
each receives its species from its object. But the act of sensation is
relatively infinite, for it bears relation to all sensible things; as sight
does to all things visible. Now the being of every creature is
restricted to one in genus and species; God's being alone is simply
infinite, comprehending all things in itself, as Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. v). Hence the Divine nature alone is its own act of
understanding and its own act of will.
Reply to Objection 1: Life is sometimes taken for the existence of the