arrested in his mischievous course. Yet even after these things we did not rest,
but were urgent in our demand that a tribunal should be formed for the purpose
of enquiry and defence: for we said that we were ready to prove that we
ourselves were guiltless, but that they had flagrantly transgressed. For there were
some Syrians among those present with him at that time, who were left behind
here; and we accosted them expressing our readiness to plead our cause, and
frequently importuned them on this behalf, demanding that the minutes (of the
late transactions) should be given up to us, or that the formal bills of indictment,
or the nature of the charges, or the accusers themselves, should be made known;
and yet we did not obtain any of these things, but were again expelled from the
Church. How am I to relate the events which followed, transcending as they do
every kind of tragedy? What language will set forth these events? What kind of
ear will receive them without shuddering? For when we were urging these
things, as I said before, a dense troop of soldiers, on the great Sabbath itself, as
the day was hastening towards eventide, having broken into the Churches
violently drove out all the clergy who were with us, and surrounded the
sanctuary with arms. And women from the oratories who had stripped
themselves for baptism just at that time, fled unclothed, from terror at this
grievous assault, not being permitted to put on the modest apparel which befits
women; indeed many received wounds before they were expelled, and the
baptismal pools were filled with blood, and the sacred water reddened by it. Nor
did the distress cease even at this point; but the soldiers, some of whom as we
understand were unbaptized, having entered the place where the sacred vessels
were stored, saw all the things which were inside it, and the most holy blood of
Christ, as might happen in the midst of such confusion, was spilt upon the
garments of the soldiers aforesaid: and every kind of outrage was committed as
in a barbarian siege. And the common people were driven to the wilderness, and
all the people tarried outside the city, and the Churches became empty in the
midst of this great Festival, and more than forty bishops who associated with us
were vainly and causelessly expelled together with the people and clergy. And

there were shrieks and lamentations, and torrents of tears were shed everywhere,
in the market places, in the houses, in the desert places, and every part of the city
was filled with these calamities; for owing to the immoderate extent of the
outrage not only the sufferers, but also they who did not undergo anything of the
kind sympathized with us, not only those who held the same opinions as ours,
but also heretics, and Jews, and Greeks, and all places were in a state of tumult
and confusion, and lamentation, as if the city had been captured by force. And
these things were perpetrated contrary to the intention of our most pious
Emperor, under cover of night, the Bishops contriving them, and in many places
conducting the attack, nor were they ashamed to have sergeants instead of
deacons marching in front of them. And when day dawned all the city was
migrating outside the walls under trees and groves, celebrating the festival, like
scattered sheep.
4. All which happened afterwards I leave you to imagine; for as I said
before it is not possible to describe each separate incident. The worst of it is that
these evils, great and serious as they are, have not even now been suppressed nor
is there any hope of their suppression; on the contrary the mischief is extending
itself every day, and we have become a laughing stock to the multitude, or rather
I should say, no one laughs even if he is infinitely lawless, but all men mourn, as
I was saying, this new kind of lawlessness, the finishing stroke of all our ills.
What is one to say to the disorders in the other Churches? For the evil did
not stop even here, but made its way to the east. For as when some evil humor is
discharged from the head, all the other parts are corrupted, so now also these
evils, having originated in this great city as from a fountain, confusion has
spread in every direction, and clergy have everywhere made insurrection against
bishops, there has been schism between bishop and bishop, people and people,
and will be yet more; every place is suffering from the throes of calamity, and
the subversion of the whole civilized world. Having been informed then of all
these things, my lords, most honourable and devout, exhibit the courage and zeal
which becomes you, so as to put a stop to this great assault of lawlessness which