The ecumenical movement, on the basis of a clearer and more widespread awareness of
the urgent need to achieve the unity of all Christians, has found on the part of the
Catholic Church its culminating expression in the work of the Second Vatican Council:
Christians must deepen in themselves and each of their communities that "obedience of
faith" of which Mary is the first and brightest example. And since she "shines forth on
earth,...as a sign of sure hope and solace for the pilgrim People of God," "it gives great
joy and comfort to this most holy Synod that among the divided brethren, too, there are

those who live due honor to the Mother of our Lord and Savior. This is especially so
among the Easterners."

30. Christians know that their unity will be truly rediscovered only if it is based on the
unity of their faith. They must resolve considerable discrepancies of doctrine concerning
the mystery and ministry of the Church, and sometimes also concerning the role of Mary
in the work of salvation. The dialogues begun by the Catholic Church with the
Churches and Ecclesial Communities of the West are steadily converging upon these
two inseparable aspects of the same mystery of salvation. If the mystery of the Word
made flesh enables us to glimpse the mystery of the divine motherhood and is, in turn,
contemplation of the Mother of God brings us to a more profound understanding of the
mystery of the Incarnation, then the same must be said for the mystery of the Church and
Mary's role in the work of salvation. By a more profound study of both Mary and the
Church, clarifying each by the light of the other, Christians who are eager to do what
Jesus tells them-as their Mother recommends (cf. Jn. 2:5)- will be able to go forward
together on this "pilgrimage of faith." Mary, who is still the model of this pilgrimage, is
to lead them to the unity which is willed by their one Lord and so much desired by those
who are attentively listening to what "the Spirit is saying to the Churches" today (Rev.
2:, 11, 17).

Meanwhile, it is a hopeful sign that these Churches and Ecclesial Communities are
finding agreement with the Catholic Church on fundamental points of Christian belief,
including matters relating to the Virgin Mary. For they recognize her as the Mother of the
Lord and hold that this forms part of our faith in Christ, true God and true man. They
look to her who at the foot of the Cross accepts as her son the beloved disciple, the one
who in his turn accepts her as his mother.

Therefore, why should we not all together look to her as our common Mother, who prays
for the unity of God's family and who "precedes" us all at the head of the long line of
witnesses of faith in the one Lord, the Son of God, who was conceived in her virginal
womb by the power of the Holy Spirit?