On two grounds then he said that the thing was impossible, and he put the
stronger last: first, because he who has been deemed worthy of such [blessings],
and who has betrayed all that was granted to him, is not worthy to be again
renewed; neither is it possible that [Christ] should again be crucified afresh: for
this is to "put Him to an open shame."
There is not then any second laver: there is not [indeed]. And if there is,
there is also a third, and a fourth; for the former one is continually disannulled
by the later, and this continually by another, and so on without end.
"And tasted," he says, "the good word of God"; and he does not unfold it;
"and the powers of the world to come," for to live as Angels and to have no need
of earthly things, to know that this is the means of our introduction to the
enjoyment of the worlds to come; this may we learn through the Spirit, and enter
into those sacred recesses.
What are "the powers of the world to come"? Life eternal, angelic
conversation. Of these we have already received the earnest through our Faith
from the Spirit. Tell me then, if after having been introduced into a palace, and
entrusted with all things therein, you had then betrayed all, would you have been
entrusted with them again?
8. What then (you say)? Is there no repentance? There is repentance, but
there is no second baptism: but repentance there is, and it has great force, and is
able to set free from the burden of his sins, if he will, even him that has been
baptized much in sins, and to establish in safety him who is in danger, even
though he should have come unto the very depth of wickedness. And this is
evident from many places. "For," says one, "does not he that falls rise again? Or
he that turns away, does not he turn back to [God]?" [Jeremiah 8:4] It is
possible, if we will, that Christ should be formed in us again: for hear Paul
saying, "My little children of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you." [Galatians 4:19] Only let us lay hold on repentance.
For behold the love of God to man! We ought on every ground to have been
punished at the first; in that having received the natural law, and enjoyed

innumerable blessings, we have not acknowledged our Master, and have lived an
unclean life. Yet He not only has not punished us, but has even made us
partakers of countless blessings, just as if we had accomplished great things.
Again we fell away, and not even so does He punish us, but has given medicine
of repentance, which is sufficient to put away and blot out all our sins; only if we
knew the nature of the medicine, and how we ought to apply it.
What then is the medicine of Repentance and how is it made up? First, of
the condemnation of our own sins; "For" (it is said) "mine iniquity have I not
hid" [Psalm 32:5]; and again, "I will confess against myself my lawlessness unto
the Lord, and Thou forgavest the iniquity of my heart." And "Declare thou at the
first your sins, that you may be justified." [Isaiah 43:26] And, "The righteous
man is an accuser of himself at the first speaking." [Proverbs 18:17]
Secondly, of great humbleness of mind: For it is like a golden chain; if one
have hold of the beginning, all will follow. Because if you confess your sin as
one ought to confess, the soul is humbled. For conscience turning it on itself
causes it to be subdued.
Other things too must be added to humbleness of mind if it be such as the
blessed David knew, when he said, "A broken and a contrite heart God will not
despise." [Psalm 51:17] For that which is broken does not rise up, does not
strike, but is ready to be ill-treated and itself rises not up. Such is contrition of
heart: though it be insulted, though it be evil entreated, it is quiet, and is not
eager for vengeance.
And after humbleness of mind, there is need of intense prayers, of many
tears, tears by day, and tears by night: for, he says, "every night, will I wash my
bed, I will water my couch with my tears. I am weary with my groaning." [Psalm
6:6] And again, "For I have eaten ashes as it were bread, and mingled my drink
with weeping." [Psalm 102:9]
And after prayer thus intense, there is need of much almsgiving: for this it
is which especially gives strength to the medicine of repentance. And as there is
a medicine among the physicians' helps which receives many herbs, but one is