very nature entails dependence on God. On the other hand, the
divine processions are in one and the same nature. Hence no parallel
exists.
Reply to Objection 4: Relations which result from the mental
operation alone in the objects understood are logical relations only,
inasmuch as reason observes them as existing between two objects
perceived by the mind. Those relations, however, which follow the
operation of the intellect, and which exist between the word
intellectually proceeding and the source whence it proceeds, are not
logical relations only, but are real relations; inasmuch as the intellect
and the reason are real things, and are really related to that which
proceeds from them intelligibly; as a corporeal thing is related to
that which proceeds from it corporeally. Thus paternity and filiation
are real relations in God.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether relation in God is the same as His

essence?
Objection 1: It would seem that the divine relation is not the same as
the divine essence. For Augustine says (De Trin. v) that "not all that
is said of God is said of His substance, for we say some things
relatively, as Father in respect of the Son: but such things do not
refer to the substance." Therefore the relation is not the divine
essence.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. vii) that, "every
relative expression is something besides the relation expressed, as
master is a man, and slave is a man." Therefore, if relations exist in
God, there must be something else besides relation in God. This can
only be His essence. Therefore essence differs from relation.
Objection 3: Further, the essence of relation is the being referred to
another, as the Philosopher says (Praedic. v). So if relation is the
divine essence, it follows that the divine essence is essentially itself
a relation to something else; whereas this is repugnant to the
perfection of the divine essence, which is supremely absolute and
self-subsisting (Question 3, Article 4). Therefore relation is not the
divine essence.
On the contrary, Everything which is not the divine essence is a
creature. But relation really belongs to God; and if it is not the divine
essence, it is a creature; and it cannot claim the adoration of latria;
contrary to what is sung in the Preface: "Let us adore the distinction
of the Persons, and the equality of their Majesty."
I answer that, It is reported that Gilbert de la Porree erred on this
point, but revoked his error later at the council of Rheims. For he
said that the divine relations are assistant, or externally affixed.
To perceive the error here expressed, we must consider that in each
of the nine genera of accidents there are two points for remark. One
is the nature belonging to each one of them considered as an
accident; which commonly applies to each of them as inherent in a
subject, for the essence of an accident is to inhere. The other point
of remark is the proper nature of each one of these genera. In the
genera, apart from that of "relation," as in quantity and quality, even