THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.5.

nevertheless the affections of the sensitive appetite are most
properly called passions of the soul. Now these were in Christ, even
as all else pertaining to man's nature. Hence Augustine says (De Civ.
Dei xiv, 9): "Our Lord having deigned to live in the form of a servant,
took these upon Himself whenever He judged they ought to be
assumed; for there was no false human affection in Him Who had a
true body and a true human soul."
Nevertheless we must know that the passions were in Christ
otherwise than in us, in three ways. First, as regards the object,
since in us these passions very often tend towards what is unlawful,
but not so in Christ. Secondly, as regards the principle, since these
passions in us frequently forestall the judgment of reason; but in
Christ all movements of the sensitive appetite sprang from the
disposition of the reason. Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 9),
that "Christ assumed these movements, in His human soul, by an
unfailing dispensation, when He willed; even as He became man
when He willed." Thirdly, as regards the effect, because in us these
movements, at times, do not remain in the sensitive appetite, but
deflect the reason; but not so in Christ, since by His disposition the
movements that are naturally becoming to human flesh so remained
in the sensitive appetite that the reason was nowise hindered in
doing what was right. Hence Jerome says (on Mt. 26:37) that "Our
Lord, in order to prove the reality of the assumed manhood, 'was
sorrowful' in very deed; yet lest a passion should hold sway over His
soul, it is by a propassion that He is said to have 'begun to grow
sorrowful and to be sad'"; so that it is a perfect "passion" when it
dominates the soul, i.e. the reason; and a "propassion" when it has
its beginning in the sensitive appetite, but goes no further.
Reply to Objection 1: The soul of Christ could have prevented these
passions from coming upon it, and especially by the Divine power;
yet of His own will He subjected Himself to these corporeal and
animal passions.
Reply to Objection 2: Tully is speaking there according to the
opinions of the Stoics, who did not give the name of passions to all,
but only to the disorderly movements of the sensitive appetite. Now,
it is manifest that passions like these were not in Christ.
Reply to Objection 3: The "passions of sins" are movements of the
sensitive appetite that tend to unlawful things; and these were not in
Christ, as neither was the "fomes" of sin.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.5.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there was sensible pain in Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was no true sensible pain in
Christ. For Hilary says (De Trin. x): "Since with Christ to die was life,
what pain may He be supposed to have suffered in the mystery of
His death, Who bestows life on such as die for Him?" And further on
he says: "The Only-begotten assumed human nature, not ceasing to
be God; and although blows struck Him and wounds were inflicted
on Him, and scourges fell upon Him, and the cross lifted Him up, yet
these wrought in deed the vehemence of the passion, but brought no
pain; as a dart piercing the water." Hence there was no true pain in
Christ.
Objection 2: Further, it would seem to be proper to flesh conceived
in original sin, to be subject to the necessity of pain. But the flesh of
Christ was not conceived in sin, but of the Holy Ghost in the Virgin's
womb. Therefore it lay under no necessity of suffering pain.
Objection 3: Further, the delight of the contemplation of Divine
things dulls the sense of pain; hence the martyrs in their passions
bore up more bravely by thinking of the Divine love. But Christ's soul
was in the perfect enjoyment of contemplating God, Whom He saw in
essence, as was said above (Question 9, Article 2). Therefore He
could feel no pain.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 53:4): "Surely He hath borne our
infirmities and carried our sorrows."
I answer that, As is plain from what has been said in the FS,
Question 35, Article 7, for true bodily pain are required bodily hurt
and the sense of hurt. Now Christ's body was able to be hurt, since it
was passible and mortal, as above stated (Question 14, Articles 1,2);
neither was the sense of hurt wanting to it, since Christ's soul
possessed perfectly all natural powers. Therefore no one should
doubt but that in Christ there was true pain.
Reply to Objection 1: In all these and similar words, Hilary does not
intend to exclude the reality of the pain, but the necessity of it.
Hence after the foregoing he adds: "Nor, when He thirsted, or
hungered, or wept, was the Lord seen to drink, or eat, or grieve. But
in order to prove the reality of the body, the body's customs were