you?" "The matter is at your disposal."
For we too have depending on us both sides of the alternative; both falling
into hell, and obtaining the kingdom: since God has so willed it. For, "behold,"
says he, "fire and water: whichever way you will, you may stretch forth your
hand" [Sirach 15:16] And, "If you be willing, and will hearken unto me, you
shall eat the good of the land; [Isaiah 1:19,] but if you be not willing, the sword
shall devour you."
But perhaps one will say, "I am willing; (and no one is so void of
understanding as not to be willing;) but to will is not sufficient for me." Nay, but
it is sufficient, if you be duly willing, and do the deeds of one that is willing. But
as it is, you are not greatly willing.
And let us try this in other things, if it seem good. For tell me, he that would
marry a wife, is he content with wishing? By no means; but he looks out for
women to advance his suit, and request friends to keep watch with him, and gets
together money. Again, the merchant is not content with sitting at home and
wishing, but he first hires a vessel, then selects sailors and rowers, then takes up
money on interest, and is inquisitive about a market and the price of
merchandise. Is it not then strange for men to show themselves so much in
earnest about earthly things, but that when they are to make a venture for
heaven, they should be content with wishing only? Rather I should say, not even
in this do they show themselves properly in earnest. For he that wills a thing as
he ought, puts also his hand unto the means which lead to the object of his
desire. Thus, when hunger compels you to take nourishment, you wait not for the
viands to come unto you of their own accord, but omittest nothing to gather
victuals together. So in thirst, and cold and all other such things, you are
industrious and duly prepared to take care of the body. Now do this in respect of
God's kingdom also, and surely you shall obtain it.
For to this end God made you a free agent, that you might not afterwards
accuse God, as though some necessity had bound you: but you, in regard of
those very things wherein you have been honored, murmur.

For in fact I have often heard people say, "But why did He then make my
goodness depend on me?" Nay, but how was He to bring you, slumbering and
sleeping, and in love with all iniquity, and living delicately, and pampering
yourself; how was He to bring you up to heaven? If He had, you would not have
abstained from vice. For if now, even in the face of threatening, you do not turn
aside from your wickedness; had he added no less than heaven as the end of your
race, when would you have ceased waxing more careless and worse by far?
([χείρων πολλῷ. πολλῶν] Bened.)
Neither again will you be able to allege, He has showed me indeed what
things were good but gave no help, for abundant also is His promise to you of
aid.
6. "But," say you, "Virtue is burdensome and distasteful; while with vice
great pleasure is blended; and the one is wide and broad, but the other strait and
narrow."
Tell me then, are they respectively such throughout, or only from the
beginning? For in fact what you here say, you say, not intending it, in behalf of
virtue; so potent a thing is truth. For suppose there were two roads, the one
leading to a furnace, and the other to a Paradise; and that the one unto the
furnace were broad, the other unto Paradise, narrow; which road would you take
in preference? For although you may now gainsay for contradiction's sake, yet
things which are plainly allowed on all hands, however shameless, you will not
be able to gainsay. Now that that way is rather to be chosen which has its
beginning difficult but not its end, I will endeavor to teach you from what is
quite obvious. And, if you please, let us first take in hand the arts. For these have
their beginning full of toil, but the end gainful. "But," say you, "no one applies
himself to an art without some one to compel him; for," you add, "so long as the
boy is his own master, he will choose rather to take his ease at first, and in the
end to endure the evil, how great soever, than to live hardly at the outset, and
afterwards reap the fruit of those labors." Well then, to make such a choice
comes of a mind left to itself, ([ὀρφανικῆς διανοίας]) and of childish idleness: