FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.7.

Reply to Objection 1: Delectation is indeed in the appetitive power as
its proximate principle; but it is in the reason as its first mover, in
accordance with what has been stated above (Article 1), viz. that
actions which do not pass into external matter are subjected in their
principles.
Reply to Objection 2: Reason has its proper elicited act about its
proper object; but it exercises the direction of all the objects of those
lower powers that can be directed by the reason: and accordingly
delectation about sensible objects comes also under the direction of
reason.
Reply to Objection 3: Delectation is said to be morose not from a
delay of time, but because the reason in deliberating dwells
[immoratur] thereon, and fails to drive it away, "deliberately holding
and turning over what should have been cast aside as soon as it
touched the mind," as Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 12).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the sin of consent to the act is in the

higher reason?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sin of consent to the act is not in
the higher reason. For consent is an act of the appetitive power, as
stated above (Question 15, Article 1): whereas the reason is an
apprehensive power. Therefore the sin of consent to the act is not in
the higher reason.
Objection 2: Further, "the higher reason is intent on contemplating
and consulting the eternal law," as Augustine states [De Trin. xii, 7].
But sometimes consent is given to an act, without consulting the
eternal law: since man does not always think about Divine things,
whenever he consents to an act. Therefore the sin of consent to the
act is not always in the higher reason.
Objection 3: Further, just as man can regulate his external actions
according to the eternal law, so can he regulate his internal
pleasures or other passions. But "consent to a pleasure without
deciding to fulfil it by deed, belongs to the lower reason," as
Augustine states (De Trin. xii, 2). Therefore the consent to a sinful
act should also be sometimes ascribed to the lower reason.
Objection 4: Further, just as the higher reason excels the lower, so
does the reason excel the imagination. Now sometimes man
proceeds to act through the apprehension of the power of
imagination, without any deliberation of his reason, as when, without
premeditation, he moves his hand, or foot. Therefore sometimes also
the lower reason may consent to a sinful act, independently of the
higher reason.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 12): "If the consent to
the evil use of things that can be perceived by the bodily senses, so
far approves of any sin, as to point, if possible, to its consummation
by deed, we are to understand that the woman has offered the
forbidden fruit to her husband."
I answer that, Consent implies a judgment about the thing to which
consent is given. For just as the speculative reason judges and
delivers its sentence about intelligible matters, so the practical
reason judges and pronounces sentence on matters of action. Now