FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.66, C.5.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.66, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether wisdom is the greatest of the intellectual

virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that wisdom is not the greatest of the
intellectual virtues. Because the commander is greater than the one
commanded. Now prudence seems to command wisdom, for it is
stated in Ethic. i, 2 that political science, which belongs to prudence
(Ethic. vi, 8), "orders that sciences should be cultivated in states,
and to which of these each individual should devote himself, and to
what extent." Since, then, wisdom is one of the sciences, it seems
that prudence is greater than wisdom.
Objection 2: Further, it belongs to the nature of virtue to direct man
to happiness: because virtue is "the disposition of a perfect thing to
that which is best," as stated in Phys. vii, text. 17. Now prudence is
"right reason about things to be done," whereby man is brought to
happiness: whereas wisdom takes no notice of human acts, whereby
man attains happiness. Therefore prudence is a greater virtue than
wisdom.
Objection 3: Further, the more perfect knowledge is, the greater it
seems to be. Now we can have more perfect knowledge of human
affairs, which are the subject of science, than of Divine things, which
are the object of wisdom, which is the distinction given by Augustine
(De Trin. xii, 14): because Divine things are incomprehensible,
according to Job 26:26: "Behold God is great, exceeding our
knowledge." Therefore science is a greater virtue than wisdom.
Objection 4: Further, knowledge of principles is more excellent than
knowledge of conclusions. But wisdom draws conclusions from
indemonstrable principles which are the object of the virtue of
understanding, even as other sciences do. Therefore understanding
is a greater virtue than wisdom.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 7) that wisdom is
"the head" among "the intellectual virtues."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), the greatness of a virtue,
as to its species, is taken from its object. Now the object of wisdom
surpasses the objects of all the intellectual virtues: because wisdom
considers the Supreme Cause, which is God, as stated at the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.66, C.6.

beginning of the Metaphysics. And since it is by the cause that we
judge of an effect, and by the higher cause that we judge of the lower
effects; hence it is that wisdom exercises judgment over all the other
intellectual virtues, directs them all, and is the architect of them all.
Reply to Objection 1: Since prudence is about human affairs, and
wisdom about the Supreme Cause, it is impossible for prudence to
be a greater virtue than wisdom, "unless," as stated in Ethic. vi, 7,
"man were the greatest thing in the world." Wherefore we must say,
as stated in the same book (Ethic. vi), that prudence does not
command wisdom, but vice versa: because "the spiritual man
judgeth all things; and he himself is judged by no man" (1 Cor. 2:15).
For prudence has no business with supreme matters which are the
object of wisdom: but its command covers things directed to
wisdom, viz. how men are to obtain wisdom. Wherefore prudence, or
political science, is, in this way, the servant of wisdom; for it leads to
wisdom, preparing the way for her, as the doorkeeper for the king.
Reply to Objection 2: Prudence considers the means of acquiring
happiness, but wisdom considers the very object of happiness, viz.
the Supreme Intelligible. And if indeed the consideration of wisdom
were perfect in respect of its object, there would be perfect
happiness in the act of wisdom: but as, in this life, the act of wisdom
is imperfect in respect of its principal object, which is God, it follows
that the act of wisdom is a beginning or participation of future
happiness, so that wisdom is nearer than prudence to happiness.
Reply to Objection 3: As the Philosopher says (De Anima i, text. 1),
"one knowledge is preferable to another, either because it is about a
higher object, or because it is more certain." Hence if the objects be
equally good and sublime, that virtue will be greater which
possesses more certain knowledge. But a virtue which is less certain
about a higher and better object, is preferable to that which is more
certain about an object of inferior degree. Wherefore the Philosopher
says (De Coelo ii, text. 60) that "it is a great thing to be able to know
something about celestial beings, though it be based on weak and
probable reasoning"; and again (De Part. Animal. i, 5) that "it is
better to know a little about sublime things, than much about mean
things." Accordingly wisdom, to which knowledge about God
pertains, is beyond the reach of man, especially in this life, so as to
be his possession: for this "belongs to God alone" (Metaph. i, 2): and
yet this little knowledge about God which we can have through
wisdom is preferable to all other knowledge.