Reply to Objection 1:: Some say that the use of reason was by the
Divine power accelerated in the Innocents slain for Christ's sake,
even as in John the Baptist while yet in his mother's womb: and in
that case they were truly martyrs in both act and will, and have the
aureole. others say, however, that they were martyrs in act only and
not in will: and this seems to be the opinion of Bernard, who
distinguishes three kinds of martyrs, as stated above (OBJ 3). In this
case the Innocents, even as they do not fulfill all the conditions of
martyrdom, and yet are martyrs in a sense, in that they died for
Christ, so too they have the aureole, not in all its perfection, but by a
kind of participation, in so far as they rejoice in having. been slain in
Christ's service; thus it was stated above (Article 5) in reference to
baptized children, that they will have a certain joy in their innocence
and carnal integrity [SS, Question 124, Article 1, ad 1, where St.
Thomas declares that the Holy Innocents were truly martyrs.]

### ARTICLE 7. Whether an aureole is due to doctors?

Objection 1: It would seem that an aureole is not due to doctors. For
every reward to be had in the life to come will correspond to some
act of virtue. But preaching or teaching is not the act of a virtue.
Therefore an aureole is not due to teaching or preaching.
Objection 2: Further, teaching and preaching are the result of
studying and being taught. Now the things that are rewarded in the
future life are not acquired by a man's study, since we merit not by
our natural and acquired gifts. Therefore no aureole will be merited
in the future life for teaching and preaching.
Objection 3: Further, exaltation in the life to come corresponds to
humiliation in the present life, because "he that humbleth himself
shall be exalted" (Mt. 23:12). But there is no humiliation in teaching
and preaching, in fact they are occasions of pride; for a gloss on Mt.
4:5, "Then the devil took Him up," says that "the devil deceives many
who are puffed up with the honor of the master's chair." Therefore it
would seem that an aureole is not due to preaching and teaching.
On the contrary, A gloss on Eph. 1:18,19, "That you may know . . .
what is the exceeding greatness," etc. says: "The holy doctors will
have an increase of glory above that which all have in common."
Therefore, etc.
Further, a gloss on Canticle of Canticles 8:12, "My vineyard is before
me," says: "He describes the peculiar reward which He has prepared
for His doctors." Therefore doctors will have a peculiar reward: and
we call this an aureole.
I answer that, Just as by virginity and martyrdom a person wins a
most perfect victory over the flesh and the world, so is a most
perfect victory gained over the devil, when a person not only refuses
to yield to the devil's assaults, but also drives him out, not from
himself alone, but from others also. Now this is done by preaching
and teaching: wherefore an aureole is due to preaching and
teaching, even as to virginity and martyrdom. Nor can we admit, as
some affirm, that it is due to prelates only, who are competent to
preach and teach by virtue of their office. but it is due to all
whosoever exercise this act lawfully. Nor is it due to prelates,