SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.133, C.3.

If, on the other hand, magnificence take its name from doing
something great, the doing [facere] being understood in a broad
sense, it is not a special virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to every perfect virtue to do
something great in the genus of that virtue, if "doing" [facere] be
taken in the broad sense, but not if it be taken strictly, for this is
proper to magnificence.
Reply to Objection 2: It belongs to magnanimity not only to tend to
something great, but also to do great works in all the virtues, either
by making [faciendo], or by any kind of action, as stated in Ethic. iv,
3: yet so that magnanimity, in this respect, regards the sole aspect of
great, while the other virtues which, if they be perfect, do something
great, direct their principal intention, not to something great, but to
that which is proper to each virtue: and the greatness of the thing
done is sometimes consequent upon the greatness of the virtue.
On the other hand, it belongs to magnificence not only to do
something great, "doing" [facere] being taken in the strict sense, but
also to tend with the mind to the doing of great things. Hence Tully
says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that "magnificence is the discussing and
administering of great and lofty undertakings, with a certain broad
and noble purpose of mind, discussion" referring to the inward
intention, and "administration" to the outward accomplishment.
Wherefore just as magnanimity intends something great in every
matter, it follows that magnificence does the same in every work that
can be produced in external matter [factibili].
Reply to Objection 3: The intention of magnificence is the production
of a great work. Now works done by men are directed to an end: and
no end of human works is so great as the honor of God: wherefore
magnificence does a great work especially in reference to the Divine
honor. Wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 2) that "the most
commendable expenditure is that which is directed to Divine
sacrifices": and this is the chief object of magnificence. For this
reason magnificence is connected with holiness, since its chief
effect is directed to religion or holiness.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.133, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.133, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the matter of magnificence is great

expenditure?
Objection 1: It seems that the matter of magnificence is not great
expenditure. For there are not two virtues about the same matter. But
liberality is about expenditure, as stated above (Question 117, Article
2). Therefore magnificence is not about expenditure.
Objection 2: Further, "every magnificent man is liberal" (Ethic. iv, 2).
But liberality is about gifts rather than about expenditure. Therefore
magnificence also is not chiefly about expenditure, but about gifts.
Objection 3: Further, it belongs to magnificence to produce an
external work. But not even great expenditure is always the means of
producing an external work, for instance when one spends much in
sending presents. Therefore expenditure is not the proper matter of
magnificence.
Objection 4: Further, only the rich are capable of great expenditure.
But the poor are able to possess all the virtues, since "the virtues do
not necessarily require external fortune, but are sufficient for
themselves," as Seneca says (De Ira i: De vita beata xvi). Therefore
magnificence is not about great expenditure.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 2) that
"magnificence does not extend, like liberality, to all transactions in
money, but only to expensive ones, wherein it exceeds liberality in
scale." Therefore it is only about great expenditure.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), it belongs to magnificence
to intend doing some great work. Now for the doing of a great work,
proportionate expenditure is necessary, for great works cannot be
produced without great expenditure. Hence it belongs to
magnificence to spend much in order that some great work may be
accomplished in becoming manner. Wherefore the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iv, 2) that "a magnificent man will produce a more magnificent
work with equal," i.e. proportionate, "expenditure." Now expenditure
is the outlay of a sum of money; and a man may be hindered from
making that outlay if he love money too much. Hence the matter of
magnificence may be said to be both this expenditure itself, which
the magnificent man uses to produce a great work, and also the very