SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.2.

as also those which ensue from natural causes by chance and in the
minority of instances, cannot be foreknown from a consideration of
their causes, because these causes have no determinate inclination
to produce these effects. Consequently such like effects cannot be
foreknown unless they be considered in themselves. Now man
cannot consider these effects in themselves except when they are
present, as when he sees Socrates running or walking: the
consideration of such things in themselves before they occur is
proper to God, Who alone in His eternity sees the future as though it
were present, as stated in the FP, Question 14, Article 13; FP,
Question 57, Article 3; FP, Question 86, Article 4. Hence it is written
(Is. 41:23): "Show the things that are to come hereafter, and we shall
know that ye are gods." Therefore if anyone presume to foreknow or
foretell such like future things by any means whatever, except by
divine revelation, he manifestly usurps what belongs to God. It is for
this reason that certain men are called divines: wherefore Isidore
says (Etym. viii, 9): "They are called divines, as though they were full
of God. For they pretend to be filled with the Godhead, and by a
deceitful fraud they forecast the future to men."
Accordingly it is not called divination, if a man foretells things that
happen of necessity, or in the majority of instances, for the like can
be foreknown by human reason: nor again if anyone knows other
contingent future things, through divine revelation: for then he does
not divine, i.e. cause something divine, but rather receives
something divine. Then only is a man said to divine, when he usurps
to himself, in an undue manner, the foretelling of future events: and
this is manifestly a sin. Consequently divination is always a sin; and
for this reason Jerome says in his commentary on Mich. 3:9, seqq.
that "divination is always taken in an evil sense."
Reply to Objection 1: Divination takes its name not from a rightly
ordered share of something divine, but from an undue usurpation
thereof, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: There are certain arts for the foreknowledge of
future events that occur of necessity or frequently, and these do not
pertain to divination. But there are no true arts or sciences for the
knowledge of other future events, but only vain inventions of the
devil's deceit, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 8).
Reply to Objection 3: Man has a natural inclination to know the
future by human means, but not by the undue means of divination.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether divination is a species of superstition?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination is not a species of
superstition. The same thing cannot be a species of diverse genera.
Now divination is apparently a species of curiosity, according to
Augustine (De Vera Relig. xxxviii) [De Doctr. Christ. ii, 23,24; De
Divin. Daem. 3]. Therefore it is not, seemingly, a species of
superstition.
Objection 2: Further, just as religion is due worship, so is
superstition undue worship. But divination does not seem to pertain
to undue worship. Therefore it does not pertain to superstition.
Objection 3: Further, superstition is opposed to religion. But in true
religion nothing is to be found corresponding as a contrary to
divination. Therefore divination is not a species of superstition.
On the contrary, Origen says in his Peri Archon [Sixteenth Homily on
the Book of Numbers]: "There is an operation of the demons in the
administering of foreknowledge, comprised, seemingly, under the
head of certain arts exercised by those who have enslaved
themselves to the demons, by means of lots, omens, or the
observance of shadows. I doubt not that all these things are done by
the operation of the demons." Now, according to Augustine (De
Doctr. Christ. ii, 20,23), "whatever results from fellowship between
demons and men is superstitious." Therefore divination is a species
of superstition.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1; Questions 92,94),
superstition denotes undue divine worship. Now a thing pertains to
the worship of God in two ways: in one way, it is something offered
to God; as a sacrifice, an oblation, or something of the kind: in
another way, it is something divine that is assumed, as stated above
with regard to an oath (Question 89, Article 4, ad 2). Wherefore
superstition includes not only idolatrous sacrifices offered to
demons, but also recourse to the help of the demons for the purpose
of doing or knowing something. But all divination results from the
demons' operation, either because the demons are expressly
invoked that the future may be made known, or because the demons
thrust themselves into futile searchings of the future, in order to
entangle men's minds with vain conceits. Of this kind of vanity it is