life only, but also even connection. All the Church, so long as she holds The
Head, increases; because here is no more passion of pride and vainglory, nor
invention of human fancy.
Mark that "from whom," meaning the Son. "Through the joints and bands,"
he says, "being supplied, and knit together, increases with the increase of God";
he means, that which is according to God, that of the best life.
Ver. 20. "If you died with Christ."
He puts that in the middle, and on either side, expressions of greater
vehemence. "If you died with Christ from the elements of the world," he says,
"why as though living in the world do ye subject yourselves to ordinances?" This
is not the consequence, for what ought to have been said is, "how as though
living are you subject to those elements?" But letting this pass, what says he?
Ver. 21, 22. "Handle not, nor taste, nor touch; all which things are to perish
with the using; after the precepts and doctrines of men."
You are not in the world, he says, how is it you are subject to its elements?
How to its observances? And mark how he makes sport of them, "touch not,
handle not, taste not," as though they were cowards and keeping themselves
clear of some great matters, "all which things are to perish with the using." He
has taken down the swollenness of the many, and added, "after the precepts and
doctrines of men." What do you say? Do you speak even of the Law? Henceforth
it is but a doctrine of men, after the time has come. Or, because they adulterated
it, or else, he alludes to the Gentile institutions. The doctrine, he says, is
altogether of man.
Ver. 23. "Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and
humility, and severity to the body; but are not of any value against the
indulgence of the flesh."
"Show," he says; not power, not truth. So that even though they have a show
of wisdom, let us turn away from them. For he may seem to be a religious
person, and modest, and to have a contempt for the body.
"Not of any value against the indulgence of the flesh." For God has given it

honor, but they use it not with honor. Thus, when it is a doctrine, he knows how
to call it honor. They dishonor the flesh, he says, depriving it, and stripping it of
its liberty, not giving leave to rule it with its will. God has honored the flesh.
Chap. iii. ver. 1. "If then you were raised together with Christ."
He brings them together, having above established that He died. Therefore
he says, "If then you were raised together with Christ, seek the things that are
above." No observances are there. "Where Christ is seated on the right hand of
God." Wonderful! Whither has he led our minds aloft! How has he filled them
with mighty aspiration! It was not enough to say, "the things that are above," nor
yet, "where Christ is," but what? "seated on the right hand of God." From that
point he was preparing them henceforward to see the earth.
Ver. 2, 3, 4. "Set your mind on the things that are above, not on the things
that are upon the earth. For you died, and your life is hid with Christ in God.
When Christ who is your life shall be manifested, then shall you also with Him
be manifested in glory."
This is not your life, he says, it is some other one. He is now urgent to
remove them, and insists upon showing that they are seated above, and are dead;
from both considerations establishing the position, that they are not to seek the
things which are here. For whether ye be dead, you ought not to seek them; or
Whether ye be above, you ought not to seek them. Does Christ appear? Neither
does your life. It is in God, above. What then? When shall we live? When Christ
shall be manifested, who is your life; then seek ye glory, then life, then
enjoyment.
This is to prepare the way for drawing them off from pleasure and ease.
Such is his wont: when establishing one position, he darts off to another; as, for
instance, when discoursing of those who at supper were beforehand with one
another, he all at once falls upon the observance of the Mysteries. For he has a
great rebuke when it is administered unsuspected. "It is hid," he says, from you.
"Then shall you also with Him be manifested." So that, now, you do not appear.
See how he has removed them into the very heaven. For, as I said, he is always