4. The Second Vatican Council prepares us for this by presenting in its teaching the
Mother of God in the mystery of Christ and of the Church. If it is true, as the Council
itself proclaims, that "only in the mystery of the Incarnate Word does the mystery of
man take on light," then this principle must be applied in a very particular way to that
exceptional "daughter of the human race," that extraordinary "woman" who became the
Mother of Christ. Only in the mystery of Christ is her mystery fully made clear. Thus has
the Church sought to interpret it from the very beginning: the mystery of the Incarnation
has enabled her to penetrate and to make ever clearer the mystery of the Mother of the
Incarnate Word. The Council of Ephesus (431) was of decisive importance in clarifying
this, for during that Council, to the great joy of Christians, the truth of the divine
motherhood of Mary was solemnly confirmed as a truth of the Church's faith. Mary is the
Mother of God (= Theotókos), since by the power of the Holy Spirit she conceived in her
virginal womb and brought into the world Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who is of one
being with the Father. "The Son of God...born of the Virgin Mary...has truly been made
one of us," has been made man. Thus, through the mystery of Christ, on the horizon of
the Church's faith there shines in its fullness the mystery of his Mother. In turn, the
dogma of the divine motherhood of Mary was for the Council of Ephesus and is for the
Church like a seal upon the dogma of the Incarnation, in which the Word truly assumes
human nature into the unity of his person, without canceling out that nature.

5. The Second Vatican Council, by presenting Mary in the mystery of Christ, also finds
the path to a deeper understanding of the mystery of the Church. Mary, as the Mother of
Christ, is in a particular way united with the Church, "which the Lord established as his
own body." It is significant that the conciliar text places this truth about the Church as
the Body of Christ (according to the teaching of the Pauline Letters) in close proximity to
the truth that the Son of God "through the power of the Holy Spirit was born of the
Virgin Mary." The reality of the Incarnation finds a sort of extension in the mystery of
the Church-the Body of Christ. And one cannot think of the reality of the Incarnation
without referring to Mary, the Mother of the Incarnate Word.

In these reflections, however, I wish to consider primarily that "pilgrimage of faith" in
which "the Blessed Virgin advanced," faithfully preserving her union with Christ. In
this way the "twofold bond" which unites the Mother of God with Christ and with the
Church takes on historical significance. Nor is it just a question of the Virgin Mother's

life-story, of her personal journey of faith and "the better part" which is hers in the
mystery of salvation; it is also a question of the history of the whole People of God, of all
those who take part in the same "pilgrimage of faith."