SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.7.

accordance with their contemplation of God: while the "oblique"
movement in the soul he also declares to be partly straight and
partly circular, in so far as in reasoning it makes use of the light
received from God.
Reply to Objection 3: These varieties of movement that are taken
from the distinction between above and below, right and left,
forwards and backwards, and from varying circles, are all comprised
under either straight and oblique movement, because they all denote
discursions of reason. For if the reason pass from the genus to the
species, or from the part to the whole, it will be, as he explains, from
above to below: if from one opposite to another, it will be from right
to left; if from the cause to the effect, it will be backwards and
forwards; if it be about accidents that surround a thing near at hand
or far remote, the movement will be circular. The discoursing of
reason from sensible to intelligible objects, if it be according to the
order of natural reason, belongs to the straight movement; but if it be
according to the Divine enlightenment, it will belong to the oblique
movement as explained above (ad 2). That alone which he describes
as immobility belongs to the circular movement.
Wherefore it is evident that Dionysius describes the movement of
contemplation with much greater fulness and depth.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether there is delight in contemplation?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no delight in contemplation.
For delight belongs to the appetitive power; whereas contemplation
resides chiefly in the intellect. Therefore it would seem that there is
no delight in contemplation.
Objection 2: Further, all strife and struggle is a hindrance to delight.
Now there is strife and struggle in contemplation. For Gregory says
(Hom. xiv in Ezech.) that "when the soul strives to contemplate God,
it is in a state of struggle; at one time it almost overcomes, because
by understanding and feeling it tastes something of the
incomprehensible light, and at another time it almost succumbs,
because even while tasting, it fails." Therefore there is no delight in
contemplation.
Objection 3: Further, delight is the result of a perfect operation, as
stated in Ethic. x, 4. Now the contemplation of wayfarers is
imperfect, according to 1 Cor. 13:12, "We see now through a glass in
a dark manner." Therefore seemingly there is no delight in the
contemplative life.
Objection 4: Further, a lesion of the body is an obstacle to delight.
Now contemplation causes a lesion of the body; wherefore it is
stated (Gn. 32) that after Jacob had said (Gn. 32:30), "'I have seen
God face to face' . . . he halted on his foot (Gn. 32:31) . . . because he
touched the sinew of his thigh and it shrank" (Gn. 32:32). Therefore
seemingly there is no delight in contemplation.
On the contrary, It is written of the contemplation of wisdom (Wis.
8:16): "Her conversation hath no bitterness, nor her company any
tediousness, but joy and gladness": and Gregory says (Hom. xiv in
Ezech.) that "the contemplative life is sweetness exceedingly
lovable."
I answer that, There may be delight in any particular contemplation
in two ways. First by reason of the operation itself [FS, Question 3,
Article 5], because each individual delights in the operation which
befits him according to his own nature or habit. Now contemplation
of the truth befits a man according to his nature as a rational animal:
the result being that "all men naturally desire to know," so that