coming unto Him. Thus to him again that said, "Good Master," and had thought
by such flattery to gain His favor, according to his purpose He made answer,
saying, "Why do you call me good? There is none good but one, that is, God."
And when they said unto Him, "Behold, Your mother and Your brethren
seek You;" [Matthew 12:47-48] forasmuch as these were under the influence of
some human infirmity, not desiring to hear something profitable, but to make a
display of their relationship to Him, and therein to be vainglorious; hear what He
says: "Who is my mother, and who are my brethren?"
And again to His brethren themselves, saying unto Him, "Show yourself to
the world," [John 7:4, 6] and wishing thence to feed their vainglory, He said,
"Your time" (so He speaks) "is always ready, but my time is not yet come."
And in the opposite cases too He does so; as in that of Nathanael, saying,
"Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile." [John 1:47] And again, "Go
and show John again those things which you do hear and see." [Matthew 11:4]
For neither in this did He reply to the words, but to the intention of him that sent
them. And with the people again in like manner, He addresses His discourse unto
their conscience, saying, "What went ye out into the wilderness to see?"
[Matthew 11:7] That is because they were probably feeling about John, as
though he had been a sort of easy and wavering person; to correct this their
suspicion, He says, "What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken
with the wind?" or, "a man clothed with soft raiment?" by both these figures
declaring, that he was neither of himself a waverer, nor would be softened by
any luxury. Thus then in the present case also He makes His answer to their
meaning.
And see how in this also He shows forth great moderation: in that He said
not, "I have it indeed, but despise it," but "I have it not." Do you see what exact
care goes along with His condescension? Even as when He eats and drinks,
when He seems to be acting in an opposite way to John, this too He does for the
sake of the Jews' salvation, or rather for that of the whole world, at once both
stopping the mouths of the heretics, and desiring to win also more abundantly

those of that day to Himself.
6. But a certain other one, we read, said unto Him,
"Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father." [Matthew 8:21]
Did you mark the difference? How one impudently says, "I will follow You
wherever You go;" but this other, although asking a thing of sacred duty, says,
"Allow me." Yet He suffered him not, but says, "Let the dead bury their dead, but
do thou follow me." For in every case He had regard to the intention. And
wherefore did He not suffer him? One may ask. Because, on the one hand, there
were those that would fulfill that duty, and the dead was not going to remain
unburied; on the other, it was not fit for this man to be taken away from the
weightier matters. But by saying, "their own dead," He implies that this is not
one of His dead. And that because he that was dead, was, at least as I suppose, of
the unbelievers.
Now if you admire the young man, that for a matter so necessary he
besought Jesus, and did not go away of his own accord; much rather do thou
admire him for staying also when forbidden.
Was it not then, one may say, extreme ingratitude, not to be present at the
burial of his father? If indeed he did so out of negligence, it was ingratitude, but
if in order not to interrupt a more needful work, his departing would most surely
have been of extreme inconsideration. For Jesus forbad him, not as commanding
to think lightly of the honor due to our parents, but signifying that nothing ought
to be to us more urgent than the things of Heaven, and that we ought with all
diligence to cleave to these, and not to put them off for ever so little, though our
engagements be exceeding indispensable and pressing. For what can be more
needful than to bury a father? What more easy? Since it would not even consume
any long time.
But if one ought not to spend even as much time as is required for a father's
burial, nor is it safe to be parted even so long from our spiritual concerns;
consider what we deserve, who all our time stand off from the things that pertain
to Christ, and prefer things very ordinary to such as are needful, and are remiss,