Or this may be understood as regarding the Son, not in His character as head of the Church, but
in the person of His members, since the Church, as Jerome says, is without knowledge of these
truths. However, in saying that the Father alone knows them, it is evident that the Son also
knows them, according to the aforesaid reason.

7. Answer may be made: As Augustine says in I De Trinitate, the verse: "It is not Mine to give
to you," etc., must be understood to mean that it is not in the power of human nature to give this,
so that He may be known to grant it by reason of the fact that He is God and equal to the Father.

8. It may be said: According to Augustine, I De Trinitate, many heretics, not understanding this
point of apostolic doctrine, broke out into insult of the Son of God, saying and declaring that He
was a creature, having little regard for the import of words. For He is said, indeed, to be the first
begotten, but not the first created, so that He might be believed to have been begotten, according
to His divine nature, and to be first on account of His perpetuity. Moreover, although the Son
belongs to no genus of creatures, yet, as Basil holds, He has something in common with
creatures: namely, the fact that He received from the Father that which He has; but this

possession is superior to that of creatures, since through His own nature He possesses what He
receives from the Father. On this account there can be noted a certain order between the
generation of the Son and the production of creatures.

9. It may be said: This saying and all sayings similar to it, which are read in regard to the wisdom
of God, ought to be referred to the wisdom of creatures, such as the angels, or to Christ Himself
according to His human nature. Thus His wisdom is said to be "from the beginning," or "at the
beginning of creation," as if from eternity it predestined that creation should belong to Him.

10. Answer may be made: As Augustine says in II De Trinitate: From the fact that the Father
will glorify the Son, it does not follow that the Son is inferior to the Father; otherwise, He would
be less than the Holy Spirit, because the Son says of the Holy Spirit in John 16:14: "He shall
glorify Me." Now, this glorification refers not to the Person of the Son, but to the fact that in the
knowledge of men He will be glorified, since the Spirit will make Him known; or it may be
referred to the body which He had assumed and to the glory of the Resurrection.

11. It may be said: The Son and the Holy Spirit are said to be "sent" by the Father, not that they
now are where they had previously not been; but that, they are now there in a certain manner in
which they had not previously been: that is to say, as regards a certain effect in creatures.
Wherefore, when the Son and the Holy Spirit are said to have been sent by the Father, no
inequality in the Trinity is revealed, but an order of origin, by which one Person is from another.
Therefore the Father is not "sent," because He is not from another in such a way that He has
from another His efficacy in relation to any of His effects; and it is in this way that a divine
Person is "sent."