SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.2.

parable, as in the example of Balaam (Num. 23:7; 24:15). The seventh
kind is the fullness of the Holy Ghost, as in the case of nearly all the
prophets." Further, he mentions three kinds of vision; "one by the
eyes of the body, another by the soul's imagination, a third by the
eyes of the mind." Now these are not included in the aforesaid
division. Therefore it is insufficient.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Jerome to whom the gloss
above quoted is ascribed.
I answer that, The species of moral habits and acts are distinguished
according to their objects. Now the object of prophecy is something
known by God and surpassing the faculty of man. Wherefore,
according to the difference of such things, prophecy is divided into
various species, as assigned above. Now it has been stated above
(Question 71, Article 6, ad 2) that the future is contained in the Divine
knowledge in two ways. First, as in its cause: and thus we have the
prophecy of "denunciation," which is not always fulfilled. but it
foretells the relation of cause to effect, which is sometimes hindered
by some other occurrence supervening. Secondly, God foreknows
certain things in themselves---either as to be accomplished by
Himself, and of such things is the prophecy of "predestination,"
since, according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 30), "God
predestines things which are not in our power"---or as to be
accomplished through man's free-will, and of such is the prophecy
of "foreknowledge." This may regard either good or evil, which does
not apply to the prophecy of predestination, since the latter regards
good alone. And since predestination is comprised under
foreknowledge, the gloss in the beginning of the Psalter assigns
only two species to prophecy, namely of "foreknowledge," and of
"denunciation."
Reply to Objection 1: Foreknowledge, properly speaking, denotes
precognition of future events in themselves, and in this sense it is
reckoned a species of prophecy. But in so far as it is used in
connection with future events, whether as in themselves, or as in
their causes, it is common to every species of prophecy.
Reply to Objection 2: The prophecy of promise is included in the
prophecy of denunciation, because the aspect of truth is the same in
both. But it is denominated in preference from denunciation,
because God is more inclined to remit punishment than to withdraw
promised blessings.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.2.

Reply to Objection 3: Isidore divides prophecy according to the
manner of prophesying. Now we may distinguish the manner of
prophesying---either according to man's cognitive powers, which are
sense, imagination, and intellect, and then we have the three kinds of
vision mentioned both by him and by Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii,
6,7)---or according to the different ways in which the prophetic
current is received. Thus as regards the enlightening of the intellect
there is the "fullness of the Holy Ghost" which he mentions in the
seventh place. As to the imprinting of pictures on the imagination he
mentions three, namely "dreams," to which he gives the third place;
"vision," which occurs to the prophet while awake and regards any
kind of ordinary object, and this he puts in the second place; and
"ecstasy," which results from the mind being uplifted to certain lofty
things, and to this he assigns the first place. As regards sensible
signs he reckons three kinds of prophecy, because a sensible sign
is---either a corporeal thing offered externally to the sight, such as "a
cloud," which he mentions in the fourth place---or a "voice"
sounding from without and conveyed to man's hearing---this he puts
in the fifth place---or a voice proceeding from a man, conveying
something under a similitude, and this pertains to the "parable" to
which he assigns the sixth place.