John 7:49
"But the people, which knows not the Law, are accursed."
Then is the charge against you the heavier, because the people believed, and
you believed not. They acted like men that knew the Law; how then are they
accursed? It is ye that are accursed, who keep not the Law, not they, who obey
the Law. Neither was it right, on the evidence of unbelievers, to slander one in
whom they believed not, for this is an unjust mode of acting. For you also
believed not God, as Paul says; "What if some did not believe? Shall their
unbelief make the faith of God of none effect? God forbid." [Romans 3:3-4] For
the Prophets ever rebuked them, saying, "Hear, you rulers of Sodom"; and, "Your
rulers are disobedient" [Isaiah 1:10, 23]; and again, "Is it not for you to know
judgment?" [Micah 3:1] And everywhere they attack them vehemently. What
then? Shall one blame God for this? Away with the thought. This blame is theirs.
And what other proof can a man bring of your not knowing the Law than your
not obeying it? For when they had said, "Hath any of the rulers believed on
him?" and, "These who know not the Law," Nicodemus in fair consequence
upbraids them, saying,

John 7:51
"Does our law judge any man before it hear him?"
He shows that they neither know the Law, nor do the Law; for if that Law
commands to kill no man without first hearing him, and they before hearing
were eager for this deed, they were transgressors of the Law. And because they
said, "None of the rulers has believed on him" [John 7:50], therefore the
Evangelist informs us that Nicodemus was "one of them," to show that even
rulers believed on Him; for although they showed not yet fitting boldness, still
they were becoming attached to Christ. Observe how cautiously he rebukes
them; he said not, "You desire to kill him, and condemn the man for a deceiver
without proof"; but spoke in a milder way, hindering their excessive violence,
and their inconsiderate and murderous disposition. Wherefore he turns his
discourse to the Law, saying, "Except it hear him carefully, and know what he
does." So that not a bare "hearing," but "careful hearing" is required. For the
meaning of, "know what he does," is, "what he intends," "on what account," "for
what purpose," "whether for the subversion of the order of things and as an
enemy." Being therefore perplexed, because they had said, "None of the rulers
has believed on him," they addressed him, neither vehemently, nor yet with
forbearance. For tell me, after he had said, "The Law judges no man," how does
it follow that they should say,

John 7:52
"Are you also of Galilee?"
2. When they ought to have shown that they had not sent to summon Him
without judgment, or that it was not fitting to allow Him speech, they take the
reply rather in a rough and angry manner.
"Search, and look: for out of Galilee has arisen no prophet."
Why, what had the man said? That Christ was a prophet? No; he said, that
He ought not to be slain unjudged; but they replied insolently, and as to one who
knew nothing of the Scriptures; as though one had said, "Go, learn," for this is
the meaning of, "Search, and look." What then did Christ? Since they were
continually dwelling upon Galilee and "The Prophet," to free all men from this
erroneous suspicion, and to show that He was not one of the prophets, but the
Master of the world, He said,