who breathed into you a soul, and set you over all things on earth, who for your
sake made earth, and heaven, and sea, and air, and all things that are, who had
been dishonored by you, yea accounted of less honor than the devil, and did not
even so withdraw Himself, but had innumerable thoughts for you after it all; who
chose to become a slave, who was beaten with rods and spit upon, who was
slain, who died the most shameful death, who also on high makes intercession
for you, who freely gives you His Spirit, who vouchsafes to you a kingdom, who
makes you such promises, whose will it is to be unto you Head, and Bridegroom,
and Garment, and House, and Root, and Meat, and Drink, and Shepherd, and
King, and who has taken you to be brother, and heir, and joint-heir with Himself;
who has brought you out of darkness into the dominion of light." These things, I
say, and more than these He might speak of, but He mentions none of these; but
what? Only the sin itself.
Even here He shows His love, and indicates the yearning which He has
toward you: not saying, "Depart into the fire prepared for you," but "prepared
for the devil." And before He tells them what wrongs they had done, and neither
so does He endure to mention all, but a few. And before these He calls the other
sort, those who have done well, to signify from this too that He is blaming them
justly.
What amount of punishment, then, is so grievous as these words? For if any
one seeing but a man who was his benefactor an hungered, would not neglect
him; or if he should neglect him, being upbraided with it, would choose rather to
sink into the earth than to hear of it in the presence of two or three friends; what
will be our feelings, on hearing these words in the presence of the whole world;
such as He would not say even then, were He not earnestly accounting for His
own doings? For that not to upbraid did He bring these things forward, but in
self-defense, and for the sake of showing, that not without ground nor at random
was He saying, "depart from me;" this is evident from His unspeakable benefits.
For if He had been minded to upbraid, He would have brought forwards all
these, but now He mentions only what treatment He had received.

10. Let us therefore, beloved, fear the hearing these words. Life is not a
plaything: or rather our present life is a plaything, but the things to come are not
such; or perchance our life is not a plaything only, but even worse than this. For
it ends not in laughter, but rather brings exceeding damage on them who are not
minded to order their own ways strictly. For what, I pray you, is the difference
between children who are playing at building houses, and us when we are
building our fine houses? What again between them making out their dinners,
and us in our delicate fare? None, but just that we do it at the risk of being
punished. And if we do not yet quite perceive the poverty of what is going on, no
wonder, for we are not yet become men; but when we have become so, we shall
know that all these things are childish.
For so those other things too, as we grow to manhood, we laugh to scorn;
but when we are children we account them to be worth anxiety; and while we are
gathering together potsherds and mire we think no less of ourselves than they
who are erecting their great circuits of walls. Nevertheless they straightway
perish and fall down, and not even when standing can they be of any use to us,
as indeed neither can those fine houses. For the citizen of Heaven they cannot
receive, neither can he bear to abide in them, who has his country above; but as
we throw down these with our feet, so he too those by his high spirit. And as we
laugh at the children, weeping at that overthrow, even so these also, when we are
bewailing it all, do not laugh only, but weep also: because both their bowels are
compassionate, and great is the mischief thence arising.
Let us therefore become men. How long are we to crawl on the earth,
priding ourselves on stones and stocks? How long are we to play? And would we
played only! But now we even betray our own salvation; and as children when
they neglect their learning, and practise themselves in these things at their
leisure, suffer very severe blows; even so we too, spending all our diligence
herein, and having then our spiritual lessons required of us in our works, and not
being able to produce them, shall have to pay the utmost penalty. And there is
none to deliver us; though he be father, brother, what you will. But while these