FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.3.

things necessary for man's salvation.
I answer that, as stated above (Article 1), the New Law had to make
such prescriptions or prohibitions alone as are essential for the
reception or right use of grace. And since we cannot of ourselves
obtain grace, but through Christ alone, hence Christ of Himself
instituted the sacraments whereby we obtain grace: viz. Baptism,
Eucharist, Orders of the ministers of the New Law, by the institution
of the apostles and seventy-two disciples, Penance, and indissoluble
Matrimony. He promised Confirmation through the sending of the
Holy Ghost: and we read that by His institution the apostles healed
the sick by anointing them with oil (Mk. 6:13). These are the
sacraments of the New Law.
The right use of grace is by means of works of charity. These, in so
far as they are essential to virtue, pertain to the moral precepts,
which also formed part of the Old Law. Hence, in this respect, the
New Law had nothing to add as regards external action. The
determination of these works in their relation to the divine worship,
belongs to the ceremonial precepts of the Law; and, in relation to our
neighbor, to the judicial precepts, as stated above (Question 99,
Article 4). And therefore, since these determinations are not in
themselves necessarily connected with inward grace wherein the
Law consists, they do not come under a precept of the New Law, but
are left to the decision of man; some relating to inferiors---as when a
precept is given to an individual; others, relating to superiors,
temporal or spiritual, referring, namely, to the common good.
Accordingly the New Law had no other external works to determine,
by prescribing or forbidding, except the sacraments, and those
moral precepts which have a necessary connection with virtue, for
instance, that one must not kill, or steal, and so forth.
Reply to Objection 1: Matters of faith are above human reason, and
so we cannot attain to them except through grace. Consequently,
when grace came to be bestowed more abundantly, the result was an
increase in the number of explicit points of faith. On the other hand,
it is through human reason that we are directed to works of virtue,
for it is the rule of human action, as stated above (Question 19,
Article 3; Question 63, Article 2). Wherefore in such matters as these
there was no need for any precepts to be given besides the moral
precepts of the Law, which proceed from the dictate of reason.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: In the sacraments of the New Law grace is
bestowed, which cannot be received except through Christ:
consequently they had to be instituted by Him. But in the sacred
things no grace is given: for instance, in the consecration of a
temple, an altar or the like, or, again, in the celebration of feasts.
Wherefore Our Lord left the institution of such things to the
discretion of the faithful, since they have not of themselves any
necessary connection with inward grace.
Reply to Objection 3: Our Lord gave the apostles those precepts not
as ceremonial observances, but as moral statutes: and they can be
understood in two ways. First, following Augustine (De Consensu
Evang. 30), as being not commands but permissions. For He
permitted them to set forth to preach without scrip or stick, and so
on, since they were empowered to accept their livelihood from those
to whom they preached: wherefore He goes on to say: "For the
laborer is worthy of his hire." Nor is it a sin, but a work of
supererogation for a preacher to take means of livelihood with him,
without accepting supplies from those to whom he preaches; as Paul
did (1 Cor. 9:4, seqq.).
Secondly, according to the explanation of other holy men, they may
be considered as temporal commands laid upon the apostles for the
time during which they were sent to preach in Judea before Christ's
Passion. For the disciples, being yet as little children under Christ's
care, needed to receive some special commands from Christ, such
as all subjects receive from their superiors: and especially so, since
they were to be accustomed little by little to renounce the care of
temporalities, so as to become fitted for the preaching of the Gospel
throughout the whole world. Nor must we wonder if He established
certain fixed modes of life, as long as the state of the Old Law
endured and the people had not as yet achieved the perfect liberty of
the Spirit. These statutes He abolished shortly before His Passion,
as though the disciples had by their means become sufficiently
practiced. Hence He said (Lk. 22:35,36) "When I sent you without
purse and scrip and shoes, did you want anything? But they said:
Nothing. Then said He unto them: But now, he that hath a purse, let
him take it, and likewise a scrip." Because the time of perfect liberty
was already at hand, when they would be left entirely to their own
judgment in matters not necessarily connected with virtue.
Reply to Objection 4: Judicial precepts also, are not essential to
virtue in respect of any particular determination, but only in regard to