1 Corinthians 14:5
"I would have you all speak with tongues, but rather that you should
prophesy: for greater is he that prophesies than he that speaks with tongues,
except he interpret, that the Church may receive edifying."
But "rather" and "greater," do not mark opposition, but superiority. So that
hence also it is evident that he is not disparaging the gift, but leading them to
better things, displaying both his carefulness on their behalf, and a spirit free
from all envy. For neither did he say, "I would that two or three," but, "that you
all spoke with tongues" and not this only, but also, "that you prophesied;" and
this rather than that; "for greater is he that prophesies." For since he has
established and proved it, he next proceeds also to assert it; not however simply,
but with a qualification. Accordingly he adds, "except he interpret;" since if he
be able to do this, I mean the interpreting, "he has become equal unto the
prophet," so he speaks, "because then there are many who reap the advantage of
it;" a thing to be especially observed, how this throughout, before all else, is his
object,

1 Corinthians 14:6
"But now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shall I
profit you, unless I speak to you either by way of revelation, or of knowledge, or
of prophesying, or of teaching?"
"And why speak I," says he, "of the rest? Nay, let the person who speaks
with tongues be Paul: for not even so will any good come to the hearers." And
these things he says to signify that he is seeking their profit, not bearing any
grudge against them that have the gift; since not even in his own person does he
shrink from pointing out its unprofitableness. And indeed it is his constant way
to work out the disagreeable topics in his own person: as in the beginning of the
Epistle he said, "Who then is Paul? And who is Apollos? And who is Cephas?"
This same then he does also here, saying, "Not even I shall profit you, except I
speak to you either by way of revelation, or of prophesying, or of knowledge, or
of teaching." And what he means is, "if I say not somewhat that can be made
intelligible to you and that may be clear, but merely make display of my having
the gift of tongues;— tongues which you do not understand, you will go away
with no sort of profit. For how should you profit by a voice which you
understand not?"

1 Corinthians 14:7
[3] "Even things without life, giving a voice, whether pipe or harp, if they
give not a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped?"
"And why do I say," says he, that in our case this is unprofitable, and that
only useful which is clear and easy to be apprehended by the hearers? Since even
in musical instruments without life one may see this: for whether it be pipe or
harp, yet if it be struck or blown confusedly and unskilfully, without proper
cadence or harmony, it will captivate none of the hearers. For even in these
inarticulate sounds there is need of some distinctness: and if you strike not or
breathe into the pipe according to art, you have done nothing. Now if from
things without life we require so much distinctness, and harmony, and
appropriateness, and into those inarticulate sounds we strive and contend to
infuse so much meaning, much more in men indued with life and reason, and in
spiritual gifts, ought one to make significancy an object.