parents, by whom they succeeded against their will in proving that what had
taken place was real, since the parents best of all knew their own child. When
they could not terrify the man himself, but beheld him with all boldness proclaim
his Benefactor, they thought to wound the miracle by means of his parents.
Observe the malice of their questioning. For what says it? Having placed them in
the midst so as to throw them into distress, they apply the questioning with great
severity and anger,

John 9:19
"Is this your son?" (and they said not, "who once was blind," but) "of whom you
say that he was born blind?"
As if they were acting deceitfully, and plotting on behalf of Christ. O you
accursed, utterly accursed! What father would choose to invent such falsehoods
against his child? For they almost say, "Whom you have made out blind, and not
only so, but have spread abroad the report everywhere."
"How then does he now see?"
2. O folly! "Yours," says one, "is the trick and the contrivance." For by
these two things do they attempt to lead the parents to a denial; by using the
words, "Whom ye say," and, "How then does he now see?" Now when there were
three questions asked, whether he was their son, whether he had been blind, and
how he received his sight, the parents only acknowledged two of them, but do
not add the third. And this came to pass for the sake of the truth, in order that
none other save the man that was healed, who was also worthy of credit, should
acknowledge this matter. And how would the parents have favored (Christ),
when even of what they knew some part they spoke not through fear of the
Jews? What say they?

John 9:20-21
"We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind; but by what means he
now sees we know not, or who has opened his eyes we know not; he is of age, he
shall speak for himself."
By making him to be worthy of credit, they begged off themselves; "He is
not a child, say they, nor incapable, but able to testify for himself."

John 9:22
"These words spoke they, because they feared the Jews."
Observe how the Evangelist again brings forward their opinion and
thoughts. This I say, because of that speech which they before uttered, when they
said, "He makes Himself equal to God." [John 5:18] For had that also been the
opinion of the Jews but not the judgment of Christ, he would have added and
said, that "it was a Jewish opinion." When therefore the parents referred them to
him that had been healed, they called him again the second time, and did not say
openly and shamelessly, "Deny that Christ healed you," but would fain effect
this under a pretense of piety.

John 9:24
"Give the glory to God."
For to have said to the parents, "Deny that he is your son, and that he was
born blind," would have seemed very ridiculous. And again, to have said this to
himself would have been manifest shamelessness. Wherefore they say not so,
but manage the matter in another way, saying, "Give God the glory," that is,
"confess that this man has wrought nothing."
"We know that this man is a sinner."
"Why then did ye not convict Him when He said, 'Which of you convinces
Me of sin?' [John 8:46] Whence know ye that He is a sinner?" After that they
had said, "Give God the glory," and the man had made no reply, Christ meeting
praised him, and did not rebuke him, nor say, "Wherefore have you not given
glory to God?" But what said He? "Do you believe in the Son of God?" [John
9:35], that you may learn that this is "to give glory to God." Now had He not
been equal in honor to the Father, this would not have been giving glory; but
since he that honors the Son honors the Father also, the blind is with good reason
not rebuked. Now while they expected that the parents would contradict and
deny the miracle, the Pharisees said nothing to the man himself, but when they
saw that they profited nothing by this, they again return to him, saying, "This
man is a sinner."