(albeit it was He who did speak), but inasmuch as their souls were weak, and
they were not yet able to hear the things concerning Christ, he says, "God has
spoken by Him." What do you mean? did God speak through the Son? Yes. What
then? Is it thus you show the superiority? For here you have but pointed out that
both the New and the Old [Covenants] are of One and the same: and that this
superiority is not great. Wherefore he henceforth follows on upon this argument,
saying, "He spoke unto us by [His] Son."
(Note, how Paul makes common cause, and puts himself on a level with the
disciples, saying, He spoke "to us": and yet He did not speak to him, but to the
Apostles, and through them to the many. But he lifts them [the Hebrews] up, and
declares that He spoke also to them. And as yet he does not at all reflect on the
Jews. For almost all to whom the prophets spoke, were a kind of evil and
polluted persons. But as yet the discourse is not of these: but, hitherto of the gifts
derived from God.)
"Whom He appointed," says he, "heir of all." What is "whom He appointed
heir of all"? He speaks here of the flesh [the human nature]. As He also says in
the second Psalm, "Ask of Me, and I will give You the heathen for Your
inheritance." [Psalm 2:8] For no longer is "Jacob the portion of the Lord" nor
"Israel His inheritance" [Deuteronomy 32:9], but all men: that is to say, He has
made Him Lord of all: which Peter also said in the Acts, "God has made Him
both Lord and Christ." [Acts 2:36] But he has used the name "Heir," declaring
two things: His proper sonship and His indefeasible sovereignty. "Heir of all,"
that is, of all the world.
3. Then again he brings back his discourse to its former point. "By whom
also He made the worlds [the ages]." Where are those who say, There was [a
time] when He was not?
Then, using degrees of ascent, he uttered that which is far greater than all
this, saying,

Hebrews 1:3-4
"Who, (being the brightness of His glory, and the express image of His
person, and upholding all things by the word of His power,) when He had by
Himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
being made so much better than the Angels as He has by inheritance obtained a
more excellent name than they."
O! The wisdom of the Apostle! Or rather, not the wisdom of Paul, but the
grace of the Spirit is the thing to wonder at. For surely he uttered not these things
of his own mind, nor in that way did he find his wisdom. (For whence could it
be? From the knife, and the skins, or the workshop?) But it was from the
working of God. For his own understanding did not give birth to these thoughts,
which was then so mean and slender as in nowise to surpass the baser sort; (for
how could it, seeing it spent itself wholly on bargains and skins?) but the grace
of the Spirit shows forth its strength by whomsoever it will.
For just as one, wishing to lead up a little child to some lofty place,
reaching up even to the top of Heaven, does this gently and by degrees, leading
him upwards by the steps from below—then when he has set him on high, and
bidden him to gaze downwards, and sees him turning giddy and confused, and
dizzy, taking hold of him, he leads him down to the lower stand, allowing him to
take breath; then when he has recovered it, leads him up again, and again brings
him down—just so did the blessed Paul likewise, both with the Hebrews and
everywhere, having learned it from his Master. For even He also did so;
sometimes He led His hearers up on high, and sometimes He brought them
down, not allowing them to remain very long.
See him, then, even here— by how many steps he led them up, and placed
them near the very summit of religion, and then or ever they grow giddy, and are
seized with dizziness, how he leads them again lower down, and allowing them