on a royal coin renders the whole spurious, so he who swerves ever so little from
the pure faith, soon proceeds from this to graver errors, and becomes entirely
corrupted. Where then are those who charge us with being contentious in
separating from heretics, and say that there is no real difference between us
except what arises from our ambition? Let them hear Paul's assertion, that those
who had but slightly innovated, subverted the Gospel. Not to say that the Son of
God is a created Being, is a small matter. Know you not that even under the elder
covenant, a man who gathered sticks on the sabbath, and transgressed a single
commandment, and that not a great one, was punished with death? [Numbers
15:32-36] and that Uzzah, who supported the Ark when on the point of being
overturned, was struck suddenly dead, because he had intruded upon an office
which did not pertain to him? [2 Samuel 6:6-7] Wherefore if to transgress the
sabbath, and to touch the falling Ark, drew down the wrath of God so signally as
to deprive the offender of even a momentary respite, shall he who corrupts
unutterably awful doctrines find excuse and par don? Assuredly not. A want of
zeal in small matters is the cause of all our calamities; and because slight errors
escape fitting correction, greater ones creep in. As in the body, a neglect of
wounds generates fever, mortification, and death; so in the soul, slight evils
overlooked open the door to graver ones. It is accounted a trivial fault that one
man should neglect fasting; that another, who is established in the pure faith,
dissembling on account of circumstances, should surrender his bold profession
of it, neither is this anything great or dreadful; that a third should be irritated,
and threaten to depart from the true faith, is excused on the plea of passion and
resentment. Thus a thousand similar errors are daily introduced into the Church,
and we have become a laughing-stock to Jews and Greeks, seeing that the
Church is divided into a thousand parties. But if a proper rebuke had at first been
given to those who attempted slight perversions, and a deflection from the divine
oracles, such a pestilence would not have been generated, nor such a storm have
seized upon the Churches. You will now understand why Paul calls circumcision
a subversion of the Gospel. There are many among us now, who fast on the same

day as the Jews, and keep the sabbaths in the same manner; and we endure it
nobly or rather ignobly and basely. And why do I speak of Jews seeing that
many Gentile customs are observed by some among us; omens, auguries,
presages, distinctions of days, a curious attention to the circumstances of their
children's birth, and, as soon as they are born, tablets with impious inscriptions
are placed upon their unhappy heads, thereby teaching them from the first to lay
aside virtuous endeavors, and drawing part of them at least under the false
domination of fate. But if Christ in no way profits those that are circumcised,
what shall faith hereafter avail to the salvation of those who have introduced
such corruptions? Although circumcision was given by God, yet Paul used every
effort to abolish it, because its unseasonable observance was injurious to the
Gospel. If then he was so earnest against the undue maintenance of Jewish
customs, what excuse can we have for not abrogating Gentile ones? Hence our
affairs are now in confusion and trouble, hence have our learners being filled
with pride, reversed the order of things throwing every thing into confusion, and
their discipline having been neglected by us their governors, they spurn our
reproof however gentle. And yet if their superiors were even more worthless and
full of numberless evils, it would not be right for the disciple to disobey. It is
said of the Jewish doctors, that as they sat in Moses' seat, their disciples were
bound to obey them, though their works were so evil, that the Lord forbad His
disciples to imitate them. What excuse therefore is there for those who insult and
trample on men, rulers of the Church, and living, by the grace of God, holy
lives? If it be unlawful for us to judge each other, much more is it to judge our
teachers.
Ver. 8, 9. "But though we, or an angel from heaven, should preach unto you
any Gospel other than that which we preached unto you, let him be anathema."
See the Apostle's wisdom; to obviate the objection that he was prompted by
vainglory to applaud his own doctrine, he includes himself also in his anathema;
and as they betook themselves to authority, that of James and John, he mentions
angels also saying, "Tell me not of James and John; if one of the most exalted