for neither are you a freeman. Since the parasites likewise hear worse things than
these, and are not pained wherefore neither are these, but rather pride themselves
in their disgrace; and when we tell them of these things, "Let me have," says one
of them, "something pleasant and sweet, and let it choke me." Alas! The devil,
what proverbs has he brought into the world, of power to overturn the whole life
of such persons. See at least this self-same devilish and pernicious saying; of
how much ruin it is full. For it means nothing else than these words, Have thou
no regard to what is honorable; have thou no regard to what is just; let all those
things be cast aside, seek one thing alone, pleasure. Though the thing stifle you,
let it be your choice; though all that meet you spurn you, though they smear your
face with mire, though they drive you away as a dog, bear all. And what else
would swine say, if they had a voice? What else would filthy dogs? But perhaps
not even they would have said such things, as the devil has persuaded men to
rave.
Wherefore I entreat you, being conscious of the senselessness of such
words as these, to flee such proverbs, and to choose out those in the Scriptures
that are contrary to them.
But what are these? "Go not," it is said, "after your lusts, and refrain
yourself from your appetites." [Sirach 18:30] And, touching an harlot again, it is
said in opposition to this proverb, "Give not heed to a bad woman: for honey
drops from the lips of a woman that is an harlot, which, for a season, is luscious
unto your throat; but afterwards you shall find it more bitter than gall, and
sharper than a two-edged sword." Unto these last then let us listen, not unto
those. For hence indeed spring our mean, hence our slavish thoughts, hence men
become brutes, because in everything they will follow after pleasure according
to this proverb, which, even without arguments of ours, is of itself ridiculous.
For after one is choked, what is the gain of sweetness?
Cease, therefore, to set up such great absurdity, and to kindle hell and
unquenchable fire; and let us look steadfastly (at length though late) as we ought,
unto the things to come, having put away the film on our eyes, that we may both

pass the present life honestly, and with much reverence and godly fear, and attain
unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world without end. Amen.

## Homily 74 on Matthew

" Woe unto you, because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish
their sepulchers, and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets."
Not because they build, nor because they blame the others, does He say,
woe, but because, while both thus, and by what they say, they are pretending to
condemn their fathers, they do worse. For in proof that the condemnation was a
pretense, Luke says, you do allow because ye build; for, "Woe unto you," says
He, "for you build the sepulchers of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
Truly ye bear witness, and you allow the deeds of your fathers, for they indeed
killed them, and you build their sepulchers." [Luke 11:47-48] For here He
reproves their purpose, wherewith they built, that it was not for the honoring of
them that were slain, but as making a show of the murders, and afraid, lest, when
the tombs had perished by time, the proof and memory of such daring should
fade away, setting up these glorious buildings, as a kind of trophy, and priding
themselves in the daring deeds of those men, and displaying them.
For the things that you now dare to do, show that you do these things also
in this spirit. For, though ye speak the contrary, says He, as condemning them,
as, for instance, "We should not, if we had been in their days, have been
partakers with them;" yet the disposition is evident wherewith ye say these
things. Wherefore also unfolding it, though darkly, still He has expressed it. For
when He had said, you say, "If we had been in the days of our fathers, we should
not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets;" He added,
"Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves, that you are the children of them
that slew the prophets." And what blame is it to be a murderer's son, if one
partake not in the mind of one's father? None. Whence it is evident, that for this
same thing He brings it forward against them, hinting at their affinity in