48. If the whole Church takes up this missionary impulse, she has to go forth to everyone without
exception. But to whom should she go first? When we read the Gospel we find a clear indication:
not so much our friends and wealthy neighbours, but above all the poor and the sick, those who
are usually despised and overlooked, “those who cannot repay you” (Lk 14:14). There can be no
room for doubt or for explanations which weaken so clear a message. Today and always, “the
poor are the privileged recipients of the Gospel”, and the fact that it is freely preached to them
is a sign of the kingdom that Jesus came to establish. We have to state, without mincing words,
that there is an inseparable bond between our faith and the poor. May we never abandon them.

49. Let us go forth, then, let us go forth to offer everyone the life of Jesus Christ. Here I repeat for
the entire Church what I have often said to the priests and laity of Buenos Aires: I prefer a Church
which is bruised, hurting and dirty because it has been out on the streets, rather than a Church
which is unhealthy from being confined and from clinging to its own security. I do not want a
Church concerned with being at the centre and which then ends by being caught up in a web of
obsessions and procedures. If something should rightly disturb us and trouble our consciences, it
is the fact that so many of our brothers and sisters are living without the strength, light and
consolation born of friendship with Jesus Christ, without a community of faith to support them,
without meaning and a goal in life. More than by fear of going astray, my hope is that we will be
moved by the fear of remaining shut up within structures which give us a false sense of security,
within rules which make us harsh judges, within habits which make us feel safe, while at our door
people are starving and Jesus does not tire of saying to us: “Give them something to eat” (Mk
6:37).

## CHAPTER TWO: AMID THE CRISIS OF COMMUNAL COMMITMENT

50. Before taking up some basic questions related to the work of evangelization, it may be helpful
to mention briefly the context in which we all have to live and work. Today, we frequently hear of a

“diagnostic overload” which is not always accompanied by improved and actually applicable
methods of treatment. Nor would we be well served by a purely sociological analysis which would
aim to embrace all of reality by employing an allegedly neutral and clinical method. What I would
like to propose is something much more in the line of an evangelical discernment. It is the
approach of a missionary disciple, an approach “nourished by the light and strength of the Holy
Spirit”.

51. It is not the task of the Pope to offer a detailed and complete analysis of contemporary reality,
but I do exhort all the communities to an “ever watchful scrutiny of the signs of the times”. This
is in fact a grave responsibility, since certain present realities, unless effectively dealt with, are
capable of setting off processes of dehumanization which would then be hard to reverse. We need
to distinguish clearly what might be a fruit of the kingdom from what runs counter to God’s plan.
This involves not only recognizing and discerning spirits, but also – and this is decisive – choosing
movements of the spirit of good and rejecting those of the spirit of evil. I take for granted the
different analyses which other documents of the universal magisterium have offered, as well as
those proposed by the regional and national conferences of bishops. In this Exhortation I claim
only to consider briefly, and from a pastoral perspective, certain factors which can restrain or
weaken the impulse of missionary renewal in the Church, either because they threaten the life and
dignity of God’s people or because they affect those who are directly involved in the Church’s
institutions and in her work of evangelization.