FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.5.

Reply to Objection 2: Respect of persons takes place in those things
which are given according to due; but it has no place in those things
which are bestowed gratuitously. Because he who, out of generosity,
gives of his own to one and not to another, is not a respecter of
persons: but if he were a dispenser of goods held in common, and
were not to distribute them according to personal merits, he would
be a respecter of persons. Now God bestows the benefits of
salvation on the human race gratuitously: wherefore He is not a
respecter of persons, if He gives them to some rather than to others.
Hence Augustine says (De Praedest. Sanct. viii): "All whom God
teaches, he teaches out of pity; but whom He teaches not, out of
justice He teaches not": for this is due to the condemnation of the
human race for the sin of the first parent.
Reply to Objection 3: The benefits of grace are forfeited by man on
account of sin: but not the benefits of nature. Among the latter are
the ministries of the angels, which the very order of various natures
demands, viz. that the lowest beings be governed through the
intermediate beings: and also bodily aids, which God vouchsafes not
only to men, but also to beasts, according to Ps. 35:7: "Men and
beasts Thou wilt preserve, O Lord."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether all men were bound to observe the Old

Law?
Objection 1: It would seem that all men were bound to observe the
Old Law. Because whoever is subject to the king, must needs be
subject to his law. But the Old Law was given by God, Who is "King
of all the earth" (Ps. 46:8). Therefore all the inhabitants of the earth
were bound to observe the Law.
Objection 2: Further, the Jews could not be saved without observing
the Old Law: for it is written (Dt. 27:26): "Cursed be he that abideth
not in the words of this law, and fulfilleth them not in work." If
therefore other men could be saved without the observance of the
Old Law, the Jews would be in a worse plight than other men.
Objection 3: Further, the Gentiles were admitted to the Jewish ritual
and to the observances of the Law: for it is written (Ex. 12:48): "If any
stranger be willing to dwell among you, and to keep the Phase of the
Lord, all his males shall first be circumcised, and then shall he
celebrate it according to the manner; and he shall be as he that is
born in the land." But it would have been useless to admit strangers
to the legal observances according to Divine ordinance, if they could
have been saved without the observance of the Law. Therefore none
could be saved without observing the Law.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. ix) that many of the
Gentiles were brought back to God by the angels. But it is clear that
the Gentiles did not observe the Law. Therefore some could be
saved without observing the Law.
I answer that, The Old Law showed forth the precepts of the natural
law, and added certain precepts of its own. Accordingly, as to those
precepts of the natural law contained in the Old Law, all were bound
to observe the Old Law; not because they belonged to the Old Law,
but because they belonged to the natural law. But as to those
precepts which were added by the Old Law, they were not binding on
save the Jewish people alone.
The reason of this is because the Old Law, as stated above (Article
4), was given to the Jewish people, that it might receive a prerogative
of holiness, in reverence for Christ Who was to be born of that