from these latter enjoying even more honor; for "to that which lacks," says he,
"He has given more abundant honor:" from the care of them being common and
equal; for "for all the members have the same care one for another:" and from
there being one honor and one grief of them all; for "whether," says he, "one
member suffers, all the members suffer with it; or one member is honored, all the
members rejoice with it:"— whereas, I say, he had above exhorted them by these
topics, here and henceforth he uses language so as to bear them down and rebuke
them. For, as I said, it behooves us neither always to exhort people nor always to
silence them. Therefore also Paul himself, because he at length exhorted them,
does henceforth vehemently attack them, saying,

1 Corinthians 12:29
"Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Have all gifts of healing?"
And he does not stop at the first and the second gift, but proceeds to the
last, either meaning this that all cannot be all things, (even as he there says, "if
all were one member, where were the body?") or establishing some other point
also along with these, which may tell in the way of consolation again. What then
is this? His signifying that even the lesser gifts are contended for equally with
the greater, from the circumstance that not even these were given absolutely to
all? For "why," says he, "do you grieve that you have not gifts of healing?
Consider that what you have, even though it be less, is oftentimes not possessed
by him that has the greater." Wherefore he says,

1 Corinthians 12:30
"Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?"
For even as the great gifts God has not vouchsafed all to all men, but to
some this, and to others that, so also did He in respect of the less, not proposing
these either to all. And this He did, procuring thereby abundant harmony and
love, that each one standing in need of the other might be brought close to his
brother. This economy He established also in the arts, this also in the elements,
this also in the plants, and in our members, and absolutely in all things.
5. Then he subjoins further the most powerful consolation, and sufficient to
recover them and quiet their vexed souls. And what is this?

1 Corinthians 12:31
"Desire earnestly," says he, "the better gifts. And a still more excellent way
show I unto you."
Now by saying this, he gently hinted that they were the cause of their own
receiving the lesser gifts, and had it in their power, if they would, to receive the
greater. For when he says, "desire earnestly," he demands from them all
diligence and desire for spiritual things. And he said not, the greater gifts, but
"the better," i.e., the more useful, those which would profit. And what he means
is this: "continue to desire gifts; and I point out to you a fountain of gifts." For
neither did he say, "a gift," but "a way," that he might the more extol that which
he intends to mention. As if he said, It is not one, or two, or three gifts that I
point out to you, but one way which leads to all these : and not merely a way, but
both "a more excellent way" and one that is open in common to all. For not as
the gifts are vouchsafed, to some these, to others those, but not all to all; so also
in this case: but it is an universal gift. Wherefore also he invites all to it. "Desire
earnestly," says he, "the better gifts and yet show I unto you a more excellent
way;" meaning love towards our neighbor.
Then intending to proceed to the discourse concerning it and the encomium
of this virtue, he first lowers these by comparison with it, intimating that they are
nothing without it; very considerately. For if he had at once discoursed of love,
and having said, "I show unto you a way," had added, "but this is love," and had
not conducted his discourse by way of comparison; some might possibly have
scoffed at what was said, not understanding clearly the force of the thing spoken
of but still gaping after these. Wherefore he does not at once unfold it, but first
excites the hearer by the promise, and says, "I show unto you a more excellent
way," and so having led him to desire it, he does not even thus straightway
proceed to it, but augmenting still further and extending their desire, he