THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.11.

in a decretal on the Holy Unction: "The candidate is anointed on the
breast, in order to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, to cast off error
and ignorance, and to acknowledge the true faith, since 'the just man
liveth by faith'; while he is anointed between the shoulders, that he
may be clothed with the grace of the Holy Ghost, lay aside
indifference and sloth, and become active in good works; so that the
sacrament of faith may purify the thoughts of his heart, and
strengthen his shoulders for the burden of labor." But after Baptism,
as Rabanus says (De Sacram. iii), "he is forthwith anointed on the
head by the priest with Holy Chrism, who proceeds at once to offer
up a prayer that the neophyte may have a share in Christ's kingdom,
and be called a Christian after Christ." Or, as Ambrose says (De
Sacram. iii), his head is anointed, because "the senses of a wise man
are in his head" (Eccl 2:14): to wit, that he may "be ready to satisfy
everyone that asketh" him to give "a reason of his faith" (cf. 1 Pt.
3:15; Innocent III, Decretal on Holy Unction).
Reply to Objection 3: This white garment is given, not as though it
were unlawful for the neophyte to use others: but as a sign of the
glorious resurrection, unto which men are born again by Baptism;
and in order to designate the purity of life, to which he will be bound
after being baptized, according to Rm. 6:4: "That we may walk in
newness of life."
Reply to Objection 4: Although those things that belong to the
solemnity of a sacrament are not essential to it, yet are they not
superfluous, since they pertain to the sacrament's wellbeing, as
stated above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether three kinds of Baptism are fittingly

described---viz. Baptism of Water, of Blood, and of the Spirit?
Objection 1: It seems that the three kinds of Baptism are not fittingly
described as Baptism of Water, of Blood, and of the Spirit, i.e. of the
Holy Ghost. Because the Apostle says (Eph. 4:5): "One Faith, one
Baptism." Now there is but one Faith. Therefore there should not be
three Baptisms.
Objection 2: Further, Baptism is a sacrament, as we have made clear
above (Question 65, Article 1). Now none but Baptism of Water is a
sacrament. Therefore we should not reckon two other Baptisms.
Objection 3: Further, Damascene (De Fide Orth. iv) distinguishes
several other kinds of Baptism. Therefore we should admit more
than three Baptisms.
On the contrary, on Heb. 6:2, "Of the doctrine of Baptisms," the
gloss says: "He uses the plural, because there is Baptism of Water,
of Repentance, and of Blood."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 62, Article 5), Baptism of
Water has its efficacy from Christ's Passion, to which a man is
conformed by Baptism, and also from the Holy Ghost, as first cause.
Now although the effect depends on the first cause, the cause far
surpasses the effect, nor does it depend on it. Consequently, a man
may, without Baptism of Water, receive the sacramental effect from
Christ's Passion, in so far as he is conformed to Christ by suffering
for Him. Hence it is written (Apoc. 7:14): "These are they who are
come out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes and have
made them white in the blood of the Lamb." In like manner a man
receives the effect of Baptism by the power of the Holy Ghost, not
only without Baptism of Water, but also without Baptism of Blood:
forasmuch as his heart is moved by the Holy Ghost to believe in and
love God and to repent of his sins: wherefore this is also called
Baptism of Repentance. Of this it is written (Is. 4:4): "If the Lord shall
wash away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall wash away
the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof, by the spirit of
judgment, and by the spirit of burning." Thus, therefore, each of
these other Baptisms is called Baptism, forasmuch as it takes the
place of Baptism. Wherefore Augustine says (De Unico Baptismo