saying we glory in tribulations, he has added the reason, in these words,
"Knowing that tribulation works patience." Notice again the argumentative spirit
of Paul, how he gives their argument an opposite turn. For since it was
tribulations above all that made them give up the hopes of things to come, and
which cast them into despondency, he says that these are the very reasons for
confidingness, and for not desponding about the things to come, for
"tribulation," he says, "works patience."
Ver. 4, 5. "And patience experience, and experience hope; and hope makes
not ashamed."
Tribulations, that is, are so far from confuting these hopes, that they even
prove them. For before the things to come are realized, there is a very great fruit
which tribulation has— patience; and the making of the man that is tried,
experienced. And it contributes in some degree too to the things to come, for it
gives hope a vigor within us, since there is nothing that so inclines a man to hope
for blessings as a good conscience. Now no man that has lived an upright life is
unconfiding about things to come, as of those who have been negligent there are
many that, feeling the burden of a bad conscience, wish there were neither
judgment nor retribution. What then? Do our goods lie in hopes? Yes, in hopes—
but not mere human hopes, which often slip away, and put him that hoped to
shame; when some one, who was expected to patronize him, dies, or is altered
though he lives. No such lot is ours: our hope is sure and unmoveable. For He
Who has made the promise ever lives, and we that are to be the enjoyers of it,
even should we die, shall rise again, and there is absolutely nothing which can
put us to shame, as having been elated at random, and to no purpose, upon
unsound hopes. Having then sufficiently cleared them of all doubtfulness by
these words of his, he does not let his discourse pause at the time present, but
urges again the time to come, knowing that there were men of weaker character,
who looked too for present advantages, and were not satisfied with these
mentioned. And so he offers a proof for them in blessings already given. For lest
any should say, But what if God be unwilling to give them to us? For that He

can, and that He abides and lives, we all know: but how do we know, that He is
willing, also, to do it? From the things which have been done already. "What
things done?" The Love which He has shown for us. In doing what? Some may
say. In giving the Holy Ghost. Wherefore after saying "hope makes not
ashamed," he goes on to the proof of this, as follows:
"Because the love of God is," he does not say "given," but "shed abroad in
our hearts," so showing the profusion of it. That gift then, which is the greatest
possible, He has given; not heaven and earth and sea, but what is more precious
than any of these, and has rendered us Angels from being men, yea sons of God,
and brethren of Christ. But what is this gift? The Holy Spirit. Now had He not
been willing to present us after our labors with great crowns, He would never
have given us such mighty gifts before our labors. But now the warmth of His
Love is hence made apparent, that it is not gradually and little by little that He
honors us; but He has shed abroad the full fountain of His blessings, and this too
before our struggles. And so, if you are not exceedingly worthy, despond not,
since you have that Love of your Judge as a mighty pleader for you. For this is
why he himself by saying, "hope makes not ashamed," has ascribed everything
not to our well-doings, but to God's love. But after mentioning the gift of the
Spirit, he again passes to the Cross, speaking as follows:
Ver. 6-8. "For while we were yet without strength, Christ in due time died
for the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet pervadenture
for a good man some would even dare to die. But God commends His love
towards us."
Now what he is saying is somewhat of this kind. For if for a virtuous man,
no one would hastily choose to die, consider your Master's love, when it is not
for virtuous men, but for sinners and enemies that He is seen to have been
crucified— which he says too after this, "In that, if when we were sinners Christ
died for us,"
Ver. 9, 10. "Much more then, being now justified by His Blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through Him. For if, when we were enemies, we were