"And they shall in nowise escape." As he was saying just now.
Ver. 4. "But you, brethren, are not in darkness, that that day should
overtake you as a thief."
Here he speaks of a life that is dark and impure. For it is just as corrupt and
wicked men do all things as in the night, escaping the notice of all, and inclosing
themselves in darkness. For tell me, does not the adulterer watch for the evening,
and the thief for the night? Does not the violator of the tombs carry on all his
trade in the night? What then? Does it not overtake them as a thief? Does it not
come upon them also uncertainly, but do they know it beforehand? How then
does he say, "You have no need that anything be written unto you"? He speaks
here not with respect to the uncertainty, but with respect to the calamity, that is,
it will not come as an evil to them. For it will come uncertainly indeed even to
them, but it will involve them in no trouble. "That that Day," he says, "may not
overtake you as a thief." For in the case of those who are watching and who are
in the light, if there should be any entry of a robber, it can do them no harm: so
also it is with those who live well. But those who are sleeping he will strip of
everything, and go off; that is, those who are trusting in the things of this life.
Ver. 5. "For you are all," he says, "sons of light, and sons of the day."
And how is it possible to be "sons of the day"? Just as it is said, "sons of
destruction" and "sons of hell." Wherefore Christ also said to the Pharisees,
"Woe unto you— for you compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and when
he has become so, you make him a son of hell." [Matthew 23:15] And again Paul
said, "For which things' sake comes the wrath of God upon the sons of
disobedience." [Colossians 3:6] That is, those who do the works of hell and the
works of disobedience. So also sons of God are those who do things pleasing to
God; so also sons of day and sons of light, those who do the works of light. "And
we are not of the night nor of darkness."
Ver. 6, 7, 8. "So then let us not sleep, as do also the rest, but let us watch
and be sober. For they that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken are
drunken in the night. But let us, since we are of the day, be sober."

Here he shows, that to be in the day depends on ourselves. For here indeed,
in the case of the present day and night, it does not depend on ourselves. But
night comes even against our will, and sleep overtakes us when we do not wish
it. But with respect to that night and that sleep, it is not so, but it is in our power
always to have it day, it is in our power always to watch. For to shut the eyes of
the soul, and to bring on the sleep of wickedness, is not of nature, but of our own
choice. "But let us watch," he says, "and be sober." For it is possible to sleep
while awake, by doing nothing good. Wherefore he has added, "and be sober."
For even by day, if any one watches, but is not sober, he will fall into numberless
dangers, so that sobriety is the intensity of watchfulness. "They that sleep," he
says, "sleep in the night, and they that be drunken are drunken in the night." The
drunkenness he here speaks of is not that from wine only, but that also which
comes of all vices. For riches and the desire of wealth is a drunkenness of the
soul, and so carnal lust; and every sin you can name is a drunkenness of the soul.
On what account then has he called vice sleep? Because in the first place the
vicious man is inactive with respect to virtue: again, because he sees everything
as a vision, he views nothing in its true light, but is full of dreams, and
oftentimes of unreasonable actions: and if he sees anything good, he has no
firmness, no fixedness. Such is the present life. It is full of dreams, and of
phantasy. Riches are a dream, and glory, and everything of that sort. He who
sleeps sees not things that are and have a real subsistence, but things that are not
he fancies as things that are. Such is vice, and the life that is passed in vice. It
sees not things that are, that is, spiritual, heavenly, abiding things, but things that
are fleeting and fly away, and that soon recede from us.
But it is not sufficient to watch and be sober, we must also be armed. For if
a man watch and is sober, but has not arms, the robbers soon dispatch him. When
therefore we ought both to watch, and to be sober, and to be armed, and we are
unarmed and naked and asleep, who will hinder him from thrusting home his
sword? Wherefore showing this also, that we have need of arms, he has added:
Ver. 8. "Putting on the breastplate of faith and love: and for a helmet the