going about to seek what was to be done, but had on easy terms the Law
pointing the way leading to virtue. For if even the Gentiles have natural reason
(and it is on this ground that these are better than they, in that they do the Law
without hearing), yet still the others had greater facility. But if you say, I am not
only a hearer, but even a teacher, this very thing is an aggravation of your
punishment. For because they prided themselves upon this, from this above all
he shows them to be ridiculous. But when he says, "a guide of the blind, an
instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes," he is speaking their own pompous
language. For they treated proselytes extremely ill, and these were the names
they called them by. And this is why he dwells at large upon what were supposed
to be their praises, well knowing that what was said gave ground for greater
accusation; "Which hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in the Law." As
if any one who had a picture of the king, were to draw nothing after it, and they
that were not entrusted with it were to imitate it exactly even without the
original. And then after mentioning the advantages they had from God, he tells
them of their failings, bringing forward what the prophets accused them of. "You
therefore who teaches another, do you not teach yourself? You that preaches that
a man should not steal, do you steal? You who says a man should not commit
adultery, do you commit adultery? You that abhors idols, do you commit
sacrilege?" For it was strictly forbidden them to touch any of the treasures upon
the idols (so Field from the manuscripts: Vulg. "in the idol temples") by reason
of the defilement. But the tyranny of avarice, he says, has persuaded you (4
manuscripts and mar. "us") to trample this Law also under foot. Then he brings
the far more grievous charge afterwards, saying,
Ver. 23. "You that makes a boast in the Law through breaking the Law do
you dishonor God?"
There are two accusations which he makes, or rather three. Both that they
dishonor, and dishonor that whereby they were honored; and that they dishonor
Him that honored them, which was the utmost extreme of unfeelingness. And
then, not to seem to be accusing them of his own mind, he brings in the Prophet

as their accuser, here briefly and concisely as it were in a summary, but
afterwards more in detail, and here Isaiah, and after that David, when he had
shown the grounds of reproof to be more than one. For to show, he means, that it
is not I who speak these things to your reproach, hear what Isaiah says.
Ver. 24. "For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through
you." [Isaiah 52:5; Ezekiel 36:20-23]
See again another double accusation. For they not only commit insolence
themselves, but even induce others to do so. What then is the use of your
teaching when you teach not your own selves? Above, however, he merely said
this, but here he has even turned it round to the contrary. For not only
yourselves, but even others, do ye not teach what should be done. And what is
far worse— ye not only teach not the things of the Law, but you even teach the
opposite, viz. to blaspheme God, which is opposite to the Law. But the
circumcision, one will say, is a great thing. Yea, I also confess it, but when?
When (So all manuscripts S. "then, when") it has the inward circumcision. And
observe his judgment, in bringing in what he says about it so opportunely. For he
did not begin straightway with it, since the conceit men had of it was great. But
after he had shown them to have offended in that which was greater and to be
responsible for the blasphemy against God, then having henceforth possession of
the reader's judgment against them, and having stripped them of their preeminence, he introduces the discussion about circumcision, feeling sure that no
one will any more advocate it, and says,
Ver. 25. "For circumcision verily profits, if you keep the Law."
And yet, were this not so, a man might have rejected it and said, What is
circumcision? For is it any good deed on his part that has it? Is it any
manifestation of a right choice? For it takes place at an unripe age, and those in
the wilderness too remained uncircumcised for a long time. And from many
other points of view also, one might look at it as not necessary. And yet it is not
on this foot that he rejects it, but upon the most proper ground, from the case of
Abraham. For this is the most exceeding victory—to take the very reason for