Therefore God does not will necessarily whatever He wills.
I answer that, There are two ways in which a thing is said to be
necessary, namely, absolutely, and by supposition. We judge a thing
to be absolutely necessary from the relation of the terms, as when
the predicate forms part of the definition of the subject: thus it is
absolutely necessary that man is an animal. It is the same when the
subject forms part of the notion of the predicate; thus it is absolutely
necessary that a number must be odd or even. In this way it is not
necessary that Socrates sits: wherefore it is not necessary
absolutely, though it may be so by supposition; for, granted that he
is sitting, he must necessarily sit, as long as he is sitting.
Accordingly as to things willed by God, we must observe that He
wills something of absolute necessity: but this is not true of all that
He wills. For the divine will has a necessary relation to the divine
goodness, since that is its proper object. Hence God wills His own
goodness necessarily, even as we will our own happiness
necessarily, and as any other faculty has necessary relation to its
proper and principal object, for instance the sight to color, since it
tends to it by its own nature. But God wills things apart from Himself
in so far as they are ordered to His own goodness as their end. Now
in willing an end we do not necessarily will things that conduce to it,
unless they are such that the end cannot be attained without them;
as, we will to take food to preserve life, or to take ship in order to
cross the sea. But we do not necessarily will things without which
the end is attainable, such as a horse for a journey which we can
take on foot, for we can make the journey without one. The same
applies to other means. Hence, since the goodness of God is perfect,
and can exist without other things inasmuch as no perfection can
accrue to Him from them, it follows that His willing things apart from
Himself is not absolutely necessary. Yet it can be necessary by
supposition, for supposing that He wills a thing, then He is unable
not to will it, as His will cannot change.
Reply to Objection 1: From the fact that God wills from eternity
whatever He wills, it does not follow that He wills it necessarily;
except by supposition.
Reply to Objection 2: Although God necessarily wills His own
goodness, He does not necessarily will things willed on account of
His goodness; for it can exist without other things.
Reply to Objection 3: It is not natural to God to will any of those

other things that He does not will necessarily; and yet it is not
unnatural or contrary to His nature, but voluntary.
Reply to Objection 4: Sometimes a necessary cause has a nonnecessary relation to an effect; owing to a deficiency in the effect,
and not in the cause. Even so, the sun's power has a non-necessary
relation to some contingent events on this earth, owing to a defect
not in the solar power, but in the effect that proceeds not necessarily
from the cause. In the same way, that God does not necessarily will
some of the things that He wills, does not result from defect in the
divine will, but from a defect belonging to the nature of the thing
willed, namely, that the perfect goodness of God can be without it;
and such defect accompanies all created good.
Reply to Objection 5: A naturally contingent cause must be
determined to act by some external power. The divine will, which by
its nature is necessary, determines itself to will things to which it has
no necessary relation.
Reply to Objection 6: As the divine essence is necessary of itself, so
is the divine will and the divine knowledge; but the divine knowledge
has a necessary relation to the thing known; not the divine will to the
thing willed. The reason for this is that knowledge is of things as
they exist in the knower; but the will is directed to things as they
exist in themselves. Since then all other things have necessary
existence inasmuch as they exist in God; but no absolute necessity
so as to be necessary in themselves, in so far as they exist in
themselves; it follows that God knows necessarily whatever He wills,
but does not will necessarily whatever He wills.