"The reproaches of them that reproached You fell upon Me." [Psalm 69:9]
But what is the import of, "He pleased not Himself?" He had power not to have
been reproached, power not to have suffered what He did suffer, had He been
minded to look to His own things. But yet He was not so minded. But through
looking to our good He neglected His own. And why did he not say, "He emptied
Himself?" [Philippians 2:7] It is because this was not the only thing he wished to
point out, that He became man, but that He was also ill-treated, and obtained a
bad reputation with many, being looked upon as weak. For it says, "If Thou be
the Son of God, come down from the Cross." [Matthew 27:40]. And, "He saved
others, Himself He cannot save." [Matthew 27:42]. Hence he mentions a
circumstance which was available for his present subject, and proves much more
than he undertook to do; for he shows that it was not Christ alone that was
reproached, but the Father also. "For the reproaches of them that reproached You
fell," he says, "upon Me." But what he says is nearly this, What has happened is
no new or strange thing. For they in the Old Testament who came to have a habit
of reproaching Him, they also raved against His Son. But these things were
written that we should not imitate them. And then he supplies (Gr. anoints) them
for a patient endurance of temptations.
Ver. 4. "For whatsoever things were written aforetime," he says, "were
written for our learning, that we, through patience and comfort of the Scriptures,
might have hope."
That is, that we might not fall away, (for there are sundry conflicts within
and without), that being nerved and comforted by the Scriptures, we might
exhibit patience, that by living in patience we might abide in hope. For these
things are productive of each other, patience of hope, and hope of patience. And
both of them are brought about by the Scriptures. Then he again brings his
discourse into the form of prayer, and says,
Ver. 5. "Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded one towards another, according to Christ Jesus."
For since he had given his own advice, and had also urged the example of

Christ, he added the testimony of the Scriptures also, to show that with the
Scripture Himself gives patience also. And this is why he said, "Now the God of
patience and consolation grant you to be like-minded one towards another,
according to Christ Jesus." For this is what love would do, be minded toward
another even as toward himself. Then to show again that it is not mere love that
he requires, he adds, "according to Christ Jesus." And this he does, in all places,
because there is also another sort of love. And what is the advantage of their
agreeing?
Ver. 6. "That ye may with one mind," he says, "and one mouth, glorify God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ."
He does not say merely with one mouth, but bids us do it with one will also.
See how he has united the whole body into one, and how he concludes his
address again with a doxology, whereby he gives the utmost inducement to
unanimity and concord. Then again from this point he keeps to the same
exhortation as before, and says,
Ver. 7. "Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the
glory of God."
The example again is as before, and the gain unspeakable. For this is a thing
that does God special glory, the being closely united. And so if even against your
will (Field "being grieved for His sake," after Savile, but against manuscripts)
and for His sake, thou be at variance with your brother, consider that by putting
an end to your anger you are glorifying your Master, and if not on your brother's
account, for this at all events be reconciled to him: or rather for this first. For
Christ also insists upon this upon all possible grounds, and when addressing His
Father he said, "By this shall all men know that You have sent Me, if they be
one." [John 17:21]
Let us obey then, and knit ourselves to one another. For in this place it is
not any longer the weak, but all that he is rousing. And were a man minded to
break with you, do not thou break also. Nor give utterance to that cold saying,
"Him I love that loves me; if my right eye does not love me, I tear it out." For