poverty, and spent so long a time in the company of Christ Himself, and was
entrusted with the money of the poor, so that his passion might be soothed
thereby (for he was a thief) even then did not become any better, although he had
been favoured with such great condescension. For since Christ knew that he was
covetous, and destined to perish on account of his love of money he not only did
not demand punishment of him for this at that time, but with a view to softening
down his passion he was entrusted with the money of the poor, that having some
means of appeasing his greed he might be saved from falling into that appalling
gulf of sin, checking the greater evil beforehand by a lesser one.
12. Thus in no case will any one be able to injure a man who does not
choose to injure himself: but if a man is not willing to be temperate, and to aid
himself from his own resources no one will ever be able to profit him. Therefore
also that wonderful history of the Holy Scriptures, as in some lofty, large, and
broad picture, has portrayed the lives of the men of old time, extending the
narrative from Adam to the coming of Christ: and it exhibits to you both those
who are upset, and those who are crowned with victory in the contest, in order
that it may instruct you by means of all examples that no one will be able to
injure one who is not injured by himself, even if all the world were to kindle a
fierce war against him. For it is not stress of circumstances, nor variation of
seasons, nor insults of men in power, nor intrigues besetting you like snow
storms, nor a crowd of calamities, nor a promiscuous collection of all the ills to
which mankind is subject, which can disturb even slightly the man who is brave,
and temperate, and watchful; just as on the contrary the indolent and supine man
who is his own betrayer cannot be made better, even with the aid of innumerable
ministrations. This at least was made manifest to us by the parable of the two
men, of whom the one built his house upon the rock, the other upon the sand: not
that we are to think of sand and rock, or of a building of stone, and a roof, or of
rivers, and rain, and wild winds, beating against the buildings, but we are to
extract virtue and vice as the meaning of these things, and to perceive from them
that no one injures a man who does not injure himself. Therefore neither the rain

although driven furiously along, nor the streams dashing against it with much
vehemence, nor the wild winds beating against it with a mighty rush, shook the
one house in any degree: but it remained undisturbed, unmoved: that you might
understand that no trial can agitate the man who does not betray himself. But the
house of the other man was easily swept away, not on account of the force of the
trials (for in that case the other would have experienced the same fate), but on
account of his own folly; for it did not fall because the wind blew upon it, but
because it was built upon the sand, that is to say upon indolence and iniquity. For
before that tempest beat upon it, it was weak and ready to fall. For buildings of
that kind, even if no one puts any pressure on them, fall to pieces of themselves,
the foundation sinking and giving way in every direction. And just as cobwebs
part asunder, although no strain is put upon them, but adamant remains unshaken
even when it is struck: even so also they who do not injure themselves become
stronger, even if they receive innumerable blows; but they who betray
themselves, even if there is no one to harass them, fall of themselves, and
collapse and perish. For even thus did Judas perish, not only having been
unassailed by any trial of this kind, but having actually enjoyed the benefit of
much assistance.
13. Would you like me to illustrate this argument in the case of whole
nations? What great forethought was bestowed upon the Jewish nation! Was not
the whole visible creation arranged with a view to their service? Was not a new
and strange method of life introduced among them? For they had not to send
down to a market, and so they had the benefit of things which are sold for money
without paying any price for them: neither did they cleave furrows nor drag a
plough, nor harrow the ground, nor cast in seed, nor had they need of rain and
wind, and annual seasons, nor sunshine, nor phases of the moon, nor climate, nor
anything of that kind; they prepared no threshing floor, they threshed no grain,
they used no winnowing fan for separating the grain from the chaff, they turned
no mill-stone, they built no oven, they brought neither wood nor fire into the
house, they needed no baker's art, they handled no spade, they sharpened no