Some cultural challenges

61. We also evangelize when we attempt to confront the various challenges which can arise.
On occasion these may take the form of veritable attacks on religious freedom or new
persecutions directed against Christians; in some countries these have reached alarming levels of
hatred and violence. In many places, the problem is more that of widespread indifference and
relativism, linked to disillusionment and the crisis of ideologies which has come about as a
reaction to any-thing which might appear totalitarian. This not only harms the Church but the fabric
of society as a whole. We should recognize how in a culture where each person wants to be
bearer of his or her own subjective truth, it becomes difficult for citizens to devise a common plan
which transcends individual gain and personal ambitions.

62. In the prevailing culture, priority is given to the outward, the immediate, the visible, the quick,
the superficial and the provisional. What is real gives way to appearances. In many countries
globalization has meant a hastened deterioration of their own cultural roots and the invasion of
ways of thinking and acting proper to other cultures which are economically advanced but ethically
debilitated. This fact has been brought up by bishops from various continents in different Synods.
The African bishops, for example, taking up the Encyclical Sollicitudo Rei Socialis, pointed out
years ago that there have been frequent attempts to make the African countries “parts of a
machine, cogs on a gigantic wheel. This is often true also in the field of social communications

which, being run by centres mostly in the northern hemisphere, do not always give due
consideration to the priorities and problems of such countries or respect their cultural make-
up”. By the same token, the bishops of Asia “underlined the external influences being brought
to bear on Asian cultures. New patterns of behaviour are emerging as a result of over-exposure to
the mass media… As a result, the negative aspects of the media and entertainment industries are
threatening traditional values, and in particular the sacredness of marriage and the stability of the
family”.

63. The Catholic faith of many peoples is nowadays being challenged by the proliferation of new
religious movements, some of which tend to fundamentalism while others seem to propose a
spirituality without God. This is, on the one hand, a human reaction to a materialistic, consumerist
and individualistic society, but it is also a means of exploiting the weaknesses of people living in
poverty and on the fringes of society, people who make ends meet amid great human suffering
and are looking for immediate solutions to their needs. These religious movements, not without a
certain shrewdness, come to fill, within a predominantly individualistic culture, a vacuum left by
secularist rationalism. We must recognize that if part of our baptized people lack a sense of
belonging to the Church, this is also due to certain structures and the occasionally unwelcoming
atmosphere of some of our parishes and communities, or to a bureaucratic way of dealing with
problems, be they simple or complex, in the lives of our people. In many places an administrative
approach prevails over a pastoral approach, as does a concentration on administering the
sacraments apart from other forms of evangelization.