merely escape hell? And what could be more pitiable than this condition of soul?
For this king does not come to judge the earth, drawn by a pair of white mules,
nor riding in a golden chariot, nor arrayed in a purple robe and diadem. How
then does He come? Hear the prophets crying aloud and saying as much as it is
possible to tell to men: for one says "God shall come openly, even our God and
shall not keep silence: a fire shall be kindled before Him, and a mighty tempest
shall be round about Him: He shall call the Heaven from above and the earth
that He may judge His people." But Esaias depicts the actual punishment
impending over us speaking thus: "Behold the day of the Lord comes,
inexorable, with wrath and anger; to lay the whole world desolate, and to
destroy sinners out of it. For the stars of Heaven, and Orion, and the whole
system of the heaven shall not give their light, and the sun shall be darkened in
its going down, and the moon shall not give her light; and I will ordain evils
against the whole world, and visit their sins upon the ungodly, and I will destroy
the insolence of the lawless, and humble the insolence of the proud, and they
who are left shall be more precious than unsmelted gold, and a man shall be
more precious than the sapphire stone. For the heaven shall be disturbed and the
earth shall be shaken from its foundations by reason of the fury of the wrath of
the Lord of Sabaoth, in the day when His wrath shall come upon us."
[Isaiah 13:9, 13] And again "windows" he says "shall be opened from the
Heaven, and the foundations of the earth shall be shaken: the earth shall be
mightily confounded, the earth shall be bent low, it shall be perplexed with great
perplexity, the earth shall stagger grievously like the drunkard and the reveller;
the earth shall shake as a hut, it shall fall and not be able to rise up again: for
iniquity has waxed mighty therein. And God shall set His hand upon the host of
the Heaven in the height in that day, and upon the kingdoms of the earth, and He
shall gather together the congregation thereof into a prison, and shall shut them
up in a stronghold." And Malachi speaking concordantly with these said "Behold
the Lord almighty comes, and who shall abide the day of His coming or who
shall stand when He appears? For He comes like a refiner's fire, and like fullers

soap: and He shall sit refining and purifying as it were silver, and as it were
gold." [Malachi 3:2-3] And again, "Behold," he says, "the day of the Lord comes,
burning like an oven, and it shall consume them, and all the aliens, and all who
work iniquity shall be stubble, and the day which is coming shall set fire to them
says the Lord almighty; and there shall be left neither root nor branch."
[Malachi 4:1] And the man greatly beloved says "I beheld until thrones were
placed, and the Ancient of Days was seated, and his raiment was white as snow,
and the hair of his head was pure as wool: His throne was a flame of fire, and
the wheels thereof burning fire: a stream of fire wound its way in front of Him.
Thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before Him. The judgment was set and the books were opened." Then after
a little space "I beheld," he says, "in a vision of the night and behold with the
clouds of Heaven, one came like the Son of Man, and reached unto the Ancient
of Days, and was brought near before Him, and to Him was given rule, and
honor, and the kingdom, and all the people, tribes and tongues serve Him. His
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His
kingdom shall not be destroyed. As for me Daniel, my spirit shuddered within
me, and the visions of my head troubled me." Then all the gates of the heavenly
vaults are opened, or rather the heaven itself is taken away out of the midst "for
the heaven," we read "shall be rolled up like a scroll," [Isaiah 34:4] wrapped up
in the middle like the skin and covering of some tent so as to be transformed into
some better shape. Then all things are full of amazement and horror and
trembling: then even the angels themselves are holden by much fear, and not
angels only but also archangels and thrones, and dominions, and principalities
and authorities. "For the powers" we read "of the heavens shall be shaken,"
because their fellow-servants are required to give an account of their life in this
world. [Matthew 24:29] For if when a single city is being judged before rulers in
this world, all men shudder, even those who are outside the danger, when the
whole world is arraigned before such a judge as this who needs no witnesses, or
proofs, but independently of all these things brings forward deeds and words and