THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.11, C.3.

fully the capabilities of a comprehensor.
Reply to Objection 1: This likeness which the Philosopher asserts is
not with regard to everything. For it is manifest that the end of the
power of seeing is to know colors; but the end of the intellective
power is not to know phantasms, but to know intelligible species,
which it apprehends from and in phantasms, according to the state
of the present life. Therefore there is a likeness in respect of what
both powers regard, but not in respect of that in which the condition
of both powers is terminated. Now nothing prevents a thing in
different states from reaching its end by different ways: albeit there
is never but one proper end of a thing. Hence, although the sight
knows nothing without color; nevertheless in a certain state the
intellect can know without phantasms, but not without intelligible
species.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the soul of Christ was of the same
nature as our souls, yet it had a state which our souls have not yet in
fact, but only in hope, i.e. the state of comprehension.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the soul of Christ could understand
without turning to phantasms, yet it could also understand by
turning to phantasms. Hence the senses were not useless in it;
especially as the senses are not afforded to man solely for
intellectual knowledge, but for the need of animal life.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.11, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether this knowledge is collative?

Objection 1: It would seem that the soul of Christ had not this
knowledge by way of comparison. For Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. iii, 14): "We do not uphold counsel or choice in Christ." Now
these things are withheld from Christ only inasmuch as they imply
comparison and discursion. Therefore it seems that there was no
collative or discursive knowledge in Christ.
Objection 2: Further, man needs comparison and discursion of
reason in order to find out the unknown. But the soul of Christ knew
everything, as was said above (Question 10, Article 2). Hence there
was no discursive or collative knowledge in Him.
Objection 3: Further, the knowledge in Christ's soul was like that of
comprehensors, who are likened to the angels, according to Mt.
22:30. Now there is no collative or discursive knowledge in the
angels, as Dionysius shows (Div. Nom. vii). Therefore there was no
discursive or collative knowledge in the soul of Christ.
On the contrary, Christ had a rational soul, as was shown (Question
5, Article 4). Now the proper operation of a rational soul consists in
comparison and discursion from one thing to another. Therefore
there was collative and discursive knowledge in Christ.
I answer that, Knowledge may be discursive or collative in two ways.
First, in the acquisition of the knowledge, as happens to us, who
proceed from one thing to the knowledge of another, as from causes
to effects, and conversely. And in this way the knowledge in Christ's
soul was not discursive or collative, since this knowledge which we
are now considering was divinely infused, and not acquired by a
process of reasoning. Secondly, knowledge may be called discursive
or collative in use; as at times those who know, reason from cause
to effect, not in order to learn anew, but wishing to use the
knowledge they have. And in this way the knowledge in Christ's soul
could be collative or discursive; since it could conclude one thing
from another, as it pleased, as in Mt. 17:24,25, when our Lord asked
Peter: "Of whom do the kings of the earth receive tribute, of their
own children, or of strangers?" On Peter replying: "Of strangers," He
concluded: "Then the children are free."