added,
2 Corinthians 4:2. "But we have renounced the hidden things of shame, not
walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully."
And what are "the hidden things of shame?" We do not, he says, profess
and promise great things, and in our actions show other things, as they do;
wherefore also he said, "You look on things after the outward appearance;" but
such we are as we appear, not having any duplicity, nor saying and doing such
things as we ought to hide and veil over with shame and blushes. And to
interpret this, he added, "not walking in craftiness." For what they considered to
be praise, that he proves to be shameful and worthy of scorn. But what is, "in
craftiness?" They had the reputation of taking nothing,, but they took and kept it
secret; they had the character of saints and approved Apostles, but they were full
of numberless evil things. But, says he, "we have renounced" these things: (for
these are what he also calls the "hidden things of shame;" being such as we
appear to be, and keeping nothing veiled over. And that not in this [our] life only,
but also in the Preaching itself. For this is, "nor handling the word of God
deceitfully."
"But by the manifestation of the truth."
Not by the countenance and the outward show, but by the very proof of our
actions.
"Commending ourselves to every man's conscience."
For not to believers only, but also to unbelievers, we are manifest; lying
open unto all that they may test our actions, as they may choose; and by this we
commend ourselves, not by acting a part and carrying about a specious mask. We
say then, that we take nothing, and we call you for witnesses; we say that we are
conscious of no wickedness, and of this again we derive the testimony from you,
not as they (sc. false Apostles) who, veiling over their things, deceive many. But
we both set forth our life before all men; and we lay bare the Preaching, so that
all comprehend it.
2. Then because the unbelievers knew not its power, he added, this is no

fault of ours, but of their own insensibility. Wherefore also he says,

2 Corinthians 4:3-4
"But if our Gospel is veiled, it is veiled in them that are lost; in whom the
God of this world has blinded the eyes of the unbelieving."
As he said also before, "To some a savor from death unto death, to others a
savor from life unto life," [2 Corinthians 2:16] so he says here too. But what is
"the God of this world?" Those that are infected with Marcion's notions , affirm
that this is said of the Creator, the just only, and not good; for they say that there
is a certain God, just and not good. But the Manichees say that the devil is here
intended, desiring from this passage to introduce another creator of the world
besides the True One, very senselessly. For the Scripture uses often to employ
the term God, not in regard of the dignity of that so designated, but of the
weakness of those in subjection to it; as when it calls Mammon lord, and the
belly god. But neither is the belly therefore God, nor Mammon Lord, save only
of those who bow down themselves to them. But we assert of this passage that it
is spoken neither of the devil nor of another creator, but of the God of the
Universe, and that it is to be read thus; "God has blinded the minds of the
unbelievers of this world. " For the world to come has no unbelievers; but the
present only. But if any one should read it even otherwise, as, for instance, "the
God of this world;" neither does this afford any handle, for this does not show
Him to be the God of this world only. For He is called "the God of Heaven,"
[Psalm 136:26, etc.] yet is He not the God of Heaven only; and we say, 'God of
the present day;' yet we say this not as limiting His power to it alone. And
moreover He is called the "God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob;" [Exodus 3:6, etc.] and yet He is not the God of them alone. And one
may find many other like testimonies in the Scriptures. How then "has" He
"blinded" them? Not by working unto this end; away with the thought! But by
suffering and allowing it. For it is usual with the Scripture so to speak, as when it