all things being purified by the advent of the Saviour. Wherefore this substance also, according to
them, was reinstated in Pleroma. They say, too, that Simeon, "who took Christ into his arms, and
gave thanks to God, and said, Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to
Thy word," was a type of the Demiurge, who, on the arrival of the Saviour, learned his own
change of place, and gave thanks to Bythus. They also assert that by Anna, who is spoken of in the
gospel as a prophetess, and who, after living seven years with her husband, passed all the rest
of her life in widowhood until she saw the Saviour, and recognised Him, and spoke of Him to all,
was most plainly indicated Achamoth, who, having for a little while looked upon the Saviour with
His associates, and dwelling all the rest of the time in the intermediate place, waited for Him till
He should come again, and restore her to her proper consort. Her name, too, was indicated by the
Saviour, when He said, "Yet wisdom is justified by her children." This, too, was done by Paul
in these words, "But we speak wisdom among them that are perfect." They declare also that Paul
has referred to the conjunctions within the Pleroma, showing them forth by means of one; for, when
writing of the conjugal union in this life, he expressed himself thus: "This is a great mystery, but
I speak concerning Christ and the Church."
5. Further, they teach that John, the disciple of the Lord, indicated the first Ogdoad, expressing
themselves in these words: John, the disciple of the Lord, wishing to set forth the origin of all
things, so as to explain how the Father produced the whole, lays down a certain principle,—that,
namely, which was first-begotten by God, which Being he has termed both the only-begotten Son
and God, in whom the Father, after a seminal manner, brought forth all things. By him the Word
was produced, and in him the whole substance of the Æons, to which the Word himself afterwards
imparted form. Since, therefore, he treats of the first origin of things, he rightly proceeds in his
teaching from the beginning, that is, from God and the Word. And he expresses himself thus: "In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the same was
in the beginning with God." Having first of all distinguished these three—God, the Beginning,
and the Word —he again unites them, that he may exhibit the production of each of them, that is,
of the Son and of the Word, and may at the same time show their union with one another, and with
the Father. For "the beginning" is in the Father, and of the Father, while "the Word" is in the
beginning, and of the beginning. Very properly, then, did he say, "In the beginning was the Word,"
for He was in the Son; "and the Word was with God," for He was the beginning; "and the Word
was God," of course, for that which is begotten of God is God. "The same was in the beginning
with God"—this clause discloses the order of production. "All things were made by Him, and