FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.2.

repugnance but only of fittingness; because being is common to all
things. But being, inasmuch as it is this determinate being, has an
aspect of repugnance to some determinate being. And in this way,
one being is hateful to another, and is evil; though not in itself, but
by comparison with something else.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as a thing may be apprehended as good,
when it is not truly good; so a thing may be apprehended as evil,
whereas it is not truly evil. Hence it happens sometimes that neither
hatred of evil nor love of good is good.
Reply to Objection 3: To different things the same thing may be
lovable or hateful: in respect of the natural appetite, owing to one
and the same thing being naturally suitable to one thing, and
naturally unsuitable to another: thus heat is becoming to fire and
unbecoming to water: and in respect of the animal appetite, owing to
one and the same thing being apprehended by one as good, by
another as bad.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether love is a cause of hatred?

Objection 1: It would seem that love is not a cause of hatred. For "the
opposite members of a division are naturally simultaneous" (Praedic.
x). But love and hatred are opposite members of a division, since
they are contrary to one another. Therefore they are naturally
simultaneous. Therefore love is not the cause of hatred.
Objection 2: Further, of two contraries, one is not the cause of the
other. But love and hatred are contraries. Therefore love is not the
cause of hatred.
Objection 3: Further, that which follows is not the cause of that
which precedes. But hatred precedes love, seemingly: since hatred
implies a turning away from evil, whereas love implies a turning
towards good. Therefore love is not the cause of hatred.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 7,9) that all
emotions are caused by love. Therefore hatred also, since it is an
emotion of the soul, is caused by love.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), love consists in a certain
agreement of the lover with the object loved, while hatred consists in
a certain disagreement or dissonance. Now we should consider in
each thing, what agrees with it, before that which disagrees: since a
thing disagrees with another, through destroying or hindering that
which agrees with it. Consequently love must needs precede hatred;
and nothing is hated, save through being contrary to a suitable thing
which is loved. And hence it is that every hatred is caused by love.
Reply to Objection 1: The opposite members of a division are
sometimes naturally simultaneous, both really and logically; e.g. two
species of animal, or two species of color. Sometimes they are
simultaneous logically, while, in reality, one precedes, and causes
the other; e.g. the species of numbers, figures and movements.
Sometimes they are not simultaneous either really or logically; e.g.
substance and accident; for substance is in reality the cause of
accident; and being is predicated of substance before it is
predicated of accident, by a priority of reason, because it is not
predicated of accident except inasmuch as the latter is in substance.
Now love and hatred are naturally simultaneous, logically but not