God." For not only it contributes nothing, but it even hinders. We must then
withdraw ourselves from it, as doing harm. Do you mark with what a high hand
he carries off the spoils of victory, having proved that so far from profiting us at
all, it is even an opponent?
And he is not content with his own arguments, but he has also adduced
testimony again, saying, "For it is written, [Job 5:13] He takes the wise in their
own craftiness." By "craftiness," i.e. by their own arms getting the better of
them. For seeing that they made use of their wisdom to the doing away of all
need of God, by it and no other thing He refuted them, showing that they were
specially in need of God. How and by what method? Because having by it
become fools, by it, as was meet, they were taken. For they who supposed that
they needed not God, were reduced to so great a strait as to appear inferior to
fishermen and unlettered persons; and from that time forth to be unable to do
without them. Wherefore he says, "In their own craftiness" He took them. For
the saying "I will destroy their wisdom," was spoken in regard to its introducing
nothing useful; but this, "who takes the wise in their own craftiness, with a view
of showing the power of God."
Next, he declares also the mode in which God took them, adding another
testimony:

1 Corinthians 3:20
"For the Lord," says he, "knows the reasonings of men [Psalm 94:11.
ἀνθρώπων] Septuagint that they are vain." Now when the Wisdom which is
boundless pronounces this edict concerning them, and declares them to be such,
what other proof do you seek of their extreme folly? For men's judgments, it is
true, in many instances fail; but the decree of God is unexceptionable and
uncorrupt in every case.
4. Thus having set up so splendid a trophy of the judgment from on high, he
employs in what follows a certain vehemence of style, turning it against those
who were under his ministry, ([ἀρχομένους]) and speaking thus:

1 Corinthians 3:21
"Wherefore let no man glory in men; for all things are yours." He comes
again to the former topic, pointing out that not even for their spiritual things
ought they to be highminded, as having nothing of themselves. "Since then the
wisdom from without is hurtful, and the spiritual gifts were not given by you,
what have you wherein to boast?" And in regard to the wisdom from without,
"Let no man deceive himself," says he, because they were conceited about a
thing which in truth did more harm than good. But here, inasmuch as the thing
spoken of was really advantageous, "Let no man glory." And he orders his
speech more gently: "for all things are yours."

1 Corinthians 3:22-23
"Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come, all are yours; and you are Christ's and Christ
is God's." For because he had handled them sharply, he refreshes them again.
And as above he had said, [1 Corinthians 3:9] "We are fellow-workers with
God;" and by many other expressions had soothed them: so here too he says,
"All things are yours;" taking down the pride of the teachers, and signifying that
so far from bestowing any favor on them, they themselves ought to be grateful to
the others. Since for their sake they were made such as they were, yea, moreover,
had received grace. But seeing that these also were sure to boast, on this account
he cuts out beforehand this disease too, saying, "As God gave to every man,"
[Supr. vi. 5. 6] and, "God gave the increase:" to the end that neither the one
party might be puffed up as bestowers of good; nor the others, on their hearing a
second time, "All things are yours," be again elated. "For, indeed, though it were
for your sakes, yet the whole was God's doing." And I wish you to observe how
he has kept on throughout, making suppositions in his own name and that of
Peter.
But what is, "or death?" That even though they die, for your sakes they die,
encountering dangers for your salvation. Do you mark how he again takes down
the high spirit of the disciples, and raises the spirit of the teachers? In fact, he
talks with them as with children of high birth, who have preceptors, and who are
to be heirs of all.
We may say also, in another sense, that both the death of Adam was for our
sakes, that we might be corrected; and the death of Christ, that we might be
saved.
"And you are Christ's; and Christ is God's." In one sense "we are Christ's,"
and in another sense "Christ is God's," and in a third sense is "the world ours."