you hear a teacher lisping, and saying over the alphabet, thou dost not say that he
is ignorant; and when he asks, Where is such a letter? You know that he does not
ask in ignorance, but because he wishes to lead on the scholar; in like manner
Christ also did not make His prayer as needing prayer, but desiring to lead you
on, that you may continually apply yourself to prayer, that you may do it without
ceasing, soberly, and with great watchfulness.
And by watching, I do not mean, merely the rising at night, but also the
being sober in our prayers during the day. For such an one is called watchful.
Since it is possible both in praying by night to be asleep, and in praying by day
to be awake, when the soul is stretched out towards God, when it considers with
whom it holds converse, to whom its words are addressed, when it has in mind
that angels stand by with fear and trembling, while he approaches gaping and
scratching himself.
9. Prayer is a mighty weapon if it be made with suitable mind. And that you
may learn its strength, continued entreaty has overcome shamelessness, and
injustice, and savage cruelty, and overbearing rashness. For He says, "Hear what
the unjust judge says." [Luke 18:6] Again it has overcome sloth also, and what
friendship did not effect, this continued entreaty did: and "although he will not
give him because he is his friend" (He says), "yet because of his importunity he
will rise and give to him." [Luke 11:8] And continued assiduity made her
worthy who was unworthy. "It is not meet" (He says) "to take the children's
bread and to cast it to the dogs. Yea! Lord!" she says, "for even the dogs eat [the
crumbs] from their master's table." [Matthew 15:26-27] Let us apply ourselves
to Prayer. It is a mighty weapon if it be offered with earnestness, if without
vainglory, if with a sincere mind. It has turned back wars, it has benefited an
entire nation though undeserving. "I have heard their groaning" (He says) "and
have come down to deliver them." [Acts 7:34] It is itself a saving medicine, and
has power to prevent sins, and to heal misdeeds. In this the desolate widow was
assiduous. [1 Timothy 5:5]
If then we pray with humility, smiting our breast as the publican, if we utter

what he did, if we say, "Be merciful to me a sinner" [Luke 18:13], we shall
obtain all. For though we be not publicans, yet have we other sins not less than
his.
For do not tell me, that you have gone wrong in some small matter [only],
since the thing has the same nature. For as a man is equally called a homicide
whether he has killed a child or a man, so also is he called overreaching whether
he be overreaching in much or in little. Yea and to remember injuries too, is no
small matter, but even a great sin. For it is said, "the ways of those who
remember injuries [tend] to death." [Proverbs 12:28, Septuagint] And "He that
is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger of hell," and he that
"calls his brother a fool" [Matthew 5:22], and senseless, and numberless such
things.
But we partake even of the tremendous mysteries unworthily, and we envy,
and we revile. And some of us have even oftentimes been drunk. But each one of
these things, even itself by itself, is enough to cast us out of the kingdom, and
when they even come all together, what comfort shall we have? We need much
penitence, beloved, much prayer, much endurance, much perseverance, that we
may be enabled to attain the good things which have been promised to us.
10. Let us then say, even we, "Be merciful to me a sinner," nay rather, let us
not say it only, but let us also be thus minded; and should another call us so, let
us not be angry. He heard the words, "I am not as this Publican" [Luke 18:11],
and was not provoked thereby, but filled with compunction. He accepted the
reproach, and he put away the reproach. The other spoke of the wound, and he
sought the medicine. Let us say then, "Be merciful to me a sinner" [Luke 18:13];
but even if another should so call us, let us not be indignant.
But if we say ten thousand evil things of ourselves, and are vexed when we
hear them from others, then there is no longer humility, nor confession, but
ostentation and vainglory. Is it ostentation (you say) to call one's self a sinner?
Yes; for we obtain the credit of humility, we are admired, we are commended;
whereas if we say the contrary of ourselves, we are despised. So that we do this