THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.3.

Faustus pretended to prove from certain apocryphal writings), then
we must believe that Joachim's mother, or else his wife, was of the
family of David, so long as we say that Mary was in some way
descended from David.
Reply to Objection 3: As Ambrose says on Lk. 3:25, this prophetical
passage does not deny that a posterity will be born of the seed of
Jechonias. And so Christ is of his seed. Neither is the fact that Christ
reigned contrary to prophecy, for He did not reign with worldly
honor; since He declared: "My kingdom is not of this world."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ's genealogy is suitably traced by

the evangelists?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's genealogy is not suitably
traced by the Evangelists. For it is written (Is. 53:8): "Who shall
declare His generation?" Therefore Christ's genealogy should not
have been set down.
Objection 2: Further, one man cannot possibly have two fathers. But
Matthew says that "Jacob begot Joseph, the husband of Mary":
whereas Luke says that Joseph was the son of Heli. Therefore they
contradict one another.
Objection 3: Further, there seem to be divergencies between them on
several points. For Matthew, at the commencement of his book,
beginning from Abraham and coming down to Joseph, enumerates
forty-two generations. Whereas Luke sets down Christ's genealogy
after His Baptism, and beginning from Christ traces the series of
generations back to God, counting in all seventy-seven generations,
the first and last included. It seems therefore that their accounts of
Christ's genealogy do not agree.
Objection 4: Further, we read (4 Kgs. 8:24) that Joram begot
Ochozias, who was succeeded by his son Joas: who was succeeded
by his son Amasius: after whom reigned his son Azarias, called
Ozias; who was succeeded by his son Joathan. But Matthew says
that Joram begot Ozias. Therefore it seems that his account of
Christ's genealogy is unsuitable, since he omits three kings in the
middle thereof.
Objection 5: Further, all those who are mentioned in Christ's
genealogy had both a father and a mother, and many of them had
brothers also. Now in Christ's genealogy Matthew mentions only
three mothers---namely, Thamar, Ruth, and the wife of Urias. He also
mentions the brothers of Judas and Jechonias, and also Phares and
Zara. But Luke mentions none of these. Therefore the evangelists
seem to have described the genealogy of Christ in an unsuitable
manner.
On the contrary, The authority of Scripture suffices.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.4.

I answer that, As is written (2 Tim. 3:16), "All Holy Scripture is
inspired of God, etc. Now what is done by God is done in perfect
order, according to Rm. 13:1: "Those that are of God are ordained.
Therefore Christ's genealogy is set down by the evangelists in a
suitable order.
Reply to Objection 1: As Jerome says on Mt. 1, Isaias speaks of the
generation of Christ's Godhead. Whereas Matthew relates the
generation of Christ in His humanity; not indeed by explaining the
manner of the Incarnation, which is also unspeakable; but by
enumerating Christ's forefathers from whom He was descended
according to the flesh.
Reply to Objection 2: Various answers have been made by certain
writers to this objection which was raised by Julian the Apostate; for
some, as Gregory of Nazianzum, say that the people mentioned by
the two evangelists are the same, but under different names, as
though they each had two. But this will not stand: because Matthew
mentions one of David's sons---namely, Solomon; whereas Luke
mentions another---namely, Nathan, who according to the history of
the kings (2 Kgs. 5:14) were clearly brothers.
Wherefore others said that Matthew gave the true genealogy of
Christ: while Luke gave the supposititious genealogy; hence he
began: "Being (as it was supposed) the son of Joseph." For among
the Jews there were some who believed that, on account of the
crimes of the kings of Juda, Christ would be born of the family of
David, not through the kings, but through some other line of private
individuals.
Others again have supposed that Matthew gave the forefathers
according to the flesh: whereas Luke gave these according to the
spirit, that is, righteous men, who are called (Christ's) forefathers by
likeness of virtue.
But an answer is given in the Qq. Vet. et Nov. Test. [Part i, qu. lvi;
part 2, qu. vi] to the effect that we are not to understand that Joseph
is said by Luke to be the son of Heli: but that at the time of Christ,
Heli and Joseph were differently descended from David. Hence
Christ is said to have been supposed to be the son of Joseph, and
also to have been the son of Heli as though (the Evangelist) were to
say that Christ, from the fact that He was the son of Joseph, could be