1 Corinthians 15:50
"Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
God."
Do you see how he explains himself again, relieving us of the trouble?
Which he often does: for by flesh he here denotes men's evil deeds, which he has
done also elsewhere; as when he says, "But you are not in the flesh:" and again,
"So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God." [Romans 8:8-9] So that
when he says, "Now this I say," he means nothing else than this: "therefore said I
these things that you may learn that evil deeds conduct not to a kingdom." Thus
from the resurrection he straightway introduced also the doctrine of the kingdom
also; wherefore also he adds, "neither does corruption inherit incorruption, "
i.e., neither shall wickedness inherit that glory and the enjoyment of the things
incorruptible. For in many other places he calls wickedness by this name, saying,
"He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption." [Galatians 6:8]
Now if he were speaking of the body and not of evil doing, he would not have
said "corruption." For he nowhere calls the body "corruption," since neither is it
corruption, but a thing corruptible: wherefore proceeding to discourse also of it,
he calls it not "corruption," but "corruptible," saying, "for this corruptible must
put on incorruption."
3. Next, having completed his advice concerning our manner of life,
according to his constant custom blending closely subject with subject, he passes
again to the doctrine of the resurrection of the body: as follows:

1 Corinthians 15:51
"Behold, I tell you a mystery."
It is something awful and ineffable and which all know not, which he is
about to speak of: which also indicates the greatness of the honor he confers on
them; I mean, his speaking mysteries to them. But what is this?
"We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed." He means as follows:
"we shall not all die, 'but we shall all be changed,'" even those who die not. For
they too are mortal. "Do not thou therefore because you die, on this account
fear," says he, "as if you should not rise again: for there are, there are some who
shall even escape this, and yet this suffices them not for that resurrection, but
even those bodies which die not must be changed and be transformed into
incorruption."

1 Corinthians 15:52
"In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump."
After he had discoursed much of the resurrection, then opportunely he
points out also its very marvellous character. As thus: "not this only," says he, is
wonderful that our bodies first turn to corruption, and then are raised; nor that
the bodies which rise again after their corruption are better than these present
ones; nor that they pass on to a much better state, nor that each receives back his
own and none that of another; but that things so many and so great, and
surpassing all man's reason and conception, are done "in a moment," i.e., in an
instant of time: and to show this more clearly, "in the twinkling of an eye," says
he, "while one can wink an eyelid." Further, because he had said a great thing
and full of astonishment; that so many and so great results should take place so
quickly; he alleges, to prove it, the credibility of Him who performs it; as
follows, "For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed." The expression, "we," he uses not of
himself, but of them that are then found alive.