qualified will may be called a willingness rather than an absolute will.
Thus it is clear that whatever God simply wills takes place; although
what He wills antecedently may not take place.
Reply to Objection 2: An act of the cognitive faculty is according as
the thing known is in the knower; while an act of the appetite faculty
is directed to things as they exist in themselves. But all that can
have the nature of being and truth virtually exists in God, though it
does not all exist in created things. Therefore God knows all truth;
but does not will all good, except in so far as He wills Himself, in
Whom all good virtually exists.
Reply to Objection 3: A first cause can be hindered in its effect by
deficiency in the secondary cause, when it is not the universal first
cause, including within itself all causes; for then the effect could in
no way escape its order. And thus it is with the will of God, as said
above.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the will of God is changeable?

Objection 1: It seems that the Will of God is changeable. For the Lord
says (Gn. 6:7): "It repenteth Me that I have made man." But whoever
repents of what he has done, has a changeable will. Therefore God
has a changeable will.
Objection 2: Further, it is said in the person of the Lord: "I will speak
against a nation and against a kingdom, to root out, and to pull
down, and to destroy it; but if that nation shall repent of its evil, I
also will repent of the evil that I have thought to do to them" (Jer.
18:7,8) Therefore God has a changeable will.
Objection 3: Further, whatever God does, He does voluntarily. But
God does not always do the same thing, for at one time He ordered
the law to be observed, and at another time forbade it. Therefore He
has a changeable will.
Objection 4: Further, God does not will of necessity what He wills, as
said before (Article 3). Therefore He can both will and not will the
same thing. But whatever can incline to either of two opposites, is
changeable substantially; and that which can exist in a place or not
in that place, is changeable locally. Therefore God is changeable as
regards His will.
On the contrary, It is said: "God is not as a man, that He should lie,
nor as the son of man, that He should be changed" (Num. 23:19).
I answer that, The will of God is entirely unchangeable. On this point
we must consider that to change the will is one thing; to will that
certain things should be changed is another. It is possible to will a
thing to be done now, and its contrary afterwards; and yet for the will
to remain permanently the same: whereas the will would be changed,
if one should begin to will what before he had not willed; or cease to
will what he had willed before. This cannot happen, unless we
presuppose change either in the knowledge or in the disposition of
the substance of the willer. For since the will regards good, a man
may in two ways begin to will a thing. In one way when that thing
begins to be good for him, and this does not take place without a
change in him. Thus when the cold weather begins, it becomes good
to sit by the fire; though it was not so before. In another way when