SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.4.

were decreed that this honor would be accorded to all who gave a
certain alms, because this would not preclude its being granted to
others. Moreover, the former ordinance has the appearance of an
exaction, whereas the latter bears a likeness to a gratuitous
remuneration.
Reply to Objection 3: A person to whom a spiritual power is
entrusted is bound by virtue of his office to exercise the power
entrusted to him in dispensing spiritual things. Moreover, he
receives a statutory payment from the funds of the Church as a
means of livelihood. Therefore, if he were to accept anything for the
exercise of his spiritual power, this would imply, not a hiring of his
labor (which he is bound to give, as a duty arising out of the office
he has accepted), but a sale of the very use of a spiritual grace. For
this reason it is unlawful for him to receive anything for any
dispensing whatever, or for allowing someone else to take his duty,
or for correcting his subjects, or for omitting to correct them. On the
other hand it is lawful for him to receive "procurations," when he
visits his subjects, not as a price for correcting them, but as a means
of livelihood. He that is possessed of science, without having taken
upon himself the obligation of using it for the benefit of others can
lawfully receive a price for his learning or advice, since this is not a
sale of truth or science, but a hiring of labor. If, on the other hand, he
be so bound by virtue of his office, this would amount to a sale of
the truth, and consequently he would sin grievously. For instance,
those who in certain churches are appointed to instruct the clerics of
that church and other poor persons, and are in receipt of an
ecclesiastical benefice for so doing, are not allowed to receive
anything in return, either for teaching, or for celebrating or omitting
any feasts.
Reply to Objection 4: It is unlawful to exact or receive anything as
price for entering a monastery: but, in the case of small monasteries,
that are unable to support so many persons, it is lawful, while
entrance to the monastery is free, to accept something for the
support of those who are about to be received into the monastery, if
its revenues are insufficient. In like manner it is lawful to be easier in
admitting to a monastery a person who has proved his regard for
that monastery by the generosity of his alms: just as, on the other
hand, it is lawful to incite a person's regard for a monastery by
means of temporal benefits, in order that he may thereby be induced
to enter the monastery; although it is unlawful to agree to give or
receive something for entrance into a monastery (I, qu. ii, cap. Quam

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.4.

pio).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.5.