SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.7.

incapable of great things, and this pertains to the seventh degree:
thirdly, that in this respect one should put others before oneself, and
this belongs to the sixth degree.
Again, some things are included that refer to outward signs. One of
these regards deeds, namely that in one's work one should not
depart from the ordinary way; this applies to the fifth degree. Two
others have reference to words, namely that one should not be in a
hurry to speak, which pertains to the fourth degree, and that one be
not immoderate in speech, which refers to the second. The others
have to do with outward gestures, for instance in restraining haughty
looks, which regards the first, and in outwardly checking laughter
and other signs of senseless mirth, and this belongs to the third
degree.
Reply to Objection 1: It is possible, without falsehood, to deem and
avow oneself the most despicable of men, as regards the hidden
faults which we acknowledge in ourselves, and the hidden gifts of
God which others have. Hence Augustine says (De Virginit. lii):
"Bethink you that some persons are in some hidden way better than
you, although outwardly you are better than they." Again, without
falsehood one may avow and believe oneself in all ways unprofitable
and useless in respect of one's own capability, so as to refer all
one's sufficiency to God, according to 2 Cor. 3:5, "Not that we are
sufficient to think anything of ourselves as of ourselves: but our
sufficiency is from God." And there is nothing unbecoming in
ascribing to humility those things that pertain to other virtues, since,
just as one vice arises from another, so, by a natural sequence, the
act of one virtue proceeds from the act of another.
Reply to Objection 2: Man arrives at humility in two ways. First and
chiefly by a gift of grace, and in this way the inner man precedes the
outward man. The other way is by human effort, whereby he first of
all restrains the outward man, and afterwards succeeds in plucking
out the inward root. It is according to this order that the degrees of
humility are here enumerated.
Reply to Objection 3: All the degrees mentioned by Anselm are
reducible to knowledge, avowal, and desire of one's own abasement.
For the first degree belongs to the knowledge of one's own
deficiency; but since it would be wrong for one to love one's own
failings, this is excluded by the second degree. The third and fourth
degrees regard the avowal of one's own deficiency; namely that not

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.7.

merely one simply assert one's failing, but that one convince another
of it. The other three degrees have to do with the appetite, which
seeks, not outward excellence, but outward abasement, or bears it
with equanimity, whether it consist of words or deeds. For as
Gregory says (Regist. ii, 10, Ep. 36), "there is nothing great in being
humble towards those who treat us with regard, for even worldly
people do this: but we should especially be humble towards those
who make us suffer," and this belongs to the fifth and sixth degrees:
or the appetite may even go so far as lovingly to embrace external
abasement, and this pertains to the seventh degree; so that all these
degrees are comprised under the sixth and seventh mentioned
above.
Reply to Objection 4: These degrees refer, not to the thing itself,
namely the nature of humility, but to the degrees among men, who
are either of higher or lower or of equal degree.
Reply to Objection 5: This argument also considers the degrees of
humility not according to the nature of the thing, in respect of which
the aforesaid degrees are assigned, but according to the various
conditions of men.