And see with what exceeding force He puts it. For He said not, "Blessed are
they which keep fast by righteousness," but, "Blessed are they which do hunger
and thirst after righteousness:" that not merely anyhow, but with all desire we
may pursue it. For since this is the most peculiar property of covetousness, and
we are not so enamored of meat and drink, as of gaining, and compassing
ourselves with more and more, He bade us to transfer this desire to a new object,
freedom from covetousness.
Then He appoints the prize, again from things sensible; saying, "for they
shall be filled." Thus, because it is thought that the rich are commonly made
such by covetousness, "Nay," says He, "it is just contrary: for it is righteousness
that does this. Wherefore, so long as you do righteously, fear not poverty, nor
tremble at hunger. For the extortioners, they are the very persons who lose all,
even as he certainly who is in love with righteousness, possesses himself the
goods of all men in safety."
But if they who covet not other men's goods enjoy so great abundance,
much more they who give up their own.
"Blessed are the merciful." [Matthew 5:7]
Here He seems to me to speak not of those only who show mercy in giving
of money, but those likewise who are merciful in their actions. For the way of
showing mercy is manifold, and this commandment is broad. What then is the
reward thereof? "For they shall obtain mercy."
And it seems indeed to be a sort of equal recompence, but it is a far greater
thing than the act of goodness. For whereas they themselves show mercy as men,
they obtain mercy from the God of all; and it is not the same thing, man's mercy,
and God's; but as wide as is the interval between wickedness and goodness, so
far is the one of these removed from the other.
"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." [Matthew 5:8]
Behold again the reward is spiritual. Now He here calls "pure," either those
who have attained unto all virtue, and are not conscious to themselves of any
evil; or those who live in temperance. For there is nothing which we need so

much in order to see God, as this last virtue. Wherefore Paul also said, "Follow
peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord."
[Hebrews 12:14] He is here speaking of such sight as it is possible for man to
have.
For because there are many who show mercy, and who commit no rapine,
nor are covetous, who yet are guilty of fornication and uncleanness; to signify
that the former alone suffices not, He has added this, much in the same sense as
Paul, writing to the Corinthians, bore witness of the Macedonians, that they were
rich not only in almsgiving, but also in all other virtue. For having spoken of the
noble spirit they had shown in regard of their goods, he says, "They gave also
their own selves to the Lord, and to us." [2 Corinthians 8:5]
7. "Blessed are the peace-makers." [Matthew 5:9]
Here He not only takes away altogether our own strife and hatred among
ourselves, but He requires besides this something more, namely, that we should
set at one again others, who are at strife.
And again, the reward which He annexes is spiritual. Of what kind then is
it.
"For they shall be called the children of God."
Yea, for this became the work of the Only Begotten, to unite the divided,
and to reconcile the alienated.
Then, lest you should imagine peace in all cases a blessing, He has added,
"Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake."
[Matthew 5:10]
That is, for virtue's sake, for succor given to others, and for godliness: it
being ever His wont to call by the name of "righteousness" the whole practical
wisdom of the soul.
"Blessed are you, when men shall revile you and persecute you, and say all
manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad."
[Matthew 5:11-12]
As if He said, "Though they should call you sorcerers, deceivers, pestilent