FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.6.

which before his experience he looked upon as impossible.
However, in this way, experience can cause a lack of hope: because
just as it makes a man think possible what he had previously
thought impossible; so, conversely, experience makes a man
consider as impossible that which hitherto he had thought possible.
Accordingly experience causes hope in two ways, despair in one
way: and for this reason we may say rather that it causes hope.
Reply to Objection 1: Experience in matters pertaining to action not
only produces knowledge; it also causes a certain habit, by reason
of custom, which renders the action easier. Moreover, the intellectual
virtue itself adds to the power of acting with ease: because it shows
something to be possible; and thus is a cause of hope.
Reply to Objection 2: The old are wanting in hope because of their
experience, in so far as experience makes them think something
impossible. Hence he adds (Rhet. ii, 13) that "many evils have
befallen them."
Reply to Objection 3: Folly and inexperience can be a cause of hope
accidentally as it were, by removing the knowledge which would help
one to judge truly a thing to be impossible. Wherefore inexperience
is a cause of hope, for the same reason as experience causes lack of
hope.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether hope abounds in young men and

drunkards?
Objection 1: It would seem that youth and drunkenness are not
causes of hope. Because hope implies certainty and steadiness; so
much so that it is compared to an anchor (Heb. 6:19). But young men
and drunkards are wanting in steadiness; since their minds are
easily changed. Therefore youth and drunkenness are not causes of
hope.
Objection 2: Further, as stated above (Article 5), the cause of hope is
chiefly whatever increases one's power. But youth and drunkenness
are united to weakness. Therefore they are not causes of hope.
Objection 3: Further, experience is a cause of hope, as stated above
(Article 5). But youth lacks experience. Therefore it is not a cause of
hope.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 8) that "drunken
men are hopeful": and (Rhet. ii, 12) that "the young are full of hope."
I answer that, Youth is a cause of hope for three reasons, as the
Philosopher states in Rhet. ii, 12: and these three reasons may be
gathered from the three conditions of the good which is the object of
hope---namely, that it is future, arduous and possible, as stated
above (Article 1). For youth has much of the future before it, and little
of the past: and therefore since memory is of the past, and hope of
the future, it has little to remember and lives very much in hope.
Again, youths, on account of the heat of their nature, are full of spirit;
so that their heart expands: and it is owing to the heart being
expanded that one tends to that which is arduous; wherefore youths
are spirited and hopeful. Likewise they who have not suffered defeat,
nor had experience of obstacles to their efforts, are prone to count a
thing possible to them. Wherefore youths, through inexperience of
obstacles and of their own shortcomings, easily count a thing
possible; and consequently are of good hope. Two of these causes
are also in those who are in drink---viz. heat and high spirits, on
account of wine, and heedlessness of dangers and shortcomings.
For the same reason all foolish and thoughtless persons attempt
everything and are full of hope.