2 Corinthians 8:21
For "we take thought for things, honorable not only in the sight of the Lord,
but also in the sight of men."
What can compare with Paul? For he said not, 'Perdition and woe to him
who chooses to suspect anything of the kind: so long as my conscience does not
condemn me, I waste not a thought on those who suspect.' Rather, the weaker
they were, the more he condescended. For it is meet not to be angry with, but
help, him that is sick. And yet from what sin are we so removed as he was from
any such suspicion? For not even a demon could have suspected that blessed
saint of this unfaithfulness. But still although so far removed from that evil
suspicion, he does everything and resorts to every expedient , so as not to leave a
shadow even to those who might be desirous in any way of suspecting
something wrong; and he avoids not only accusations, but also blame and the
slightest censure, even bare suspicion.

2 Corinthians 8:22
2. "And we have sent with them our brother."
Behold, again he adds yet another, and him also with an encomium; both
his own judgment, and many other witnesses [to him].
"Whom," says he, "we have many times proved earnest in many things, but
now much more earnest." And having praised him from his own good works, he
extols him also from his love towards them; and what he said of Titus, that
"being very earnest he went forth of his own accord;" this he says of this person
also, saying, "but now much more earnest;" laying up beforehand for them the
seeds of [the proof of their] love toward the Corinthians.
And then, after having showed forth their virtue, he exhorts them also on
their behalf, saying,

2 Corinthians 8:23
"Whether any inquire about Titus; he is my partner and my fellow-worker to
youward."
What is, "Whether about Titus?" 'If,' says he, 'it be necessary to say any
thing, this I have to say,' "that he is my partner and fellow-worker to youward."
For he either means this; or, 'if you will do anything for Titus, you will do it unto
no ordinary person, for he is "my partner."' And while appearing to be praising
him, he magnifies them, showing them to be so disposed towards himself as that
it were sufficient ground of honor among them that any one should appear to be
his "partner." But, nevertheless, he was not content with this, but he also added
another thing, saying, "fellow-worker to youward." Not merely "fellow-worker,"
'but in matters concerning you, in your progress, in your growth, in our
friendship, in our zeal for you;' which last would avail most especially to endear
him unto them.
"Or our brethren:" 'or whether you wish,' he says, 'to hear any thing about
the others: they too have great claims to be commended to you. For they also,' he
says, 'are our brethren, and,
"The messengers of the Churches,"' that is, sent by the Churches. Then,
which is greater than all,
"The glory of Christ;" for to Him is referred whatever shall be done to
them. 'Whether then ye wish to receive them as brethren, or as Apostles of the
Churches, or as acting for the glory of Christ; you have many motives for good
will towards them. For on behalf of Titus, I have to say, that he is both "my
partner," and a lover of you; on behalf of these, that they are "brethren," that
they are "the messengers of the churches," that they are "the glory of Christ." Do
you see that it is plain from hence also, that they were of such as were unknown
to them? For otherwise he would have set them off by those things with which