says "in my Fathers house are many mansions;" [John 14:2] and, "there is one
glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon." [1 Corinthians 15:41] And
what wonder, if in dealing with such great matters he has spoken with such
precision, seeing that He declares there is a difference in that world even
between one star and another? Knowing then all these things let us never desist
from doing good deeds, nor grow weary, nor, if we should be unable to reach the
rank of the sun or of the moon, let us despise that of the stars. For if only we
display thus much virtue at least, we shall be able to have a place in Heaven.
And though we may not have become gold, or precious stone, yet if we only
occupy the rank of silver we shall abide in the foundation; only let us not fall
back again into that material which the fire readily devours, nor, when we are
unable to accomplish great things, desist also from small ones, for this is the part
of extreme folly, which I trust we may not experience. For just as material
wealth increases if the lovers of it do not despise even the smallest gains, so is it
also with the spiritual. For it is a strange thing that the judge should not overlook
the reward of even a cup of cold water, but that we, if our achievements are not
altogether great, should neglect the performance of little things. For he who does
not despise the lesser things, will exercise much zeal concerning the greatest; but
he who overlooks the former will also abstain from the latter; and to prevent this
taking place Christ has defined great rewards even for these small things. For
what is easier than to visit the sick? Yet even this He requites with a great
recompense. Lay hold then on eternal life, delight in the Lord, and supplicate
Him; take up again the easy yoke, bow yourself beneath the light burden, put a
finish to your life worthy of the beginning; do not suffer so great a stream of
wealth to slip past you. For if you should continue provoking God by your
deeds, you will destroy yourself; but if before much damage has been done, and
all your husbandry has been overwhelmed with a flood, you will dam up the
channels of wickedness, you will be able to recover again what has been spoiled
and to add to it not a little further produce. Having considered all these things,
shake off the dust, get up from the ground, and you will be formidable to the

adversary; for he himself indeed has overthrown you, as if you would never rise
again; but if he sees you again lifting up your hands against him, he will receive
such an unexpected blow that he will be less forward in trying to upset you
again, and you yourself will be more secure against receiving any wound of that
kind in future. For if the calamities of others are sufficient to instruct us, much
more those which we have ourselves undergone. And this is what I expect
speedily to see in the case of your own dear self, and that by the grace of God
you are again become more radiant than before, and displaying such great virtue,
as even to be a protector of others in the world above. Only do not despair, do
not fall back; for I will not cease repeating this in every form of speech, and
wherever I see you, as well as by the lips of others; and if you listen to this you
will no longer need other remedies.