FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.2.

But the promulgation cannot be from eternity on the part of the
creature that hears or reads.
Reply to Objection 3: The law implies order to the end actively, in so
far as it directs certain things to the end; but not passively---that is
to say, the law itself is not ordained to the end---except accidentally,
in a governor whose end is extrinsic to him, and to which end his law
must needs be ordained. But the end of the Divine government is
God Himself, and His law is not distinct from Himself. Wherefore the
eternal law is not ordained to another end.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there is in us a natural law?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no natural law in us. Because
man is governed sufficiently by the eternal law: for Augustine says
(De Lib. Arb. i) that "the eternal law is that by which it is right that all
things should be most orderly." But nature does not abound in
superfluities as neither does she fail in necessaries. Therefore no
law is natural to man.
Objection 2: Further, by the law man is directed, in his acts, to the
end, as stated above (Question 90, Article 2). But the directing of
human acts to their end is not a function of nature, as is the case in
irrational creatures, which act for an end solely by their natural
appetite; whereas man acts for an end by his reason and will.
Therefore no law is natural to man.
Objection 3: Further, the more a man is free, the less is he under the
law. But man is freer than all the animals, on account of his free-will,
with which he is endowed above all other animals. Since therefore
other animals are not subject to a natural law, neither is man subject
to a natural law.
On the contrary, A gloss on Rm. 2:14: "When the Gentiles, who have
not the law, do by nature those things that are of the law," comments
as follows: "Although they have no written law, yet they have the
natural law, whereby each one knows, and is conscious of, what is
good and what is evil."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 90, Article 1, ad 1), law,
being a rule and measure, can be in a person in two ways: in one
way, as in him that rules and measures; in another way, as in that
which is ruled and measured, since a thing is ruled and measured, in
so far as it partakes of the rule or measure. Wherefore, since all
things subject to Divine providence are ruled and measured by the
eternal law, as was stated above (Article 1); it is evident that all
things partake somewhat of the eternal law, in so far as, namely,
from its being imprinted on them, they derive their respective
inclinations to their proper acts and ends. Now among all others, the
rational creature is subject to Divine providence in the most
excellent way, in so far as it partakes of a share of providence, by
being provident both for itself and for others. Wherefore it has a