SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.5.

"temperate," and such a man we may call humble. Moreover, for the
reason given above (Question 160, Article 2), among the various
parts of temperance, the one under which humility is comprised is
modesty as understood by Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 54), inasmuch
as humility is nothing else than a moderation of spirit: wherefore it is
written (1 Pt. 3:4): "In the incorruptibility of a quiet and meek spirit."
Reply to Objection 1: The theological virtues, whose object is our
last end, which is the first principle in matters of appetite, are the
causes of all the other virtues. Hence the fact that humility is caused
by reverence for God does not prevent it from being a part of
modesty or temperance.
Reply to Objection 2: Parts are assigned to a principal virtue by
reason of a sameness, not of subject or matter, but of formal mode,
as stated above (Question 137, Article 2, ad 1; Question 157, Article
3, ad 2). Consequently, although humility is in the irascible as its
subject, it is assigned as a part of modesty or temperance by reason
of its mode.
Reply to Objection 3: Although humility and magnanimity agree as to
matter, they differ as to mode, by reason of which magnanimity is
reckoned a part of fortitude, and humility a part of temperance.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.160, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether humility is the greatest of the virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that humility is the greatest of the virtues.
For Chrysostom, expounding the story of the Pharisee and the
publican (Lk. 18), says [Eclog. hom. vii de Humil. Animi.] that "if
humility is such a fleet runner even when hampered by sin that it
overtakes the justice that is the companion of pride, whither will it
not reach if you couple it with justice? It will stand among the angels
by the judgment seat of God." Hence it is clear that humility is set
above justice. Now justice is either the most exalted of all the
virtues, or includes all virtues, according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
v, 1). Therefore humility is the greatest of the virtues.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Verb. Dom., Serm. S. 10,
C1): "Are you thinking of raising the great fabric of spirituality?
Attend first of all to the foundation of humility." Now this would seem
to imply that humility is the foundation of all virtue. Therefore
apparently it is greater than the other virtues.
Objection 3: Further, the greater virtue deserves the greater reward.
Now the greatest reward is due to humility, since "he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted" (Lk. 14:11). Therefore humility is the
greatest of virtues.
Objection 4: Further, according to Augustine (De Vera Relig. 16),
"Christ's whole life on earth was a lesson in moral conduct through
the human nature which He assumed." Now He especially proposed
His humility for our example, saying (Mt. 11:29): "Learn of Me,
because I am meek and humble of heart." Moreover, Gregory says
(Pastor. iii, 1) that the "lesson proposed to us in the mystery of our
redemption is the humility of God." Therefore humility would seem to
be the greatest of virtues.
On the contrary, Charity is set above all the virtues, according to Col.
3:14, "Above all . . . things have charity." Therefore humility is not
the greatest of virtues.
I answer that, The good of human virtue pertains to the order of
reason: which order is considered chiefly in reference to the end:
wherefore the theological virtues are the greatest because they have
the last end for their object. Secondarily, however, it is considered in