friendship you gain so much as to fulfil the whole Law, you owe him love as
being benefited by him.
Ver. 9. "For this, You shall not commit adultery, You shall not kill, You shall
not steal, You shall not bear false witness, and any other commandment, is
briefly comprehended in this saying, You shall love your neighbor as yourself."
He does not say merely it is fulfilled, but "it is briefly comprehended," that
is, the whole work of the commandments is concisely and in a few words
completed. For the beginning and the end of virtue is love. This it has for its
root, this for its groundwork, this for its summit. If then it be both beginning and
fulfilment, what is there equal to it? But he does not seek love merely, but
intense love. For he does not say merely "love your neighbor," but, "as yourself."
Hence also Christ said that "the Law and the Prophets hang upon" it. And in
making two kinds of love, see how He has raised this! For after saying that the
first commandment is, "You shall love the Lord your God," He added a second;
and He did not stay, but added, "like it; You shall love your neighbor as
yourself." What can be equal to this love to man, or this gentleness? That when
we were at infinite distance from Him, He brings the love to us into comparison
with that toward Himself, and says that "is like this." Hence then, to put the
measures of either as nearly the same, of the one He says, "with all your heart,
and with all your soul," but of this towards one's neighbor, He says, "as
yourself." But Paul said, that when this did not exist even the other was of no
great profit to us. As then we, when we are fond of any one, say, if you love him,
then you love me; so He also to show this says, "is like it;" and to Peter, "If you
love Me, feed My sheep." [John 21:16]
Ver. 10. "Love works no ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of
the Law."
Observe how it has both virtues, abstinence from evils (for it "works no ill,"
he says), and the working of good deeds. "For it is," he says, "the fulfilling (or
filling up) of the Law;" not bringing before us instruction only on moral duties in
a concise form, but making the accomplishment of them easy also. For that we

should become acquainted with things profitable to us was not all that he was
careful for (which is the Law's care), but also with a view to the doing of them it
brought us great assistance; accomplishing not some part of the commandments,
but the whole sum of virtue in us. Let us then love one another, since in this way
we shall also love God, Who loves us. For in the case of men, if you love a
man's beloved, he that loves him is contentious at it. But here He deems you
worthy to share His love, and hates you when you share not. For man's love is
laden with envy and grudging; but God's is free from all passion, whence also
He seeks for those to share His love. For He says, love thou with Me, and then
yourself also will I love the more. You see the words of a vehement lover! If you
love My beloved, then will I also reckon Myself to be greatly beloved of you.
For He vehemently desires our salvation, and this He showed from of old. Now
hear what He says when He was forming the man, "Let Us make man in Our
Image:" and again, "Let Us make an help meet for him. It is not good for him to
be alone." [Genesis 1:26] And when he had transgressed, He rebuked him,
observe how gently; and He does not say, Wretch! Thou very wretch! After
receiving so great benefits, have you after all trusted to the devil? And left your
Benefactor, to take up with the evil spirit? But what says He? "Who told you that
you are naked, unless you have eaten of the Tree, from which alone I commanded
you not to eat?" [Genesis 3:11] As if a father were to say to a child, who was
ordered not to touch a sword, and then disobeyed and got wounded, "How
camest thou wounded? You came so by not listening to me." You see they are the
words of a friend rather than a master, of a friend despised, and not even then
forsaking. Let us then imitate Him, and when we rebuke, let us preserve this
moderation. For even the woman He also rebukes again with the same
gentleness. Or rather what He said was not so much rebuke as admonition and
correction, and security against the future. This is why He says nothing to the
serpent. For he was the designer of the mischiefs, and had it not in his power to
put off the accusation on any one else, wherefore He punished him severely: and
even here He did not come to a pause, but made the earth also to share in the