FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.2.

goodness when a thing is such that it is sufficient in itself to
conduce to the end: while there is imperfect goodness when a thing
is of some assistance in attaining the end, but is not sufficient for
the realization thereof. Thus a medicine is perfectly good, if it gives
health to a man; but it is imperfect, if it helps to cure him, without
being able to bring him back to health. Again it must be observed
that the end of human law is different from the end of Divine law. For
the end of human law is the temporal tranquillity of the state, which
end law effects by directing external actions, as regards those evils
which might disturb the peaceful condition of the state. On the other
hand, the end of the Divine law is to bring man to that end which is
everlasting happiness; which end is hindered by any sin, not only of
external, but also of internal action. Consequently that which
suffices for the perfection of human law, viz. the prohibition and
punishment of sin, does not suffice for the perfection of the Divine
law: but it is requisite that it should make man altogether fit to
partake of everlasting happiness. Now this cannot be done save by
the grace of the Holy Ghost, whereby "charity" which fulfilleth the
law . . . "is spread abroad in our hearts" (Rm. 5:5): since "the grace
of God is life everlasting" (Rm. 6:23). But the Old Law could not
confer this grace, for this was reserved to Christ; because, as it is
written (Jn. 1:17), the law was given "by Moses, grace and truth came
by Jesus Christ." Consequently the Old Law was good indeed, but
imperfect, according to Heb. 7:19: "The law brought nothing to
perfection."
Reply to Objection 1: The Lord refers there to the ceremonial
precepts; which are said not to be good, because they did not confer
grace unto the remission of sins, although by fulfilling these
precepts man confessed himself a sinner. Hence it is said pointedly,
"and judgments in which they shall not live"; i.e. whereby they are
unable to obtain life; and so the text goes on: "And I polluted them,"
i.e. showed them to be polluted, "in their own gifts, when they
offered all that opened the womb, for their offenses."
Reply to Objection 2: The law is said to have been deadly, as being
not the cause, but the occasion of death, on account of its
imperfection: in so far as it did not confer grace enabling man to
fulfil what is prescribed, and to avoid what it forbade. Hence this
occasion was not given to men, but taken by them. Wherefore the
Apostle says (Rm. 5:11): "Sin, taking occasion by the commandment,
seduced me, and by it killed me." In the same sense when it is said
that "the law entered in that sin might abound," the conjunction

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.2.

"that" must be taken as consecutive and not final: in so far as men,
taking occasion from the law, sinned all the more, both because a
sin became more grievous after law had forbidden it, and because
concupiscence increased, since we desire a thing the more from its
being forbidden.
Reply to Objection 3: The yoke of the law could not be borne without
the help of grace, which the law did not confer: for it is written (Rm.
9:16): "It is not him that willeth, nor of him that runneth," viz. that he
wills and runs in the commandments of God, "but of God that
showeth mercy." Wherefore it is written (Ps. 118:32): "I have run the
way of Thy commandments, when Thou didst enlarge my heart," i.e.
by giving me grace and charity.