SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.5.

like things. Therefore the precept of the observance of the Sabbath
is unfittingly expressed.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Scripture.
I answer that, The obstacles to true religion being removed by the
first and second precepts of the decalogue, as stated above (Articles
2,3), it remained for the third precept to be given whereby man is
established in true religion. Now it belongs to religion to give
worship to God: and just as the Divine scriptures teach the interior
worship under the guise of certain corporal similitudes, so is
external worship given to God under the guise of sensible signs.
And since for the most part man is induced to pay interior worship,
consisting in prayer and devotion, by the interior prompting of the
Holy Ghost, a precept of the Law as necessary respecting the
exterior worship that consists in sensible signs. Now the precepts of
the decalogue are, so to speak, first and common principles of the
Law, and consequently the third precept of the decalogue describes
the exterior worship of God as the sign of a universal boon that
concerns all. This universal boon was the work of the Creation of the
world, from which work God is stated to have rested on the seventh
day: and sign of this we are commanded to keep holy seventh day--that is, to set it aside as a day to be given to God. Hence after the
precept about the hallowing of the Sabbath the reason for it is given:
"For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth . . . and rested on
the seventh day."
Reply to Objection 1: The precept about hallowing the Sabbath,
understood literally, is partly oral and partly ceremonial. It is a moral
precept in the point of commanding man to aside a certain time to be
given to Divine things. For there is in man a natural inclination to set
aside a certain time for each necessary thing, such as refreshment of
the body, sleep, and so forth. Hence according to the dictate of
reason, man sets aside a certain time for spiritual refreshment, by
which man's mind is refreshed in God. And thus to have a certain
time set aside for occupying oneself with Divine things is the matter
of a moral precept. But, in so far as this precept specializes the time
as a sign representing the Creation of the world, it is a ceremonial
precept. Again, it is a ceremonial precept in its allegorical
signification, as representative of Christ's rest in the tomb on the
seventh day: also in its moral signification, as representing
cessation from all sinful acts, and the mind's rest in God, in which
sense, too, it is a general precept. Again, it is a ceremonial precept in

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.5.

its analogical signification, as foreshadowing the enjoyment of God
in heaven. Hence the precept about hallowing the Sabbath is placed
among the precepts of the decalogue, as a moral, but not as a
ceremonial precept.
Reply to Objection 2: The other ceremonies of the Law are signs of
certain particular Divine works: but the observance of the Sabbath is
representative of a general boon, namely, the production of all
creatures. Hence it was fitting that it should be placed among the
general precepts of the decalogue, rather than any other ceremonial
precept of the Law.
Reply to Objection 3: Two things are to be observed in the hallowing
of the Sabbath. One of these is the end: and this is that man occupy
himself with Divine things, and is signified in the words: "Remember
that thou keep holy the Sabbath day." For in the Law those things
are said to be holy which are applied to the Divine worship. The
other thing is cessation from work, and is signified in the words (Ex.
20:11), "On the seventh day . . . thou shalt do no work." The kind of
work meant appears from Lev. 23:3, "You shall do no servile work on
that day." Now servile work is so called from servitude: and
servitude is threefold. One, whereby man is the servant of sin,
according to Jn. 8:34, "Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of
sin," and in this sense all sinful acts are servile. Another servitude is
whereby one man serves another. Now one man serves another not
with his mind but with his body, as stated above (Question 104,
Articles 5,6, ad 1). Wherefore in this respect those works are called
servile whereby one man serves another. The third is the servitude
of God; and in this way the work of worship, which pertains to the
service of God, may be called a servile work. In this sense servile
work is not forbidden on the Sabbath day, because that would be
contrary to the end of the Sabbath observance: since man abstains
from other works on the Sabbath day in order that he may occupy
himself with works connected with God's service. For this reason,
according to Jn. 7:23, "a man receives circumcision on the Sabbath
day, that the law of Moses may not be broken": and for this reason
too we read (Mt. 12:5), that "on the Sabbath days the priests in the
temple break the Sabbath," i.e. do corporal works on the Sabbath,
"and are without blame." Accordingly, the priests in carrying the ark
on the Sabbath did not break the precept of the Sabbath observance.
In like manner it is not contrary to the observance of the Sabbath to
exercise any spiritual act, such as teaching by word or writing.
Wherefore a gloss on Num 28 says that "smiths and like craftsmen