From Rome, 16 May, 1556.

# 45. TO BROTHER GIOVANNI BATTISTA

On the Desire to Study

Rome, May 23, 1556

Brother Giovanni Battista 1 was the buyer at the Jesuit college in Padua and for some time had been growing unhappy as a coadjutor brother and now desired to take up studies. He made this proposal to his rector, who in turn passed it on to Ignatius in Rome. Ignatius interpreted the brother's desire for studies to be a temptation of the devil, and within that framework wrote to him telling him that he is surprised that the brother had fallen for the devil's ruse. Ignatius adds that considering Giovanni's age and his natural capabilities, studies would be a waste of time, and reminds him that in the Society, as in the human body, there is a variety of members, and that each member must be content with the task that God offers him through the will of the superior. Ignatius' letter is in Italian [ Ep . 11:437-438].

Jesus

The peace of Christ.

My dear Brother Giovanni Battista: We are not surprised at your temptation regarding studies, for we know that it is the devil's work to annoy and disturb the servants of God. But you should be surprised at yourself for having yielded to it, forgetting that a religious should have no will of his own, and that he may do God's will he should follow the will of his superiors. And you have all the less reason for yielding to the devil's suggestion in this matter, since you were expressly told from the very beginning not to think of studies, but to exercise yourself in the offices of charity and humility. Taking into account your age and your aptitudes, it was thought that you would be wasting your time in study, and that you could make better use of it in other employments in God's service. In the body all the members are not eyes, nor ears, nor hands, nor feet. And as each member has its function, and is satisfied with it, so likewise in the body of the Society all cannot be learned, nor all priests, but each one must be content with the employment given him according to the will and judgment of the superior, who will have to give an account to God for all his subjects. Finally, Giovanni Battista, if you have given all to God, allow yourself to be guided by God, and act not in your own way, but in God's way. You will have to learn this by obedience to your superior. If someone tells you something different, even though he is transformed into an angel of light, be sure that he is the devil who is trying to draw you out of the Society. The Society will not put up with this self-will of yours if you do not really amend. You may have the name of religious, but if you fail in obedience, you are not a religious at all. Now, for the good we desire for you, we want you to examine yourself and get over the way of acting you have had in this matter for some time now. May God our Lord grant you His grace.