prevailed, that the matter had actually become a ground of accusation. Which
was a twofold charge against them, in that they both invented novelties, and
were so strict exactors on their own account, while of God they made no
reckoning.
And omitting to speak of the other things, the pots and the brazen vessels
(for it was too ridiculous), what seemed more reasonable than the rest, that they
bring forward, wishing, as seems at least to me, in that way to provoke Him to
anger. Wherefore also they made mention of the elders, in order that He, as
setting them at nought, might give occasion against Himself.
But it were meet first to inquire, why the disciples ate with unwashen
hands. Wherefore then did they so eat? Not as making a point of it, but as
overlooking henceforth the things that are superfluous, and attending to such as
are necessary; having no law to wash or not to wash, but doing either as it
happened. For they that despised even their own necessary food, how were they
to hold these things worth much consideration? This then having often happened
unintentionally—for instance, when they ate in the wilderness, when they
plucked the ears of grain—is now put forward as a charge by these persons, who
are always transgressing in the great things, and making much account of the
superfluous.
2. What then says Christ? He did not set Himself against it, neither made
He any defense, but straightway blames them again, plucking down their
confidence, and signifying that he who commits great sins ought not to be strict
with others concerning small matters. "What? When you ought to be blamed,"
says He, "do ye even blame?"
But do thou observe, how when it is His will to set aside any of the things
enjoined by the law, He does it in the form of an apology; and so He did in that
case. For by no means does He proceed at once to transgress it, nor does He say,
"It is nothing;" for surely He would have made them more audacious; but first
He clean cuts away their boldness, bringing forward the far heavier charge, and
directing it upon their head. And He neither says, "they do well in transgressing

it," lest He should give them a hold on Him; nor does He speak ill of their
proceeding, lest He should confirm the law: nor again, on the other hand, does
He blame the elders, as lawless and unholy men; for doubtless they would have
shunned Him as a reviler and injurious: but all these things He gives up, and
proceeds another way. And He seems indeed to be rebuking the persons
themselves who had come to Him, but He is reprehending them that enacted
these laws; nowhere indeed making mention of the elders, but by His charge
against the Scribes casting down them also, and signifying that their sin is
twofold, first in disobeying God, next in doing so on men's account; as though
He had said, "Why this, this has ruined you, your obeying the elders in all
things."
Yet He says not so, but this is just what He intimates, by answering them as
follows:
Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God by your tradition? For
God commanded, saying, Honor your father and your mother: and, He that
curses father or mother, let him die the death. But ye say, Whosoever shall say to
his father or his mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever you might be profited by me,
and honor not his father or his mother — And you have made void the
commandment of God by your tradition.
And He said not, "the elders' tradition," but "your own." And, "ye say;"
again He said not, "the elders say:" in order to make His speech less galling.
That is, because they wanted to prove the disciples transgressors of the law, He
signifies that they themselves are doing so, but that these are free from blame.
For of course that is not a law, which is enjoined by men (wherefore also He
calls it "a tradition"), and especially by men that are transgressors of the law.
And since this had no shade of contrariety to the law, to command men to
wash their hands, He brings forward another tradition, which is opposed to the
law. And what He says is like this. "They taught the young, under the garb of
piety, to despise their fathers." How, and in what way? "If one of their parents
said to his child, Give me this sheep that you have, or this calf, or any such