8. As to the point, then, that their system is weak and untenable as well as utterly chimerical,
enough has been said. For it is not needful, to use a common proverb, that one should drink up the
ocean who wishes to learn that its water is salt. But, just as in the case of a statue which is made
of clay, but coloured on the outside that it may be thought to be of gold, while it really is of clay,
any one who takes out of it a small particle, and thus laying it open reveals the clay, will set free
those who seek the truth from a false opinion; in the same way have I (by exposing not a small part
only, but the several heads of their system which are of the greatest importance) shown to as many
as do not wish wittingly to be led astray, what is wicked, deceitful, seductive, and pernicious,
connected with the school of the Valentinians, and all those other heretics who promulgate
wicked opinions respecting the Demiurge, that is, the Fashioner and Former of this universe, and
who is in fact the only true God—exhibiting, [as I have done,] how easily their views are overthrown.
9. For who that has any intelligence, and possesses only a small proportion of truth, can tolerate
them, when they affirm that there is another god above the Creator; and that there is another
Monogenes as well as another Word of God, whom also they describe as having been produced in
[a state of] degeneracy; and another Christ, whom they assert to have been formed, along with the
Holy Spirit, later than the rest of the Æons; and another Saviour, who, they say, did not proceed
from the Father of all, but was a kind of joint production of those Æons who were formed in [a
state of] degeneracy, and that He was produced of necessity on account of this very degeneracy?
It is thus their opinion that, unless the Æons had been in a state of ignorance and degeneracy, neither
Christ, nor the Holy Spirit, nor Horos, nor the Saviour, nor the angels, nor their Mother, nor her
seed, nor the rest of the fabric of the world, would have been produced at all; but the universe would
have been a desert, and destitute of the many good things which exist in it. They are therefore not
only chargeable with impiety against the Creator, declaring Him the fruit of a defect, but also against
Christ and the Holy Spirit, affirming that they were produced on account of that defect; and, in like
manner, that the Saviour [was produced] subsequently to [the existence of] that defect. And who
will tolerate the remainder of their vain talk, which they cunningly endeavour to accommodate to
the parables, and have in this way plunged both themselves, and those who give credit to them, in
the profoundest depths of impiety?

### Chapter XX.—Futility of the arguments adduced to demonstrate the sufferings of the twelfth
Æon, from the parables, the treachery of Judas, and the passion of our Saviour.
1. That they improperly and illogically apply both the parables and the actions of the Lord to
their falsely-devised system, I prove as follows: They endeavour, for instance, to demonstrate that
passion which, they say, happened in the case of the twelfth Æon, from this fact, that the passion
of the Saviour was brought about by the twelfth apostle, and happened in the twelfth month. For