inflammations, and that burning fever none can quench, for wealth will not allow
of this, having persuaded it that those things are gains, which are really losses,
such as not enduring any one and doing everything at will. For no other soul will
one find so replete with lusts so great and so extravagant, as theirs who are
desirous of being rich. For what silly trifles do they not picture to themselves!
One may see these devising more extravagant things than limners of
hippocentaurs, and chimæras, and dragon-footed things, and Scyllas, and
monsters. And if one should choose to give a picture of one lust of theirs, neither
Scylla, nor chimæra, nor hippocentaur will appear anything at all by the side of
such a prodigy; but you will find it to contain every wild beast at once.
And perchance some one will suppose that I have been myself possessed of
much wealth, seeing I am so true to what really comes of it. It is reported of one
(for I will first confirm what I have said from the legends of the Greeks)— it is
reported among them of a certain king, that he became so insolent in luxury, as
to make a plane tree of gold, and a sky above it, and there sate, and this too when
invading a people skilled in warfare. Now was not this lust hippocentaurean, was
it not Scyllæan? Another, again, used to cast men into a wooden bull. Was not
this a very Scylla? And even him, the king I just mentioned, the warrior, wealth
made, from a man a woman, from a woman, what shall I say? A brute beast, and
yet more degraded than this for the beasts, if they lodge under a tree, take up
with nature, and seek for nothing further; but the man in question overshot the
nature even of beasts.
What then can be more senseless than are the wealthy? And this arises from
the greediness of their desires. But, are there not many that admire him?
Therefore truly do they share in the laughter he incurs. That displayed not his
wealth but his folly. How much better than that golden plane tree is that which
the earth produces! For the natural is more grateful than the unnatural. But what
meant that your golden heaven, O senseless one? Do you see how wealth that is
abundant makes men mad? How it inflamed them? I suppose he knows not the
sea even, and perchance will presently have a mind to walk upon it. Now is not

this a chimaera? Is it not a hippocentaur? But there are, at this time also, some
who fall not short even of him, but are actually much more senseless. For in
point of senselessness, wherein do they differ, tell me, from that golden plane
tree, who make silver jars, pitchers, and scent bottles? And wherein do those
women differ, (ashamed indeed I am, but it is necessary to speak it,) who make
chamber utensils of silver? It is ye should be ashamed, that are the makers of
these things. When Christ is famishing, do you so revel in luxury? Yea rather, so
play the fool! What punishment shall these not suffer? And do you inquire still,
why there are robbers? Why murderers? Why such evils? When the devil has
thus made you ridiculous. For the mere having of silver dishes indeed, this even
is not in keeping with a soul devoted to wisdom, but is altogether a piece of
luxury; but the making unclean vessels also of silver, is this then luxury? Nay, I
will not call it luxury, but senselessness; nay, nor yet this, but madness; nay
rather, worse than even madness.
I know that many persons make jokes at me for this; but I heed them not,
only let some good result from it. In truth, to be wealthy does make people
senseless and mad. Did their power reach to such an excess, they would have the
earth too of gold, and walls of gold, perchance the heaven too, and the air of
gold. What a madness is this, what an iniquity, what a burning fever! Another,
made after the image of God, is perishing of cold; and do you furnish yourself
with such things as these? O the senseless pride! What more would a madman
have done? Do you pay such honor to your excrements, as to receive them in
silver? I know that you are shocked at hearing this; but those women that make
such things ought to be shocked, and the husbands that minister to such
distempers. For this is wantonness, and savageness, and inhumanity, and
brutishness, and lasciviousness. What Scylla, what chimæra, what dragon, yea
rather what demon, what devil would have acted on this wise? What is the
benefit of Christ? What of the Faith? When one has to put up with men being
heathens, yea rather, not heathens, but demons? If to adorn the head with gold
and pearls be not right; one that uses silver for a service so unclean, how shall he