better than the teachers of these, isolated as they were in the midst of the
populace, and of tyrants, and having all men on all sides their enemies, and yet
not in the slightest degree dragged down or yielding. Hear at least what he says
to the Philippians, [Philippians 1:29] "Because to you it has been granted in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe in Him, but also to suffer in his behalf." And
again to the Thessalonians, [1 Thessalonians 2:14] "For you, brethren, became
imitators of the churches of God which are in Judæa." And again in writing to
the Hebrews [Hebrews 10:34] he said, "And ye took joyfully the spoiling of your
possessions." And to the Colossians [Colossians 3:3] he testifies, saying, "For
you died, and your life is hid with Christ in God." And indeed to these very
Ephesians he bears witness of many perils and dangers. And again in writing to
the Galatians, [Galatians 3:4] he says, "Did ye suffer so many things in vain? If it
be indeed in vain." And you see them too, all employed in doing good. Hence it
was that both grace wrought effectually in those days, hence also that they lived
in good works. Hear, moreover, what he writes to the Corinthians, against whom
he brings charges out of number; yet does he not bear even them record, where
he says, "Yea, what zeal it wrought in you, yea, what longing!" [1 Corinthians
7:11] And again, in how many points does he bear them record on this subject?
These things one shall not see now-a-days, even in teachers. They are all gone
and perished. And the cause is, that love has waxed cold, that sinners go
unpunished; (for hear what he says writing to Timothy, [1 Timothy 5:20] "Them
that sin, reprove in the sight of all;") it is that the rulers are in a sickly state; for
if the head be not sound, how can the rest of the body maintain its vigor? But
mark how great is the present disorder. They, who were living virtuously, and
who under any circumstance might have confidence, have taken possession of
the tops of the mountains, and have escaped out of the world, separating
themselves as from an enemy and an alien and not from a body to which they
belonged.
Plagues too, teeming with untold mischiefs, have lighted upon the
Churches. The chief offices have become saleable. Hence numberless evils are

springing, and there is no one to redress, no one to reprove them. Nay, the
disorder has assumed a sort of method and consistency. Has a man done wrong,
and been arraigned for it? His effort is not to prove himself guiltless, but to find
if possible accomplices in his crimes. What is to become of us? Since hell is our
threatened portion. Believe me, had not God stored up punishment for us there,
you would see every day tragedies deeper than the disasters of the Jews. What
then? However let no one take offense, for I mention no names; suppose some
one were to come into this church to present you that are here at this moment,
those that are now with me, and to make inquisition of them; or rather not now,
but suppose on Easter day any one, endued with such a spirit, as to have a
thorough knowledge of the things they had been doing, should narrowly examine
all that came to Communion, and were being washed [in Baptism] after they had
attended the mysteries; many things would be discovered more shocking than
the Jewish horrors. He would find persons who practise augury, who make use
of charms, and omens and incantations, and who have committed fornication,
adulterers, drunkards, and revilers,— covetous, I am unwilling to add, lest I
should hurt the feelings of any of those who are standing here. What more?
Suppose any one should make scrutiny into all the communicants in the world,
what kind of transgression is there which he would not detect? And what if he
examined those in authority? Would he not find them eagerly bent upon gain?
Making traffic of high places? envious, malignant, vainglorious, gluttonous, and
slaves to money?
Where then there is such impiety as this going on, what dreadful calamity
must we not expect? And to be assured how sore vengeance they incur who are
guilty of such sins as these, consider the examples of old. One single man, a
common soldier, stole the sacred property, and all were smitten. You know,
doubtless, the history I mean? I am speaking of Acham the son of Carmi, the
man who stole the consecrated spoil. [Joshua 7:1-26] The time too when the
Prophet spoke, was a time when their country was full of soothsayers, like that
of the Philistines. [Isaiah 2:6] Whereas now there are evils out of number at the