206. Economy, as the very word indicates, should be the art of achieving a fitting management of
our common home, which is the world as a whole. Each meaningful economic decision made in
one part of the world has repercussions everywhere else; consequently, no government can act
without regard for shared responsibility. Indeed, it is becoming increasingly difficult to find local
solutions for enormous global problems which overwhelm local politics with difficulties to resolve. If
we really want to achieve a healthy world economy, what is needed at this juncture of history is a
more efficient way of interacting which, with due regard for the
sovereignty of each nation, ensures the economic well-being of all countries, not just of a few.

207. Any Church community, if it thinks it can comfortably go its own way without creative concern
and effective cooperation in helping the poor to live with dignity and reaching out to everyone, will
also risk breaking down, however much it may talk about social issues or criticize governments. It
will easily drift into a spiritual worldliness camouflaged by religious practices, unproductive
meetings and empty talk.

208. If anyone feels offended by my words, I would respond that I speak them with affection and

with the best of intentions, quite apart from any personal interest or political ideology. My words
are not those of a foe or an opponent. I am interested only in helping those who are in thrall to an
individualistic, indifferent and self-centred mentality to be freed from those unworthy chains and to
attain a way of living and thinking which is more humane, noble and fruitful, and which will bring
dignity to their presence on this earth.

Concern for the vulnerable

209. Jesus, the evangelizer par excellence and the Gospel in person, identifies especially with the
little ones (cf. Mt 25:40). This reminds us Christians that we are called to care for the vulnerable of
the earth. But the current model, with its emphasis on success and self-reliance, does not appear
to favour an investment in efforts to help the slow, the weak or the less talented to find
opportunities in life.

210. It is essential to draw near to new forms of poverty and vulnerability, in which we are called to
recognize the suffering Christ, even if this appears to bring us no tangible and immediate benefits.
I think of the homeless, the addicted, refugees, indigenous peoples, the elderly who are
increasingly isolated and abandoned, and many others. Migrants present a particular challenge for
me, since I am the pastor of a Church without frontiers, a Church which considers herself mother
to all. For this reason, I exhort all countries to a generous openness which, rather than fearing the
loss of local identity, will prove capable of creating new forms of cultural synthesis. How beautiful
are those cities which overcome paralysing mistrust, integrate those who are different and make
this very integration a new factor of development! How attractive are those cities which, even in
their architectural design, are full of spaces which connect, relate and favour the recognition of
others!