FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.4.

or say, according as the thing is so or not. Accordingly the good of
speculative intellectual virtue consists in a certain mean, by way of
conformity with things themselves, in so far as the intellect
expresses them as being what they are, or as not being what they
are not: and it is in this that the nature of truth consists. There will be
excess if something false is affirmed, as though something were,
which in reality it is not: and there will be deficiency if something is
falsely denied, and declared not to be, whereas in reality it is.
The truth of practical intellectual virtue, if we consider it in relation to
things, is by way of that which is measured; so that both in practical
and in speculative intellectual virtues, the mean consists in
conformity with things. But if we consider it in relation to the
appetite, it has the character of a rule and measure. Consequently
the rectitude of reason is the mean of moral virtue, and also the
mean of prudence---of prudence as ruling and measuring, of moral
virtue, as ruled and measured by that mean. In like manner the
difference between excess and deficiency is to be applied in both
cases.
Reply to Objection 1: Intellectual virtues also have their measure, as
stated, and they observe the mean according as they conform to that
measure.
Reply to Objection 2: There is no need for an indefinite series of
virtues: because the measure and rule of intellectual virtue is not
another kind of virtue, but things themselves.
Reply to Objection 3: The things themselves that are contrary have
no contrariety in the mind, because one is the reason for knowing
the other: nevertheless there is in the intellect contrariety of
affirmation and negation, which are contraries, as stated at the end
of Peri Hermenias. For though "to be" and "not to be" are not in
contrary, but in contradictory opposition to one another, so long as
we consider their signification in things themselves, for on the one
hand we have "being" and on the other we have simply "non-being";
yet if we refer them to the act of the mind, there is something
positive in both cases. Hence "to be" and "not to be" are
contradictory: but the opinion stating that "good is good" is contrary
to the opinion stating that "good is not good": and between two such
contraries intellectual virtue observes the mean.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.4.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the theological virtues observe the

mean?
Objection 1: It would seem that theological virtue observes the
mean. For the good of other virtues consists in their observing the
mean. Now the theological virtues surpass the others in goodness.
Therefore much more does theological virtue observe the mean.
Objection 2: Further, the mean of moral virtue depends on the
appetite being ruled by reason; while the mean of intellectual virtue
consists in the intellect being measured by things. Now theological
virtue perfects both intellect and appetite, as stated above (Question
62, Article 3). Therefore theological virtue also observes the mean.
Objection 3: Further, hope, which is a theological virtue, is a mean
between despair and presumption. Likewise faith holds a middle
course between contrary heresies, as Boethius states (De Duab.
Natur. vii): thus, by confessing one Person and two natures in Christ,
we observe the mean between the heresy of Nestorius, who
maintained the existence of two persons and two natures, and the
heresy of Eutyches, who held to one person and one nature.
Therefore theological virtue observes the mean.
On the contrary, Wherever virtue observes the mean it is possible to
sin by excess as well as by deficiency. But there is no sinning by
excess against God, Who is the object of theological virtue: for it is
written (Ecclus. 43:33): "Blessing the Lord, exalt Him as much as you
can: for He is above all praise." Therefore theological virtue does not
observe the mean.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the mean of virtue depends
on conformity with virtue's rule or measure, in so far as one may
exceed or fall short of that rule. Now the measure of theological
virtue may be twofold. One is taken from the very nature of virtue,
and thus the measure and rule of theological virtue is God Himself:
because our faith is ruled according to Divine truth; charity,
according to His goodness; hope, according to the immensity of His
omnipotence and loving kindness. This measure surpasses all
human power: so that never can we love God as much as He ought
to be loved, nor believe and hope in Him as much as we should.
Much less therefore can there be excess in such things. Accordingly