aid from above. He accepts then Peter's love, but cuts off the spirit of
contradiction engendered by it. "For if you love, you ought to obey Him who is
beloved. I said to you and to those with you, 'You can not'; why are you
contentious? Do you know what a thing it is to contradict God? But since you
will not learn in this way that it is impossible that what I say should not come to
pass, you shall learn it in the denial." And yet this appeared to you to be much
more incredible. For this thou did not even understand, but of that you had the
knowledge in your heart. Yet still that came to pass which was not even
expected.
"I will lay down my life for You." For since he had heard, "Greater love than
this has, no man," he straightway sprang forward, insatiably eager and desirous
to reach even to the highest pitch of virtue. But Christ, to show that it belonged
to Himself alone to promise these things with authority, says,

John 13:38
"Before the cock crow."
That is, "now"; there was but a little interval. He spoke when it was late at
night, and the first and second watch was past.

John 14:1
"Let not your heart be troubled."
This He says, because it was probable that when they heard they would be
troubled. For if the leader of their band, one so entirely fervent, was told that
before the cock crew he should thrice deny his Master, it was likely that they
would expect to have to undergo some great reverse, sufficient to bend even
souls of adamant. Since then it was probable that they considering these things
would be astounded, see how He comforts them, saying, "Let not your heart be
troubled." By this first word showing the power of His Godhead, because, what
they had in their hearts He knew and brought to light.
"You believe in God, believe also in Me." That is, "All dangers shall pass
you by, for faith in Me and in My Father is more powerful than the things which
come upon you, and will permit no evil thing to prevail against you." Then He
adds,

John 14:2
"In My Father's house are many mansions."
As He comforts Peter when bewildered by saying, "but you shall follow
afterwards," so also He gives this glimpse of hope to the others. For lest they
should think that the promise was given to him alone, He says, "In My Father's
house are many mansions."
"If it were not so I would have said to you, I go to prepare a place for you."
That is, "The same place which receives Peter shall receive you." For a
great abundance of dwellings is there, and it may not be said that they need
preparation. When He said, "You cannot follow Me now," that they might not
deem that they were finally cut off, He added,

John 14:3
"That where I am, there ye may be also."
"So earnest have I been concerning this matter, that I should already have
been given up to it, had not preparation been made long ago for you." Showing
them that they ought to be very bold and confident. Then that He may not seem
to speak as though enticing them, but that they may believe the thing to be so,
He adds,