must also be love: since if the first is wanting, all that follows is also
wanting. Now it has been shown that will is in God (Question 19,
Article 1), and hence we must attribute love to Him.
Reply to Objection 1: The cognitive faculty does not move except
through the medium of the appetitive: and just as in ourselves the
universal reason moves through the medium of the particular
reason, as stated in De Anima iii, 58,75, so in ourselves the
intellectual appetite, or the will as it is called, moves through the
medium of the sensitive appetite. Hence, in us the sensitive appetite
is the proximate motive-force of our bodies. Some bodily change
therefore always accompanies an act of the sensitive appetite, and
this change affects especially the heart, which, as the Philosopher
says (De part. animal. iii, 4), is the first principle of movement in
animals. Therefore acts of the sensitive appetite, inasmuch as they
have annexed to them some bodily change, are called passions;
whereas acts of the will are not so called. Love, therefore, and joy
and delight are passions; in so far as they denote acts of the
intellective appetite, they are not passions. It is in this latter sense
that they are in God. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii): "God
rejoices by an operation that is one and simple," and for the same
reason He loves without passion.
Reply to Objection 2: In the passions of the sensitive appetite there
may be distinguished a certain material element---namely, the bodily
change---and a certain formal element, which is on the part of the
appetite. Thus in anger, as the Philosopher says (De Anima iii,
15,63,64), the material element is the kindling of the blood about the
heart; but the formal, the appetite for revenge. Again, as regards the
formal element of certain passions a certain imperfection is implied,
as in desire, which is of the good we have not, and in sorrow, which
is about the evil we have. This applies also to anger, which supposes
sorrow. Certain other passions, however, as love and joy, imply no
imperfection. Since therefore none of these can be attributed to God
on their material side, as has been said (ad 1); neither can those that
even on their formal side imply imperfection be attributed to Him;
except metaphorically, and from likeness of effects, as already show
(Question 3, Article 2, ad 2; Question 19, Article 11). Whereas, those
that do not imply imperfection, such as love and joy, can be properly
predicated of God, though without attributing passion to Him, as said
before (Question 19, Article 11).
Reply to Objection 3: An act of love always tends towards two

things; to the good that one wills, and to the person for whom one
wills it: since to love a person is to wish that person good. Hence,
inasmuch as we love ourselves, we wish ourselves good; and, so far
as possible, union with that good. So love is called the unitive force,
even in God, yet without implying composition; for the good that He
wills for Himself, is no other than Himself, Who is good by His
essence, as above shown (Question 6, Articles 1,3). And by the fact
that anyone loves another, he wills good to that other. Thus he puts
the other, as it were, in the place of himself; and regards the good
done to him as done to himself. So far love is a binding force, since
it aggregates another to ourselves, and refers his good to our own.
And then again the divine love is a binding force, inasmuch as God
wills good to others; yet it implies no composition in God.