away when He was brought before Pilate. They maintain, further, that not even the seed which He
had received from the mother [Achamoth] was subject to suffering; for it, too, was impassible, as
being spiritual, and invisible even to the Demiurge himself. It follows, then, according to them,
that the animal Christ, and that which had been formed mysteriously by a special dispensation,
underwent suffering, that the mother might exhibit through him a type of the Christ above, namely,
of him who extended himself through Stauros, and imparted to Achamoth shape, so far as
substance was concerned. For they declare that all these transactions were counterparts of what
took place above.
3. They maintain, moreover, that those souls which possess the seed of Achamoth are superior
to the rest, and are more dearly loved by the Demiurge than others, while he knows not the true
cause thereof, but imagines that they are what they are through his favour towards them. Wherefore,
also, they say he distributed them to prophets, priests, and kings; and they declare that many things
were spoken by this seed through the prophets, inasmuch as it was endowed with a transcendently
lofty nature. The mother also, they say, spake much about things above, and that both through him
and through the souls which were formed by him. Then, again, they divide the prophecies [into
different classes], maintaining that one portion was uttered by the mother, a second by her seed,
and a third by the Demiurge. In like manner, they hold that Jesus uttered some things under the
influence of the Saviour, others under that of the mother, and others still under that of the Demiurge,
as we shall show further on in our work.
4. The Demiurge, while ignorant of those things which were higher than himself, was indeed
excited by the announcements made [through the prophets], but treated them with contempt,
attributing them sometimes to one cause and sometimes to another; either to the prophetic spirit
(which itself possesses the power of self-excitement), or to [mere unassisted] man, or that it was
simply a crafty device of the lower [and baser order of men]. He remained thus ignorant until
the appearing of the Lord. But they relate that when the Saviour came, the Demiurge learned all
things from Him, and gladly with all, his power joined himself to Him. They maintain that he is
the centurion mentioned in the Gospel, who addressed the Saviour in these words: "For I also am
one having soldiers and servants under my authority; and whatsoever I command they do." They
further hold that he will continue administering the affairs of the world as long as that is fitting and
needful, and specially that he may exercise a care over the Church; while at the same time he is
below, who was extended upon the cross.
classes, and some to the others.