Invisible One and to live in intimacy with the mystery. And this is the way that Mary, for many
years, lived in intimacy with the mystery of her Son, and went forward in her pilgrimage of
faith”.

288. There is a Marian “style” to the Church’s work of evangelization. Whenever we look to Mary,
we come to believe once again in the revolutionary nature of love and tenderness. In her we see
that humility and tenderness are not virtues of the weak but of the strong who need not treat
others poorly in order to feel important themselves. Contemplating Mary, we realize that she who
praised God for “bringing down the mighty from their thrones” and “sending the rich away empty”
(Lk 1:52-53) is also the one who brings a homely warmth to our pursuit of justice. She is also the
one who carefully keeps “all these things, pondering them in her heart” (Lk 2:19). Mary is able to
recognize the traces of God’s Spirit in events great and small. She constantly contemplates the
mystery of God in our world, in human history and in our daily lives. She is the woman of prayer
and work in Nazareth, and she is also Our Lady of Help, who sets out from her town “with haste”
(Lk 1:39) to be of service to others. This interplay of justice and tenderness, of contemplation and
concern for others, is what makes the ecclesial community look to Mary as a model of
evangelization. We implore her maternal intercession that the Church may become a home for
many peoples, a mother for all peoples, and that the way may be opened to the birth of a new
world. It is the Risen Christ who tells us, with a power that fills us with confidence and
unshakeable hope: “Behold, I make all things new” (Rev 21:5). With Mary we advance confidently
towards the fulfilment of this promise, and to her we pray:

Mary, Virgin and Mother,
you who, moved by the Holy Spirit,
welcomed the word of life
in the depths of your humble faith:
as you gave yourself completely to the Eternal One,
help us to say our own “yes”
to the urgent call, as pressing as ever,
to proclaim the good news of Jesus.

Filled with Christ’s presence,
you brought joy to John the Baptist,
making him exult in the womb of his mother.
Brimming over with joy,
you sang of the great things done by God.
Standing at the foot of the cross
with unyielding faith,
you received the joyful comfort of the resurrection,
and joined the disciples in awaiting the Spirit
so that the evangelizing Church might be born.

Obtain for us now a new ardour born of the resurrection,
that we may bring to all the Gospel of life
which triumphs over death.
Give us a holy courage to seek new paths,
that the gift of unfading beauty
may reach every man and woman.

Virgin of listening and contemplation,
Mother of love, Bride of the eternal wedding feast,
pray for the Church, whose pure icon you are,
that she may never be closed in on herself
or lose her passion for establishing God’s kingdom.