Again, 1 John 5:20, "And we know that the Son of God is come: and He hath given us
understanding that we may know the true God, and may be in His true Son. This is the true God
and life eternal." Therefore He is not less than the Father.

Again, it is shown that the Holy Spirit is the true God and equal to the Father by what is said in
Phil. 3:3, according to the Greek text. "We are the circumcision, who serve God the Spirit", and
in regard to this service, that of latria is understood, as is evident in the Greek. And such honor is
due to no creature. Deut. 6:13 and Matt. 4:10: "The Lord your God you shall adore, and Him
only you shall serve." Therefore, the Holy Spirit is not a creature.

Again, the members of Christ cannot be the temple of anyone who is less than Christ: but our
bodies, which are members of Christ, according to the Apostle, are temples of the Holy Spirit, as
is said in 1 Cor. 6: 19. Therefore the Holy Spirit is not less than Christ, or less than the Father;
and thus it is true, as the author says, that this is a doctrine of the Catholic religion.

Response. I answer that it must be said that the position of the Arians, which establishes
inequality among the divine persons, is not a confession of the Catholic religion, but rather an
impiety of the Gentiles, as is thus evident.

Among the Gentiles all immortal substances are called gods. Among these, moreover, they hold,
or rather the Platonists hold, that there are three principal persons, as is made clear by Augustine
in De civitate Dei (Bk. X), and by Macrobius on the Somnium Scipionis, namely, the God, who
is the Creator of all things, whom they call also the Father, since all things have their source in
Him; and, secondly, a certain inferior substance, whom they call the Paternal Mind or the
Paternal Intellect, who contains the ideas of all things, and who is made by God the Father, they
say; and thirdly, after Him they suppose a Soul-of-the-World, a spirit who is, as it were, the life
of the whole world. And these three substances they name as their chief gods, and as the three
principles by which souls are purified.

Origen, moreover, following the teachings of the Platonists, thought that after the same manner
the doctrine of the true faith ought to be interpreted, because it is said, "There are three who give
testimony in heaven" (1 John 5:7). And so, as the Platonists supposed that there were three
principal substances, Origen held that the Son was a creature and less than the Father, in that
book which is entitled Peri Archon ("Concerning the Principles"), as is made clear by Jerome in
a certain epistle regarding the errors of Origen. And since Origen himself taught at Alexandria,
Arius drank in his error from the things he wrote. On this account Epiphanius says that Origen
was the father and font of Arius.