This table is the same as that, and has nothing less. For it is not so that
Christ wrought that, and man this, but He does this too. This is that upper
chamber, where they were then; and hence they went forth unto the mount of
Olives.
Let us also go out unto the hands of the poor, for this spot is the mount of
Olives. For the multitude of the poor are olive-trees planted in the house of God,
dropping the oil, which is profitable for us there, which the five virgins had, and
the others that had not received perished thereby. Having received this, let us
enter in that with bright lamps we may meet the bridegroom; having received
this, let us go forth hence.
Let no inhuman person be present, no one that is cruel and merciless, no
one at all that is unclean.
6. These things I say to you that receive, and to you that minister. For it is
necessary to address myself to you also, that you may with much care distribute
the gifts there. There is no small punishment for you, if being conscious of any
wickedness in any man, you allow him to partake of this table. "His blood shall
be required at your hands." [Ezekiel 33:8] Though any one be a general, though
a deputy, though it be he himself who is invested with the diadem, and come
unworthily, forbid him, the authority you have is greater than his. You, if you
were entrusted to keep a spring of water clean for a flock, and then were to see a
sheep having much mire on its mouth, you would not suffer it to stoop down
unto it and foul the stream: but now being entrusted with a spring not of water,
but of blood and of spirit, if you see any having on them sin, which is more
grievous than earth and mire, coming unto it, are you not displeased? Do you not
drive them off? And what excuse can you have?
For this end God has honored you with this honor, that you should discern
these things. This is your office, this your safety, this your whole crown, not that
you should go about clothed in a white and shining vestment.
And whence know I, you may say, this person, and that person? I speak not
of the unknown, but of the notorious.

Shall I say something more fearful. It is not so grievous a thing for the
energumens to be within, as for such as these, whom Paul affirms to trample
Christ under foot, and to "account the blood of the covenant unclean, and to do
despite to the grace of the Spirit." For he that has fallen into sin and draws near,
is worse than one possessed with a devil. For they, because they are possessed
are not punished, but those, when they draw near unworthily, are delivered over
to undying punishment. Let us not therefore drive away these only, but all
without exception, whomsoever we may see coming unworthily.
Let no one communicate who is not of the disciples. Let no Judas receive,
lest he suffer the fate of Judas. This multitude also is Christ's body. Take heed,
therefore, you that ministerest at the mysteries, lest you provoke the Lord, not
purging this body. Give not a sword instead of meat.
Nay, though it be from ignorance that he come to communicate, forbid him,
be not afraid. Fear God, not man. If you should fear man, you will be laughed to
scorn even by him, but if God, you will be an object of respect even to men.
But if you dare not to do it yourself, bring him to me; I will not allow any to
dare do these things. I would give up my life rather than impart of the Lord's
blood to the unworthy; and will shed my own blood rather than impart of such
awful blood contrary to what is meet.
But if any has not known the bad man, after much inquiry, it is no blame.
For these things have been said about the open sinners. For if we amend these,
God will speedily discover to us the unknown also; but if we let these alone,
wherefore should He then make manifest those that are hidden.
But these things I say, not that we repel them only, nor cut them off, but in
order that we may amend them, and bring them back, that we may take care of
them. For thus shall we both have God propitious, and shall find many to receive
worthily; and for our own diligence, and for our care for others, receive great
reward; unto which God grant we may all attain by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world without end. Amen.