bodies hardened to encounter the summer heat without uneasiness. For since
sudden changes to opposite extremes are productive of the worst injury and
disease, God has contrived that after winter we should take up the spring, and
after the spring the summer; and after the summer the autumn; and thus transport
us to winter, so that these changes from seasons which are opposite, should come
upon us harmlessly and by degrees, through the aid of intermediate ones. Who
then is so wretched and pitiable, that beholding the heavens; and beholding sea,
and land; and beholding this exact adjustment of the seasons, and the unfailing
order of day and night, he can think that these things happen of their own accord,
instead of adoring Him who has arranged them all with a corresponding wisdom!
7. But I have yet somewhat more to say on this head. For not only, indeed,
does the magnitude and beauty of the creation, but also the very manner of it,
display a God who is the artificer of the universe. For since we were not present
at the beginning, while he was engaged in the work of forming and creating all
things; nor had we been present, could we have known how they came into
being, the power that disposed them being invisible; He has made the mode of
this creation to become our best teacher, by compounding all things in a manner
which transcends the course of nature. Perhaps what I have said, is not
sufficiently clear. Therefore it is necessary that I should again repeat it in a
clearer manner. All men, then, must admit that it is the course of nature for water
to be supported on the earth, and not the earth on the waters. For the earth being
a certain dense, hard, unyielding, and solid substance, is easily able to support
the nature of water; but the water, which is fluid, and rare, and soft, and
diffusive, and giving way to all it meets with, must be unable to support any
solid body, though it were of the lightest kind. Often indeed when a small pebble
fails upon it, it yields, and makes way, and sends it down to the bottom. When
therefore you behold not a small pebble, but the whole earth borne upon the
waters, and not submerged, admire the power of Him who wrought these
marvellous things in a supernatural manner! And whence does this appear, that
the earth is borne upon the waters? The prophet declares this when he says, "He

has founded it upon the seas, and prepared it upon the floods." And again: "To
him who has founded the earth upon the waters." What do you say? The water is
not able to support a small pebble on its surface, and yet bears up the earth, great
as it is; and mountains, and hills, and cities, and plants, and men, and brutes; and
it is not submerged! What do I say? Is not submerged? How comes it to pass,
that since the water has been in close contact with it below, during so long a
period, it has not been dissolved, and the whole of it become mud? For the
substance of wood, when soaked in water but a little time, is rotted and
dissolved; and why do I say of wood? What can be firmer than iron? Yet often
this is softened, when it remains a long time in water; and well it may. For it
derives its substance from the earth. Therefore many run-away servants, when
they make their escape, dragging their shackles and chains along with them, go
to brooks of water, and thrust their shackled feet therein, and after making the
iron softer by this means, they easily break it by striking it with a stone. Iron,
forsooth, is softened, and wood is rotted, and stones are worn away by the nature
of water; yet so great a mass as the earth has remained such a length of time
lying upon the waters, without being either submerged, or dissolved, and
destroyed!
8. And who is there that must not feel astonished and amazed at these
things; and confidently pronounce that they are not the works of nature, but of
that Providence which is above nature? Therefore one speaks thus: "Who hangs
the earth upon nothing." [Job 26:7] And another observes, "In His hands are the
corners of the earth." And again: "He has laid the foundation of it upon the
seas." And these declarations, though they seem contrary to one another, have
yet an entire agreement. For he that said, "He has laid the foundation of it upon
the seas," meant the same thing as he did who declared, "He has hung it upon
nothing." For its standing upon the waters is just the same thing as hanging upon
nothing. Where then is it suspended and placed? Hear the same one saying, "In
His hands are the corners of the earth." Not that God has hands, but that you
may know that His power it is, providing for all things which holds together and