irremediable evils. Does it not now seem to be broad daylight? Do we not think
that all men are awake and sober? Yet still (and perhaps you will smile at what I
say, still say it I will) we seem all of us like men sleeping and snoring in the
depth of night. And if indeed an incorporeal being could be seen, I would show
you how most men are snoring, and the devil breaking through walls, and
butchering us as we lie, and stealing away the goods within, doing everything
fearlessly, as if in profound darkness. Or rather, even if it be impossible to see
this with our eyes, let us sketch it out in words, and consider how many have
been weighed down by evil desires, how many held down by the sore evil of
wantonness, and have quenched the light of the Spirit. Hence it comes that they
see one thing instead of another, hear one thing instead of another, and take no
notice of any of the things here told them. Or if I am mistaken in saying so, and
you are awake, tell me what has been doing here this day, if you have not been
hearing this as a dream. I am indeed aware that some can tell me (and I do not
mean this of all); but do thou who comest under what has been said, who hast
come here to no purpose, tell me what Prophet, what Apostle has been
discoursing to us today? And on what subjects? And you would not have it in
your power to tell me. For you have been talking a great deal here, just as in a
dream, without hearing the realities. And this I would have said to the women
too, as there is a great deal of sleeping among them. And would it were sleep!
For he that is asleep says nothing either good or bad. But he that is awake as you
are puts forth many a word even for mischief on his own head, telling his
interest, casting up his creditor accounts, calling to memory some barefaced
bargaining, planting the thorns thick in his own soul, and not letting the seed
make even ever so little advance. But rouse yourself, and pull these thorns up by
the roots, and shake the drunkenness off: for this is the cause of the sleep. But by
drunkenness I mean, not that from wine only, but from worldly thoughts, and
with them that from wine also. (See p. 443.) And this advice I am giving not to
the rich only, but the poor too, and chiefly those that club together for social
parties. For this is not really indulgence or relaxation, but punishment and

vengeance. For indulgence lies not in speaking filthy things, but in talking
solemnly, in being filled, not being ready to burst. But if you think this is
pleasure, show me the pleasure by the evening! You can not! And hitherto I say
nothing of the mischiefs it leads to, but at present have only been speaking to
you of the pleasure that withers away so quickly. For the party is no sooner
broken up, than all that went for mirth is flown away. But when I come to
mention the spewing, and the headaches, and the numberless disorders, and the
soul's captivity, what have you to say to all this? Have we any business, because
we are poor, to behave ourselves unseemly too? And in saying this I do not
forbid your meeting together, or taking your suppers at a common table, but to
prevent your behaving unseemly, and as wishing indulgence to be really
indulgence, and not a punishment, nor a vengeance, or drunkenness and
revelling. Let the Gentiles ([ἑ] [λληνες]) see that Christians know best how to
indulge, and to indulge in an orderly way. For it says, "Rejoice in the Lord with
trembling." [Psalm 2:11] But how then can one rejoice? Why, by saying hymns,
making prayers, introducing psalms in the place of those low songs. Thus will
Christ also be at our table, and will fill the whole feast with blessing, when you
pray, when you sing spiritual songs, when you invite the poor to partake of what
is set before you, when you set much orderliness and temperance over the feast.
So you will make the party a Church, by hymning, in the room of ill-timed
shouts and cheers, the Master of all things. And tell me not, that another custom
has come to prevail, but correct what is thus amiss. "For whether you eat," it
says, "or whether ye drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God." [1
Corinthians 10:31] For from banquets of that sort you have evil desires, and
impurities, and wives come to be in disrepute, and harlots in honor among you.
Hence come the upsetting of families and evils unnumbered, and all things are
turned upside down, and you have left the pure fountain, and run to the conduit
of mire. For that an harlot's body is mire, I do not enquire of any one else but of
your own self that wallowest in the mire, if you dost not feel ashamed of
yourself, if you dost not think yourself unclean after the sin is over. Wherefore I