in parables and allegories; but that after the Lord's appearance, when he had clearly ascertained
from the words of Christ and His apostles that eternal fire has been prepared for him as he apostatized
from God of his own free-will, and likewise for all who unrepentant continue in the apostasy, he
now blasphemes, by means of such men, the Lord who brings judgment [upon him] as being already
condemned, and imputes the guilt of his apostasy to his Maker, not to his own voluntary disposition.
Just as it is with those who break the laws, when punishment overtakes them: they throw the blame
upon those who frame the laws, but not upon themselves. In like manner do those men, filled with
a satanic spirit, bring innumerable accusations against our Creator, who has both given to us the
spirit of life, and established a law adapted for all; and they will not admit that the judgment of
God is just. Wherefore also they set about imagining some other Father who neither cares about
nor exercises a providence over our affairs, nay, one who even approves of all sins.
### Chapter XXVII.—The future judgment by Christ. Communion with and separation from
the divine being. The eternal punishment of unbelievers.
1. If the Father, then, does not exercise judgment, [it follows] that judgment does not belong
to Him, or that He consents to all those actions which take place; and if He does not judge, all
persons will be equal, and accounted in the same condition. The advent of Christ will therefore be
without an object, yea, absurd, inasmuch as [in that case] He exercises no judicial power. For "He
came to divide a man against his father, and the daughter against the mother, and the daughter-in-law
against the mother-in-law;" and when two are in one bed, to take the one, and to leave the other;
and of two women grinding at the mill, to take one and leave the other: [also] at the time of the
end, to order the reapers to collect first the tares together, and bind them in bundles, and burn them
with unquenchable fire, but to gather up the wheat into the barn; and to call the lambs into the
kingdom prepared for them, but to send the goats into everlasting fire, which has been prepared by
His Father for the devil and his angels. And why is this? Has the Word come for the ruin and
for the resurrection of many? For the ruin, certainly, of those who do not believe Him, to whom
also He has threatened a greater damnation in the judgment-day than that of Sodom and Gomorrah;
but for the resurrection of believers, and those who do the will of His Father in heaven. If then the
advent of the Son comes indeed alike to all, but is for the purpose of judging, and separating the
believing from the unbelieving, since, as those who believe do His will agreeably to their own

Matt. xxv. 33, etc.