1. The Lord has taught with very great fulness, that souls not only continue to exist, not by
passing from body to body, but that they preserve the same form [in their separate state] as the
body had to which they were adapted, and that they remember the deeds which they did in this state
of existence, and from which they have now ceased,—in that narrative which is recorded respecting
the rich man and that Lazarus who found repose in the bosom of Abraham. In this account He
states that Dives knew Lazarus after death, and Abraham in like manner, and that each one of
these persons continued in his own proper position, and that [Dives] requested Lazarus to be sent
to relieve him—[Lazarus], on whom he did not [formerly] bestow even the crumbs [which fell]
from his table. [He tells us] also of the answer given by Abraham, who was acquainted not only
with what respected himself, but Dives also, and who enjoined those who did not wish to come
into that place of torment to believe Moses and the prophets, and to receive the preaching of
Him who was to rise again from the dead. By these things, then, it is plainly declared that souls
continue to exist that they do not pass from body to body, that they possess the form of a man, so
that they may be recognised, and retain the memory of things in this world; moreover, that the gift
of prophecy was possessed by Abraham, and that each class [of souls] receives a habitation such
as it has deserved, even before the judgment.
2. But if any persons at this point maintain that those souls, which only began a little while ago
to exist, cannot endure for any length of time; but that they must, on the one hand, either be unborn,
in order that they may be immortal, or if they have had a beginning in the way of generation, that
they should die with the body itself—let them learn that God alone, who is Lord of all, is without
beginning and without end, being truly and for ever the same, and always remaining the same
unchangeable Being. But all things which proceed from Him, whatsoever have been made, and are
made, do indeed receive their own beginning of generation, and on this account are inferior to Him
who formed them, inasmuch as they are not unbegotten. Nevertheless they endure, and extend their
existence into a long series of ages in accordance with the will of God their Creator; so that He
grants them that they should be thus formed at the beginning, and that they should so exist afterwards.
3. For as the heaven which is above us, the firmament, the sun, the moon, the rest of the stars,
and all their grandeur, although they had no previous existence, were called into being, and continue
throughout a long course of time according to the will of God, so also any one who thinks thus
respecting souls and spirits, and, in fact, respecting all created things, will not by any means go far
astray, inasmuch as all things that have been made had a beginning when they were formed, but
endure as long as God wills that they should have an existence and continuance. The prophetic
Irenæus here expresses an opinion like that of Tertullian in the passage referred to, and thinks that the special form (character)
mentioned is to be understood as simply denoting individual spiritual properties. But his remarks are not satisfactory.