THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.63, C.4.

relation to some particular end, to which he, who receives the
character is ordained: as has been stated concerning the military
character (Article 1) by which a soldier of the king is distinguished
from the enemy's soldier in relation to the battle. In like manner the
character of the faithful is that by which the faithful of Christ are
distinguished from the servants of the devil, either in relation to
eternal life, or in relation to the worship of the Church that now is. Of
these the former is the result of charity and grace, as the objection
runs; while the latter results from the sacramental character.
Wherefore the "character of the beast" may be understood by
opposition, to mean either the obstinate malice for which some are
assigned to eternal punishment, or the profession of an unlawful
form of worship.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.63, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the character be subjected in the powers

of the soul?
Objection 1: It seems that the character is not subjected in the
powers of the soul. For a character is said to be a disposition to
grace. But grace is subjected in the essence of the soul as we have
stated in the FS, Question 110, Article 4. Therefore it seems that the
character is in the essence of the soul and not in the powers.
Objection 2: Further, a power of the soul does not seem to be the
subject of anything save habit and disposition. But a character, as
stated above (Article 2), is neither habit nor disposition, but rather a
power: the subject of which is nothing else than the essence of the
soul. Therefore it seems that the character is not subjected in a
power of the soul, but rather in its essence.
Objection 3: Further, the powers of the soul are divided into those of
knowledge and those of appetite. But it cannot be said that a
character is only in a cognitive power, nor, again, only in an
appetitive power: since it is neither ordained to knowledge only, nor
to desire only. Likewise, neither can it be said to be in both, because
the same accident cannot be in several subjects. Therefore it seems
that a character is not subjected in a power of the soul, but rather in
the essence.
On the contrary, A character, according to its definition given above
(Article 3), is imprinted in the rational soul "by way of an image." But
the image of the Trinity in the soul is seen in the powers. Therefore a
character is in the powers of the soul.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), a character is a kind of seal
by which the soul is marked, so that it may receive, or bestow on
others, things pertaining to Divine worship. Now the Divine worship
consists in certain actions: and the powers of the soul are properly
ordained to actions, just as the essence is ordained to existence.
Therefore a character is subjected not in the essence of the soul, but
in its power.
Reply to Objection 1: The subject is ascribed to an. accident in
respect of that to which the accident disposes it proximately, but not
in respect of that to which it disposes it remotely or indirectly. Now a