FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.5.

movement of the will proceeds from a right love, as Augustine says
(De Civ. Dei xiv, 9). Hence faith may be without charity, but not as a
perfect virtue: just as temperance and fortitude can be without
prudence. The same applies to hope. Because the act of hope
consists in looking to God for future bliss. This act is perfect, if it is
based on the merits which we have; and this cannot be without
charity. But to expect future bliss through merits which one has not
yet, but which one proposes to acquire at some future time, will be
an imperfect act; and this is possible without charity. Consequently,
faith and hope can be without charity; yet, without charity, they are
not virtues properly so-called; because the nature of virtue requires
that by it, we should not only do what is good, but also that we
should do it well (Ethic. ii, 6).
Reply to Objection 1: Moral virtue depends on prudence: and not
even infused prudence has the character of prudence without
charity; for this involves the absence of due order to the first
principle, viz. the ultimate end. On the other hand faith and hope, as
such, do not depend either on prudence or charity; so that they can
be without charity, although they are not virtues without charity, as
stated.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument is true of faith considered as a
perfect virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine is speaking here of that hope
whereby we look to gain future bliss through merits which we have
already; and this is not without charity.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether charity can be without faith and hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity can be without faith and
hope. For charity is the love of God. But it is possible for us to love
God naturally, without already having faith, or hope in future bliss.
Therefore charity can be without faith and hope.
Objection 2: Further, charity is the root of all the virtues, according
to Eph. 3:17: "Rooted and founded in charity." Now the root is
sometimes without branches. Therefore charity can sometimes be
without faith and hope, and the other virtues.
Objection 3: Further, there was perfect charity in Christ. And yet He
had neither faith nor hope: because He was a perfect comprehensor,
as we shall explain further on (TP, Question 7, Articles 3,4).
Therefore charity can be without faith and hope.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 11:6): "Without faith it is
impossible to please God"; and this evidently belongs most to
charity, according to Prov. 8:17: "I love them that love me." Again, it
is by hope that we are brought to charity, as stated above (Question
62, Article 4). Therefore it is not possible to have charity without faith
and hope.
I answer that, Charity signifies not only the love of God, but also a
certain friendship with Him; which implies, besides love, a certain
mutual return of love, together with mutual communion, as stated in
Ethic. viii, 2. That this belongs to charity is evident from 1 Jn. 4:16:
"He that abideth in charity, abideth in God, and God in him," and
from 1 Cor. 1:9, where it is written: "God is faithful, by Whom you are
called unto the fellowship of His Son." Now this fellowship of man
with God, which consists in a certain familiar colloquy with Him, is
begun here, in this life, by grace, but will be perfected in the future
life, by glory; each of which things we hold by faith and hope.
Wherefore just as friendship with a person would be impossible, if
one disbelieved in, or despaired of, the possibility of their fellowship
or familiar colloquy; so too, friendship with God, which is charity, is
impossible without faith, so as to believe in this fellowship and
colloquy with God, and to hope to attain to this fellowship. Therefore
charity is quite impossible without faith and hope.