But now He says not this, "Give ye them to eat," but what? "I have
compassion on them, and will not send them away fasting;" bringing the
disciples nearer, and provoking them more, and granting them clearer sight, to
ask these things of Him. For in truth they were the words of one signifying that
He has power not to send them away fasting; of one manifesting His authority.
For the expression, "I will not," implies such a purpose in Him.
2. Since however they still spoke of the multitude merely, and the place,
and the wilderness (for "whence," it is said, "should we have in a wilderness so
many loaves, as to fill so great a multitude"?); and not even so understood what
He said, He proceeds to contribute His own part, and says unto them,
"How many loaves do you have? And they say, Seven, and a few little
fishes." [Matthew 15:34]
And they no more say, "But what are these among so many?" [John 6:9] as
they had said before. So that although they reached not His whole meaning, yet
nevertheless they became higher by degrees. For so He too, arousing their mind
hereby, puts the question much as He had done before, that by the very form of
the inquiry He might remind them of the works already done.
But as you have seen their imperfection hereby, so observe the severity of
their spirit, and admire their love of truth, how, writing themselves, they conceal
not their own defects, great as they were. For it was no small blame to have
presently forgotten this miracle, which had so recently taken place; wherefore
they are also rebuked.
And herewith consider also their strictness in another matter, how they were
conquerors of their appetite; how disciplined to make little account of their diet.
For being in the wilderness and abiding there three days, they had seven loaves.
Now all the rest He does as on the former occasion; thus He both makes
them sit down on the ground, and He makes the loaves multiply themselves in
the hands of the disciples.
For, "He commanded," it is said, "the multitude to sit down on the ground.
And He took the seven loaves, and the fishes, and gave thanks, and broke, and

gave to His disciples, and the disciples to the multitude."
But when we come to the end, there is a difference.
For, "they did all eat," so it is said, "and were filled, and they took up of the
broken meat that was left, seven baskets full. And they that did eat were four
thousand men, besides women and children." [Matthew 15:37-38]
But why at the former time, when there were five thousand, did twelve
baskets full remain over and above, whereas here, when there were four
thousand, it was seven baskets full? For what purpose, I say, and by what cause,
were the remnants less, the guests not being so many?
Either then one may say this, that the baskets on this last occasion were
greater than those used before, or if this were not so, lest the equality of the
miracle should again cast them into forgetfulness, He rouses their recollection by
the difference, that by the variation they might be reminded of both one and the
other. Accordingly, in that case, He makes the baskets full of fragments equal in
number to His disciples, in this, the other baskets equal to the loaves; indicating
even hereby His unspeakable power, and the ease wherewith He exercised His
authority, in that it was possible for Him to work such miracles, both in this way
and in the other. For neither was it of small power, to maintain the exact number,
both then and now; then when there were five thousand, now when there were
four thousand; and not suffer the remnants to be more than the baskets used on
the one occasion or on the other, although the number of the guests was
different.
And the end again was like the former. For as then He left the multitude and
withdrew in a ship, so also now; and John also says this. [John 6:17] For since
no sign did so work upon them to follow Him, as the miracle of the loaves; and
they were minded not only to follow Him, but also to make Him a king;
[John 6:15] avoiding all suspicion of usurping royalty, He hastens away after this
work of wonder: and He does not even go away afoot, lest they should follow
Him, but by entering into a ship.
"And He sent away the multitudes," so it says, "and went on board the ship,