that of one assigning something. It shows that death itself in holding Him had
pangs as in travail, and was sore bestead: whereas, by pains, or, travail-pangs, of
death, the Old Testament means danger and disaster: and that He so rose as
never more to die. For the assertion, "Seeing that it was not possible that He
should be holden of it," means this, that His rising was not common to the rest.
Then, however, before their thoughts can enter at all into his meaning, he brings
David upon them, an authority which sets aside all human reasoning. "For David
says (with reference) to Him." [Acts 2:25] And observe how, once more, the
testimony is lowly. For therefore he begins the citation further up, with the
matters of lowlier import: therefore was death not in the number of grievous
things [because], says he, "I foresaw the Lord always before my face, that He is
on my right hand that I should not be moved:" [Acts 2:25-27] and, "that You will
not leave my soul in hell." Then, having finished the citation from the Prophet,
he adds; "Men and brethren." [Acts 2:29] When he is about to say anything
great, he uses this opening address, to rouse and to conciliate them. "Let me be
allowed," he says, "to speak freely to you of the patriarch David." Remarkable
lowliness, in a case where he was giving no hurt, nor was there any reason why
the hearers should be angry. For he did not say, This is not said concerning
David, but concerning the Christ. But in another point of view: by his reverential
expression towards the blessed David, he awed them; speaking of an
acknowledged fact as if it were a bold thing to say, and therefore begging them
to pardon him for saying it. And thereupon his expression is not simply
"concerning David," but "concerning the patriarch David, that he is both dead
and buried:" he does not also say, "and is not risen again," but in another way
(though this too would have been no great thing to say), "And his sepulchre is
with us unto this day," he has said what comes to the same thing. Then— and
even so he does not come to the mention of Christ, but what next?— he goes on
with his encomium upon David, "Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that
with an oath God had sworn unto him." [Acts 2:30] But this he says, that were it
but on account of the honor shown to David, and the descent from him, they may

accept what is said concerning Christ's resurrection, as seeing that it would be an
injury to the prophecy, and a derogating from ([τἥς εἰς αὐτοὺς τιμἥς]) their
honor, if this were not the fact. "And knowing," he says, "that with an oath God
had sworn unto him"— he does not say simply "promised"— "of the fruit of his
loins after the flesh to raise up Christ, to seat Him upon his throne." Observe
how he has again only hinted at what is sublime. For now that he has soothed
them with his expression, he confidently adds this: The prophet [says it] "of His
resurrection, that neither was His soul left in hell, nor did His flesh see
corruption." [Acts 2:31] This again is wonderful: it shows that His resurrection
was not like that of other men. For though death laid hold on Him, yet it did not
its own work then.— And, as regards the sin, he has spoken of that, covertly and
darkly; of the punishment, he forbore to add anything; but that they had slain
Him, this he has spoken out; for the rest he now comes to the sign given by God.
And when it is once proved, that He, the slain, was just, was dear to God, then,
though thou be silent of the punishment, be sure that he which did the sin will
condemn himself more than ever you can condemn him. So then, that he refers
all to the Father, is in order that they may receive what is said: and that assertion,
"Not possible," he fetches in from the prophecy. Well then, let us again look over
what has been said.
"Jesus of Nazareth, a man proved (to be sent) from God unto you."
[Recapitulation of Acts 2:22-31]: one, of whom, by reason of His works, there
can be no doubt; but who, on the contrary, is demonstrated. Thus also
Nicodemus said, "No man can do these miracles which Thou doest— By
miracles, and wonders, and signs which God wrought by Him in the midst of
you" [John 3:2]: not secretly. Setting out from facts notorious to those whom he
was addressing, he then comes to things hidden. Thereupon [in saying, "By the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,"] [Acts 2:23] he shows that it
was not because they had the power to do it, and that there was a wisdom and a
Divine arrangement in the event, seeing it was from God. He rapidly passes over
the unpleasant part, [adding, "Whom God raised up," etc.] [Acts 2:24]. For it is