John 4:10
"If you knew the gift of God and who it is that says to you, Give Me to drink, you
would have asked of Him, and He would have given you living water."
First, He shows that she is worthy to hear and not to be overlooked, and
then He reveals Himself. For she, as soon as she had learned who He was, would
straightway hearken and attend to Him; which none can say of the Jews, for they,
when they had learned, asked nothing of Him, nor did they desire to be informed
on any profitable matter, but insulted and drove Him away. But when the woman
had heard these words, observe how gently she answers:

John 4:11
"Sir, you have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep; from whence then have
you that living water?"
Already He has raised her from her low opinion of Him, and from deeming
that He is a common man. For not without a reason does she here call Him,
"Lord"; but assigning to Him high honor. That she spoke these words to honor
Him, is plain from what is said afterwards, since she did not laugh nor mock, but
doubted for a while. And wonder not if she did not at once perceive all, for
neither did Nicodemus. What says he? "How can these things be?" and again,
"How can a man be born when he is old?" and again, "Can he enter the second
time into his mother's womb, and be born?" But this woman more reverently:
"Sir, you have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep; from whence then have
you that living water?" Christ said one thing, and she imagined another, hearing
nothing beyond the words, and as yet unable to form any lofty thought. Yet, had
she spoken hastily, she might have said, "If you had had that living water, you
would not have asked of me, but wouldest rather have provided for yourself. You
are but a boaster." But she said nothing like this; she answers with much
gentleness, both at first and afterwards. For at first she says, "How is it that thou,
being a Jew, ask drink of me?" she says not, as though speaking to an alien and
an enemy, "Far be it from me to give to you, who art a foe and a stranger to our
nation." And afterwards again, when she heard Him utter great words, a thing at
which enemies are most annoyed, she did not mock nor deride ; but what says
she?

John 4:12
"Are you greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank
thereof himself, and his children, and his cattle?"
Observe how she thrusts herself into the noble stock of the Jews. For what
she says is somewhat of this kind: "Jacob used this water, and had nothing better
to give us." And this she said showing that from the first answer (of Christ) she
had conceived a great and sublime thought; for by the words, "he drank thereof
himself, and his children, and his cattle," she implies nothing else, than that she
had a notion of a better Water, but that she never found it, nor clearly knew it.
More clearly to explain what she means to say, the sense of her words is this:
"You can not assert that Jacob gave us this well, and used another himself; for
he and his children drank of this one, which they would not have done if they had
had another and a better. Now of the water of this well it is not in your power to
give me, and you can not have another and a better, unless thou dost confess that
you are greater than Jacob. Whence then have you that water which you promise
that you will give us?" The Jews did not converse with Him thus mildly, and yet
He spoke to them on the same subject, making mention of the like water, but
they profited nothing; and when He made mention of Abraham, they even
attempted to stone Him. Not so does this woman approach Him; but with much
gentleness, in the midst of the heat, at noon, she with much patience says and
hears all, and does not so much as think of what the Jews most probably would
have asserted, that "This fellow is mad, and beside himself: he has tied me to this
fount and well, giving me nothing, but using big words"; no, she endures and
perseveres until she has found what she seeks.
5. If now a woman of Samaria is so earnest to learn something profitable, if
she abides by Christ though not as yet knowing Him, what pardon shall we
obtain, who both knowing Him, and being not by a well, nor in a desert place,
nor at noon-day, nor beneath the scorching sunbeams, but at morning-tide, and