befallen the angels in their assumed bodies; for it is related: "After
the sons of God went in to the daughters of men, and they brought
forth children, these are the mighty men of old, men of renown" (Gn.
6:4). Consequently the angels exercised vital functions in their
assumed bodies.
On the contrary, The bodies assumed by angels have no life, as was
stated in the previous article (ad 3). Therefore they cannot exercise
functions of life through assumed bodies.
I answer that, Some functions of living subjects have something in
common with other operations; just as speech, which is the function
of a living creature, agrees with other sounds of inanimate things, in
so far as it is sound; and walking agrees with other movements, in
so far as it is movement. Consequently vital functions can be
performed in assumed bodies by the angels, as to that which is
common in such operations; but not as to that which is special to
living subjects; because, according to the Philosopher (De Somn. et
Vig. i), "that which has the faculty has the action." Hence nothing
can have a function of life except what has life, which is the potential
principle of such action.
Reply to Objection 1: As it is in no wise contrary to truth for
intelligible things to be set forth in Scripture under sensible figures,
since it is not said for the purpose of maintaining that intelligible
things are sensible, but in order that properties of intelligible things
may be understood according to similitude through sensible figures;
so it is not contrary to the truth of the holy angels that through their
assumed bodies they appear to be living men, although they are
really not. For the bodies are assumed merely for this purpose, that
the spiritual properties and works of the angels may be manifested
by the properties of man and of his works. This could not so fittingly
be done if they were to assume true men; because the properties of
such men would lead us to men, and not to angels.
Reply to Objection 2: Sensation is entirely a vital function.
Consequently it can in no way be said that the angels perceive
through the organs of their assumed bodies. Yet such bodies are not
fashioned in vain; for they are not fashioned for the purpose of
sensation through them, but to this end, that by such bodily organs
the spiritual powers of the angels may be made manifest; just as by
the eye the power of the angel's knowledge is pointed out, and other
powers by the other members, as Dionysius teaches (Coel. Hier.).

Reply to Objection 3: Movement coming from a united mover is a
proper function of life; but the bodies assumed by the angels are not
thus moved, since the angels are not their forms. Yet the angels are
moved accidentally, when such bodies are moved, since they are in
them as movers are in the moved; and they are here in such a way as
not to be elsewhere which cannot be said of God. Accordingly,
although God is not moved when the things are moved in which He
exists, since He is everywhere; yet the angels are moved
accidentally according to the movement of the bodies assumed. But
they are not moved according to the movement of the heavenly
bodies, even though they be in them as the movers in the thing
moved, because the heavenly bodies do not change place in their
entirety; nor for the spirit which moves the world is there any fixed
locality according to any restricted part of the world's substance,
which now is in the east, and now in the west, but according to a
fixed quarter; because "the moving energy is always in the east," as
stated in Phys. viii, text 84.
Reply to Objection 4: Properly speaking, the angels do not talk
through their assumed bodies; yet there is a semblance of speech, in
so far as they fashion sounds in the air like to human voices.
Reply to Objection 5: Properly speaking, the angels cannot be said
to eat, because eating involves the taking of food convertible into the
substance of the eater.
Although after the Resurrection food was not converted into the
substance of Christ's body, but resolved into pre-existing matter;
nevertheless Christ had a body of such a true nature that food could
be changed into it; hence it was a true eating. But the food taken by
angels was neither changed into the assumed body, nor was the
body of such a nature that food could be changed into it;
consequently, it was not a true eating, but figurative of spiritual
eating. This is what the angel said to Tobias: "When I was with you, I
seemed indeed to eat and to drink; but I use an invisible meat and
drink" (Tob. 12:19).
Abraham offered them food, deeming them to be men, in whom,
nevertheless, he worshipped God, as God is wont to be in the
prophets, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xvi).