lameness, it is easy to become upright: but if we turn out of the way, what will be
left? For it is to those who have not yet fallen that he thus discourses, striking
them with terror, and says that it is not possible for him who is fallen to obtain
consolation; but to those who have fallen, that they may not fall into despair, he
says the contrary, speaking thus, "My little children, of whom I travail in birth
again, until Christ he formed in you." [Galatians 4:19] And again, "Whosoever
of you are justified by the Law, are fallen from Grace." [Galatians 5:4] Lo! He
testifies that they had fallen away. For he that stands, hearing that it is not
possible to obtain pardon after having fallen, will be more zealous, and more
cautious about his standing: if however thou use the same violence towards one
also who is fallen, he will never rise again. For by what hope will he show forth
the change?
But he not only wept (you say), but also "sought earnestly." He does not
then exclude repentance; but makes them careful not to fall.
4. As many then as do not believe in Hell, let them call these things to
mind: as many as think to sin without being punished, let them take account of
these things. Why did Esau not obtain pardon? Because he repented not as he
ought. Would you see perfect repentance? Hear of the repentance of Peter after
his denial. For the Evangelist in relating to us the things concerning him, says,
"And he went out and wept bitterly." [Matthew 26:75] Therefore even such a sin
was forgiven him, because he repented as he ought. Although the Victim had not
yet been offered, nor had The Sacrifice as yet been made, nor was sin as yettaken away, it still had the rule and sovereignty.
And that you may learn, that this denial [arose] not so much from sloth, as
from His being forsaken of God, who was teaching him to know the measures of
man and not to contradict the sayings of the Master, nor to be more high-minded
than the rest, but to know that nothing can be done without God, and that
"Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain who build it" [Psalm 127:1]:
therefore also Christ said to him alone, "Satan desired to sift you as wheat," and
I allowed it not, "that your faith may not fail." [Luke 22:31-32] For since it was

likely that he would be high-minded, being conscious to himself that he loved
Christ more than they all, therefore "he wept bitterly"; and he did other things
after his weeping, of the same character. For what did he do? After this he
exposed himself to dangers innumerable, and by many means showed his
manliness and courage.
Judas also repented, but in an evil way: for he hanged himself. Esau too
repented; as I said; or rather, he did not even repent; for his tears were not [tears]
of repentance, but rather of pride and wrath. And what followed proved this. The
blessed David repented, thus saying, "Every night will I wash my bed: I will
water my couch with my tears." [Psalm 6:6] And the sin which had been
committed long ago, after so many years, after so many generations he bewailed,
as if it had recently occurred.
5. For he who repents ought not to be angry, nor to be fierce, but to be
contrite, as one condemned, as not having boldness, as one on whom sentence
has been passed, as one who ought to be saved by mercy alone, as one who has
shown himself ungrateful toward his Benefactor, as unthankful, as reprobate, as
worthy of punishments innumerable. If he considers these things, he will not be
angry, he will not be indignant, but will mourn, will weep, will groan, and
lament night and day.
He that is penitent ought never to forget his sin, but on the one hand, to
beseech God not to remember it; while on the other, he himself never forgets it.
If we remember it, God will forget it. Let us exact punishment from ourselves;
let us accuse ourselves; thus shall we propitiate the Judge. For sin confessed
becomes less, but not confessed worse. For if sin add to itself shamelessness and
ingratitude, how will he who does not know that he sinned before be at all able
to guard himself from falling again into the same [evils]?
Let us then not deny [our sins], I beseech you, nor be shameless, that we
may not unwillingly pay the penalty. Cain heard God say, "Where is Abel your
brother? And he said, I know not; am I my brother's keeper?" [Genesis 4:9] Do
you see how this made his sin more grievous? But his father did not act thus.