FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.3.

Holy Ghost, for the reason already given.
Reply to Objection 3: Whether we consider human reason as
perfected in its natural perfection, or as perfected by the theological
virtues, it does not know all things, nor all possible things.
Consequently it is unable to avoid folly and other like things
mentioned in the objection. God, however, to Whose knowledge and
power all things are subject, by His motion safeguards us from all
folly, ignorance, dullness of mind and hardness of heart, and the
rest. Consequently the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which make us
amenable to His promptings, are said to be given as remedies to
these defects.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the gifts of the Holy Ghost are habits?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gifts of the Holy Ghost are not
habits. Because a habit is a quality abiding in man, being defined as
"a quality difficult to remove," as stated in the Predicaments
(Categor. vi). Now it is proper to Christ that the gifts of the Holy
Ghost rest in Him, as stated in Is. 11:2,3: "He upon Whom thou shalt
see the Spirit descending and remaining upon Him, He it is that
baptizeth"; on which words Gregory comments as follows (Moral. ii,
27): "The Holy Ghost comes upon all the faithful; but, in a singular
way, He dwells always in the Mediator." Therefore the gifts of the
Holy Ghost are not habits.
Objection 2: Further, the gifts of the Holy Ghost perfect man
according as he is moved by the Spirit of God, as stated above
(Articles 1,2). But in so far as man is moved by the Spirit of God, he
is somewhat like an instrument in His regard. Now to be perfected by
a habit is befitting, not an instrument, but a principal agent.
Therefore the gifts of the Holy Ghost are not habits.
Objection 3: Further, as the gifts of the Holy Ghost are due to Divine
inspiration, so is the gift of prophecy. Now prophecy is not a habit:
for "the spirit of prophecy does not always reside in the prophets,"
as Gregory states (Hom. i in Ezechiel). Neither, therefore, are the
gifts of the Holy Ghost.
On the contrary, Our Lord in speaking of the Holy Ghost said to His
disciples (Jn. 14:17): "He shall abide with you, and shall be in you."
Now the Holy Ghost is not in a man without His gifts. Therefore His
gifts abide in man. Therefore they are not merely acts or passions
but abiding habits.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the gifts are perfections of
man, whereby he becomes amenable to the promptings of the Holy
Ghost. Now it is evident from what has been already said (Question
56, Article 4; Question 58, Article 2), that the moral virtues perfect the
appetitive power according as it partakes somewhat of the reason, in
so far, to wit, as it has a natural aptitude to be moved by the
command of reason. Accordingly the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as
compared with the Holy Ghost Himself, are related to man, even as
the moral virtues, in comparison with the reason, are related to the