Himself given him the law; but delivers him from the charge, and turns the
whole upon their head, as everywhere He does.
For again when they were blaming His disciples for plucking the ears of
grain, He shows themselves to be guilty; and when they were laying a
transgression to their charge as to their not washing their hands, He shows
themselves to be the transgressors, and touching the Sabbath also: both
everywhere, and here in like manner.
Then because the saying was hard to bear, and brought on them much
blame, He quickly directs back His discourse to that ancient law, saying as He
had said before also, "But in the beginning it was not so," that is, God by His
acts at the beginning ordained the contrary. For in order that they may not say,
Whence is it manifest, that "for our hardness Moses said this?" hereby again He
stops their mouths. For if this were the primary law, and for our good, that other
would not have been given at the beginning; God in creating would not have so
created, He would not have said such things.
"But I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife except it be for
fornication, and marry another, commits adultery." For since he had stopped
their mouths, He then gives the law with His own authority, like as touching the
meats, like as touching the Sabbath.
For with regard to the meats likewise, when He had overcome them, then,
and not till then, He declared unto the multitude, that, "Not that which goes in
defiles the man;" [Matthew 15:11] and with regard to the Sabbath, when He had
stopped their mouths, He says, "Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath
day;" [Matthew 12:12] and here this self-same thing.
But what took place there, this happened here also. For as there, when the
Jews had been put to silence the disciples were troubled, and came unto Him
with Peter and said, "Declare unto us this parable;" [Matthew 15:15] even so
now also they were troubled and said, "If the case of the man be so, it is good not
to marry."
For now they understood the saying more than before. Therefore then

indeed they held their peace, but now when there has been gainsaying, and
answering, and question, and learning by reply, and the law appeared more clear,
they ask Him. And openly to contradict they do not dare, but they bring forward
what seemed to be a grievous and galling result of it, saying, "If the case of the
man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry." For indeed it seemed to be a
very hard thing to have a wife full of every bad quality, and to endure a wild
beast perpetually shut up with one in the house. And that you may learn that this
greatly troubled them, Mark said, [Mark 10:10] to show it, that they spoke to
Him privately.
3. But what is, "If such be the case of a man with his wife?" That is, if to
this end he is joined with her, that they should be one, or, on the other hand, if
the man shall get to himself blame for these things, and always transgresses by
putting away, it were easier to fight against natural desire and against one's self,
than against a wicked woman.
What then says Christ? He said not, "yea, it is easier, and so do," lest they
should suppose that the thing is a law; but He subjoined, "Not all men receive it,
but they to whom it is given," [Matthew 19:11] raising the thing, and showing
that it is great, and in this way drawing them on, and urging them.
But see herein a contradiction. For He indeed says this is a great thing; but
they, that it is easier. For it was meet that both these things should be done, and
that it should be at once acknowledged a great thing by Him, that it might render
them more forward, and by the things said by themselves it should be shown to
be easier, that on this ground too they might the rather choose virginity and
continence. For since to speak of virginity seemed to be grievous, by the
constraint of this law He drove them to this desire. Then to show the possibility
of it, He says, "There are some eunuchs, who were so born from their mother's
womb, there are some eunuchs which were made eunuchs of men, and there be
eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of Heaven's
sake," [Matthew 19:12] by these words secretly leading them to choose the
thing, and establishing the possibility of this virtue, and all but saying, Consider