perfection, whereby it will become adapted to that subjection: and
this perfection is called "the gift of the glorified body." Now the soul
is united to body not only as its form, but also as its mover; and in
both ways the glorified body must needs be most perfectly subject
to the glorified soul. Wherefore even as by the gift of subtlety the
body is wholly subject to the soul as its form, whence it derives its
specific being, so by the gift of agility it is subject to the soul as its
mover, so that it is prompt and apt to obey the spirit in all the
movements and actions of the soul.
Some, however, ascribe the cause of this agility to the fifth, i.e. the
heavenly essence, which will then be predominant in the glorified
bodies. But of this we have frequently observed that it does not
seem probable (Question 82, Article 1; Question 83, Article 1).
Wherefore it is better to ascribe it to the soul, whence glory flows to
the body.
Reply to Objection 1: Glorified bodies are said to be borne by the
angels and also on the clouds, not as though they needed them, but
in order to signify the reverence which both angels and all creatures
will show them.
Reply to Objection 2: The more the power of the moving soul
dominates over the body, the less is the labor of movement, even
though it be counter to the body's nature. Hence those in whom the
motive power is stronger, and those who through exercise have the
body more adapted to obey the moving spirit, labor less in being
moved. And since, after the resurrection, the soul will perfectly
dominate the body, both on account of the perfection of its own
power, and on account of the glorified body's aptitude resulting from
the outflow of glory which it receives from the soul, there will be no
labor in the saints' movements, and thus it may be said that the
bodies of the saints' will be agile.
Reply to Objection 3: By the gift of agility the glorified body will be
rendered apt not only for local movement but also for sensation, and
for the execution of all the other operations of the soul.
Reply to Objection 4: Even as nature gives to fleeter animals
instruments of a different disposition in shape and quantity, so God
will give to the bodies of the saints a disposition other than that
which they have now, not indeed in shape and quantity, but in that

property of glory which is called agility.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the saints will never use their agility for

the purpose of movement?
Objection 1: It would seem that the saints will never use their agility
for the purpose of movement. For, according to the Philosopher
(Phys. iii, 2), "movement is the act of the imperfect." But there will be
no imperfection in glorified bodies. Neither therefore will there be
any movement.
Objection 2: Further, all movement is on account of some need,
because whatever is in motion is moved for the sake of obtaining
some end. But glorified bodies will have no need, since as Augustine
says (De Spiritu et Anima, lxiii [Question 70, Article 2, ad 1]), "all thou
willest will be there, and nothing that thou willest not." Therefore
they will not move.
Objection 3: Further, according to the Philosopher (De Coelo et
Mundo ii), "that which shares the Divine goodness without
movement shares it more excellently than that which shares it with
movement." Now the glorified body shares the Divine goodness
more excellently than any other body. Since then certain bodies, like
the heavenly bodies, will remain altogether without movement, it
seems that much more will human bodies remain so.
Objection 4: Further, Augustine says (De Vera Relig. xii) that the soul
being established in God will in consequence establish its body.
Now the soul will be so established in God, that in no way will it
move away from Him. Therefore in the body there will be no
movement caused by the soul.
Objection 5: Further, the more noble a body is, the more noble a
place is due to it: wherefore Christ's body which is the most exalted
of all has the highest place of all, according to Heb. 7:26, "Made
higher than the heavens," where a gloss says, "in place and dignity."
And again each glorified body will, in like manner, have a place
befitting it according to the measure of its dignity. Now a fitting place
is one of the conditions pertaining to glory. Since then after the
resurrection the glory of the saints will never vary, neither by
increase nor by decrease, because they will then have reached the
final term of all, it would seem that their bodies will never leave the
place assigned to them, and consequently will not be moved.