we alone are in peril; for you also," says he, "are partakers of the same
sufferings." Thus then, by admitting them to be partakers in the perils and
ascribing to them the cause of their own comfort, he softens what he says. If then
we be beset by craft , be of good cheer; we endure this that your faith may grow
in strength. And if we be comforted, glory in this also; for we enjoy this too for
your sakes, that thereby ye may receive some encouragement by sharing in our
joy. And that the comfort he here speaks of is that which they enjoyed not only
from being comforted by themselves, (the Apostles) but also from knowing them
(the Apostles) to be at rest, hear him declaring in what follows next, "Knowing
that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so also are you of the comfort." For
as when we suffer persecution, you are in distress as though yourselves so
suffering; so are we sure that when we are comforted, you think the enjoyment
also your own. What more humble-minded than this spirit? He who so greatly
surpasses in perils, calls them "partakers," who endured no part of them
whatever ; while of the comfort he ascribes the whole cause to them, not to his
own labors.
3. Next, having spoken before only generally of troubles, he now makes
mention of the place too where they (Ben. he) endured them.

2 Corinthians 1:8
"For we would not, Brethren, have you ignorant concerning our affliction
which befell us in Asia."
"These things we speak," says he, "that you may not be ignorant of what
befell us; for we wish, yea have earnestly endeavored, that you should know our
affairs:" which is a very high proof of love. Of this even in the former Epistle he
had before given notice, where he said, "For a great door and effectual is
opened to me at Ephesus, and there are many adversaries." [1 Corinthians 16:89] Putting them then in mind of this, and recounting how much he suffered, he
says, "I would not have you ignorant of our affliction which befell us in Asia."
And in his Epistle to the Ephesians too he said the same. For having sent
Tychicus to them, he gives this as the reason of his journey: whence he says,
"But that you also may know my affairs, and how I do, Tychicus, the beloved
brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all things;
whom I have sent unto you for this very purpose, that you may know our state,
and that he may comfort your hearts." [Ephesians 6:21-22] And in other Epistles
also he does the very same. Nor is it superfluous, but even exceedingly
necessary: both because of his exceeding affection for the disciples, and because
of their continued trials; wherein the knowledge of each other's fortunes was a
very great comfort; so that if these were calamitous, they might be prepared both
to be energetic and to be safer against falling; or if these were good, they might
rejoice with them. He here, however, speaks as well of being delivered from
trials as of being assaulted by them, saying, "We were weighed down
exceedingly, beyond our power." Like a vessel sinking under some mighty
burden. He may seem to have said, only one thing here "exceedingly" and
"beyond our power:" it is, however, not one but two; for lest one should object,
"What then? Granting the peril were exceeding, yet it was not great to you;" he