SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.149, C.3.

properly speaking, because morals take their species not from
things that occur accidentally and beside the intention, but from that
which is directly intended. In this way drunkenness is a mortal sin,
because then a man willingly and knowingly deprives himself of the
use of reason, whereby he performs virtuous deeds and avoids sin,
and thus he sins mortally by running the risk of falling into sin. For
Ambrose says (De Patriarch. [De Abraham i.]): "We learn that we
should shun drunkenness, which prevents us from avoiding
grievous sins. For the things we avoid when sober, we unknowingly
commit through drunkenness." Therefore drunkenness, properly
speaking, is a mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 1: Assiduity makes drunkenness a mortal sin, not
on account of the mere repetition of the act, but because it is
impossible for a man to become drunk assiduously, without
exposing himself to drunkenness knowingly and willingly, since he
has many times experienced the strength of wine and his own
liability to drunkenness.
Reply to Objection 2: To take more meat or drink than is necessary
belongs to the vice of gluttony, which is not always a mortal sin: but
knowingly to take too much drink to the point of being drunk, is a
mortal sin. Hence Augustine says (Confess. x, 31): "Drunkenness is
far from me: Thou wilt have mercy, that it come not near me. But full
feeding sometimes hath crept upon Thy servant."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 141, Article 6), meat
and drink should be moderate in accordance with the demands of
the body's health. Wherefore, just as it happens sometimes that the
meat and drink which are moderate for a healthy man are
immoderate for a sick man, so too it may happen conversely, that
what is excessive for a healthy man is moderate for one that is ailing.
In this way when a man eats or drinks much at the physician's advice
in order to provoke vomiting, he is not to be deemed to have taken
excessive meat or drink. There is, however, no need for intoxicating
drink in order to procure vomiting, since this is caused by drinking
lukewarm water: wherefore this is no sufficient cause for excusing a
man from drunkenness.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.149, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.149, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether drunkenness is the gravest of sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that drunkenness is the gravest of sins.
For Chrysostom says (Hom. lviii in Matth.) that "nothing gains the
devil's favor so much as drunkenness and lust, the mother of all the
vices." And it is written in the Decretals (Dist. xxxv, can. Ante
omnia): "Drunkenness, more than anything else, is to be avoided by
the clergy, for it foments and fosters all the vices."
Objection 2: Further, from the very fact that a thing excludes the
good of reason, it is a sin. Now this is especially the effect of
drunkenness. Therefore drunkenness is the greatest of sins.
Objection 3: Further, the gravity of a sin is shown by the gravity of
its punishment. Now seemingly drunkenness is punished most
severely; for Ambrose says [De Elia et de Jejunio v] that "there
would be no slavery, were there no drunkards." Therefore
drunkenness is the greatest of sins.
On the contrary, According to Gregory (Moral. xxxiii, 12), spiritual
vices are greater than carnal vices. Now drunkenness is one of the
carnal vices. Therefore it is not the greatest of sins.
I answer that, A thing is said to be evil because it removes a good.
Wherefore the greater the good removed by an evil, the graver the
evil. Now it is evident that a Divine good is greater than a human
good. Wherefore the sins that are directly against God are graver
than the sin of drunkenness, which is directly opposed to the good
of human reason.
Reply to Objection 1: Man is most prone to sins of intemperance,
because such like concupiscences and pleasures are connatural to
us, and for this reason these sins are said to find greatest favor with
the devil, not for being graver than other sins, but because they
occur more frequently among men.
Reply to Objection 2: The good of reason is hindered in two ways: in
one way by that which is contrary to reason, in another by that which
takes away the use of reason. Now that which is contrary to reason
has more the character of an evil, than that which takes away the use
of reason for a time, since the use of reason, which is taken away by