manifested by what follows.
For He brought in also a prophecy, to confirm their desolation, saying, "But
when you shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the
prophet, standing in the holy place, let him that reads understand." He referred
them to Daniel. And by "abomination" He means the statue of him who then
took the city, which he who desolated the city and the temple placed within the
temple, wherefore Christ calls it, "of desolation." Moreover, in order that they
might learn that these things will be while some of them are alive, therefore He
said, "When ye see the abomination of desolation."
3. Whence one may most marvel at Christ's power, and their courage, for
that they preached in such times, in which most especially the Jewish state was
warred against, in which most especially men regarded them as movers of
sedition, when Cæsar commanded all of them to be driven away. [Acts 18:2]
And the result was the same as if any one (when the sea was stirred up on every
side, and darkness was filling all the air, and successive shipwrecks taking place,
and when all their fellow-sailors were at strife above, and monsters were rising
up from beneath, and with the waves devouring the mariners, and thunderbolts
falling, and their being pirates, and those in the vessel plotting one against
another), were to command men inexperienced in sailing, and who had not so
much as seen the sea to sit at the rudder, and to guide and fight the vessel, and
when an immense fleet was coming against them with a great array, making use
of a single bark, with her crew in this disturbed state, to sink and subdue the
fleet. For indeed by the heathens they were hated as Jews, and by the Jews were
stoned, as waging war against their laws; and nowhere could they stand.
Thus were all things, precipices, and reefs, and rocks, the things in the
cities, the things in the fields, the things in the houses, and every single person
was at war with them; generals and rulers, and private persons, and all nations,
and all people, and a turmoil which cannot be set forth by words. For the Jewish
race was exceedingly detestable to the government of the Romans, as having
occasioned them endless trouble; and not even from this did the preaching of the

word take hurt; but the city was stormed and set on fire, and involved its
inhabitants in countless evils; but the apostles that came from thence,
introducing new laws, prevailed even over the Romans.
O strange and wonderful facts! Countless myriads of Jews did the Romans
then subdue, and they did not prevail over twelve men fighting against them
naked and unarmed. What language can set forth this miracle? For they that
teach need to have these two things, to be worthy of credit, and to be beloved by
them whom they are instructing; and together with these, and besides them, that
their sayings should be easy of reception, and the time should be free from
trouble and tumults.
But then were all the contraries to these. For while they did not seem
worthy of credit, they were withdrawing from such as did seem worthy of it,
those who had been deceived by them. So far from being loved, they were even
hated, and were taking men away from what they loved, both habits, and
hereditary customs, and laws.
Again, their injunctions had great difficulty; but the things, from which they
were withdrawing men, much pleasure. And many were the perils, many the
deaths, both themselves and they that obeyed them underwent, and together with
all this, the time also occasioned them much difficulty, teeming with wars,
tumults, disturbance, so that, even if there had been none of the things we have
mentioned, it would have quite thrown all things into confusion.
We have good occasion to say, "Who shall tell the mighty works of the Lord,
and make all His praises to be heard." For if his own people amid signs
hearkened not to Moses, because of the clay only, and the bricks; who persuaded
these that every day were beaten and slain, and were suffering incurable evils, to
leave a quiet life, and to prefer thereto this which was teeming with blood and
death, and that when they who preached it were strangers to them, and very
hostile in every way? For I say not unto nations and cities and people, but into a
small house let one bring in him that is hated of all that are in the house, and by
him endeavor to bring them away from those whom they love, from father, and