experience of disaster, were overturned by a mere rumour, and dropped at once
all the philosophy we were meditating.
3. What think you are now my thoughts? How should I conceal—yea, bury
myself? How must I blush with shame? If I had not been forcibly urged by our
Fathers, I would not have arisen, I would not have spoken, while my mind was
darkened with sadness because of your pusillanimity. But neither now have I
been able to recover myself; since anger and sorrow have laid such seige to my
soul. For who would not feel provoked and indignant, that after so much
teaching ye should need the instructions of Gentiles, that you might be
comforted and persuaded to bear in a manly way the present alarm. Pray ye
therefore that free utterance may be given us in opening our mouth; and that we
may be able to shake off this sadness, and to hold up again a little; for indeed
this shame on account of your pusillanimity has greatly depressed our spirits.
4. Lately, I addressed to your Charity many things concerning the snares
lying on all sides of us; and concerning fear and sadness, sorrow and pleasure;
and also concerning the sickle that flies down upon the houses of swearers. Now,
out of all these many matters, I would have you especially to remember what I
said respecting the "winged sickle," and its settling in the swearer's house; and
pulling down the stones and the wood, and consuming the whole mass. And
withal, take heed to this; that it is the extreme of folly to swear by taking the
Gospels, and to turn the very Law which forbids swearing into an oath; and that
it is better to suffer loss of property than to impose an oath on our neighbours;
since this is a great honour to be done to God. For when you say to God, "For
your sake I have not put such a one, who has robbed and injured me, on his
oath," God will pay you back a great recompense on account of this honour, both
here and hereafter. Say these things to others, and observe them also yourselves.
I know that in this place we become more reverent, and lay aside every evil
habit. But what is to be aimed at is, not that we be lovers of wisdom here only,
but that when we depart, we may take this reverence out with us, where we
especially need it. For those who carry water do not merely have their vessels

full when near the fountain, and empty them when they reach home, but there
they put them away with special caution, that they may not be overturned, and
their labours rendered useless. Let us all imitate these persons; and when we
come home, let us strictly retain what has been spoken; since if you here have
gotten full, but return home empty, having the vessels of your understandings
destitute of what you have heard, there will be no advantage from your
replenishment here. Show me not the wrestler in the place of exercise, but of
actual contest; and religion not at the season of hearing, but at the season of
practice.
5. Thou applaudest what is said now. When you are required to swear, then
remember all these things. If you quickly accomplish this law, we will advance
our teaching to other and greater things. Lo! This is the second year that I am
discoursing to your Charity; and I have not yet been able to explain a hundred
lines of the Scriptures. And the reason is, that you need to learn of us what ye
might reduce to practice at home, and of yourselves; and thus the greater part of
our exhortation is consumed on ethical discourse. But this ought not to have
been so; the regulation of manners you ought to have learned at home, and of
yourselves; but the sense of the Scriptures, and the speculations upon them, you
might commit to us. If, however, it were necessary that you should hear such
things of us, there was no need of more than one day: for what there is to be said
is of no diversified or difficult character, or such as requires any elaboration. For
when God declares His sentence, subtle arguments are unseasonable. God has
said, "You shall not swear." Do not then demand of me the reasons of this. It is a
royal law. He who established it, knows the reason of the law. If it had not been
profitable, He would not have forbidden it. Kings bring in laws, and not all
perchance profitable; for they are men, and cannot be competent to discover
what is useful, like God. Nevertheless, we obey them. Whether we marry, or
make wills, or are about to purchase servants, or houses, or fields, or to do any
other act, we do these things not according to our own mind, but according to the
laws which they ordain; and we are not entirely at liberty to dispose of the things