what there is to keep it in motion, but what there is to stop it. It would be a mistake to
represent the Aristotelian argument of the Prime Mover as referring to some primitive
push, or some rotary motion started in the primitive nebula, at the first creation of
matter. Matter, to Aristotle, to Plato, and to the Greeks generally, is eternal, not created.
I need hardly add that between an immovable Prime Mover and a Personal God a wide
gulf intervenes which Aristotle does not bridge over. See however Chapter XXIII of
this Book. The whole idea of a Prime Mover has vanished from modern physics. The
whole universe, as we know it, is a congeries of sun-and-planet systems -- some of
them apparently still in process of formation -- arranged possibly in the shape of a huge
convex lens. These bodies act and react on each other. And besides these molar
motions there are also molecular motions quite as real. The causes of these motions
are innumerable forces. The study of them carries us back to consider the `primitive
collocation' of the forces of the universe, a collocation whereby they were arranged in a
`position of advantage,' so that out of their interaction has ensued this orderly world, and
in it our earth, fit habitation for living things. On this `primitive collocation,' Father Bdder
writes (Natural Theology, p. 56): "Although we have nothing to say against the
assumption made by astronomers, that our cosmic system resulted from the
condensation and division of a primitive rotating nebula; yet we cannot admit this nebula
without observing that there must have been a first arrangement of the material
elements which constituted it, one which already contained the present system, or else
the said system could never have resulted from it. Now this first arrangement was
neither the effect of the forces of matter, nor was it essential to matter. . . . Therefore if
we would explain the origin of that system without violation of reason, we are forced to
say that its first beginning, nebular or otherwise, is due to an intelligent cause." To this
effect he adds this quotation from Huxley (Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, II, 201,
202): "The teleological and the mechanical views of nature are not, necessarily,
mutually exclusive. On the contrary, the more purely a mechanist the speculator is, the
more firmly does he assume a primordial molecular arrangement of which all the
phenomena of the universe are consequences, and the more completely is he thereby
at the mercy of the teleologist, who can always defy him to disprove that this primordial
molecular arrangement was not intended to evolve the phenomena of the universe."
Omne quod movetur ab alio movetur, I translate "Everything in motion is put and kept in
motion by another": such is the sense of St Thomas and of Aristotle. The ab alio
however is not in Aristotle. His words are: "Everything in motion must be put and kept in
motion by something" (Phys. vii, 1); and he adds: "Everything in local motion is moved
either by itself or by another" (Physics, vii, 2) Things that had souls he thought were
moved by themselves, and especially the heavenly bodies, which were guided by some
sort of animating soul in perpetual circular motion. St Thomas (B. III, Chap.LXXXVII,
in the Latin) has his doubts as to the heavenly bodies being animated. He considers
however (B. III, Chap.LXXXII) "that sublunary bodies are ruled by God through the
heavenly bodies." Taking `movement' for `local motion,' the argument of the Prime
Mover, for a modern mind, resolves itself into the question of `primitive collocation.'
Some collocation is presupposed to every mechanical problem. `Why this collocation
rather than that?" is a question answerable only either by a regressus in infinitum
(Q.E.A.) or by an invocation of Mind and Design. The argument however may, avail
itself of a wider meaning of motus, namely, change; and contend that, at the back of the