"That the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus;" that is the soul.
Not as though this were saved alone, but because it was a settled point that if that
were saved, without all controversy the body too would partake in its salvation.
For as it became mortal because of the soul's sinning: so if this do righteousness,
that also on the other hand shall enjoy great glory.
But some maintain, that "the Spirit" is the Gracious Gift which is
extinguished when we sin. "In order then that this may not happen," says he, "let
him be punished; that thereby becoming better, he may draw down to himself
God's grace, and be found having it safe in that day." So that all comes as from
one exercising a nurse's or a physician's office, not merely scourging nor
punishing rashly and at random. For the gain is greater than the punishment: one
being but for a season, the other everlasting.
And he said not simply, "That the spirit may be saved," but "in that day."
Well and seasonably does he remind them of that day in order that both they
might more readily apply themselves to the cure, and that the person censured
might the rather receive his words, not as it were of anger, but as the forethought
of an anxious father. For this cause also he said, "unto the destruction of the
flesh:" proceeding to lay down regulations for the devil and not suffering him to
go a step too far. As in the instance of Job, God said, [Job 2:6] "But touch not his
life."
5. Then, having ended his sentence, and spoken it in brief without dwelling
on it, he brings in again a rebuke, directing himself against them;

1 Corinthians 5:6
"Your glorying is not good:" signifying that it was they up to the present
time who had hindered him from repenting, by taking pride in him. Next he
shows that he is taking this step in order to spare not that person only, but also
those to whom he writes. To which effect he adds,
"Do you not know, that a little leaven leavens the whole lump?" "For," says
he, "though the offense be his, yet if neglected it has power to waste the rest of
the body of the Church also. For when the first transgressor escapes punishment,
speedily will others also commit the same faults."
In these words he indicates moreover that their struggle and their danger is
for the whole Church, not for any one person. For which purpose he needs also
the similitude of the leaven. For "as that," says he, "though it be but little,
transforms unto its own nature the whole lump; so also this man, if he be let go
unpunished and this sin turn out unavenged, will corrupt likewise all the rest."

1 Corinthians 5:7-8
"Purge out the old leaven," that is, this evil one. Not that he speaks
concerning this one only; rather he glances at others with him. For, "the old
leaven" is not fornication only, but also sin of every kind. And he said not,
"purge," but "purge out;" "cleanse with accuracy so that there be not so much as
a remnant nor a shadow of that sort." In saying then, "purge out," he signifies
that there was still iniquity among them. But in saying, "that you may be a new
lump, even as you are unleavened," he affirms and declares that not over very
many was the wickedness prevailing. But though he says, "as you are
unleavened," he means it not as a fact that all were clean, but as to what sort of
people you ought to be.
6. "For our Passover also has been sacrificed for us, even Christ;
wherefore let us keep the feast: not with old leaven, nor with the leaven of malice
and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth." So also
Christ called His doctrine Leaven. And further he himself dwells upon the
metaphor, reminding them of an ancient history, and of the Passover and
unleavened bread, and of their blessings both then and now, and their
punishments and their plagues.
It is festival, therefore, the whole time in which we live. For though he
said, "Let us keep the feast," not with a view to the presence of the Passover or
of Pentecost did he say it; but as pointing out that the whole of time is a festival
unto Christians, because of the excellency of the good things which have been
given. For what has not come to pass that is good? The Son of God was made
man for you; He freed you from death; and called you to a kingdom. You
therefore who hast obtained and art still obtaining such things, how can it be less
than your duty to "keep the feast" all your life? Let no one then be downcast
about poverty, and disease, and craft of enemies. For it is a festival, even the