15 Exx 322. Cf the entry for February 26: 'On beginning mass.., a very slight weeping - I thought that with less I was more satisfied and content; in that way I felt I was being ruled by His Divine Majesty, to whom it belongs to give and withdraw his graces as and when it is most convenient'.

26 Exx 332- & THE IGNATIAN EXERCISES seen in reference to the type of inner life portrayed in the Diary. This is a life tenderly responsive to the slightest movements of grace, and completely dependent on them. Time, which most men in Ignatius' position would have considered of vital importance, becomes irrelevant as the days of quiet waiting impose themselves. The great virtue becomes that of patience.

19 First week, fourth addition: Exx 7 6. This is the key idea in the 'Principle and Foundation', which opens the Exercises: it is also present, though with renewed meaning, in all the petitions of the last three weeks: to ask grace from our Lord that I may not be deaf to his call, but ready and diligent to fulfil his most holy will. 2° The spirituality of St Ignatius has been described as christocentric: it is not difficult to see what is meant. On February 23, for example, he writes: While I prepared the altar for mass, Jesus came into my thoughts and I felt impelled to follow him, for to my mind it seemed that since he was the head of the society, he was a greater argument for complete poverty than all other human reasons. And he continues a little later: It seemed to be in some way the work of the blessed Trinity that I could see or feel Jesus, and I remembered the time when the Father placed me with the Son. He is referring to the great visitation of grace that occurred at La Storta (in late October or in November of 1537) as he was making his way to Rome.

21 Autobiography, ch Io, no g6.

32 Lalnez's own account has been preserved only at second hand. However, the version is corroborated both by Ribadeneira and by Nadah cf MHSI, 66, p 313, especially n. 37, and p 499, n. 23. For a full study, cf R. Rouquette, in Revue d'Ascetique et de Mystique (1957), PP 34-6I, 15o-17o. rare indications that in one sense the soul is to advance even further. There are only hints in the Exercises of the devotional importance of the blessed Trinity. The first preamble to the contemplation of the Incarnation, for

24 Exx Io2, lO6-8, 1o 9. ~5 There are five references in the short 'Mysteria vitae Christi', (Exx 263, 073, 304, 307, 3x2), and one in the 'Rules for thinking with the Church' (Exx 365). in turn the sacred Humanity of Christ). The mystery of the Trinity, with its circuminsession of Persons, finds its true context here, although it defies expression: I had very many intuitions about the blessed Trinity, my mind being enlightened with them to such an extent that it seemed to me that with hard study I would not have known so much. February 19. And later: During the prayers to the Father, it seemed that Jesus was presenting them, or accompanying those that I was saying, before the Father: and I felt or saw in a way that cannot be explained. February 25. Later still: I saw the home-land of heaven, or the Lord of it, for I understood in some way the three Persons, and how within the Father were the second and third. February 29. It would be incorrect to suppose that, at the time of composing the Exercises, Ignatius was still unaware of the role of the Trinity. Already in 1522 he had received at Manresa an illumination of the Trinity's intimate nature: One day when he (Ignatius) was reciting the Little Office of our Lady on the steps of that same monastery (of the Dominicans), his understanding began to rise, as if he saw the blessed Trinity represented by three organ keys, and this with so many tears and sobs that he could not control himself. On the other hand, it would be equally misleading to suppose that Ignatius had passed beyond the learning stage. He says himself, with reference to the new insight he had received concerning the essence of the Trinity: So great an achievement did it seem to have untied this knot... that I could not stop repeating to myself, with reference to myself, 'Who are you? From where?... What did you deserve? Why this?'