low, that they were easily to be received by all men: nay, for these doctrines are
far higher than those. For as to virginity, they never imagined even the name
thereof so much as in a dream, nor yet of voluntary poverty, nor of fasting, nor
of any other of those things that are high.
But they that are of our part not only exterminate lust, they chastise not
only the act, but even an unchaste look, and insulting language, and disorderly
laughter, and dress, and gait, and clamor, and they carry on their exactness even
to the smallest things, and have filled the whole earth with the plant of virginity.
And touching God too, and the things in heaven, they persuade men to be wise
with such knowledge as no one of those has at any time been able so much as to
conceive in his mind. For how could they, who made for gods images of beasts,
and of monsters that crawl on the earth, and of other things still more vile?
Yet these high doctrines were both accepted and believed, and they flourish
every day and increase; but the others have passed away, and perished, having
disappeared more easily than spiders' webs.
And very naturally, for they were demons that published these things;
wherefore besides their uncleanness, their obscurity is great, and the labor they
require greater. For what could be more ridiculous than that "republic," in which,
besides what I have mentioned, the philosopher, when he has spent lines without
number, that he may be able to show what justice is, has over and above this
prolixity filled his discourse with much indistinctness? This, even if it did
contain anything profitable, must needs be very useless for the life of man. For if
the husbandman and the smith, the builder and the pilot, and every one who
subsists by the labor of his hands, is to leave his trade, and his honest toils, and is
to spend such and such a number of years in order to learn what justice is; before
he has learned he will often times be absolutely destroyed by hunger, and perish
because of this justice, not having learned anything else useful to be known, and
having ended his life by a cruel death.
12. But our lessons are not such; rather Christ has taught us what is just,
and what is seemly, and what is expedient, and all virtue in general, comprising

it in few and plain words: at one time saying that, "on two commandments hang
the Law and the Prophets;" [Matthew 22:40] that is to say, on the love of God
and on the love of our neighbor: at another time, "Whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye also to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets."
[Matthew 7:12]
And these things even to a laborer, and to a servant, and to a widow woman,
and to a very child, and to him that appears to be exceedingly slow of
understanding, are all plain to comprehend and easy to learn. For the lessons of
the truth are like this; and the actual result bears witness thereto. All at least have
learned what things they are to do, and not learned only, but been emulous also
of them; and not in the cities alone nor in the midst of the market places, but also
in the summits of the mountains.
Yea, for there will you see true wisdom abounding, and choirs of angels
shining forth in a human body, and the commonwealth of Heaven manifested
here on earth. For a commonwealth did these fishermen too write for us, not with
commands that it should be embraced from childhood, like those others, nor
making it a law that the virtuous man must be so many years old, but addressing
their discourse generally to every age. For those lessons are children's toys, but
these are the truth of things.
And as a place for this their commonwealth they have assigned Heaven,
and God they have brought in as the framer thereof, and as lawgiver of the
statutes there set; as indeed was their duty. And the rewards in their
commonwealth are not leaves of bay nor olive, nor an allowance of meat in the
public hall, nor statues of brass, these cold and ordinary things, but a life which
has no end, and to become children of God, to join the angels' choir, and to stand
by the royal throne, and to be always with Christ. And the popular guides of this
commonwealth are publicans, and fishermen, and tent-makers, not such as have
lived for a short time, but such as are now living for ever. Therefore even after
their death they may possibly do the greatest good to the governed.
This republic is at war not with men, but with devils, and those incorporeal