220. People in every nation enhance the social dimension of their lives by acting as committed
and responsible citizens, not as a mob swayed by the powers that be. Let us not forget that
“responsible citizenship is a virtue, and participation in political life is a moral obligation”. Yet
becoming a people demands something more. It is an ongoing process in which every new
generation must take part: a slow and arduous effort calling for a desire for integration and a
willingness to achieve this through the growth of a peaceful and multifaceted culture of encounter.

221. Progress in building a people in peace, justice and fraternity depends on four principles
related to constant tensions present in every social reality. These derive from the pillars of the
Church’s social doctrine, which serve as “primary and fundamental parameters of reference for
interpreting and evaluating social phenomena”. In their light I would now like to set forth these
four specific principles which can guide the development of life in society and the building of a
people where differences are harmonized within a shared pursuit. I do so out of the conviction that
their application can be a genuine path to peace within each nation and in the entire world.

Time is greater than space

222. A constant tension exists between fullness and limitation. Fullness evokes the desire for
complete possession, while limitation is a wall set before us. Broadly speaking, “time” has to do
with fullness as an expression of the horizon which constantly opens before us, while each

individual moment has to do with limitation as an expression of enclosure. People live poised
between each individual moment and the greater, brighter horizon of the utopian future as the final
cause which draws us to itself. Here we see a first principle for progress in building a people: time
is greater than space.

223. This principle enables us to work slowly but surely, without being obsessed with immediate
results. It helps us patiently to endure difficult and adverse situations, or inevitable changes in our
plans. It invites us to accept the tension between fullness and limitation, and to give a priority to
time. One of the faults which we occasionally observe in sociopolitical activity is that spaces and
power are preferred to time and processes. Giving priority to space means madly attempting to
keep everything together in the present, trying to possess all the spaces of power and of self-
assertion; it is to crystallize processes and presume to hold them back. Giving priority to time
means being concerned about initiating processes rather than possessing spaces. Time governs
spaces, illumines them and makes them links in a constantly expanding chain, with no possibility
of return. What we need, then, is to give priority to actions which generate new processes in
society and engage other persons and groups who can develop them to the point where they bear
fruit in significant historical events. Without anxiety, but with clear convictions and tenacity.