So that the more a man is humbled, so much the more is he exalted. For as in the
case of water, the more a man presses it downwards, the more he forces it up;
and the further a man retires to hurl a javelin, the surer his aim; so is it also with
humility. However, when we speak of ascents with reference to God, we must
needs conceive a descent first; but when with reference to man, not at all so.
Then he goes on to show further His providential care, and His wisdom, for He
who has wrought such things as these, who had such might, and who refused not
to go down even to those lower parts for our sakes, never would He have made
these distributions of spiritual gifts without a purpose. Now elsewhere he tells us
that this was the work of the Spirit, in the words, "In the which the Holy Ghost
has made you bishops to feed the Church of God." And here he says that it is the
Son; and elsewhere that it is God. "And He gave to the Church some apostles,
and some prophets." But in the Epistle to the Corinthians, he says, "I planted,
Apollos watered; but God gave the increase." And again, "Now he that plants
and he that waters are one: but each shall receive his own reward according to
his own labor." [1 Corinthians 3:6-8] So is it also here; for what if you bring in
but little? You have received so much. First, he says, "apostles"; for these had all
gifts; secondarily, "prophets," for there were some who were not indeed apostles,
but prophets, as Agabus; thirdly, "evangelists," who did not go about
everywhere, but only preached the Gospel, as Priscilla and Aquila; "pastors and
teachers," those who were entrusted with the charge of a whole nation. What
then? Are the pastors and the teachers inferior? Yes, surely; those who were
settled and employed about one spot, as Timothy and Titus, were inferior to
those who went about the world and preached the Gospel. However, it is not
possible from this passage to frame the subordination and precedence, but from
another Epistle. "He gave," says he; you must not say a word to gainsay it. Or
perhaps by "evangelists" he means those who wrote the Gospel.
"For the perfecting of the saints unto the work of ministering, unto the
building up of the body of Christ."
Perceive ye the dignity of the office? Each one edifies, each one perfects,

each one ministers.
Ver. 13. "Till we all attain," he proceeds, "unto the unity of the faith and of
the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a full-grown man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ."
By "stature" here he means perfect "knowledge"; for as a man will stand
firmly, whereas children are carried about and waver in mind, so is it also with
believers.
"To the unity," says he, "of the faith."
That is, until we shall be shown to have all one faith: for this is unity of
faith, when we all are one, when we shall all alike acknowledge the common
bond. Till then you must labor to this end. If for this you have received a gift,
that you might edify others, look well that thou overturn not yourself, by
envying another. God has honored you, and ordained you, that you should build
up another. Yea, for about this was the Apostle also engaged; and for this was the
prophet prophesying and persuading, and the Evangelist preaching the Gospel,
and for this was the pastor and teacher; all had undertaken one common work.
For tell me not of the difference of the spiritual gifts; but that all had one work.
Now when we shall all believe alike then shall there be unity; for that this is
what he calls "a perfect man," is plain. And yet he elsewhere calls us "babes" [1
Corinthians 13:11], even when we are of mature age; but he is there looking to
another comparison, for there it is in comparison with our future knowledge that
he there calls us babes. For having said, "We know in part" [1 Corinthians 13:912], he adds also the word "darkly," and the like: whereas here he speaks with
reference to another thing, with reference to changeableness, as he says also
elsewhere, "But solid food is for full-grown men." [Hebrews 5:14] Do you see
then also in what sense he there calls them full-grown? Observe also in what
sense he calls men "perfect" here, by the words next added, where he says, "that
we may be no longer children." That we keep, he means to say, that little
measure, which we may have received, with all diligence, with firmness and
steadfastness.