causes the return of previous sins, is a special sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that the ingratitude, whereby a
subsequent sin causes the return of sins previously forgiven, is a
special sin. For the giving of thanks belongs to counterpassion
which is a necessary condition of justice, as the Philosopher shows
(Ethic. v, 5). But justice is a special virtue. Therefore this ingratitude
is a special sin.
Objection 2: Further, Tully says (De Inv. Rhet. ii) that thanksgiving is
a special virtue. But ingratitude is opposed to thanksgiving.
Therefore ingratitude is a special sin.
Objection 3: Further, a special effect proceeds from a special cause.
Now ingratitude has a special effect, viz. the return, after a fashion,
of sins already forgiven. Therefore ingratitude is a special sin.
On the contrary, That which is a sequel to every sin is not a special
sin. Now by any mortal sin whatever, a man becomes ungrateful to
God, as evidenced from what has been said (Article 1). Therefore
ingratitude is not a special sin.
I answer that, The ingratitude of the sinner is sometimes a special
sin; and sometimes it is not, but a circumstance arising from all
mortal sins in common committed against God. For a sin takes its
species according to the sinner's intention, wherefore the
Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 2) that "he who commits adultery in order
to steal is a thief rather than an adulterer."
If, therefore, a sinner commits a sin in contempt of God and of the
favor received from Him, that sin is drawn to the species of
ingratitude, and in this way a sinner's ingratitude is a special sin. If,
however, a man, while intending to commit a sin, e.g. murder or
adultery, is not withheld from it on account of its implying contempt
of God, his ingratitude will not be a special sin, but will be drawn to
the species of the other sin, as a circumstance thereof. And, as
Augustine observes (De Nat. et Grat. xxix), not every sin implies
contempt of God in His commandments. Therefore it is evident that
the sinner's ingratitude is sometimes a special sin, sometimes not.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.5.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections: for the first (three)
objections prove that ingratitude is in itself a special sin; while the
last objection proves that ingratitude, as included in every sin, is not
a special sin.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.89, C.1.

## QUESTION 89 — OF THE RECOVERY OF VIRTUE BY MEANS OF

PENANCE

Prologue
We must now consider the recovery of virtues by means of Penance,
under which head there are six points of inquiry:
(1) Whether virtues are restored through Penance?
(2) Whether they are restored in equal measure?
(3) Whether equal dignity is restored to the penitent?
(4) Whether works of virtue are deadened by subsequent sin?
(5) Whether works deadened by sin revive through Penance?
(6) Whether dead works, i.e. works that are done without charity, are
quickened by Penance?