him to reap the fruit of what is done in the day. You have been made Consul? So
was I in the night; only I in the night, thou in the day. And what of this? Not
even so have you any advantage over me, except haply its being said, Such an
one is Consul, and the pleasure that springs from the words, gives him the
advantage.
I mean something of this kind, for I will express it more plainly: if I say
"Such an one is Consul," and bestow on him the name, is it not gone as soon as it
is spoken? So also are the things themselves; no sooner does the Consul appear,
than he is no more. But let us suppose [that he is Consul] for a year, or two
years, or three or four years. Where are they who were ten times Consul?
Nowhere.
But Paul is not so. For he was, and also is living continually: he did not live
one day, nor two, nor ten, and twenty, nor thirty; nor ten and twenty, nor yet
thirty years— and die. Even the four hundredth year is now past, and still even
yet is he illustrious, yea much more illustrious than when he was alive. And
these things indeed [are] on earth; but the glory of the saints in heaven what
word could set forth?
Wherefore I entreat you, let us seek this glory; let us pursue after it, that we
may attain it. For this is the true glory. Let us henceforth stand aloof from the
things of this life, that we may find grace and mercy in Christ Jesus our Lord:
with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor
and worship, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 10 on Hebrews

Hebrews 6:7-8
" For the Earth which drinks in the rain that comes oft upon it, and brings
forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God. But
if it bear thorns and briars it is rejected, and near unto cursing, whose end is to
be burned."
1. Let us hear the oracles of God with fear, with fear and much trembling.
For (it is said) "Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice unto Him with trembling."
[Psalm 2:11] But if even our joy and our exultation ought to be "with
trembling," of what punishment are we not worthy, if we listen not with terror to
what is said, when the things spoken, as now, are themselves fearful?
For having said that "it is impossible for those who have fallen away" to be
baptized a second time, and to receive remission through the laver, and having
pointed out the awfulness of the case, he goes on: "for the earth which drinks in
the rain that comes oft upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it
is dressed, receives blessing from God. But if it bear thorns and thistles, it is
rejected, and near unto cursing; whose end is to be burned."
Let us then fear, beloved! This threat is not Paul's, these words are not of
man: they are of the Holy Ghost, of Christ that speaks in him. Is there then any
one that is clear from these thorns? And even if we were clear, not even so ought
we to be confident, but to fear and tremble lest at any time thorns should spring
up in us. But when we are "thorns and thistles" through and through, whence
(tell me) are we confident? And are becoming supine? What is it which makes us
inert? If "he that thinks he stands" ought to fear "lest he fall"; for (he says) "Let
him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall" [1 Corinthians 10:12]; he that
falls, how anxious ought he to be that he may rise up again! If Paul fears, "lest