of bitter and sweet. Moreover, they teach that the whole man contains the entire image of the
Triacontad as follows: In his hands, by means of his fingers, he bears the Decad; and in his whole
body the Duodecad, inasmuch as his body is divided into twelve members; for they portion that
out, as the body of Truth is divided by them—a point of which we have already spoken. But the
Ogdoad, as being unspeakable and invisible, is understood as hidden in the viscera.
2. Again, they assert that the sun, the great light-giver, was formed on the fourth day, with a
reference to the number of the Tetrad. So also, according to them, the courts of the tabernacle
constructed by Moses, being composed of fine linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, pointed to
the same image. Moreover, they maintain that the long robe of the priest falling over his feet, as
being adorned with four rows of precious stones, indicates the Tetrad; and if there are any other
things in the Scriptures which can possibly be dragged into the number four, they declare that these
had their being with a view to the Tetrad. The Ogdoad, again, was shown as follows:—They affirm
that man was formed on the eighth day, for sometimes they will have him to have been made on
the sixth day, and sometimes on the eighth, unless, perchance, they mean that his earthly part was
formed on the sixth day, but his fleshly part on the eighth, for these two things are distinguished
by them. Some of them also hold that one man was formed after the image and likeness of God,
masculo-feminine, and that this was the spiritual man; and that another man was formed out of the
earth.
3. Further, they declare that the arrangement made with respect to the ark in the Deluge, by
means of which eight persons were saved, most clearly indicates the Ogdoad which brings
salvation. David also shows forth the same, as holding the eighth place in point of age among his
brethren. Moreover, that circumcision which took place on the eighth day, represented the
circumcision of the Ogdoad above. In a word, whatever they find in the Scriptures capable of being
referred to the number eight, they declare to fulfil the mystery of the Ogdoad. With respect, again,
to the Decad, they maintain that it is indicated by those ten nations which God promised to Abraham
for a possession. The arrangement also made by Sarah when, after ten years, she gave her
handmaid Hagar to him, that by her he might have a son, showed the same thing. Moreover, the
servant of Abraham who was sent to Rebekah, and presented her at the well with ten bracelets of

Or, rather, perhaps "curtains." Ex. xxvi. 1.

Gen. xvii. 12.

gold, and her brethren who detained her for ten days; Jeroboam also, who received the ten
sceptres (tribes), and the ten courts of the tabernacle, and the columns of ten cubits [high],
and the ten sons of Jacob who were at first sent into Egypt to buy corn, and the ten apostles to
whom the Lord appeared after His resurrection,—Thomas being absent,—represented, according
to them, the invisible Decad.
4. As to the Duodecad, in connection with which the mystery of the passion of the defect
occurred, from which passion they maintain that all things visible were framed, they assert that is
to be found strikingly and manifestly everywhere [in Scripture]. For they declare that the twelve
sons of Jacob, from whom also sprung twelve tribes,— the breastplate of the high priest, which
bore twelve precious stones and twelve little bells,—the twelve stones which were placed by
Moses at the foot of the mountain,—the same number which was placed by Joshua in the river,
and again, on the other side, the bearers of the ark of the covenant,—those stones which were
set up by Elijah when the heifer was offered as a burnt-offering; the number, too, of the apostles;
and, in fine, every event which embraces in it the number twelve,—set forth their Duodecad. And
then the union of all these, which is called the Triacontad, they strenuously endeavour to demonstrate
by the ark of Noah, the height of which was thirty cubits; by the case of Samuel, who assigned
Saul the chief place among thirty guests; by David, when for thirty days he concealed himself
in the field; by those who entered along with him into the cave; also by the fact that the length
(height) of the holy tabernacle was thirty cubits; and if they meet with any other like numbers,
they still apply these to their Triacontad.