SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.28, C.2.

among various persons, while peace denotes, in addition to this
union, the union of the appetites even in one man.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking there of that peace
which is between one man and another, and he says that this peace
is concord, not indeed any kind of concord, but that which is well
ordered, through one man agreeing with another in respect of
something befitting to both of them . For if one man concord with
another, not of his own accord, but through being forced, as it were,
by the fear of some evil that besets him, such concord is not really
peace, because the order of each concordant is not observed, but is
disturbed by some fear-inspiring cause. For this reason he premises
that "peace is tranquillity of order," which tranquillity consists in all
the appetitive movements in one man being set at rest together.
Reply to Objection 2: If one man consent to the same thing together
with another man, his consent is nevertheless not perfectly united to
himself, unless at the same time all his appetitive movements be in
agreement.
Reply to Objection 3: A twofold dissension is opposed to peace,
namely dissension between a man and himself, and dissension
between one man and another. The latter alone is opposed to
concord.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.28, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether all things desire peace?

Objection 1: It would seem that not all things desire peace. For,
according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. xi), peace "unites consent." But
there cannot be unity of consent in things which are devoid of
knowledge. Therefore such things cannot desire peace.
Objection 2: Further, the appetite does not tend to opposite things at
the same time. Now many desire war and dissension. Therefore all
men do not desire peace.
Objection 3: Further, good alone is an object of appetite. But a
certain peace is, seemingly, evil, else Our Lord would not have said
(Mt. 10:34): "I came not to send peace." Therefore all things do not
desire peace.
Objection 4: Further, that which all desire is, seemingly, the
sovereign good which is the last end. But this is not true of peace,
since it is attainable even by a wayfarer; else Our Lord would vainly
command (Mk. 9:49): "Have peace among you." Therefore all things
do not desire peace.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 12,14) that "all
things desire peace": and Dionysius says the same (Div. Nom. xi).
I answer that, From the very fact that a man desires a certain thing it
follows that he desires to obtain what he desires, and, in
consequence, to remove whatever may be an obstacle to his
obtaining it. Now a man may be hindered from obtaining the good he
desires, by a contrary desire either of his own or of some other, and
both are removed by peace, as stated above. Hence it follows of
necessity that whoever desires anything desires peace, in so far as
he who desires anything, desires to attain, with tranquillity and
without hindrance, to that which he desires: and this is what is
meant by peace which Augustine defines (De Civ. Dei xix, 13) "the
tranquillity of order."
Reply to Objection 1: Peace denotes union not only of the intellective
or rational appetite, or of the animal appetite, in both of which
consent may be found, but also of the natural appetite. Hence
Dionysius says that "peace is the cause of consent and of