discourse of these things; and not even he openly, but when he had taken Him
apart; that is, having separated himself from the rest of the disciples; and he says,
"Be it far from You, Lord, this shall not be unto You." What ever is this? He that
obtained a revelation, he that was blessed, has he so soon fallen away, and
suffered overthrow, so as to fear His passion? And what marvel, that one who
had not on these points received any revelation, should have that feeling? Yea, to
inform you that not of himself did he speak those other things either, see in these
matters that were not revealed to him how he is confounded and overthrown, and
being told ten thousand times, knows not what the saying can mean.
For that He is Son of God he had learned, but what the mystery of the cross
and of the resurrection might be, was not yet manifest to him: for "the saying," it
is said, "was hid from them."
Do you see that with just cause He bade them not declare it to the rest? For
if it so confounded them, who must needs be made aware of it, what would not
all others have felt?
6. He however, to signify that He is far from coming to the passion against
His will, both rebuked Peter, and called him Satan.
Let them hear, as many as are ashamed of the suffering of the cross of
Christ. For if the chief apostle, even before he had learned all distinctly, was
called Satan for feeling this, what excuse can they have, who after so abundant
proof deny His economy? I say, when he who had been so blessed, who made
such a confession, has such words addressed to him; consider what they will
suffer, who after all this deny the mystery of the cross.
And He said not, "Satan spoke by you," but, "Get behind me, Satan."
[Matthew 16:23] For indeed it was a desire of the adversary that Christ should
not suffer. Therefore with such great severity did He rebuke him, as knowing
that both he and the rest are especially afraid of this, and will not easily receive
it.
Therefore He also reveals the thoughts of his mind, saying, "Thou savorest
not the things that be of God, but those that be of men."

But what means, "Thou savorest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of men"? Peter examining the matter by human and earthly reasoning,
accounted it disgraceful to Him and an unmeet thing. Touching him therefore
sharply, He says, "My passion is not an unmeet thing, but you give this sentence
with a carnal mind; whereas if you had hearkened to my sayings in a godly
manner, disengaging yourself from your carnal understanding, you would know
that this of all things most becomes me. For thou indeed supposest that to suffer
is unworthy of me; but I say unto you, that for me not to suffer is of the devil's
mind;" by the contrary statements repressing his alarm.
Thus as John, accounting it unworthy of Christ to be baptized by him, was
persuaded of Christ to baptize Him, He saying, "Thus it becomes us,"
[Matthew 3:15] and this same Peter too, forbidding Him to wash his feet, by the
words, "You have no part with me, unless I wash your feet;" [John 13:8] even so
here too He restrained him by the mention of the opposite, and by the severity of
the reproof repressed his fear of suffering.
7. Let no man therefore be ashamed of the honored symbols of our
salvation, and of the chiefest of all good things, whereby we even live, and
whereby we are; but as a crown, so let us bear about the cross of Christ. Yea, for
by it all things are wrought, that are wrought among us. Whether one is to be
new-born, the cross is there; or to be nourished with that mystical food, or to be
ordained, or to do anything else, everywhere our symbol of victory is present.
Therefore both on house, and walls, and windows, and upon our forehead, and
upon our mind, we inscribe it with much care.
For of the salvation wrought for us, and of our common freedom, and of the
goodness of our Lord, this is the sign. "For as a sheep was He led to the
slaughter." [Isaiah 53:7] When therefore you sign yourself, think of the purpose
of the cross, and quench anger, and all the other passions. When you sign
yourself, fill your forehead with all courage, make your soul free. And ye know
assuredly what are the things that give freedom. Wherefore also Paul leading us
there, I mean unto the freedom that beseems us, did on this wise lead us unto it,