Further, the dwelling should befit the dweller. But the world was
made to be man's dwelling. Therefore it should befit man. Now man
will be renewed. Therefore the world will be likewise.
Further, "Every beast loveth its like" (Ecclus. 13:19), wherefore it is
evident that likeness is the reason of love. Now man has some
likeness to the universe, wherefore he is called "a little world."
Hence man loves the whole world naturally and consequently
desires its good. Therefore, that man's desire be satisfied the
universe must needs also be made better.
I answer that, We believe all corporeal things to have been made for
man's sake, wherefore all things are stated to be subject to him [Ps.
8:5, seqq.]. Now they serve man in two ways, first, as sustenance to
his bodily life, secondly, as helping him to know God, inasmuch as
man sees the invisible things of God by the things that are made
(Rm. 1:20). Accordingly glorified man will nowise need creatures to
render him the first of these services, since his body will be
altogether incorruptible, the Divine power effecting this through the
soul which it will glorify immediately. Again man will not need the
second service as to intellective knowledge, since by that knowledge
he will see God immediately in His essence. The carnal eye,
however, will be unable to attain to this vision of the Essence;
wherefore that it may be fittingly comforted in the vision of God, it
will see the Godhead in Its corporeal effects, wherein manifest
proofs of the Divine majesty will appear, especially in Christ's flesh,
and secondarily in the bodies of the blessed, and afterwards in all
other bodies. Hence those bodies also will need to receive a greater
inflow from the Divine goodness than now, not indeed so as to
change their species, but so as to add a certain perfection of glory:
and such will be the renewal of the world. Wherefore at the one same
time, the world will be renewed, and man will be glorified.
Reply to Objection 1: Solomon is speaking there of the natural
course: this is evident from his adding: "Nothing under the sun is
new." For since the movement of the sun follows a circle, those
things which are subject to the sun's power must needs have some
kind of circular movement. This consists in the fact that things which
were before return the same in species but different in the individual
(De Generat. i). But things belonging to the state of glory are not
"under the sun."
Reply to Objection 2: This argument considers natural alteration

which proceeds from a natural agent, which acts from natural
necessity. For such an agent cannot produce different dispositions,
unless it be itself disposed differently. But things done by God
proceed from freedom of will, wherefore it is possible, without any
change in God Who wills it, for the universe to have at one time one
disposition, and another at another time. Thus this renewal will not
be reduced to a cause that is moved, but to an immovable principle,
namely God.
Reply to Objection 3: God is stated to have ceased on the seventh
day forming new creatures, for as much as nothing was made
afterwards that was not previously in some likeness [FP, Question
73, Article 1] either generically, or specifically, or at least as in a
seminal principle, or even as in an obediential potentiality [FP,
Question 115, Article 2, ad 4; TP, Question 11, Article 1]. I say then
that the future renewal of the world preceded in the works of the six
days by way of a remote likeness, namely in the glory and grace of
the angels. Moreover it preceded in the obediential potentiality which
was then bestowed on the creature to the effect of its receiving this
same renewal by the Divine agency.
Reply to Objection 4: This disposition of newness will be neither
natural nor contrary to nature, but above nature (just as grace and
glory are above the nature of the soul): and it will proceed from an
everlasting agent which will preserve it for ever.
Reply to Objection 5: Although, properly speaking, insensible bodies
will not have merited this glory, yet man merited that this glory
should be bestowed on the whole universe, in so far as this
conduces to man's increase of glory. Thus a man merits to be
clothed in more splendid robes, which splendor the robes nowise
merited themselves.