should still consort with the Jews, still persecute the Church, I who have cast off
my country altogether, my companions, my friends, my kindred, and all my
reputation, and taken in exchange for these, persecution, enmity, strife, and
daily-impending death, have given a signal proof that I speak not from love of
human applause. This he says, being about to narrate his former life, and sudden
conversion, and to demonstrate clearly that it was sincere. And that they might
not be elevated by a notion that he did this by way of self-vindication to them, he
premises, "For do I now persuade men?" He well knew how, on a fitting
occasion, to correct his disciples, in a grave and lofty tone: assuredly he had
other sources whence to demonstrate the truth of his preaching—by signs and
miracles, by dangers, by prisons, by daily deaths, by hunger and thirst, by
nakedness, and the like. Now however that he is speaking not of false apostles,
but of the true, who had shared these very perils, he employs another method.
For when his discourse was pointed towards false apostles, he institutes a
comparison by bringing forward his endurance of danger, saying, "Are they
ministers of Christ? (I speak as one beside himself) I more; in labors more
abundantly, in prisons more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths oft."
[2 Corinthians 11:23] But now he speaks of his former manner of life and says,
Ver. 11, 12. "For I make known to you, brethren, as touching the Gospel
which was preached by me that it is not after man. For neither did I receive it
from man, nor was I taught it, but it came to me through revelation of Jesus
Christ."
You observe how sedulously he affirms that he was taught of Christ, who
Himself, without human intervention, condescended to reveal to him all
knowledge. And if he were asked for his proof that God Himself thus
immediately revealed to him these ineffable mysteries, he would instance his
former manner of life, arguing that his conversion would not have been so
sudden, had it not been by Divine revelation. For when men have been vehement
and eager on the contrary side, their conviction, if it is effected by human means,
requires much time and ingenuity. It is clear therefore that he, whose conversion

is sudden, and who has been sobered in the very height of his madness, must
have been vouchsafed a Divine revelation and teaching, and so have at once
arrived at complete sanity. On this account he is obliged to relate his former life,
and to call the Galatians as witnesses of past events. That the Only-Begotten Son
of God had Himself from heaven vouchsafed to call me, says he, you who were
not present, could not know, but that I was a persecutor you do know. For my
violence even reached your ears, and the distance between Palestine and Galatia
is so great, that the report would not have extended there, had not my acts
exceeded all bounds and endurance. Wherefore he says,
Ver. 13. "For you have heard of my manner of life in time past in the Jews'
religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the Church of God, and made
havoc of it."
Observe how he shrinks not from aggravating each point; not saying simply
that he "persecuted" but "beyond measure," and not only "persecuted" but "made
havoc of it," which signifies an attempt to extinguish, to pull down, to destroy, to
annihilate, the Church.
Ver. 14. "And I advanced in the Jews' religion beyond many of my own age
among my countrymen, being more exceedingly zealous for the traditions of my
fathers."
To obviate the notion that his persecution arose from passion, vain-glory, or
enmity, he shows that he was actuated by zeal, not indeed "according to
knowledge," [Romans 10:2] still by a zealous admiration of the traditions of his
fathers. This is his argument; — if my efforts against the Church sprung not
from human motives, but from religious though mistaken zeal, why should I be
actuated by vain-glory, now that I am contending for the Church, and have
embraced the truth? If it was not this motive, but a godly zeal, which possessed
me when I was in error, much more now that I have come to know the truth,
ought I to be free from such a suspicion. As soon as I passed over to the
doctrines of the Church I shook off my Jewish prejudices, manifesting on that
side a zeal still more ardent; and this is a proof that my conversion is sincere,