"bond." We had dismissed it, and it has of itself come back on us again. A
goodly bond was that, and goodly is this one also, and that other is the fruit of
this. Bind yourself to your brother. They bear all things lightly who are bound
together in love. Bind yourself to him and him to you; you are lord of both, for
whomsoever I may be desirous to make my friend, I can by means of kindliness
accomplish it.
"Giving diligence," he says; a thing not to be done easily, and not in every
one's power.
"Giving diligence," he proceeds, "to keep the unity of the Spirit." What is
this "unity of Spirit?" In the human body there is a spirit which holds all
together, though in different members. So is it also here; for to this end was the
Spirit given, that He might unite those who are separated by race and by
different manners; for old and young, rich and poor, child and youth, woman and
man, and every soul become in a manner one, and more entirely so than if there
were one body. For this spiritual relation is far higher than the other natural one,
and the perfectness of the union more entire; because the conjunction of the soul
is more perfect, inasmuch as it is both simple and uniform. And how then is this
unity preserved? "In the bond of peace. " It is not possible for this to exist in
enmity and discord. "For whereas there is," says he, "among you jealousy and
strife, are you not carnal, and walk after the manner of men?" [1 Corinthians
3:3] For as fire when it finds dry pieces of wood works up all together into one
blazing pile, but when wet does not act at all nor unite them; so also it is here.
Nothing that is of a cold nature can bring about this union, whereas any warm
one for the most part can. Hence at least it is that the glow of charity is
produced; by the "bond of peace," he is desirous to bind us all together. For just
in the same way, he would say, as if you would attach yourself to another, you
can do it in no other way except by attaching him to yourself; and if you should
wish to make the tie double, he must needs in turn attach himself to you; so also
here he would have us tied one to another; not simply that we be at peace, not
simply that we love one another, but that all should be only even one soul. A

glorious bond is this; with this bond let us bind ourselves together with one
another and unto God. This is a bond that bruises not, nor cramps the hands it
binds, but it leaves them free, and gives them ample play, and greater courage
than those which are at liberty. The strong if he be bound to the weak, will
support him, and not suffer him to perish: and if again he be tied to the indolent,
him he will rather rouse and animate. "Brother helped by brother," it is said, "is
as a strong city. " This chain no distance of place can interrupt, neither heaven,
nor earth, nor death, nor any thing else, but it is more powerful and strong than
all things. This, though it issue from but one soul, is able to embrace numbers at
once; for hear what Paul says, "You are not straitened in us, but you are
straitened in your own affections; be ye also enlarged." [2 Corinthians 6:12]
Now then, what impairs this bond? Love of money, passion for power, for
glory, and the like, loosens them, and severs them asunder. How then are we to
see that they be not cut asunder? If these tempers be got rid of, and none of those
things which destroy charity come in by the way to trouble us. For hear what
Christ says, [Matthew 24:12] "Because iniquity shall be multiplied, the love of
the many shall wax cold." Nothing is so opposed to love as sin, and I mean not
love towards God, but that towards our neighbor also. But how then, it may be
said, are even robbers at peace? When are they, tell me? Not when they are
acting in a spirit which is that of robbers; for if they fail to observe the rules of
justice among those with whom they divide the spoil, and to render to every one
his right, you will find them too in wars and broils. So that neither among the
wicked is it possible to find peace: but where men are living in righteousness and
virtue, you may find it every where. But again, are rivals ever at peace? Never.
And whom then would you have me mention? The covetous man can never
possibly be at peace with the covetous. So that were there not just and good
persons, even though wronged by them, to stand between them, the whole race
of them would be torn to pieces. When two wild beasts are famished, if there be
not something put between them to consume, they will devour one another. The
same would be the case with the covetous and the vicious. So that it is not