15. When at the Annunciation Mary hears of the Son whose Mother she is to become and
to whom "she will give the name Jesus" (= Savior), she also learns that "the Lord God
will give to him the throne of his father David," and that "he will reign over the house of
Jacob for ever and of his kingdom there will be no end" (Lk. 1:32- 33). The hope of the
whole of Israel was directed towards this. The promised Messiah is to be "great," and the
heavenly messenger also announces that "he will be great"-great both by bearing the
name of Son of the Most High and by the fact that he is to assume the inheritance of
David. He is therefore to be a king, he is to reign "over the house of Jacob." Mary had
grown up in the midst of these expectations of her people: could she guess, at the moment
of the Annunciation, the vital significance of the angel's words? And how is one to
understand that "kingdom" which "will have no end"?

Although through faith she may have perceived in that instant she was the mother of the
"Messiah King," nevertheless she replied: "Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord; let it
be to me according to your word" (Lk. 1:38). From the first moment Mary professed
above all the "obedience of faith," abandoning herself to the meaning which was given to
the words of the Annunciation by him from whom they proceeded: God himself.

16. Later, a little further along this way of the "obedience of faith," Mary hears other
words: those uttered by Simeon in the Temple of Jerusalem. It was now forty days after
the birth of Jesus when, in accordance with the precepts of the Law of Moses, Mary and
Joseph "brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord" (Lk. 2:22). The birth

had taken place in conditions of extreme poverty. We know from Luke that when, on the
occasion of the census ordered by the Roman authorities, Mary went with Joseph to
Bethlehem, having found "no place in the inn," she gave birth to her Son in a stable and
"laid him in a manger" (cf. Lk. 2:7).

A just and God-fearing man, called Simeon, appears at this beginning of Mary's
"journey" of faith. His words, suggested by the Holy Spirit (cf. Lk. 2:25-27), confirm the
truth of the Annunciation. For we read that he took up in his arms the child to whom-in
accordance with the angel's command-the name Jesus was given (cf. Lk. 2:21). Simeon's
words match the meaning of this name, which is Savior: "God is salvation." Turning to
the Lord, he says: "For my eyes have seen your salvation which you have prepared in the
presence of all peoples, a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and for glory to your people
Israel" (Lk. 2:30-32). At the same time, however, Simeon addresses Mary with the
following words: "Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising of many in Israel, and for
a sign that is spoken against, that thoughts out of many hearts may be revealed"; and he
adds with direct reference to her: "and a sword will pierce through your own soul also"
(cf. Lk. 2:34-35). Simeon's words cast new light on the announcement which Mary had
heard from the angel: Jesus is the Savior, he is "a light for revelation" to mankind. Is not
this what was manifested in a way on Christmas night, when the shepherds come to the
stable (cf. Lk. 2:8-20)? Is not this what was to be manifested even more clearly in the
coming of the Magi from the East (cf. Mt. 2:1-12)? But at the same time, at the very
beginning of his life, the Son of Mary, and his Mother with him, will experience in
themselves the truth of those other words of Simeon: "a sign that is spoken against" (Lk.
2:34). Simeon's words seem like a second Annunciation to Mary, for they tell her of the
actual historical situation in which the Son is to accomplish his mission, namely, in
misunderstanding and sorrow. While this announcement on the one hand confirms her
faith in the accomplishment of the divine promises of salvation, on the other hand it also
reveals to her that she will have to live her obedience of faith in suffering, at the side of
the suffering Savior, and that her motherhood will be mysterious and sorrowful. Thus,
after the visit of the Magi who came from the East, after their homage ("they fell down
and worshipped him") and after they had offered gifts (cf. Mt. 2:11), Mary together with
the child has to flee into Egypt in the protective care of Joseph, for "Herod is about to
search for the child, to destroy him" (cf. Mt. 2:13). And until the death of Herod they will
have to remain in Egypt (cf. Mt. 2:15).