the priests stood, where the Jews, the Proselytes, the Grecians, the Nazarites.
Since, therefore even Gentiles were permitted to tread it, he calls it "worldly."
For surely the Jews were not "the world."
"For" (he says) "there was a tabernacle made; the first, which is called
holy, wherein was the Candlestick, and the Table, and the Show-bread." These
things are symbols of the world.
"And after the second veil" (There was then not one veil [only], but there
was a veil without also) "the tabernacle, which is called holy of holies." Observe
how everywhere he calls it a tabernacle in regard of [God's] encamping there.
"Which had" (he says) "a golden Censer, and the ark of the Covenant
overlaid round about with gold: wherein was the golden pot that held the manna,
and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tables of the covenant." All these things
were venerable and conspicuous memorials of the Jewish obstinacy; "and the
tables of the covenant" (for they broke them) "And the manna" (for they
murmured; and therefore handing on the memory thereof to posterity, He
commanded it to be laid up in a golden pot). "And Aaron's rod that budded. And
over it, the Cherubim of glory." What is "the Cherubim of glory"? He either
means "the glorious," or those which are under God. "Shadowing the mercyseat."
But in another point of view also he extols these things in his discourse, in
order to show that those which come after them are greater. "Of which" (he says)
"we cannot now speak particularly." In these words he hints that these were not
merely what was seen, but were a sort of enigmas. "Of which" (he says) "we
cannot now speak particularly," perhaps because they needed a long discourse.

Hebrews 9:6
2. "Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into
the first tabernacle accomplishing the service [of God]." That is, these things
indeed were [there], but the Jews did not enjoy them: they saw them not. So that
they were no more theirs than [ours] for whom they prophesied.

Hebrews 9:7
[Hebrews 9:7] "But into the second the High Priest went alone once every
year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the
people." You see that the types were already laid down beforehand? For, lest
they should say, "how is there [but] one sacrifice?" he shows that this was so
from the beginning, since at least the more holy and the awful [sacrifice] was
[but] one. And how did the High Priest offer once for all? Thus were they wont
[to do] from the beginning, for then also (he says) "the High Priest" offered
"once for all."
And well said he, "not without blood." (Not indeed without blood, yet not
this blood, for the business was not so great.) He signifies that there shall be a
sacrifice, not consumed by fire, but rather distinguished by blood. For inasmuch
as he called the Cross a sacrifice, though it had neither fire, nor logs, nor was
offered many times, but had been offered in blood once for all; he shows that the
ancient sacrifice also was of this kind, was offered "once for all" in blood.
"Which he offers for himself;" again, "for himself; and for the errors of the
people." He said not "sins"; but "errors," that they might not be high-minded.
For even if you have not sinned intentionally, yet unintentionally you have erred,
and from this no man is pure.
And everywhere [he adds] the "for himself," showing that Christ is much
greater. For if He be separated from our sins, how did He "offer for Himself"?
Why then did you say these things (one says)? Because this is [a mark] of One
that is superior.