THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.20, C.2.

to say, to the rays of this goodness. Secondly, human nature is
subject to God, as regards God's power, inasmuch as human nature,
even as every creature, is subject to the operation of the Divine
ordinance. Thirdly, human nature is especially subject to God
through its proper act, inasmuch as by its own will it obeys His
command. This triple subjection to God Christ professes of Himself.
The first (Mt. 19:17): "Why askest thou Me concerning good? One is
good, God." And on this Jerome remarks: "He who had called Him a
good master, and had not confessed Him to be God or the Son of
God, learns that no man, however holy, is good in comparison with
God." And hereby He gave us to understand that He Himself, in His
human nature, did not attain to the height of Divine goodness. And
because "in such things as are great, but not in bulk, to be great is
the same as to be good," as Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 8), for this
reason the Father is said to be greater than Christ in His human
nature. The second subjection is attributed to Christ, inasmuch as all
that befell Christ is believed to have happened by Divine
appointment; hence Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv) that Christ "is
subject to the ordinance of God the Father." And this is the
subjection of subservience, whereby "every creature serves
God" (Judith 16:17), being subject to His ordinance, according to
Wis. 16:24: "The creature serving Thee the Creator." And in this way
the Son of God (Phil. 2:7) is said to have taken "the form of a
servant." The third subjection He attributes to Himself, saying (Jn.
8:29): "I do always the things that please Him." And this is the
subjection to the Father, of obedience unto death. Hence it is written
(Phil. 2:8) that he became "obedient" to the Father "unto death."
Reply to Objection 1: As we are not to understand that Christ is a
creature simply, but only in His human nature, whether this
qualification be added or not, as stated above (Question 16, Article
8), so also we are to understand that Christ is subject to the Father
not simply but in His human nature, even if this qualification be not
added; and yet it is better to add this qualification in order to avoid
the error of Arius, who held the Son to be less than the Father.
Reply to Objection 2: The relation of subservience and dominion is
based upon action and passion, inasmuch as it belongs to a servant
to be moved by the will of his master. Now to act is not attributed to
the nature as agent, but to the person, since "acts belong to
supposita and to singulars," according to the Philosopher (Metaph. i,
1). Nevertheless action is attributed to the nature as to that whereby
the person or hypostasis acts. Hence, although the nature is not

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.20, C.2.