said "them" in the plural, as Augustine (Gen. ad lit. iii, 22) remarks,
lest it should be thought that both sexes were united in one
individual. But in a secondary sense the image of God is found in
man, and not in woman: for man is the beginning and end of woman;
as God is the beginning and end of every creature. So when the
Apostle had said that "man is the image and glory of God, but
woman is the glory of man," he adds his reason for saying this: "For
man is not of woman, but woman of man; and man was not created
for woman, but woman for man."
Reply to Objection 2:and 3: These reasons refer to the image
consisting in the conformity of grace and glory.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the image of God is in man according to

the Trinity of Persons?
Objection 1: It would seem that the image of God does not exist in
man as to the Trinity of Persons. For Augustine says (Fulgentius De
Fide ad Petrum i): "One in essence is the Godhead of the Holy
Trinity; and one is the image to which man was made." And Hilary
(De Trin. v) says: "Man is made to the image of that which is
common in the Trinity." Therefore the image of God in man is of the
Divine Essence, and not of the Trinity of Persons.
Objection 2: Further, it is said (De Eccl. Dogmat.) that the image of
God in man is to be referred to eternity. Damascene also says (De
Fide Orth. ii, 12) that the image of God in man belongs to him as "an
intelligent being endowed with free-will and self-movement." Gregory
of Nyssa (De Homin. Opificio xvi) also asserts that, when Scripture
says that "man was made to the image of God, it means that human
nature was made a participator of all good: for the Godhead is the
fulness of goodness." Now all these things belong more to the unity
of the Essence than to the distinction of the Persons. Therefore the
image of God in man regards, not the Trinity of Persons, but the
unity of the Essence.
Objection 3: Further, an image leads to the knowledge of that of
which it is the image. Therefore, if there is in man the image of God
as to the Trinity of Persons; since man can know himself by his
natural reason, it follows that by his natural knowledge man could
know the Trinity of the Divine Persons; which is untrue, as was
shown above (Question 32, Article 1).
Objection 4: Further, the name of Image is not applicable to any of
the Three Persons, but only to the Son; for Augustine says (De Trin.
vi, 2) that "the Son alone is the image of the Father." Therefore, if in
man there were an image of God as regards the Person, this would
not be an image of the Trinity, but only of the Son.
On the contrary, Hilary says (De Trin. iv): "The plurality of the Divine
Persons is proved from the fact that man is said to have been made
to the image of God."
I answer that, as we have seen (Question 40, Article 2), the