minded, who will care truly for your state." How then do you say now, "The
brethren which are with me"? He either says, "The brethren which are with me,"
because he has no one like-minded of those who are with him, (where he does
not speak of those in the city, for how were they constrained to undertake the
affairs of the Apostles?) or that he did not refuse to call even those brethren.
Ver. 22, 23. "All the saints salute you, especially they that are of Cæsar's
household. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit."
He elevated them and strengthened them, by showing that his preaching had
reached even to the king's household. For if those who were in the king's palace
despised all things for the sake of the King of Heaven, far more ought they to do
this. And this too was a proof of the love of Paul, and that he had told many
things of them, and said great things of them, whence he had even led those who
were in the palace to a longing for them, so that those who had never seen them
saluted them. Especially because the faithful were then in affliction, his love was
great. And those who were absent from each other were closely conjoined
together as if real limbs. And the poor man was similarly disposed toward the
rich, and the rich toward the poor, and there was no preëminence, in that they
were all equally hated and cast out, and that for the same cause. For as, if
captives taken from various cities should arise and come to the same towns, they
eagerly embrace each other, their common calamity binding them together; thus
too at that time they had great love one toward another, the communion of their
afflictions and persecutions uniting them.
Moral. For affliction is an unbroken bond, the increase of love, the occasion
of compunction and piety. Hear the words of David, "It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I might learn Your statutes." [Psalm 119:71] And again
another prophet, who says, "It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his
youth." [Lamentations 3:27] And again, "Blessed is the man whom You chasten,
O Lord." [Psalm 94:12] And another who says, "Despise not the chastening of
the Lord." [Proverbs 3:11] And "if you come near to serve the Lord, prepare
your soul for temptation." [Sirach 11:1] And Christ also said to His disciples, "In

the world you shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer." [John 16:33] And
again, "You shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice." [John 16:20]
And again, "Narrow and straitened is the way." [Matthew 7:14] Do you see how
tribulation is everywhere lauded, everywhere assumed as needful for us? For if
in the contests of the world, no one without this receives the crown, unless he
fortify himself by toil, by abstinence from delicacies, by living according to rule,
by watchings, and innumerable other things, much more so here. For whom will
you name as an instance? The king? Not even he lives a life free from care, but
one burdened with much tribulation and anxiety. For look not to his diadem, but
to his sea of cares, by which the crown is produced for him. Nor look to his
purple robe, but to his soul, which is darker than that purple. His crown does not
so closely bind his brow, as care does his soul. Nor look to the multitude of his
spearmen, but to the multitude of his disquietudes. For it is not possible to find a
private house laden with so many cares as a king's palace. Violent deaths are
each day expected, and a vision of blood is seen as they sit down to eat and
drink. Nor can we say how oft he is disturbed in the night season, and leaps up,
haunted with visions. And all this in peace; but if war should overtake him, what
could be more piteous than such a life as this! What evils has he from those that
are his own, I mean, those who are under his dominion. Nay, and of a truth the
pavement of a king's house is always full of blood, the blood of his own
relations. And if you will, I will also relate some instances, and you will
presently know; chiefly old occurrences— but also some things that have
happened in our own times— yet still preserved in memory. One, it is said,
having suspected his wife of adultery, bound her naked upon mules, and exposed
her to wild beasts, though she had already been the mother to him of many
princes. What sort of life, think ye, could that man have lived? For he would not
have broken out into such vengeance, had he not been deeply affected with that
distress. Moreover, this same man slew his own son, or rather his brother did so.
Of his sons, the one indeed slew himself when seized by a tyrant, and another
put to death his cousin, his colleague in the kingdom, to which he had appointed