FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.5.

eternal law itself.
Reply to Objection 1: We may speak of God's will in two ways. First,
as to the will itself: and thus, since God's will is His very Essence, it
is subject neither to the Divine government, nor to the eternal law,
but is the same thing as the eternal law. Secondly, we may speak of
God's will, as to the things themselves that God wills about
creatures; which things are subject to the eternal law, in so far as
they are planned by Divine Wisdom. In reference to these things
God's will is said to be reasonable: though regarded in itself it
should rather be called their type [ratio].
Reply to Objection 2: God the Son was not made by God, but was
naturally born of God. Consequently He is not subject to Divine
providence or to the eternal law: but rather is Himself the eternal law
by a kind of appropriation, as Augustine explains (De Vera Relig.
xxxi). But He is said to be subject to the Father by reason of His
human nature, in respect of which also the Father is said to be
greater than He.
The third objection we grant, because it deals with those necessary
things that are created.
Reply to Objection 4: As the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text. 6),
some necessary things have a cause of their necessity: and thus
they derive from something else the fact that they cannot be
otherwise. And this is in itself a most effective restraint; for whatever
is restrained, is said to be restrained in so far as it cannot do
otherwise than it is allowed to.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.93, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether natural contingents are subject to the

eternal law?
Objection 1: It would seem that natural contingents are not subject
to the eternal law. Because promulgation is essential to law, as
stated above (Question 90, Article 4). But a law cannot be
promulgated except to rational creatures, to whom it is possible to
make an announcement. Therefore none but rational creatures are
subject to the eternal law; and consequently natural contingents are
not.
Objection 2: Further, "Whatever obeys reason partakes somewhat of
reason," as stated in Ethic. i. But the eternal law, is the supreme
type, as stated above (Article 1). Since then natural contingents do
not partake of reason in any way, but are altogether void of reason, it
seems that they are not subject to the eternal law.
Objection 3: Further, the eternal law is most efficient. But in natural
contingents defects occur. Therefore they are not subject to the
eternal law.
On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 8:29): "When He compassed the
sea with its bounds, and set a law to the waters, that they should not
pass their limits."
I answer that, We must speak otherwise of the law of man, than of
the eternal law which is the law of God. For the law of man extends
only to rational creatures subject to man. The reason of this is
because law directs the actions of those that are subject to the
government of someone: wherefore, properly speaking, none
imposes a law on his own actions. Now whatever is done regarding
the use of irrational things subject to man, is done by the act of man
himself moving those things, for these irrational creatures do not
move themselves, but are moved by others, as stated above
(Question 1, Article 2). Consequently man cannot impose laws on
irrational beings, however much they may be subject to him. But he
can impose laws on rational beings subject to him, in so far as by his
command or pronouncement of any kind, he imprints on their minds
a rule which is a principle of action.
Now just as man, by such pronouncement, impresses a kind of