[2 Thessalonians 3:13] Even thus do we at home; when any two are striving with
each other, we take each apart, and give them the opposite advice. This did God
also, and Moses. For while to God he said, "If you will forgive them their sin,
forgive it; else blot me out also;" them on the contrary he commanded to slay
one another, and all that pertained to them. Yet these things are contrary;
nevertheless, both looked to one end.
Again, God said to Moses in the hearing of the Jews, "Let me alone, that I
may consume the people," [Exodus 32:10] (for though they were not present
when God was saying this, yet they were to hear it afterwards): but privately He
gives him directions of the opposite tenor. And this, Moses upon constraint
revealed afterwards, thus saying, "What? Did I conceive them, that you say to
me, Carry them, as a nurse would carry the sucking child in her bosom?"
These things are done also in houses, and often a father while he blames the
tutor in private for having used his child reproachfully, saying, "Be not rough,
nor hard," to the youth speaks in the contrary way, "Though thou be reproached
unjustly, bear it;" out of those opposites making up some one wholesome result.
Thus also Paul said to such as are in health and beg, "If any man will not work,
neither let him eat," that he may urge them into employment: but to such as can
show mercy, "You, for your part, be not weary in well doing:" that he may lead
them to give alms.
So also, when he was admonishing those of the Gentiles, in his Epistle to
the Romans, not to be highminded against the Jews, he brought forward also the
wild olive, and he seems to be saying one thing to these, another to those.
[Romans 11:17]
Let us not therefore fall away into cruelty, but let us listen to Paul, saying,
"Be not weary in well doing;" let us listen to the Lord, who says, "Give to every
man that asks of you," [Luke 6:30] and, "Be merciful as your Father."
[Luke 6:36] And though He has spoken of many things, He has nowhere used
this expression, but with regard to our deeds of mercy only. For nothing so
equals us with God, as doing good.

"But nothing is more shameless," says one, "than a poor man." Why, I pray
you? Because he runs up, and cries out after you? Will you then let me point out,
how we are more importunate than they, and very shameless? Remember, I say,
now at the season of the fast, how often, when your table was spread at eventide,
and you had called your ministering servant; on his moving rather leisurely, you
have overset everything, kicking, insulting, reviling, merely about a little delay;
although fully assured, that if not immediately, yet a little after you shall enjoy
your victuals. Upon which thou dost not call yourself impudent, changed as you
are into a wild beast for nothing; but the poor man, alarmed and trembling about
his greater interests (for not about delay, but about famine, is all his fear), him do
you call audacious, and shameless, and impudent, and all the most opprobrious
names? Nay, how is this anything but extreme impudence.
But these things we do not consider: therefore we account such men
troublesome: since if we at all searched into our own doings, and compared them
with theirs, we should not have thought them intolerable.
Be not then a severe judge. Why, if you were clear of all sins, not even then
would the law of God permit you to be strict in searching out other men's sins.
And if the Pharisee perished on this account, what defense are we to find? If He
suffer not such as have done well to be bitter in searching out other men's
doings, much less them that have offended.
7. Let us not then be savage, nor cruel, not without natural feeling, not
implacable, not worse than wild beasts. For I know many to have gone even so
far in brutishness, as for a little trouble to slight famishing persons, and to say
these words: "I have no servant now with me; we are far from home; there is no
money-changer that I know." Oh cruelty! Did you promise the greater, and do
you not fulfill the less? To save your walking a little way, does he perish with
hunger? Oh insolence! Oh pride! Why, if it were ten furlongs to be walked,
ought thou to be backward? Does it not even come into your mind that so your
reward is made greater? For whereas, when you give, you receive reward for the
gift only: when you yourself also go, for this again is appointed you a