SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.5.

Objection 5: Further, religious especially are bound to imitate the
perfection of the apostles; wherefore the Apostle says (Phil. 3:15):
"Let us . . . as many as are perfect, be thus minded." But the Apostle
was unwilling to live at the expense of the faithful, either in order to
cut off the occasion from the false apostles as he himself says (2
Cor. 11:12), or to avoid giving scandal to the weak, as appears from 1
Cor. 9:12. It would seem therefore that religious ought for the same
reasons to refrain from living on alms. Hence Augustine says (De
oper. Monach. 28): "Cut off the occasion of disgraceful marketing
whereby you lower yourselves in the esteem of others, and give
scandal to the weak: and show men that you seek not an easy
livelihood in idleness, but the kingdom of God by the narrow and
strait way."
On the contrary, Gregory says (Dial. ii, 1): The Blessed Benedict after
leaving his home and parents dwelt for three years in a cave, and
while there lived on the food brought to him by a monk from Rome.
Nevertheless, although he was able-bodied, we do not read that he
sought to live by the labor of his hands. Therefore religious may
lawfully live on alms.
I answer that, A man may lawfully live on what is his or due to him.
Now that which is given out of liberality becomes the property of the
person to whom it is given. Wherefore religious and clerics whose
monasteries or churches have received from the munificence of
princes or of any of the faithful any endowment whatsoever for their
support, can lawfully live on such endowment without working with
their hands, and yet without doubt they live on alms. Wherefore in
like manner if religious receive movable goods from the faithful they
can lawfully live on them. For it is absurd to say that a person may
accept an alms of some great property but not bread or some small
sum of money. Nevertheless since these gifts would seem to be
bestowed on religious in order that they may have more leisure for
religious works, in which the donors of temporal goods wish to have
a share, the use of such gifts would become unlawful for them if they
abstained from religious works, because in that case, so far as they
are concerned, they would be thwarting the intention of those who
bestowed those gifts.
A thing is due to a person in two ways. First, on account of
necessity, which makes all things common, as Ambrose [Basil,
Serm. de Temp. lxiv] asserts. Consequently if religious be in need

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.5.

they can lawfully live on alms. Such necessity may occur in three
ways. First, through weakness of body, the result being that they are
unable to make a living by working with their hands. Secondly,
because that which they gain by their handiwork is insufficient for
their livelihood: wherefore Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xvii)
that "the good works of the faithful should not leave God's servants
who work with their hands without a supply of necessaries, that
when the hour comes for them to nourish their souls, so as to make
it impossible for them to do these corporal works, they be not
oppressed by want." Thirdly, because of the former mode of life of
those who were unwont to work with their hands: wherefore
Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xxi) that "if they had in the world
the wherewithal easily to support this life without working, and gave
it to the needy when they were converted to God, we must credit
their weakness and bear with it." For those who have thus been
delicately brought up are wont to be unable to bear the toil of bodily
labor.
In another way a thing becomes due to a person through his
affording others something whether temporal or spiritual, according
to 1 Cor. 9:11, "If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great
matter if we reap your carnal things?" And in this sense religious
may live on alms as being due to them in four ways. First, if they
preach by the authority of the prelates. Secondly, if they be ministers
of the altar, according to 1 Cor. 9:13,14, "They that serve the altar
partake with the altar. So also the lord ordained that they who preach
the Gospel should live by the Gospel." Hence Augustine says (De
oper. Monach. xxi): "If they be gospelers, I allow, they have" (a claim
to live at the charge of the faithful): "if they be ministers of the altar
and dispensers of the sacraments, they need not insist on it, but it is
theirs by perfect right." The reason for this is because the sacrament
of the altar wherever it be offered is common to all the faithful.
Thirdly, if they devote themselves to the study of Holy Writ to the
common profit of the whole Church. Wherefore Jerome says (Contra
Vigil. xiii): "It is still the custom in Judea, not only among us but also
among the Hebrews, for those who meditate on the law of the Lord
day and night, end have no other share on earth but God alone, to be
supported by the subscriptions of the synagogues and of the whole
world." Fourthly, if they have endowed the monastery with the goods
they possessed, they may live on the alms given to the monastery.
Hence Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xxv) that "those who
renouncing or distributing their means, whether ample or of any
amount whatever, have desired with pious and salutary humility to