he suffered from them, and is willing to be accursed for them; to Stephen, who is
stoned, and entreating this sin may be forgiven them. And having considered all
these things, cast away all anger, that God may forgive us also all our trespasses
by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and always, and world
without end. Amen.

## Homily 62 on Matthew

Matt. XIX. 1.
"And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, He
departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judæa beyond Jordan."
Having constantly left Judæa on account of the envy of those men, now He
frequents it from this time forth, because the passion was to be near at hand; He
goes not up, however, unto Jerusalem for a while, but "into the coasts of Judæa."
"And," when He had come, "great multitudes followed Him, and He healed
them." [Matthew 19:2]
For neither in the teaching by words does He continue always, nor in the
wonderful working of signs, but He does now one now the other, variously
working the salvation of them that were waiting upon Him and following Him,
so as by the miracles to appear, in what He said, a Teacher worthy of belief, and
by the teaching of His word to increase the profit from the miracles; and this was
to lead them by the hand to the knowledge of God.
But do thou mark, I pray you, this too, how the disciples pass over whole
multitudes with one word, not declaring by name each of them that are healed.
For they said not, that such a one, and such another, but that many, teaching us to
be unostentatious. But Christ healed, benefiting both them, and by them many
others. For the healing of these men's infirmity was to others a foundation for the
knowledge of God.
But not so to the Pharisees, but even for this self-same thing they become
more fierce, and come unto Him tempting Him. For because they could not lay
hold of the works that were doing, they propose to Him questions. For they
"came unto Him, and tempting Him said, Is it lawful for a man to put away his
wife for every cause?" [Matthew 19:3]
O folly! They thought to silence Him by their questions, although they had

already received certain proof of this power in Him. When at least they argued
much about the Sabbath, when they said, "He blasphemes," when they said, "He
has a devil," when they found fault with His disciples as they were walking in
the grain fields, when they argued about unwashen hands, on every occasion
having sewed fast their mouths, and shut up their shameless tongue, He thus sent
them away. Nevertheless, not even so do they keep off from Him. For such is
wickedness, such is envy, shameless and bold; though it be put to silence ten
thousand times, ten thousand times does it assault again.
But mark thou, I pray you, their craft also from the form of their question.
For neither did they say unto Him, You commanded not to put away a wife, for
indeed He had already discoursed about this law; but never theless they made no
mention of those words; but took occasion from hence, and thinking to make
their snare the greater, and being minded to drive Him to a necessity of
contradicting the law, they say not, why did You enact this or that? But as though
nothing had been said, they ask, "Is it lawful?" expecting that He had forgotten
having said it; and being ready if on the one hand He said, "It is lawful to put
away," to bring against Him the things He Himself had spoken, and to say, How
then did You affirm the contrary? But if the same things now again as before, to
bring against Him the words of Moses.
What then said He? He said not, do you tempt me, you hypocrites?
although afterwards He says this, but here He speaks not thus. Why can this be?
In order that together with His power He might show forth His gentleness also.
For He does neither always keep silence, lest they should suppose they are
hidden; nor does He always reprove, in order that He may instruct us to bear all
things with gentleness.
How then does He answer them? "Have ye not read, that He which made
them at the beginning, made them male and female, and said, For this cause
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and
they two shall be one flesh? So that they are no more two but one flesh. What
therefore God has joined together, let not man put asunder." [Matthew 19:4-6]