24. But the Apostle John says, "Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and
it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when He shall
appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is." Hence it
appears, that the full likeness of God is to take place in that image of God
at that time when it shall receive the full sight of God. And yet this may
also possibly seem to be said by the Apostle John of the immortality of
the body. For we shall be like to God in this too, but only to the Son,
because He only in the Trinity took a body, in which He died and rose
again, and which He carried with Him to heaven above. For this, too, is
called an image of the Son of God, in which we shall have, as He has, an
immortal body, being conformed in this respect not to the image of the
Father or of the Holy Spirit, but only of the Son, because of Him alone is
it read and received by a sound faith, that "the Word was made flesh."
And for this reason the apostle says, "Whom He did foreknow, He also
did predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son, that He might
be the first-born among many brethren." "The first-born" certainly "from
the dead," according to the same apostle; by which death His flesh was
sown in dishonor, and rose again in glory. According to this image of the
Son, to which we are conformed in the body by immortality, we also do
that of which the same apostle speaks, "As we have borne the image of the
earthy, so shall we also bear the image of the heavenly;" to wit, that we
who are mortal after Adam, may hold by a true faith, and a sure and
certain hope, that we shall be immortal after Christ. For so can we now
bear the same image, not yet in sight, but in faith; not yet in fact, but in
hope. For the apostle, when he said this, was speaking of the resurrection
of the body.

### CHAP. 19.—JOHN IS RATHER TO BE UNDERSTOOD OF OUR PERFECT LIKENESS WITH THE TRINITY IN LIFE ETERNAL. WISDOM IS PERFECTED IN HAPPINESS.

25. But in respect to that image indeed, of which it is said, "Let us make
man after our image and likeness," we believe,—and, after the utmost
search we have been able to make, understand,—that man was made after

the image of the Trinity, because it is not said, After my, or After thy
image. And therefore that place too of the Apostle John must be
understood rather according to this image, when he says, "We shall be
like Him, for we shall see Him as He is;" because he spoke too of Him of
whom he had said, "We are the sons of God." And the immortality of the
flesh will be perfected in that moment of the resurrection, of which the
Apostle Paul says, "In the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; and the
dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed." For in that
very twinkling of an eye, before the judgment, the spiritual body shall rise
again in power, in incorruption, in glory, which is now sown a natural
body in weakness, in corruption, in dishonor. But the image which is
renewed in the spirit of the mind in the knowledge of God, not outwardly,
but inwardly, from day to day, shall be perfected by that sight itself;
which then after the judgment shall be face to face, but now makes
progress as through a glass in an enigma.5 And we must understand it to
be said on account of this perfection, that "we shall be like Him, for we
shall see Him as He is." For this gift will be given to us at that time, when
it shall have been said, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you." For then will the ungodly be taken away, so
that he shall not see the glory of the Lord,7 when those on the left hand
shall go into eternal punishment, while those on the right go into life
eternal. But "this is eternal life," as the Truth tells us; "to know Thee," He
says, "the one true God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent."
26. This contemplative wisdom, which I believe is properly called wisdom
as distinct from knowledge in the sacred writings; but wisdom only of
man, which yet man has not except from Him, by partaking of whom a
rational and intellectual mind can be made truly wise;—this
contemplative wisdom, I say, it is that Cicero commends, in the end of the
dialogue Hortensius, when he says: "While, then, we consider these
things night and day, and sharpen our understanding, which is the eye of
the mind, taking care that it be not ever dulled, that is, while we live in
philosophy; we, I say, in so doing, have great hope that, if, on the one
hand, this sentiment and wisdom of ours is mortal and perishable, we
shall still, when we have discharged our human offices, have a pleasant
setting, and a not painful extinction, and as it were a rest from life: or if,
on the other, as ancient philosophers thought,—and those, too, the