6. And now, should you come unto the desert of Egypt, you will see this
desert become better than any paradise, and ten thousand choirs of angels in
human forms, and nations of martyrs, and companies of virgins, and all the
devil's tyranny put down, while Christ's kingdom shines forth in its brightness.
And the mother of poets, and wise men, and magicians, were but inventions of
sottish old women, but the real philosophy, and worthy of heaven, is this, which
was declared unto them by the fishermen. And for this very cause, together with
their so great exactness in doctrine, they exhibit also by their life that extreme
seriousness. For when they have stripped themselves of all that they have, and
are crucified to the whole world, they urge their course on again yet farther,
using the labor of their body for the nourishment of them that be in need. For
neither, because they fast and watch, do they think it meet to be idle by day; but
their nights they spend in the holy hymns and in vigils, and their days in prayers,
and at the same time in laboring with their own hands imitating the zeal of the
apostle. For if he when the whole world was looking unto him for the sake of
nourishing them that were in need, both occupied a workshop, and practised a
craft, and being thus employed did not so much as sleep by night; how much
more, say they, is it meet that we, who have taken up our abode in the
wilderness, and have nothing to do with the turmoils in the cities, should use the
leisure of our quiet for spiritual labors!
Let us then be ashamed all of us, both they that are rich, and they that are
poor, when those having nothing at all but a body only and hands, force their
way on and strive eagerly to find thence a supply for the poor; while we, having
endless stores within, touch not even our superfluities for these objects. What
kind of plea shall we have then, I pray you? And what sort of excuse?
Yet further consider, how of old these Egyptians were both avaricious, and
gluttonous, together with their other vices. For there were the flesh-pots
[Exodus 16:3] which the Jews remember; there, the great tyranny of the belly.
Nevertheless, having a willing mind, they changed: and having caught fire from
Christ, they set off at once on their voyage towards heaven; and though more

ardent than the rest of mankind, and more headstrong, both in anger, and in
bodily pleasures, they imitate the incorporeal powers in meekness, and in the rest
of that freedom from passions which pertains unto self-denial.
7. Now if any man has been in the country, he knows what I say. But if he
have never entered those tabernacles, let him call to mind him who even until
now is in the mouths of all men—him whom, after the apostles, Egypt brought
forth—the blessed and great Antony; and let him put it to himself, "This man,
too, was born in the same country with Pharaoh; nevertheless he was not
thereby damaged, but both had a divine vision vouchsafed him, and showed forth
such a life as the laws of Christ require." And this any man shall know perfectly,
when he has read the book that contains the history of that man's life; in which
also he will perceive much prophecy. I allude to his prediction about those
infected with the errors of Arius, and his statement of the mischief that would
arise from them; God even then having shown them to him, and sketched out
before his eyes all that was coming. A thing which most especially (among the
rest) serves to demonstrate the truth, that no person, belonging to the heresies
without, has such a man to mention. But, not to depend on us for this
information, look earnestly into what is written in that book, and you will learn
all exactly, and thence be instructed in much self-denial.
And this advice I give, that we not merely peruse what is written there, but
that we also emulate it, and make neither place, nor education, nor forefathers'
wickedness an excuse. For if we will take heed to ourselves, none of these things
shall be an hindrance to us, since even Abraham had an ungodly father,
[Joshua 24:2] but he inherited not his wickedness; and Hezekiah, Ahaz: yet
nevertheless he became dear to God. And Joseph too when in the midst of Egypt,
adorned himself with the crowns of temperance; and the Three Children no less
in the midst of Babylon, and of the palace, when a table like those at Sybaris was
set before them, showed the highest self-denial; and Moses also in Egypt, and
Paul in the whole world; but nothing was to any one of these an hindrance in the
race of virtue.