circumcision: for he preached the decrees of the Apostles. "And as they went
through the cities, they delivered them the decrees for to keep, that were
ordained of the Apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem. And so were the
Churches established in the faith, and increased in number daily." (v. 4, 5.) Do
you mark fighting, and by fighting, edification? Not warred upon by others, but
themselves doing contrary things, so they edified the Church! They introduced a
decree not to circumcise, and he circumcises! "And so were the Churches," it
says, "established in the faith," and in multitude: "increased," it says, "in number
daily." Then he does not continue to tarry with these, as having come to visit
them: but how? He goes further. "Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia
and the region of Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the
word in Asia," [Acts 16:6] having left Phrygia and Galatia, they hastened into
the interior. For, it says, "After they had come to Mysia, they assayed to go into
Bithynia: but the Spirit suffered them not." [Acts 16:7] Wherefore they were
forbidden, he does not say, but that they were "forbidden," he does say, teaching
us to obey and not ask questions, and showing that they did many things as men.
"And the Spirit," it says, "suffered them not: but having passed by Mysia they
came down to Troas." [Acts 16:8] "And a vision appeared to Paul in the night;
There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into
Macedonia, and help us." [Acts 16:9] Why a vision, and not the Holy Ghost?
Because He forbade the other. He would even in this way draw them over: since
to the saints also He appeared in a dream, and in the beginning (Paul) himself
saw a vision, "a man coming in and laying his hands upon him." [Acts 9:12] In
this manner also Christ appears to him, saying, "You must stand before Cæsar."
Then for this reason also He draws him there, that the preaching may be
extended. This is why he was forbidden to tarry long in the other cities, Christ
urging him on. For these were to enjoy the benefit of John for a long time, and
perhaps did not extremely need him (Paul), but there he behooved to go. And
now he crosses over and goes forth. "And after he had seen the vision,
immediately we endeavored to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the

Lord had called us for to preach the Gospel unto them." [Acts 16:10] Then the
writer mentions also the places, as relating a history, and showing where he
made a stay (namely), in the greater cities, but passed by the rest. "Therefore
loosing from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next
day to Neapolis; and from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that part
of Macedonia, and a colony." (v. 11, 12.) It is a high distinction for a city, the
being a colony. "And in this city we were tarrying certain days." But let us look
over again what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "And after some days, Paul said," etc. [Acts 15:36] He put
to Barnabas a necessity for their going abroad, saying "Let us visit the cities in
which we preached the word." "But Paul begged," etc. [Acts 15:38] And yet no
need for him to beg, who had to make an accusation presently. This happens
even in the case where God and men are the parties: the man requests, God is
angry. For instance, when He says, "If her father had spit in her face" [Numbers
12:14]: and again, "Let me alone, and in Mine anger I will blot out this people."
[Exodus 32:32] And Samuel when he mourns for Saul. [1 Samuel 15:35] For by
both, great good is done. Thus also here: the one is angry, the other not so. The
same happens also in matters where we are concerned. And the sharp contention
with good reason, that Mark may receive a lesson, and the affair may not seem
mere stage-playing. For it is not to be thought that he who bids, "Let not the sun
go down upon your wrath," [Ephesians 4:26] would have been angry because of
such a matter as this: nor that he who on all occasions gave way would not have
given way here, he who so greatly loved Paul that before this he sought him in
Tarsus, and brought him to the Apostles, and undertook the alms in common
with him, and in common the business relating to the decree. But they take
themselves so as to instruct and make perfect by their separation them that need
the teaching which was to come from them. And he rebukes others indeed, but
bids do good to all men. As in fact he does elsewhere, saying, "But you, be not
weary in well-doing." [2 Thessalonians 3:13] This we also do in our common
practice. Here it seems to me that others also were alike displeased with Paul.