one mind and fervent love, and thereby becoming eagles, so to mount up to the
very heaven, nay, even beyond the heaven. "For wheresoever the carcass is,"
says He, "there also will be the eagles," [Matthew 24:28] calling His body a
carcass by reason of His death. For unless He had fallen, we should not have
risen again. But He calls us eagles, implying that he who draws near to this Body
must be on high and have nothing common with the earth, nor wind himself
downwards and creep along; but must ever be soaring heavenwards, and look on
the Sun of Righteousness, and have the eye of his mind quick-sighted. For
eagles, not daws, have a right to this table. Those also shall then meet Him
descending from heaven, who now worthily have this privilege, even as they
who do so unworthily, shall suffer the extremest torments.
For if one would not inconsiderately receive a king— (why say I a king?
Nay were it but a royal robe, one would not inconsiderately touch it with unclean
hands;)— though he should be in solitude, though alone, though no man were at
hand: and yet the robe is nought but certain threads spun by worms: and if you
admire the dye, this too is the blood of a dead fish; nevertheless, one would not
choose to venture on it with polluted hands: I say now, if even a man's garment
be what one would not venture inconsiderately to touch, what shall we say of the
Body of Him Who is God over all, spotless, pure, associate with the Divine
Nature, the Body whereby we are, and live; whereby the gates of hell were
broken down and the sanctuaries of heaven opened? How shall we receive this
with so great insolence? Let us not, I pray you, let us not slay ourselves by our
irreverence, but with all awfulness and purity draw near to It; and when you see
It set before you, say thou to yourself, "Because of this Body am I no longer
earth and ashes, no longer a prisoner, but free: because of this I hope for
heaven, and to receive the good things therein, immortal life, the portion of
angels, converse with Christ; this Body, nailed and scourged, was more than
death could stand against; this Body the very sun saw sacrificed, and turned
aside his beams; for this both the veil was rent in that moment, and rocks were
burst asunder, and all the earth was shaken. This is even that Body, the blood-

stained, the pierced, and that out of which gushed the saving fountains, the one
of blood, the other of water, for all the world."
Would you from another source also learn its power? Ask of her diseased
with an issue of blood, who laid hold not of Itself, but of the garment with which
It was clad; nay not of the whole of this, but of the hem: ask of the sea, which
bare It on its back: ask even of the Devil himself, and say, "Whence have you
that incurable stroke? Whence have you no longer any power? Whence are you
captive? By whom have you been seized in your flight?" And he will give no
other answer than this, "The Body that was crucified." By this were his goads
broken in pieces; by this was his head crushed; by this were the powers and the
principalities made a show of. "For," says he, "having put off from himself
principalities and powers, He made a show of them openly, triumphing over
them in it." [Colossians 2:15]
Ask also Death, and say, "whence is it that your sting has been taken away?
Your victory abolished? Your sinews cut out? And thou become the laughingstock of girls and children, who wast before a terror even to kings and to all
righteous men?" And he will ascribe it to this Body. For when this was crucified,
then were the dead raised up, then was that prison burst, and the gates of brass
were broken, and the dead were loosed, and the keepers of hell-gate all cowered
in fear. And yet, had He been one of the many, death on the contrary should have
become more mighty; but it was not so. For He was not one of the many.
Therefore was death dissolved. And as they who take food which they are unable
to retain, on account of that vomit up also what was before lodged in them; so
also it happened unto death. That Body, which he could not digest, he received:
and therefore had to cast forth that which he had within him. Yea, he travailed in
pain, while he held Him, and was straitened until He vomited Him up.
Wherefore says the Apostle, "Having loosed the pains of death." [Acts 11:24]
For never woman labouring of child was so full of anguish as he was torn and
racked in sunder, while he held the Body of the Lord. And that which happened
to the Babylonian dragon, when, having taken the food it burst asunder in the