THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.4.

one is moved towards an image as a certain thing, is different from
the movement towards the thing: whereas the latter movement,
which is towards the image as an image, is one and the same as that
which is towards the thing. Thus therefore we must say that no
reverence is shown to Christ's image, as a thing---for instance,
carved or painted wood: because reverence is not due save to a
rational creature. It follow therefore that reverence should be shown
to it, in so far only as it is an image. Consequently the same
reverence should be shown to Christ's image as to Christ Himself.
Since, therefore, Christ is adored with the adoration of "latria," it
follows that His image should be adored with the adoration of
"latria."
Reply to Objection 1: This commandment does not forbid the making
of any graven thing or likeness, but the making thereof for the
purpose of adoration, wherefore it is added: "Thou shalt not adore
them nor serve them." And because, as stated above, the movement
towards the image is the same as the movement towards the thing,
adoration thereof is forbidden in the same way as adoration of the
thing whose image it is. Wherefore in the passage quoted we are to
understand the prohibition to adore those images which the Gentiles
made for the purpose of venerating their own gods, i.e. the demons,
and so it is premised: "Thou shalt not have strange gods before Me."
But no corporeal image could be raised to the true God Himself,
since He is incorporeal; because, as Damascene observes (De Fide
Orth. iv, 16): "It is the highest absurdity and impiety to fashion a
figure of what is Divine." But because in the New Testament God was
made man, He can be adored in His corporeal image.
Reply to Objection 2: The Apostle forbids us to have anything in
common with the "unfruitful works" of the Gentiles, but not with their
useful works. Now the adoration of images must be numbered
among the unfruitful works in two respects. First, because some of
the Gentiles used to adore the images themselves, as things,
believing that there was something Divine therein, on account of the
answers which the demons used to give in them, and on account of
other such like wonderful effects. Secondly on account of the things
of which they were images; for they set up images to certain
creatures, to whom in these images they gave the veneration of
"latria." Whereas we give the adoration of "latria" to the image of
Christ, Who is true God, not for the sake of the image, but for the
sake of the thing whose image it is, as stated above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: Reverence is due to the rational creature for its
own sake. Consequently, if the adoration of "latria" were shown to
the rational creature in which this image is, there might be an
occasion of error---namely, lest the movement of adoration might
stop short at the man, as a thing, and not be carried on to God,
Whose image he is. This cannot happen in the case of a graven or
painted image in insensible material.
Reply to Objection 4: The Apostles, led by the inward instinct of the
Holy Ghost, handed down to the churches certain instructions which
they did not put in writing, but which have been ordained, in
accordance with the observance of the Church as practiced by the
faithful as time went on. Wherefore the Apostle says (2 Thess. 2:14):
"Stand fast; and hold the traditions which you have learned, whether
by word"---that is by word of mouth---"or by our epistle"---that is by
word put into writing. Among these traditions is the worship of
Christ's image. Wherefore it is said that Blessed Luke painted the
image of Christ, which is in Rome.