(c)

In the third place, it seems that it is not appropriate to divine science to proceed according to the
mode of intellect, for:

1. According to the Philosopher," there is understanding (intellectus) of principles, whereas there
is science of conclusions. But principles alone are not considered in divine science; some
conclusions are also considered. Therefore to proceed according to the mode of intellect is not
appropriate to divine science.

2. Again, we cannot proceed intellectually with regard to those things that transcend every
intellect. But divine things transcend every intellect, as Dionysius and the Philosopher say.
Therefore they cannot be dealt with intellectually.

3. Again, Dionysius says that angels have intellectual power inasmuch as they do not gather their
divine knowledge from what is sensible and divided; but, as he adds, this is beyond the power of
the soul. Therefore, since the divine science that is now under discussion is a science belonging
to the human soul, it appears that its proper method is not to proceed intellectually.

4. Again, theology seems particularly concerned with the things of faith. But understanding
(intelligere) is the goal of the things of faith. Thus it is said in lsaiah, according to another
version, "Unless you believe, you will not understand." So we should not say that proceeding
intellectually about divine things is the method of theology but the goal.

On the contrary, the De Spiritu et Anima says that intellect (intellectus) has for its object created
spirits, while understanding (intelligentia) has for its object God himself. Now divine science is
principally concerned with them. Therefore it seems proper to it to proceed intellectually.

Moreover, the method of a science must correspond to its subject matter. But divine things are
intelligible in virtue of themselves. Therefore the method appropriate to divine science is to
proceed intellectually.

Reply: To the first question (a) I reply that a method of proceeding in the sciences is called
rational in three ways:

ln one way, because of the principles from which we begin; for instance, when we proceed to
prove something beginning with mental beings, like genus, species, opposite, and concepts of
this sort, which the logicians study. In this sense a method will be called rational when in a
science we use the propositions taught in logic; namely, when we use logic as having a teaching
function in the other sciences. But this method of proceeding cannot belong properly to any
particular science: it will fall into error unless it proceeds from its own proper principles.
However, logic and metaphysics may properly and suitably use this method, because both are
universal sciences and in a sense treat of the same subject.

In a second way, a method is called rational because of the end that terminates the thinking
process. (1) For the ultimate end that rational inquiry ought to reach is the understanding of
principles, in which we resolve our judgments. And when this takes place, it is not called a
rational procedure or proof but a demonstration. (2) Sometimes, however, rational inquiry,
cannot arrive at the ultimate end, but stops in the course of the investigation itself; that is to say,
when several possible solutions still remain open to the investigator. This happens when we
proceed by means of probable arguments, which by their nature produce opinion or belief, but
not science. In this sense, rational method is opposed to demonstrative method. We can proceed
by this rational method in all the sciences, preparing the way for necessary, proofs by probable
arguments. This is another use of logic in the demonstrative sciences; not indeed as having a
teaching function, but as being an instrument. ln these two ways, then, a method is called rational
from rational science, for, as the Commentator says, in both of them logic (which is another
name for rational science) is used in the demonstrative sciences.