## CHAPTER LXXV--Confutation of the Arguments which seem to prove the Unity of the
Potential Intellect
ARG. 1. Apparently, every form that is specifically one and numerically multiplied, is
individualised by its matter: for things specifically one and numerically many agree in
form, and are distinguished according to matter. If then the potential intellect is
multiplied according to number in different men, while it remains one in species, it must
be multiplied in this and that man by matter, -- by the matter which is that man's body
the form of which it is supposed to be. But every form, individualised by matter which it
actuates, is a material form: for the being of everything must depend on that on which
its individuation depends: for as general constituents are of the essence of the species,
so individualising constituents are of the essence of this individual. It follows therefore
that the potential intellect is a material form, and consequently that it does not receive
any thing, nor do anything, except through a bodily organ: which is contrary to the
nature of the potential intellect.
Reply. We confess that the potential intellect is specifically one in different men, and
many according to number, -- waiving the point that the constituents of man are not put
into genus and species for what they are in themselves, but for what they are as
constituents of the whole. Still it does not follow that the potential intellect is a material
form, dependent for its being on the body. For as it is specifically proper to the human
soul to be united to a certain species of body, so any individual soul differs from any
other individual soul, in number only, inasmuch as it is referable to numerically another
body. Thus then human souls, -- and consequently the potential intellect, which is a
faculty of the human soul, -- are individualised according to bodies, not that the
individuation is caused by the bodies.
Arg. 2. If the potential intellect were different in this man and that, the impression
understood would have to be numerically different in this man, while remaining one in
species: for since the proper subject of impressions actually understood is the potential
intellect, when that intellect is multiplied there must be a corresponding multiplication of
intellectual impressions according to the number of different individuals. But the only
impressions or forms which are the same in species and different in number, are
individual forms, which cannot be intellectual forms, because objects of intellect are
universal, not particular. It is impossible therefore for the potential intellect to be
multiplied in different individual men.
Reply. This second argument fails from neglecting to distinguish between that whereby
(quo) we understand, and that which (quod) we understand. The impression received in
the potential intellect is not to be taken for that which is understood. For as all arts and
sciences have for their object-matter things which are understood, it would follow that
the subject-matter of all sciences was impressions on the potential intellect: which is
manifestly false, for no science has anything to say to such mental impressions except
psychology and metaphysics: though it is true that through those mental impressions
there is known the whole content of all the sciences. Therefore, in the process of
understanding, the intellectual impression received in the potential intellect is that