It seems necessary to regard these words as parenthetical, though the point is overlooked by all the editors.

"Decem" is of doubtful authority.

also detailed their views] respecting Christ, whom they describe as having been produced
subsequently to all these, and also regarding Soter, who, [according to them,] derived his being
from those Æons who were formed within the Pleroma. But I have of necessity mentioned their
names at present, that from these the absurdity of their falsehood may be made manifest, and also
the confused nature of the nomenclature they have devised. For they themselves detract from [the
dignity of] their Æons by a multitude of names of this sort. They give out names plausible and
credible to the heathen, [as being similar] to those who are called their twelve gods, and even
these they will have to be images of their twelve Æons. But the images [so called] can produce
names [of their own] much more seemly, and more powerful through their etymology to indicate
divinity [than are those of their fancied prototypes].

### Chapter XV.—No account can be given of these productions.
1. But let us return to the fore-mentioned question as to the production [of the Æons]. And, in
the first place, let them tell us the reason of the production of the Æons being of such a kind that
they do not come in contact with any of those things which belong to creation. For they maintain
that those things [above] were not made on account of creation, but creation on account of them;
and that the former are not images of the latter, but the latter of the former. As, therefore, they
render a reason for the images, by saying that the month has thirty days on account of the thirty
Æons, and the day twelve hours, and the year twelve months, on account of the twelve Æons which
are within the Pleroma, with other such nonsense of the same kind, let them now tell us also the
reason for that production of the Æons, why it was of such a nature, for what reason the first and
first-begotten Ogdoad was sent forth, and not a Pentad, or a Triad, or a Septenad, or any one of
those which are defined by a different number? Moreover, how did it come to pass, that from Logos
and Zoe were sent forth ten Æons, and neither more nor less; while again from Anthropos and
Ecclesia proceeded twelve, although these might have been either more or less numerous?
2. And then, again, with reference to the entire Pleroma, what reason is there that it should be
divided into these three —an Ogdoad, a Decad, and a Duodecad—and not into some other number
different from these? Moreover, with respect to the division itself, why has it been made into three
parts, and not into four, or five, or six, or into some other number among those which have no
connection with such numbers as belong to creation? For they describe those [Æons above] as
the original."