evil deprives a thing of some sort of being, as blindness deprives us
of that being which is sight; yet it does not destroy every mode,
species and order, but only such as follow upon the being of sight.
Reply to Objection 4: Augustine says (De Nat. Boni. xxiii), "Every
mode, as mode, is good" (and the same can be said of species and
order). "But an evil mode, species and order are so called as being
less than they ought to be, or as not belonging to that which they
ought to belong. Therefore they are called evil, because they are out
of place and incongruous."
Reply to Objection 5: The nature of light is spoken of as being
without number, weight and measure, not absolutely, but in
comparison with corporeal things, because the power of light
extends to all corporeal things; inasmuch as it is an active quality of
the first body that causes change, i.e. the heavens.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether goodness is rightly divided into the

virtuous, the useful and the pleasant?
Objection 1: It seems that goodness is not rightly divided into the
virtuous, the useful and the pleasant. For goodness is divided by the
ten predicaments, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. i). But the
virtuous, the useful and the pleasant can be found under one
predicament. Therefore goodness is not rightly divided by them.
Objection 2: Further, every division is made by opposites. But these
three do not seem to be opposites; for the virtuous is pleasing, and
no wickedness is useful; whereas this ought to be the case if the
division were made by opposites, for then the virtuous and the
useful would be opposed; and Tully speaks of this (De Offic. ii).
Therefore this division is incorrect.
Objection 3: Further, where one thing is on account of another, there
is only one thing. But the useful is not goodness, except so far as it
is pleasing and virtuous. Therefore the useful ought not to divided
against the pleasant and the virtuous.
On the contrary, Ambrose makes use of this division of goodness
(De Offic. i, 9)
I answer that, This division properly concerns human goodness. But
if we consider the nature of goodness from a higher and more
universal point of view, we shall find that this division properly
concerns goodness as such. For everything is good so far as it is
desirable, and is a term of the movement of the appetite; the term of
whose movement can be seen from a consideration of the movement
of a natural body. Now the movement of a natural body is terminated
by the end absolutely; and relatively by the means through which it
comes to the end, where the movement ceases; so a thing is called a
term of movement, so far as it terminates any part of that movement.
Now the ultimate term of movement can be taken in two ways, either
as the thing itself towards which it tends, e.g. a place or form; or a
state of rest in that thing. Thus, in the movement of the appetite, the
thing desired that terminates the movement of the appetite relatively,
as a means by which something tends towards another, is called the
useful; but that sought after as the last thing absolutely terminating
the movement of the appetite, as a thing towards which for its own