with those who are the most virulent enemies, so the object of their actions and
schemes is to plunge their lovers into shame and poverty, and the worst
extremities. And in the same manner as hunters, when they have spread out their
nets, endeavour to drive there the wild animals, in order that they may put them
to death, so also is it with these women. When they have spread out on every
side the wings of lasciviousness by means of the eyes, and dress, and language,
they afterwards drive in their lovers, and bind them; nor do they give over until
they have drunk up their blood, insulting them at last, and mocking their folly,
and pouring over them a flood of ridicule. And indeed such a man is no longer
worthy of compassion but deserves to be derided and jeered, since he is found
more irrational than a woman, and a harlot besides. Therefore the Wise Man
gives this word of exhortation again, "Drink waters from your own cistern, and
from the fountain of your own well." [Proverbs 5:15] And again; "Let the hind of
your friendship, and the foal of your favours, consort with you." These things he
speaks of a wife associated with her husband by the law of marriage. Why do
you leave her who is a helpmate, to run to one who is a plotter against you? Why
do you turn away from her who is the partner of your living, and court her who
would subvert your life? The one is your member and body, the other is a sharp
sword. Therefore, beloved, flee fornication; both for its present evils, and for its
future punishment.
11. Perchance we may seem to have fallen aside from the subject; but to say
thus much, is no departure from it. For we do not wish to read you histories
merely for their own sake, but that you may correct each of the passions which
trouble you: therefore also we make these frequent appeals, preparing our
discourse for you in all varieties of style; since it is probable that in so large an
assembly, there is a great variety of distempers; and our task is to cure not one
only, but many different wounds; and therefore it is necessary that the medicine
of instruction should be various. Let us however return there from whence we
made this digression: "And the Priest said, Let us draw near unto God. And Saul
asked counsel of God. Shall I go down after the strangers? Will You deliver them

into my hands? But on that day the Lord answered him not." Observe the
benignity and mildness of God who loves man. For He did not launch a
thunderbolt, nor shake the earth; but what friends do to friends, when treated
contemptuously, this the Lord did towards the servant. He only received him
silently, speaking by His silence, and by it giving utterance to all His wrath. This
Saul understood, and said, as it is recorded, "Bring near hither all the tribes of
the people, and know and see in whom this sin has been this day. For as the Lord
lives, Who has saved Israel, though the answer be against Jonathan my son, he
shall surely die." [1 Samuel 14:38] Do you see his rashness? Perceiving that his
first oath had been transgressed, he does not even then learn self-control, but
adds again a second. Consider also the malignity of the devil. For since he was
aware that frequently the son when discovered, and publicly arraigned, is able by
the very sight at once to make the father relent, and might soften the king's
wrath, he anticipated his sentence by the obligation of a second oath; holding
him by a kind of double bond, and not permitting him to be the master of his
own determination, but forcing him on every side to that iniquitous murder. And
even while the offender was not yet produced, he has passed judgment, and
while ignorant of the criminal, he gave sentence. The father became the
executioner; and before the enquiry declared his verdict of condemnation! What
could be more irrational than this proceeding?
12. Saul then having made this declaration, the people were more afraid
than before, and all were in a state of great trembling and terror. But the devil
rejoiced, at having rendered them all thus anxious. There was no one, we are
told, of all the people, who answered. "And Saul said, You will be in bondage,
and I, and Jonathan my son, will be in bondage." But what he means is to this
effect; "You are aiming at nothing else, than to deliver yourselves to your
enemies, and to become slaves instead of free men; while you provoke God
against you, in not delivering up the guilty person." Observe also another
contradiction produced by the oath. It had been fitting, if he wished to find the
author of this guilt, to have made no such threat, nor to have bound himself to