maintained by you; but requires both, that they be quiet, and that they work?
"That they may eat their own bread," says he, not that of another.
Ver. 13. "But you, brethren, be not weary in well doing."
See how immediately the fatherly heart was overcome. He was not able to
carry out his reproof farther, but again pitied them. And see with what
discretion! He has not said, But pardon them, until they are amended; but what?
"But you, be not weary in well doing." Withdraw yourselves, he says, from them,
and reprove them; do not, however, suffer them to perish with hunger. What
then, he says, if having abundance from us, he should remain idle? In that case,
he says, I have spoken of a mild remedy, that you withdraw yourselves from
him, that is, do not partake with him in free conversation; show that you are
angry. This is no little matter. For such is the reproof that is given to a brother, if
we wish really to amend him. We are not ignorant of the methods of reproof. For
tell me, if you had a brother in the flesh, would you then overlook him pining
with hunger? Truly I think not; but perhaps you would even correct him.
Ver. 14. "And if any man obeys not our word by this Epistle."
He has not said, He that disobeys, disobeys me, but "note that man." This is
no slight chastisement. "Have no company with him." Then again he says, "that
he may be ashamed." And he does not permit them to proceed farther. For as he
had said, "if any does not work neither let him eat" fearing lest they should
perish by hunger, he has added, "But in doing good, be not weary." Thus having
said, "Withdraw yourselves, and have no company with him," then fearing lest
this very thing might cut him off from the brotherhood— for he who gives
himself up to despair will quickly be lost if he is not admitted to freedom of
conversation— he has added,
Ver. 15. "Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother."
By this he shows that he has assigned a heavy punishment against him, in
depriving him of freedom of conversation.
For if to be a receiver even with many others is worthy of disgrace, when
they even reprove while they offer it, and withdraw themselves, how great is the

reproach, quite sufficient to sting the soul. For if only giving rather tardily, and
with murmuring, they inflame the receivers— for tell me not of impudent
beggars, but of the faithful— if they were to reprove while they give, what
would they not do? To what punishment would it not be equal? We do not do so,
but as if we had been greatly injured, we so insult and turn away from those who
beg of us. Thou dost not give, but why do you also grieve him? "Admonish
them," he says, "as brethren," do not insult them as enemies. He who
admonishes his brother, does it not publicly. He does not make an open show of
the insult, but he does it privately and with much address, and grieving, as hurt,
and weeping and lamenting. Let us bestow therefore with the disposition of a
brother, let us admonish with the good will of a brother, not as if we grieved at
giving, but as if we grieved for his transgressing the commandment. Since what
is the advantage? For if, even after giving, you insult, you destroy the pleasure of
giving. But when you do not give and yet insult, what wrong do you not do to
that wretched and unfortunate man? He came to you, to receive pity from you,
but he goes away having received a deadly blow, and weeps the more. For when
by reason of his poverty he is compelled to beg, and is insulted on account of his
begging, think how great will be the punishment of those who insult him. "He
that dishonors the poor," it says, "provokes his Maker." [Proverbs 14:12-31,
Septuagint] For tell me, did He suffer him to be poor for your sake, that you
might be able to heal yourself— and do you insult him who for your sake is
poor? What obstinacy is this! What an act of ingratitude is it! "Admonish him as
a brother," he says, and after having given, he orders you to admonish him. But
if even without giving we insult him, what excuse shall we have?
Ver. 16. "Now the Lord of peace Himself give you peace at all times in all
ways."
See how, when he mentions the things that are to be done, he sets his mark
upon them by prayer, adding prayer and supplication, like certain marks set upon
things that are laid up. "Give you peace," he says, "at all times, in all ways." For
since it was likely that contentions would arise from these things, those men