The Greek original of the work of Irenæus is from time to time recovered through the numerous quotations made from
it by subsequent writers, especially by the author's pupil Hippolytus, and by Epiphanius. The latter preserves (Hær. xxxi. secs.
9—32) the preface of Irenæus, and most of the first book. An important difference of reading occurs between the Latin and Greek
in the very first word. The translator manifestly read !"#$, quatenus, while in Epiphanius we find !"$, against. The former is
probably correct, and has been followed in our version. We have also supplied a clause, in order to avoid the extreme length of
the sentence in the original, which runs on without any apodosis to the words %&'()'*+& ,(-./0-&, "I have judged it necessary."
Pothinus, whom he succeeded at Lyons, is generally meant; but the reference may sometimes be to Polycarp, with whom in
early life he had been acquainted. [On this matter of quotations from anonymous authors of the apostolic times, not infrequently
made by Irenæus, consult the important tractate of Dr. Routh, in his Reliquiæ Sacræ, vol. i. 45—68.]

it my duty (after reading some of the Commentaries, as they call them, of the disciples of Valentinus,
and after making myself acquainted with their tenets through personal intercourse with some of
them) to unfold to thee, my friend, these portentous and profound mysteries, which do not fall
within the range of every intellect, because all have not sufficiently purged their brains. I do this,
in order that thou, obtaining an acquaintance with these things, mayest in turn explain them to all
those with whom thou art connected, and exhort them to avoid such an abyss of madness and of
blasphemy against Christ. I intend, then, to the best of my ability, with brevity and clearness to set
forth the opinions of those who are now promulgating heresy. I refer especially to the disciples of
Ptolemæus, whose school may be described as a bud from that of Valentinus. I shall also endeavour,
according to my moderate ability, to furnish the means of overthrowing them, by showing how
absurd and inconsistent with the truth are their statements. Not that I am practised either in
composition or eloquence; but my feeling of affection prompts me to make known to thee and all
thy companions those doctrines which have been kept in concealment until now, but which are at
last, through the goodness of God, brought to light. "For there is nothing hidden which shall not
be revealed, nor secret that shall not be made known."
3. Thou wilt not expect from me, who am resident among the Keltæ, and am accustomed for
the most part to use a barbarous dialect, any display of rhetoric, which I have never learned, or any
excellence of composition, which I have never practised, or any beauty and persuasiveness of style,
to which I make no pretensions. But thou wilt accept in a kindly spirit what I in a like spirit write
to thee simply, truthfully, and in my own homely way; whilst thou thyself (as being more capable
than I am) wilt expand those ideas of which I send thee, as it were, only the seminal principles; and
in the comprehensiveness of thy understanding, wilt develop to their full extent the points on which
I briefly touch, so as to set with power before thy companions those things which I have uttered in
weakness. In fine, as I (to gratify thy long-cherished desire for information regarding the tenets of
these persons) have spared no pains, not only to make these doctrines known to thee, but also to
furnish the means of showing their falsity; so shalt thou, according to the grace given to thee by
the Lord, prove an earnest and efficient minister to others, that men may no longer be drawn away
by the plausible system of these heretics, which I now proceed to describe.
probably followed a somewhat different reading. Various emendations have been proposed, but the author may be understood
by the ordinary text to be referring ironically to the boasted subtlety and sublimity of the Gnostics.
reading through succeeding chapters down to chap. xxix.]