1 Corinthians 14:8
"For if the trumpet give an uncertain voice, who shall prepare himself for
war?"
Thus from things merely ornamental he carries on his argument to those
which are more necessary and useful; and says that not in the harp alone, but in
the trumpet also one may see this effect produced. For in that also there are
certain measures; and they give out at one time a warlike note, and at another
one that is not so; and again sometimes it leads out to line of battle and at others
recalls from it: and unless one know this, there is great danger. Which is just
what he means, and the mischief of it what he is manifesting, when he says,
"who shall prepare himself for war?" So then, if it have not this quality, it is the
ruin of all. "And what is this to us," says one? Truly it concerns you very
especially; wherefore also he adds,

1 Corinthians 14:9
"So also ye, unless ye utter by the tongue, speech easy to be understood,
you will be speaking into the air:" i.e., calling to nobody, speaking unto no one.
Thus every where he shows its unprofitableness.
4. "But if it be unprofitable, why was it given?" says one. So as to be useful
to him that has received it. But if it is to be so to others also, there must be added
interpretation. Now this he says, bringing them near to one another; that if a
person himself have not the gift of interpretation, he may take unto him another
that has it, and make his own gift useful through him. Wherefore he every where
points out its imperfection, that so he may bind them together. Any how, he that
accounts it to be sufficient for itself, does not so much commend it as disparage
it, not suffering it to shine brightly by the interpretation. For excellent indeed and
necessary is the gift, but it is so when it has one to explain what is spoken. Since
the finger too is a necessary thing, but when you separate it from the other
members, it will not be equally useful: and the trumpet is necessary, but when it
sounds at random, it is rather an annoyance. Yea, neither shall any art come to
light, without matter subject to it; nor is matter put into shape, if no form be
assigned to it. Suppose then the voice to be as the subject-matter, but the
distinctness as that form, which not being present, there will be no use in the
material.

1 Corinthians 14:10
"There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and no kind is
without signification:" i.e., so many tongues, so many voices of Scythians,
Thracians, Romans, Persians, Moors, Indians, Egyptians, innumerable other
nations.

1 Corinthians 14:11
"If then I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be to him that speaks a
barbarian." "For suppose not," says he, "that this happens only in our case;
rather in all one may see this taking place: so that I do not say this to disparage
the voice, but to signify that to me it is useless, as long as it is not intelligible."
Next, that he may not render the accusation unpalatable, he makes his charge
alike for the two, saying, "He shall be unto me a barbarian, and I to him." Not
from the nature of the voice, but from our ignorance. Do you see how little by
little he draws men to that which is akin to the subject. Which is his use to do, to
fetch his examples from afar, and to end with what more properly belongs to the
matter. For having spoken of a pipe and harp, wherein is much that is inferior
and unprofitable, he comes to the trumpet, a thing more useful; next, from that
he proceeds to the very voice itself. So also before, when he was discoursing to
show that it was not forbidden the Apostles to receive, beginning first with
husbandmen, and shepherds, and soldiers, then he brought the discourse on to
that which is nearer to the subject, the priests in the old covenant.
But do thou, I pray, consider, how every where he has given diligence to
free the gift from censure, and to bring round the charge to the receivers of it.
For he said not, "I shall be a barbarian," but, "unto him that speaks, a
barbarian." And again, he did not say, "he that speaks shall be a barbarian," but
"he that speaks shall be a barbarian unto me. "
5. "What then must be done?" says he. Why, so far from disparaging, one
ought to recommend and to teach it; as indeed himself also does. Since after he
had accused and rebuked it and shown its unprofitableness, he proceeds to
counsel them; saying,