SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.2.

after religion, whereby we pay God due worship, and piety, whereby
we worship our parents, and observance, whereby we worship
persons excelling in dignity, there is thankfulness or gratitude,
whereby we give thanks to our benefactors. And it is distinct from
the foregoing virtues, just as each of these is distinct from the one
that precedes, as falling short thereof.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as religion is superexcelling piety, so is it
excelling thankfulness or gratitude: wherefore giving thanks to God
was reckoned above (Question 83, Article 17) among things
pertaining to religion.
Reply to Objection 2: Proportionate repayment belongs to
commutative justice, when it answers to the legal due; for instance
when it is contracted that so much be paid for so much. But the
repayment that belongs to the virtue of thankfulness or gratitude
answers to the moral debt, and is paid spontaneously. Hence
thanksgiving is less thankful when compelled, as Seneca observes
(De Beneficiis iii).
Reply to Objection 3: Since true friendship is based on virtue,
whatever there is contrary to virtue in a friend is an obstacle to
friendship, and whatever in him is virtuous is an incentive to
friendship. In this way friendship is preserved by repayment of
favors, although repayment of favors belongs specially to the virtue
of gratitude.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the innocent is more bound to give

thanks to God than the penitent?
Objection 1: It seems that the innocent is more bound to give thanks
to God than the penitent. For the greater the gift one has received
from God, the more one is bound to give Him thanks. Now the gift of
innocence is greater than that of justice restored. Therefore it seems
that the innocent is more bound to give thanks to God than the
penitent.
Objection 2: Further, a man owes love to his benefactor just as he
owes him gratitude. Now Augustine says (Confess. ii): "What man,
weighing his own infirmity, would dare to ascribe his purity and
innocence to his own strength; that so he should love Thee the less,
as if he had less needed Thy mercy, whereby Thou remittest sins to
those that turn to Thee?" And farther on he says: "And for this let
him love Thee as much, yea and more, since by Whom he sees me to
have been recovered from such deep torpor of sin, by Him he sees
himself to have been from the like torpor of sin preserved."
Therefore the innocent is also more bound to give thanks than the
penitent.
Objection 3: Further, the more a gratuitous favor is continuous, the
greater the thanksgiving due for it. Now the favor of divine grace is
more continuous in the innocent than in the penitent. For Augustine
says (Confess. iii): "To Thy grace I ascribe it, and to Thy mercy, that
Thou hast melted away my sins as it were ice. To Thy grace I ascribe
also whatsoever I have not done of evil; for what might I not have
done? . . . Yea, all I confess to have been forgiven me, both what
evils I committed by my own wilfulness, and what by Thy guidance
committed not." Therefore the innocent is more bound to give thanks
than the penitent.
On the contrary, It is written (Lk. 7:43): "To whom more is forgiven,
he loveth more." Therefore for the same reason he is bound to
greater thanksgiving.
I answer that, Thanksgiving [gratiarum actio] in the recipient
corresponds to the favor [gratia] of the giver: so that when there is
greater favor on the part of the giver, greater thanks are due on the
part of the recipient. Now a favor is something bestowed "gratis":