Now then that unbelievers should have these feelings, is no marvel; but
when they who have partaken of so great mysteries and learned such high rules
of self-denial concerning things to come, delight to dwell in things present, what
indulgence do they deserve?
16. Whence then arises their loving to dwell in present things? From giving
their mind to luxury, and fattening their flesh, and making their soul delicate, and
rendering their burden heavy, and their darkness great, and their veil thick. For in
luxury the better part is enslaved, but the worse prevails; and the former is
blinded on every side and dragged on in its maimed condition; while the other
draws and leads men about every where, though it ought to be in the rank of
things that are led.
Since great indeed is the bond between the soul and the body; the Maker
having contrived this, lest any should induce us to abhor it as alien. For God
indeed bade us love our enemies; but the devil has so far prevailed as to induce
some even to hate their own body. Since when a man says that it is of the devil,
he proves nothing else than this; which is the extreme of dotage. For if it be of
the devil, what is this so perfect harmony, such as to render it meet in every way
for the energies of the self-controlling soul? "Nay," says one, "if it be meet, how
does the body blind it?" It is not the body which blinds the soul; far from it, O
man; but the luxury. But whence do we desire the luxury? Not from our having a
body, by no means; but from an evil choice. For the body requires feeding, not
high feeding , the body needs nourishing, not breaking up and falling apart. You
see that not to the soul only, but to the very body also which receives the
nourishment, the luxury is hostile. For it becomes weaker instead of strong, and
softer instead of firm, and sickly instead of healthful, and heavier instead of
light, and slighter instead of compact, and ill-favored instead of handsome, and
unsavory instead of fragrant, and impure instead of clean, and full of pain
instead of being at ease, and useless instead of useful, and old instead of young,
and decaying instead of strong, and slow and dull instead of quick, and maimed
instead of whole. Whereas if it were of the devil, it ought not to receive injury

from the things of the devil, I mean, from sin.
17. But neither is the body, nor food, of the devil, but luxury alone. For by
means of it that malignant fiend brings to pass his innumerable evils. Thus did
he make victims of a whole people. "For the beloved waxed fat," says one, "and
grew thick, and was enlarged, and kicked." [Deuteronomy 32:15] And thence
also was the beginning of those thunderbolts on Sodom. And to declare this,
Ezekiel said, "But this was the iniquity of Sodom, in pride and fullness of bread
and refinements they waxed wanton." [Ezekiel 16:4] Therefore also Paul said, [1
Timothy 5:6] "She that gives herself to pleasure , is dead while she lives." How
should this be? Because as a sepulchre she bears about her body, bound close to
innumerable evils. And if the body so perish, how will the soul be affected; what
disorder, what waves, what a tempest will she be filled with? Hereby, you see,
she becomes unfitted for every duty, and will have no power easily to speak, or
hear, or take counsel, or do anything that is needful. But as a pilot when the
storm has got the better of his skill, is plunged into the deep, vessels and sailors
and all: so also the soul together with the body is drowned in the grievous abyss
of insensibility.
For, in fact, God has set the stomach in our bodies as a kind of mill, giving
it a proportionate power, and appointing a set measure which it ought to grind
every day. If therefore one cast in more, remaining undigested it does injury to
the whole body. Hence diseases and weaknesses and deformities: since in truth
luxury makes the beautiful woman not only sickly, but also foul to look upon.
For when she is continually sending forth unpleasant exhalations, and breathes
fumes of stale wine, and is more florid than she ought to be, and spoils the
symmetry that beseems a woman, and loses all her seemliness, and her body
becomes flabby, her eyelids bloodshot and distended, and her bulk unduly great,
and her flesh an useless load; consider what a disgust it all produces.
Moreover, I have heard a physician say that many have been hindered from
reaching their proper height by nothing so much as luxurious living. For the
breath being obstructed by the multitude of things which are cast in and being