SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.4.

damnation. Hence it belongs to the unhappy state of the damned,
that they should know that they cannot by any means escape from
damnation and obtain happiness. Wherefore it is written (Job 15:22):
"He believeth not that he may return from darkness to light." It is,
therefore, evident that they cannot apprehend happiness as a
possible good, as neither can the blessed apprehend it as a future
good. Consequently there is no hope either in the blessed or in the
damned. On the other hand, hope can be in wayfarers, whether of
this life or in purgatory, because in either case they apprehend
happiness as a future possible thing.
Reply to Objection 1: As Gregory says (Moral. xxxiii, 20) this is said
of the devil as regards his members, whose hope will fail utterly: or,
if it be understood of the devil himself, it may refer to the hope
whereby he expects to vanquish the saints, in which sense we read
just before (Job 40:18): "He trusteth that the Jordan may run into his
mouth": this is not, however, the hope of which we are speaking.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (Enchiridion viii), "faith is
about things, bad or good, past, present, or future, one's own or
another's; whereas hope is only about good things, future and
concerning oneself." Hence it is possible for lifeless faith to be in the
damned, but not hope, since the Divine goods are not for them future
possible things, but far removed from them.
Reply to Objection 3: Lack of hope in the damned does not change
their demerit, as neither does the voiding of hope in the blessed
increase their merit: but both these things are due to the change in
their respective states.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether there is certainty in the hope of a

wayfarer?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is no certainty in the hope of a
wayfarer. For hope resides in the will. But certainty pertains not to
the will but to the intellect. Therefore there is no certainty in hope.
Objection 2: Further, hope is based on grace and merits, as stated
above (Question 17, Article 1). Now it is impossible in this life to
know for certain that we are in a state of grace, as stated above (FS,
Question 112, Article 5). Therefore there is no certainty in the hope of
a wayfarer.
Objection 3: Further, there can be no certainty about that which may
fail. Now many a hopeful wayfarer fails to obtain happiness.
Therefore wayfarer's hope has no certainty.
On the contrary, "Hope is the certain expectation of future
happiness," as the Master states (Sent. iii, D, 26): and this may be
gathered from 2 Tim. 1:12, "I know Whom I have believed, and I am
certain that He is able to keep that which I have committed to Him."
I answer that, Certainty is found in a thing in two ways, essentially
and by participation. It is found essentially in the cognitive power; by
participation in whatever is moved infallibly to its end by the
cognitive power. In this way we say that nature works with certainty,
since it is moved by the Divine intellect which moves everything with
certainty to its end. In this way too, the moral virtues are said to work
with greater certainty than art, in as much as, like a second nature,
they are moved to their acts by the reason: and thus too, hope tends
to its end with certainty, as though sharing in the certainty of faith
which is in the cognitive faculty.
This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: Hope does not trust chiefly in grace already
received, but on God's omnipotence and mercy, whereby even he
that has not grace, can obtain it, so as to come to eternal life. Now
whoever has faith is certain of God's omnipotence and mercy.
Reply to Objection 3: That some who have hope fail to obtain