FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.2.

that they were forbidden to accept presents, as is clearly stated in
Ex. 23:8: "You shall not take bribes, which even blind the wise, and
pervert the words of the just."
Objection 5: Further, as a kingdom is the best form of government,
so is tyranny the most corrupt. But when the Lord appointed the
king, He established a tyrannical law; for it is written (1 Kgs. 8:11):
"This will be the right of the king, that shall reign over you: He will
take your sons," etc. Therefore the Law made unfitting provision with
regard to the institution of rulers.
On the contrary, The people of Israel is commended for the beauty of
its order (Num. 24:5): "How beautiful are thy tabernacles, O Jacob,
and thy tents." But the beautiful ordering of a people depends on the
right establishment of its rulers. Therefore the Law made right
provision for the people with regard to its rulers.
I answer that, Two points are to be observed concerning the right
ordering of rulers in a state or nation. One is that all should take
some share in the government: for this form of constitution ensures
peace among the people, commends itself to all, and is most
enduring, as stated in Polit. ii, 6. The other point is to be observed in
respect of the kinds of government, or the different ways in which
the constitutions are established. For whereas these differ in kind, as
the Philosopher states (Polit. iii, 5), nevertheless the first place is
held by the "kingdom," where the power of government is vested in
one; and "aristocracy," which signifies government by the best,
where the power of government is vested in a few. Accordingly, the
best form of government is in a state or kingdom, where one is given
the power to preside over all; while under him are others having
governing powers: and yet a government of this kind is shared by
all, both because all are eligible to govern, and because the rules are
chosen by all. For this is the best form of polity, being partly
kingdom, since there is one at the head of all; partly aristocracy, in
so far as a number of persons are set in authority; partly democracy,
i.e. government by the people, in so far as the rulers can be chosen
from the people, and the people have the right to choose their rulers.
Such was the form of government established by the Divine Law. For
Moses and his successors governed the people in such a way that
each of them was ruler over all; so that there was a kind of kingdom.
Moreover, seventy-two men were chosen, who were elders in virtue:
for it is written (Dt. 1:15): "I took out of your tribes wise and

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.2.

honorable, and appointed them rulers": so that there was an element
of aristocracy. But it was a democratical government in so far as the
rulers were chosen from all the people; for it is written (Ex. 18:21):
"Provide out of all the people wise men," etc.; and, again, in so far as
they were chosen by the people; wherefore it is written (Dt. 1:13):
"Let me have from among you wise men," etc. Consequently it is
evident that the ordering of the rulers was well provided for by the
Law.
Reply to Objection 1: This people was governed under the special
care of God: wherefore it is written (Dt. 7:6): "The Lord thy God hath
chosen thee to be His peculiar people": and this is why the Lord
reserved to Himself the institution of the chief ruler. For this too did
Moses pray (Num. 27:16): "May the Lord the God of the spirits of all
the flesh provide a man, that may be over this multitude." Thus by
God's orders Josue was set at the head in place of Moses; and we
read about each of the judges who succeeded Josue that God
"raised . . . up a saviour" for the people, and that "the spirit of the
Lord was" in them (Jgs 3:9,10,15). Hence the Lord did not leave the
choice of a king to the people; but reserved this to Himself, as
appears from Dt. 17:15: "Thou shalt set him whom the Lord thy God
shall choose."
Reply to Objection 2: A kingdom is the best form of government of
the people, so long as it is not corrupt. But since the power granted
to a king is so great, it easily degenerates into tyranny, unless he to
whom this power is given be a very virtuous man: for it is only the
virtuous man that conducts himself well in the midst of prosperity,
as the Philosopher observes (Ethic. iv, 3). Now perfect virtue is to be
found in few: and especially were the Jews inclined to cruelty and
avarice, which vices above all turn men into tyrants. Hence from the
very first the Lord did not set up the kingly authority with full power,
but gave them judges and governors to rule them. But afterwards
when the people asked Him to do so, being indignant with them, so
to speak, He granted them a king, as is clear from His words to
Samuel (1 Kgs. 8:7): "They have not rejected thee, but Me, that I
should not reign over them."
Nevertheless, as regards the appointment of a king, He did establish
the manner of election from the very beginning (Dt. 17:14, seqq.):
and then He determined two points: first, that in choosing a king they
should wait for the Lord's decision; and that they should not make a
man of another nation king, because such kings are wont to take