whit the less. Or, to use a more familiar example, I will instance that of light,
which the Apostle himself added immediately, saying, "And the Life was the
Light." As then light, however many myriads it may enlighten, suffers no
diminution of its own brightness; so also God, before commencing His work and
after completing it, remains alike indefectible, nothing diminished, nor wearied
by the greatness of the creation. Nay, if need were that ten thousand, or even an
infinite number of such worlds be created, He remains the same, sufficient for
them all not merely to produce, but also to control them after their creation. For
the word "Life" here refers not merely to the act of creation, but also to the
providence (engaged) about the permanence of the things created; it also lays
down beforehand the doctrine of the resurrection, and is the beginning of these
marvelous good tidings. Since when "life" has come to be with us, the power of
death is dissolved; and when "light" has shone upon us, there is no longer
darkness, but life ever abides within us, and death cannot overcome it. So that
what is asserted of the Father might be asserted absolutely of Him (Christ) also,
that "In Him we live and move and have our being." [Colossians 1:16-17] As
Paul has shown when he says, "By Him were all things created," and "by Him all
things consist"; for which reason He has been called also "Root" and
"Foundation."
But when you hear that "In Him was Life," do not imagine Him a
compound Being, since farther on he says of the Father also, "As the Father has
Life in Himself, so has He given to the Son also to have Life" [John 5:26]; now
as you would not on account of this expression say that the Father is
compounded, so neither can you say so of the Son. Thus in another place he
says, that "God is Light" [1 John 1:5], and elsewhere (it is said), that He "dwells
in light unapproachable" [1 Timothy 6:16]; yet these expressions are used not
that we may suppose a compounded nature, but that little by little we may be led
up to the highest doctrines. For since one of the multitude could not easily have
understood how His life was Life Impersonate, he first used that humbler
expression, and afterwards leads them (thus) trained to the higher doctrine. For

He who had said that "He has given Him (the Son) to have life" [John 5:26]; the
Same says in another place, "I am the Life" [John 14:6]; and in another, "I am the
Light." [John 8:12] And what, tell me, is the nature of this "light"? This kind (of
light) is the object not of the senses, but of the intellect, enlightening the soul
herself. And since Christ should hereafter say, that "None can come unto Me
except the Father draw him" [John 6:44]; the Apostle has in this place
anticipated an objection, and declared that it is He (the Son) who "gives light"
[John 1:9]; that although you hear a saying like this concerning the Father, you
may not say that it belongs to the Father only, but also to the Son. For, "All
things," He says, "which the Father has are Mine." [John 16:15]
First then, the Evangelist has instructed us respecting the creation, after that
he tells us of the goods relating to the soul which He supplied to us by His
coming; and these he has darkly described in one sentence, when he says, "And
the Life was the Light of men." [John 1:4] He does not say, "was the light of the
Jews," but universally "of men": nor did the Jews only, but the Greeks also, come
to this knowledge, and this light was a common proffer made to all. "Why did he
not add 'Angels,' but said, 'of men?'?" Because at present his discourse is of the
nature of men, and to them he came bearing glad tidings of good things.
"And the light shines in darkness." [John 1:5] He calls death and error,
"darkness." For the light which is the object of our senses does not shine in
darkness, but apart from it; but the preaching of Christ has shone forth in the
midst of prevailing error, and made it to disappear. And He by enduring death
has so overcome death, that He has recovered those already held by it. Since
then neither death overcame it, nor error, since it is bright everywhere, and
shines by its proper strength, therefore he says,
"And the darkness comprehended it not." For it cannot be overcome, and
will not dwell in souls which wish not to be enlightened.
4. But let it not trouble you that It took not all, for not by necessity and
force, but by will and consent does God bring us to Himself. Therefore do not
thou shut your doors against this light, and you shall enjoy great happiness. But