2. Again, in the Physics the Philosopher frequently distinguishes between the methods of
arriving at rational conclusions and physical conclusions. Therefore it is not the special
characteristic of natural science to proceed rationally.

3. Again, what is common to all the sciences should not be reserved to one. But every science
proceeds by reasoning, advancing from effects to causes or from causes to effects or from certain
signs So this method should not be reserved to natural science.

4. Again, in the Ethics the Philosopher distinguishes the reasoning part of the soul from the
scientific part. But natural philosophy belongs to the scientific part. Therefore it is not
appropriately said to proceed according to the mode of reason.

On the contrary, the De Spiritu et Anima says that reason is concerned with the forms of
bodies. Now it belongs most especially to natural philosophy to consider bodies. Therefore the
rational method is appropriately attributed to it.

Moreover, Boethius says: "When reason contemplates some universal nature, using neither
imagination nor sense, it nevertheless comprehends imaginable and sensible things." Now it
belongs to the natural philosopher alone to comprehend what is imaginable and sensible.
Therefore the rational method is suitably attributed to natural philosophy.

(b)

In the second place, it seems inappropriate to say that mathematics proceeds according to the
mode of learning, for:

1. Learning seems to be nothing else than the receiving knowledge. But we receive scientific
knowledge in all branches of philosophy, because all proceed by means of demonstration. So it
is common to all parts of philosophy to proceed according to the mode of learning; and so this
procedure should not be made exclusive to mathematics.

2. Again, the more certain something is, the easier it seems to learn it. But natural things seem to
be more certain than mathematics because they are apprehended by the senses, from which all
our knowledge takes its origin. Therefore this method belongs to the natural philosopher rather

than to the mathematician.

3. Again, as the Metaphysics says, in the sciences we begin at the point from which we learn
more easily. But learning begins with logic, which must be mastered before mathematics and all
the other sciences. Therefore it belongs to logic rather than to the other sciences to proceed
according to the mode of learning.

4. Again, the methods of natural and divine science are taken from powers of the soul, namely
from reason and intellect. Therefore in the same way the method of mathematics ought to be
taken from some power of the soul. So it is not appropriate to say that its method is to proceed
according to the mode of learning.

On the contrary, to proceed according to the mode of learning is to proceed by demonstration
and with certitude. But as Ptolemy says, "Mathematics alone, if one applies himself diligently to
it, will give the inquirer after knowledge firm and unshaken certitude by demonstrations carried
out with unquestionable methods." Therefore it is most characteristic of mathematics to proceed
according to the mode of learning. Moreover, this is evident from the Philosopher who, in
several places in his works, calls the mathematical sciences disciplines.