probably unpleasant and undesirable. In the first place his sight of heaven, and
heavenly things would have been delayed, which is no small loss to those who
have put their trust in things to come; and in the next place, even had he lived a
very pure life yet the length of his life and the exigencies of his high office
would have prevented his departing in such a pure condition as has now been the
case. In fact it is uncertain whether he might not have undergone many changes
and given way to indolence before he breathed his last. For now we are
confident that by the grace of God he has taken his flight to the region of rest,
because he had not committed himself to any of those deeds which exclude from
the kingdom of Heaven; but in that case after long contact with public business,
he might probably have contracted great defilement. For it is an exceedingly rare
thing for one who is moving in the midst of such great evils to hold a straight
course, but to go astray, both wittingly and against his will, is a natural thing,
and one which constantly occurs. But, as it is, we have been relieved from this
apprehension, and we are firmly persuaded that in the great day he will appear in
much radiance, shining forth near the King, and going with the angels in
advance of Christ and clad with the robe of unutterable glory, and standing by
the side of the King as he gives judgment, and acting as one of His chief
ministers. Wherefore desisting from mourning and lamentation do thou hold on
to the same way of life as his, yea even let it be more exact, that having speedily
attained an equal standard of virtue with him, you may inhabit the same abode
and be united to him again through the everlasting ages, not in this union of
marriage but another far better. For this is only a bodily kind of intercourse, but
then there will be a union of soul with soul more perfect, and of a far more
delightful and far nobler kind.

## Homily on St. Ignatius

Eulogy. On the holy martyr Saint Ignatius, the god-bearer, arch-bishop
of Antioch the great, who was carried off to Rome, and there suffered
martyrdom, and thence was conveyed back again to Antioch.
1. [Sumptuous] and splendid entertainers give frequent and constant
entertainments, alike to display their own wealth, and to show good-will to their
acquaintance. So also the grace of the Spirit, affording us a proof of his own
power, and displaying much good-will towards the friends of God, sets before us
successively and constantly the tables of the martyrs. Lately, for instance, a
maiden quite young, and unmarried, the blessed martyr Pelagia, entertained us,
with much joy. Today again, this blessed and noble martyr Ignatius has
succeeded to her feast. The persons are different: The table is one. The
wrestlings are varied: The crown is one. The contests are manifold: The prize is
the same. For in the case of the heathen contests, since the tasks are bodily, men
alone are, with reason, admitted. But here, since the contest is wholly concerning
the soul, the lists are open to each sex, for each kind the theatre is arranged.
Neither do men alone disrobe, in order that the women may not take refuge in
the weakness of their nature, and seem to have a plausible excuse, nor have
women only quitted themselves like men, lest the race of men be put to shame;
but on this side and on that many are proclaimed conquerors, and are crowned,
in order that you may learn by means of the exploits themselves that in Christ
Jesus neither male nor female, [Galatians 3:28] neither sex, nor weakness of
body, nor age, nor any such thing could be a hindrance to those who run in the
course of religion; if there be a noble readiness, and an eager mind, and a fear of
God, fervent and kindling, be established in our souls. On this account both
maidens and women, and men, both young and old, and slaves, and freemen, and
every rank, and every age, and each sex, disrobe for those contests, and in no