But (you say) he has means, and pretends. This is a charge against yourself,
not against him. He knows that he has to deal with the cruel, with wild beasts
rather than with men, and that, even if he utter a pitiable story, he attracts no
one's attention: and on this account he is forced to assume also a more miserable
guise, that he may melt your soul. If we see a person coming to beg in a
respectable dress, This is an impostor (you say), and he comes in this way that
he may be supposed to be of good birth. If we see one in the contrary guise, him
too we reproach. What then are they to do? O the cruelty, O the inhumanity!
And why (you say) do they expose their maimed limbs? Because of you. If
we were compassionate, they would have no need of these artifices: if they
persuaded us at the first application, they would not have contrived these
devices. Who is there so wretched, as to be willing to cry out so much, as to be
willing to behave in an unseemly way, as to be willing to make public
lamentations, with his wife destitute of clothing, with his children, to sprinkle
ashes on [himself]. How much worse than poverty are these things? Yet on
account of them not only are they not pitied, but are even accused by us.
9. Shall we then still be indignant, because when we pray to God, we are
not heard? Shall we then still be vexed, because when we entreat we do not
persuade? Do we not tremble for fear, my beloved?
But (you say) I have often given. But do you not always eat? And do you
drive away your children often begging of you? O the shamelessness! Do you
call a poor man shameless? And thou indeed art not shameless when plundering,
but he is shameless when begging for bread! Considerest thou not how great are
the necessities of the belly? Do you not do all things for this? Do you not for this
neglect things spiritual? Is not heaven set before you and the kingdom of
heaven? And thou fearing the tyranny of that [appetite] endurest all things, and
thinkest lightly of that [kingdom]. This is shamelessness.
Do you see not old men maimed? But O what trifling! 'Such an one' (you
say) 'lends out so many pieces of gold, and such an one so many, and yet begs.'
You repeat the stories and trifles of children; for they too are always hearing

such stories from their nurses. I am not persuaded of it. I do not believe this. Far
from it. Does a man lend money, and beg when he has abundance? For what
purpose, tell me? And what is more disgraceful than begging? It were better to
die than to beg. Where does our inhumanity stop? What then? Do all lend
money? Are all impostors? Is there no one really poor? "Yea" (you say) "and
many." Why then do you not assist those persons, seeing you are a strict enquirer
into their lives? This is an excuse and a pretense.
"Give to every one that asks of you, and from him that would borrow of you
turn not thou away." [Matthew 5:42] Stretch out your hand, let it not be closed
up. We have not been constituted examiners into men's lives, since so we should
have compassion on no one. When you call upon God why do you say,
Remember not my sins? So then, if that person even be a great sinner, make this
allowance in his case also, and do not remember his sins. It is the season of
kindness, not of strict enquiry; of mercy, not of account. He wishes to be
maintained: if you are willing, give; but if not willing, send him away without
raising doubts. Why are you wretched and miserable? Why do you not even
yourself pity him, and also turnest away those who would? For when such an
one hears from you, This [fellow] is a cheat; that a hypocrite; and the other lends
out money; he neither gives to the one nor to the other; for he suspects all to be
such. For you know that we easily suspect evil, but good, not [so easily].
10. Let us "be merciful," not simply so, but "as our heavenly Father is."
[Luke 6:36] He feeds even adulterers, and fornicators, and sorcerers, and what
shall I say? Those having every kind of wickedness. For in so large a world there
must needs be many such. But nevertheless He feeds all; He clothes all. No one
ever perished of hunger, unless one did so of his own choice. So let us be
merciful. If one be in want and in necessity, help him.
But now we have come to such a degree of unreasonableness, as to act thus
not only in regard to the poor who walk up and down the alleys, but even in the
case of men that live in [religious] solitude. Such an one is an impostor, you say.
Did I not say this at first, that if we give to all indiscriminately, we shall always