THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.43, C.5.

with so great a power so many defects and ailments and grievances
of mortal men, this we read concerning none soever of the men of
old. To say nothing of those, each of whom by His bidding, as they
came in His way, He made whole . . . Mark saith (6:56):
'Whithersoever He entered, into towns or into villages or into cities,
they laid the sick in the streets, and besought Him that they might
touch but the hem of His garment: and as many as touched Him were
made whole.' These things none other did in them; for when He saith
'In them,' it is not to be understood to mean 'Among them,' or 'In
their presence,' but wholly 'In them,' because He healed them . . .
Therefore whatever works He did in them are works that none ever
did; since if ever any other man did any one of them, by His doing he
did it; whereas these works He did, not by their doing, but by
Himself."
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine explains this passage of John as
follows (Tract. lxxi): "What are these 'greater works' which believers
in Him would do? That, as they passed by, their very shadow healed
the sick? For it is greater that a shadow should heal than the hem of
a garment . . . When, however, He said these words, it was the deeds
and works of His words that He spoke of: for when He said . . . 'The
Father who abideth in Me, He doth the works,' what works did He
mean, then, but the words He was speaking? . . . and the fruits of
those same words was the faith of those (who believed): but when
the disciples preached the Gospel, not some few like those, but the
very nations believed . . . (Tract. lxxii). Did not that rich man go away
from His presence sorrowful? . . . and yet afterwards, what one
individual, having heard from Him, did not, that many did when He
spake by the mouth of His disciples . . . Behold, He did greater works
when spoken of by men believing than when speaking to men
hearing. But there is yet this difficulty: that He did these 'greater
works' by the apostles: whereas He saith as meaning not only
them: . . . 'He that believeth in Me' . . . Listen! . . . 'He that believeth in
Me, the works that I do, he also shall do': first, 'I do,' then 'he also
shall do,' because I do that he may do. What works---but that from
ungodly he should be made righteous? . . . Which thing Christ
worketh in him, truly, but not without him. Yes, I may affirm this to be
altogether greater than to create" "heaven and earth . . . for 'heaven
and earth shall pass away'; but the salvation and justification of the
predestinate shall remain . . . But also in the heavens . . . the angels
are the works of Christ: and does that man do greater works than
these, who co-operates with Christ in the work of his
justification? . . . let him, who can, judge whether it be greater to