11. In the salvific design of the Most Holy Trinity, the mystery of the Incarnation
constitutes the superabundant fulfillment of the promise made by God to man after
original sin, after that first sin whose effects oppress the whole earthly history of man (cf.
Gen. 3:15). And so, there comes into the world a Son, "the seed of the woman" who will
crush the evil of sin in its very origins: "he will crush the head of the serpent." As we see
from the words of the Protogospel, the victory of the woman's Son will not take place
without a hard struggle, a struggle that is to extend through the whole of human history.
The "enmity," foretold at the beginning, is confirmed in the Apocalypse (the book of the
final events of the Church and the world), in which there recurs the sign of the "woman,"
this time "clothed with the sun" (Rev. 12:1).

Mary, Mother of the Incarnate Word, is placed at the very center of that enmity, that
struggle which accompanies the history of humanity on earth and the history of salvation
itself. In this central place, she who belongs to the "weak and poor of the Lord" bears in
herself, like no other member of the human race, that "glory of grace" which the Father
"has bestowed on us in his beloved Son," and this grace determines the extraordinary
greatness and beauty of her whole being. Mary thus remains before God, and also before
the whole of humanity, as the unchangeable and inviolable sign of God's election, spoken
of in Paul's letter: "in Christ...he chose us...before the foundation of the world,...he
destined us...to be his sons" (Eph. 1:, 5). This election is more powerful than any
experience of evil and sin, than all that "enmity" which marks the history of man. In this
history Mary remains a sign of sure hope.

### 2. Blessed is she who believed
12. Immediately after the narration of the Annunciation, the Evangelist Luke guides us in
the footsteps of the Virgin of Nazareth towards "a city of Judah" (Lk. 1:39). According to
scholars this city would be the modern Ain Karim, situated in the mountains, not far from
Jerusalem. Mary arrived there "in haste," to visit Elizabeth her kinswoman. The reason
for her visit is also to be found in the fact that at the Annunciation Gabriel had made
special mention of Elizabeth, who in her old age had conceived a son by her husband
Zechariah, through the power of God: "your kins woman Elizabeth in her old age has also
conceived a Son; and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. For with
God nothing will be impossible" (Lk. 1:36-37). The divine messenger had spoken of what
had been accomplished in Elizabeth in order to answer Mary's question. "How shall this
be, since I have no husband?" (Lk. 1:34) It is to come to pass precisely through the
"power of the Most High," just as it happened in the case of Elizabeth, and even more so.