the soul of him that was wounded to be, that he had power after this grievous
wound both to rise up again, and to stand in the very forefront of the battle array,
and bear down him that had wounded him.
And how great a thing this is, they best know, whosoever are fallen into
grievous sins. For it is not so much a proof of a generous and vigorous soul to
walk upright, and to run all the way (for such a soul has the good hope going
along with it, to cheer and to rouse it, to nerve and render it more zealous); as
after those innumerable crowns, and so many trophies, and victories, having
undergone the utmost loss, to be able to resume the same course. And that what I
say may be made plain, I will endeavor to bring before you another example, not
at all inferior to the former.
For imagine, I pray you, some pilot, when he had compassed seas without
number, and sailed over the whole ocean; after those many storms, and rocks and
waves, to sink, having with him a great freight, in the very mouth of the harbor,
and hardly with his naked body to escape this grievous shipwreck; how would he
naturally feel towards the sea, and navigation, and such labors? Will such a one
then ever choose, unless he be of a very noble soul, to see a beach, or a vessel, or
a harbor? I trow not; but he will lie hiding his face, seeing night all through the
day, and shrinking from all things; and he will choose rather to live by begging,
than to put his hand to the same labors.
But not such was this blessed man; but though he had undergone such a
shipwreck, after those innumerable troubles and toils, he stayed not with his face
covered, but launched his vessel, and having spread his sails, and taken the
rudder in hand, he applies himself to the same labors, and has made his wealth
more abundant again. Now if to stand be so admirable, and not to lie down for
ever after one has fallen; to rise up again, and to do such deeds, what crowns
would not this deserve?
And yet surely there were many things to drive him to despair; as first, the
greatness of his sins; secondly, that not at the beginning of life, when our hopes
also are more abundant, but near the end, these things befell him. For neither

does the merchant, who has just gone out of the harbor and been wrecked, grieve
equally with him, who after very many traffickings strikes on a rock. Thirdly,
that when he had already obtained great wealth, he incurred this. Yea, for by that
time he had stored up no small merchandise: for instance, the deeds of his early
youth, when he was a shepherd; those about Goliath, when he set up the glorious
trophy; those pertaining to his self-command respecting Saul. Since he showed
forth even the evangelical long-suffering, in that he got his enemy ten thousand
times into his hands, and continually spared him; and chose rather to be an
outcast from his country and from liberty, and from life itself, than to slay him
that was unjustly plotting against him. Likewise after his coming to the kingdom,
there were noble deeds of his to no small amount.
And besides what I have said, his credit also among the many, and his fall
from glory so bright, would cause no ordinary perplexity. For the purple did by
no means so much adorn him, as the stain of his sin disgraced him. And ye know
of course what a great thing it is for evil deeds to be exposed, and how great a
soul is required in such an one, not to despond after the censure of the multitude,
and when he has so many witnesses of his own offenses.
Nevertheless all these darts that noble person drew out of his soul, and so
shone forth after this, so wiped out the stain, became so pure, that his offspring
even after his death had their sins mitigated by him: and that which was said of
Abraham, we find God saying the same of this man also; or rather, much more of
the latter. For with respect to the patriarch it is said, "I remembered my covenant
with Abraham;" [Exodus 2:24] but here He says not "the covenant," but how? "I
will defend this city for my servant David's sake." [Isaiah 37:35] And besides, on
account of His favor towards him, He suffered not Solomon to fall from the
kingdom, great as the sin was which he had committed. And so great was the
glory of the man, that Peter, so many years after, in exhorting the Jews, spoke on
this wise: "Let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both
dead and buried." [Acts 2:29] And Christ too, discoursing with the Jews,
signifies him after his sin to have had the Spirit vouchsafed to such a degree, that