1 Corinthians 16:13-14
"Watch ye, stand fast in the faith."
Not in the wisdom which is without: for there it is not possible to stand, but
to be borne along; even as "in the faith" ye may "stand." "Quit you like men, be
strong." "Let all that you do be done in love." Now in saying these things, he
seems indeed to advise; but he is reprimanding them as indolent. Wherefore he
says, "Watch," as though they slept; "Stand," as though they were rocking to and
fro: "Quit you like men," as though they were playing the coward: "Let all that
you do be done in love," as though they were in dissensions. And the first
caution refers to the deceivers, viz., "Watch," "stand:" the next, to those who plot
against us, "Quit you like men:" the third, to those who make parties and
endeavor to distract, "Let all that you do be done in love;" which thing is "the
bond of perfectness," and the root and fountain of all blessings.
But what means, "All things in love?" "Whether any one rebuke," says he,
"or rule or be ruled, or learn or teach, let all be in love:" since in fact all the
things which have been mentioned arose from neglect of it. For if this had not
been neglected, they would not have been puffed up, they would not have said,
"I am of Paul, and I of Apollos." If this had existed, they would not have gone to
law before heathens, or rather they would not have gone to law at all. If this had
existed, that notorious person would not have taken his father's wife: they would
not have despised the weak brethren; there would have been no factions among
them; they would not have been vain-glorious about their gifts. Therefore it is
that he says, "Let all things be done in love."

1 Corinthians 16:15-16
3. "Now I beseech you, brethren;— ye know the house of Stephanas, that it
is the first-fruits of Achaia, and that they have set themselves to minister unto the
saints."
In the beginning too he mentions this man, saying, "I baptized also the
home of Stephanas:" and now he speaks of him as "the first-fruits" not of
Corinth only, but also of all Greece. And this too is no small encomium that he
was the first to come to Christ. Wherefore also in the Epistle to the Romans,
praising certain persons on this account, he said, "Who also were in Christ before
me." [Romans 16:7] And he said not, that they were the first who believed, but
were the "first-fruits;" implying that together with their faith they showed forth
also a most excellent life, in every way proving themselves worthy, as in the case
of fruits. For so the first-fruits ought to be better than the rest of those things
whereof they are the first-fruits: a kind of praise which Paul has attributed to
these also by this expression: namely, that they not only had a genuine faith, as I
was saying, but also they exhibited great piety, and the climax of virtue, and
liberality in almsgiving.
And not from hence only, but from another topic likewise he indicates their
piety, i.e., from their having filled their whole house also with godliness.
And that they flourished in good works also, he declares by what follows,
saying, "They have set themselves to minister unto the saints." Hear ye, how vast
are the praises of their hospitality? For he did not say, "they minister," but, "have
set themselves:" this kind of life they have chosen altogether, this is their
business in which they are always busy.
That ye also be in subjection unto such, that is, "that you take a share with
them both in expenditure of money, and in personal service: that you be
partakers with them." For both to them the labor will be light when they have