forth so abundantly be wrought by the Lord?' the Lord declared, "They who shall come to these
[times] shall see.' " When prophesying of these times, therefore, Esaias says: "The wolf also shall
feed with the lamb, and the leopard shall take his rest with the kid; the calf also, and the bull, and
the lion shall eat together; and a little boy shall lead them. The ox and the bear shall feed together,
and their young ones shall agree together; and the lion shall eat straw as well as the ox. And the
infant boy shall thrust his hand into the asp's den, into the nest also of the adder's brood; and they
shall do no harm, nor have power to hurt anything in my holy mountain." And again he says, in
recapitulation, "Wolves and lambs shall then browse together, and the lion shall eat straw like the
ox, and the serpent earth as if it were bread; and they shall neither hurt nor annoy anything in my
holy mountain, saith the Lord." I am quite aware that some persons endeavour to refer these
words to the case of savage men, both of different nations and various habits, who come to believe,
and when they have believed, act in harmony with the righteous. But although this is [true] now
with regard to some men coming from various nations to the harmony of the faith, nevertheless in
the resurrection of the just [the words shall also apply] to those animals mentioned. For God is rich
in all things. And it is right that when the creation is restored, all the animals should obey and be
in subjection to man, and revert to the food originally given by God (for they had been originally
subjected in obedience to Adam), that is, the productions of the earth. But some other occasion,
and not the present, is [to be sought] for showing that the lion shall [then] feed on straw. And this
indicates the large size and rich quality of the fruits. For if that animal, the lion, feeds upon straw
[at that period], of what a quality must the wheat itself be whose straw shall serve as suitable food
for lions?

### Chapter XXXIV.—He fortifies his opinions with regard to the temporal and earthly kingdom
of the saints after their resurrection, by the various testimonies of Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah,
and Daniel; also by the parable of the servants watching, to whom the Lord promised that
He would minister.
1. Then, too, Isaiah himself has plainly declared that there shall be joy of this nature at the
resurrection of the just, when he says: "The dead shall rise again; those, too, who are in the tombs
shall arise, and those who are in the earth shall rejoice. For the dew from Thee is health to them."
And this again Ezekiel also says: "Behold, I will open your tombs, and will bring you forth out of
your graves; when I will draw my people from the sepulchres, and I will put breath in you, and ye
shall live; and I will place you on your own land, and ye shall know that I am the Lord." And
again the same speaks thus: "These things saith the Lord, I will gather Israel from all nations whither