THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.12.

seeing that "according to the purpose" of God to Whom it pertains to
measure grace, it is bestowed on Christ's soul as on a universal
principle for bestowing grace on human nature, according to Eph.
1:5,6, "He hath graced us in His beloved Son"; thus we might say
that the light of the sun is infinite, not indeed in being, but in the
nature of light, as having whatever can pertain to the nature of light.
Reply to Objection 1: When it is said that the Father "doth not give
the Spirit by measure," it may be expounded of the gift which God
the Father from all eternity gave the Son, viz. the Divine Nature,
which is an infinite gift. Hence the comment of a certain gloss: "So
that the Son may be as great as the Father is." Or again, it may be
referred to the gift which is given the human nature, to be united to
the Divine Person, and this also is an infinite gift. Hence a gloss says
on this text: "As the Father begot a full and perfect Word, it is united
thus full and perfect to human nature." Thirdly, it may be referred to
habitual grace, inasmuch as the grace of Christ extends to whatever
belongs to grace. Hence Augustine expounding this (Tract. xiv in
Joan.) says: "The division of the gifts is a measurement. For to one
indeed by the Spirit is given the word of wisdom, to another the word
of knowledge." But Christ the giver does not receive by measure.
Reply to Objection 2: The grace of Christ has an infinite effect, both
because of the aforesaid infinity of grace, and because of the unity
of the Divine Person, to Whom Christ's soul is united.
Reply to Objection 3: The lesser can attain by augment to the
quantity of the greater, when both have the same kind of quantity.
But the grace of any man is compared to the grace of Christ as a
particular to a universal power; hence as the force of fire, no matter
how much it increases, can never equal the sun's strength, so the
grace of a man, no matter how much it increases, can never equal
the grace of Christ.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.13.

### ARTICLE 12. Whether the grace of Christ could increase?

Objection 1: It would seem that the grace of Christ could increase.
For to every finite thing addition can be made. But the grace of
Christ was finite. Therefore it could increase.
Objection 2: Further, it is by Divine power that grace is increased,
according to 2 Cor. 9:8: "And God is able to make all grace abound
in you." But the Divine power, being infinite, is confined by no limits.
Therefore it seems that the grace of Christ could have been greater.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Lk. 2:52) that the child "Jesus
advanced in wisdom and age and grace with God and men."
Therefore the grace of Christ could increase.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 1:14): "We saw Him as it were . . .
the Only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." But nothing
can be or can be thought greater than that anyone should be the
Only-begotten of the Father. Therefore no greater grace can be or
can be thought than that of which Christ was full.
I answer that, For a form to be incapable of increase happens in two
ways: First on the part of the subject; secondly, on the part of the
form itself. On the part of the subject, indeed, when the subject
reaches the utmost limit wherein it partakes of this form, after its
own manner, e.g. if we say that air cannot increase in heat, when it
has reached the utmost limit of heat which can exist in the nature of
air, although there may be greater heat in actual existence, viz. the
heat of fire. But on the part of the form, the possibility of increase is
excluded when a subject reaches the utmost perfection which this
form can have by nature, e.g. if we say the heat of fire cannot be
increased because there cannot be a more perfect grade of heat than
that to which fire attains. Now the proper measure of grace, like that
of other forms, is determined by the Divine wisdom, according to
Wis. 11:21: "Thou hast ordered all things in number, weight and
measure." And it is with reference to its end that a measure is set to
every form. as there is no greater gravity than that of the earth,
because there is no lower place than that of the earth. Now the end
of grace is the union of the rational creature with God. But there can
neither be nor be thought a greater union of the rational creature
with God than that which is in the Person. And hence the grace of