THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.6.

whereas other liquors are called wine from resemblance to the wine
of the grape. Thirdly, because the wine from the grape is more in
keeping with the effect of this sacrament, which is spiritual; because
it is written (Ps. 103:15): "That wine may cheer the heart of man."
Reply to Objection 1: Such liquors are called wine, not properly but
only from their resemblance thereto. But genuine wine can be
conveyed to such countries wherein the grape-vine does not
flourish, in a quantity sufficient for this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: Wine becomes vinegar by corruption; hence
there is no returning from vinegar to wine, as is said in Metaph. viii.
And consequently, just as this sacrament may not be made from
bread which is utterly corrupt, so neither can it be made from
vinegar. It can, however, be made from wine which is turning sour,
just as from bread turning corrupt, although he who does so sins, as
stated above (Article 3).
Reply to Objection 3: The juice of unripe grapes is at the stage of
incomplete generation, and therefore it has not yet the species of
wine: on which account it may not be used for this sacrament. Must,
however, has already the species of wine, for its sweetness indicates
fermentation which is "the result of its natural heat" (Meteor. iv);
consequently this sacrament can be made from must. Nevertheless
entire grapes ought not to be mixed with this sacrament, because
then there would be something else besides wine. It is furthermore
forbidden to offer must in the chalice, as soon as it has been
squeezed from the grape, since this is unbecoming owing to the
impurity of the must. But in case of necessity it may be done: for it is
said by the same Pope Julius, in the passage quoted in the
argument: "If necessary, let the grape be pressed into the chalice."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether water should be mixed with the wine?

Objection 1: It seems that water ought not to be mixed with the wine,
since Christ's sacrifice was foreshadowed by that of Melchisedech,
who (Gn. 14:18) is related to have offered up bread and wine only.
Consequently it seems that water should not be added in this
sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, the various sacraments have their respective
matters. But water is the matter of Baptism. Therefore it should not
be employed as the matter of this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, bread and wine are the matter of this
sacrament. But nothing is added to the bread. Therefore neither
should anything be added to the wine.
On the contrary, Pope Alexander I writes (Ep. 1 ad omnes orth.): "In
the sacramental oblations which in mass are offered to the Lord,
only bread and wine mixed with water are to be offered in sacrifice."
I answer that, Water ought to be mingled with the wine which is
offered in this sacrament. First of all on account of its institution: for
it is believed with probability that our Lord instituted this sacrament
in wine tempered with water according to the custom of that country:
hence it is written (Prov. 9:5): "Drink the wine which I have mixed for
you." Secondly, because it harmonizes with the representation of our
Lord's Passion: hence Pope Alexander I says (Ep. 1 ad omnes orth.):
"In the Lord's chalice neither wine only nor water only ought to be
offered, but both mixed because we read that both flowed from His
side in the Passion." Thirdly, because this is adapted for signifying
the effect of this sacrament, since as Pope Julius says (Concil.
Bracarens iii, Can. 1): "We see that the people are signified by the
water, but Christ's blood by the wine. Therefore when water is mixed
with the wine in the chalice, the people is made one with Christ."
Fourthly, because this is appropriate to the fourth effect of this
sacrament, which is the entering into everlasting life: hence
Ambrose says (De Sacram. v): "The water flows into the chalice, and
springs forth unto everlasting life."
Reply to Objection 1: As Ambrose says (De Sacram. v), just as
Christ's sacrifice is denoted by the offering of Melchisedech, so