Christ arose at such an hour.
Reply to Objection 1: When the resurrection occurs, it will not be
time but the end of time; because at the very instant that the heavens
will cease to move the dead will rise again. Nevertheless the stars
will be in the same position as they occupy now at any fixed hour:
and accordingly it is said that the resurrection will be at this or that
hour.
Reply to Objection 2: The most perfect disposition of time is said to
be midday, on account of the light given by the sun. But then the city
of God will need neither sun nor moon, because the glory of God will
enlighten it (Apoc. 22:5). Wherefore in this respect it matters not
whether the resurrection be in the day or in the night.
Reply to Objection 3: That time should be adapted to manifestation
as regards the things that will happen then, and to secrecy as
regards the fixing of the time. Hence either may happen fittingly,
namely that the resurrection be in the day or in the night.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the resurrection will happen suddenly or

by degrees?
Objection 1: It would seem that the resurrection will not happen
suddenly but by degrees. For the resurrection of the dead is foretold
(Ezech. 37:7,8) where it is written: "The bones came together . . . and
I saw and behold the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and
the skin was stretched out over them, but there was no spirit in
them." Therefore the restoration of the bodies will precede in time
their reunion with the souls, and thus the resurrection will not be
sudden.
Objection 2: Further, a thing does not happen suddenly if it require
several actions following one another. Now the resurrection requires
several actions following one another, namely the gathering of the
ashes, the refashioning of the body, the infusion of the soul.
Therefore the resurrection will not be sudden.
Objection 3: Further, all sound is measured by time. Now the sound
of the trumpet will be the cause of the resurrection, as stated above
(Question 76, Article 2). Therefore the resurrection will take time and
will not happen suddenly.
Objection 4: Further, no local movement can be sudden as stated in
De Sensu et Sensato vii. Now the resurrection requires local
movement in the gathering of the ashes. Therefore it will not happen
suddenly.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 15:51,52): "We shall all indeed
rise again . . . in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye." Therefore the
resurrection will be sudden.
Further, infinite power works suddenly. But the Damascene says (De
Fide Orth. iv): "Thou shalt believe in the resurrection to be wrought
by the power of God," and it is evident that this is infinite. Therefore
the resurrection will be sudden.
I answer that, At the resurrection something will be done by the
ministry of the angels, and something immediately by the power of
God, as stated above (Question 76, Article 3). Accordingly that which
is done by the ministry of the angels, will not be instantaneous, if by