more in the time of Grace.
Then that he might not make his discourse too rough, he dwells not long
upon his " reduc tio ad absurdum," but again turns his discourse to exhortation,
saying,

1 Corinthians 15:33
"Be not deceived: evil company does corrupt good manners."
And this he said, both to rebuke them as without understanding, (for here he
by a charitable expression, calls "good" that which is easily deceived,) and also,
as far as he could, to make some allowance to them for the past with a view to
their return, and to remove from them and transfer to others the greater part of
his charges, and so by this way also to allure them to repentance. Which he does
likewise in the Epistle to the Galatians, saying, "But he that troubles you shall
bear his judgment, whosoever he be." [Galatians 5:10]

1 Corinthians 15:34
"Awake up righteously and sin not."
As if he were speaking to drunkards and madmen. For suddenly to cast
every thing out of their hands, was the part of drunkards and madmen, in not
seeing any longer what they saw nor believing what they had before confessed.
But what is, "righteously?" with a view to what is profitable and useful. For it is
possible to awake up unrighteously, when a man is thoroughly roused up to the
injury of his own soul. And well did he add, "sin not," implying that hence were
the sins of their unbelief. And in many places he covertly signifies this, that a
corrupt life is the parent of evil doctrines; as when he says, "The love of money is
a root of all kinds of evil, which some reaching after, have been led astray from
the faith." [1 Timothy 6:10] Yea, and many of those who are conscious of
wickedness and would fain not pay its penalty are by this fear damaged also in
their faith concerning the resurrection: even as they who do very virtuously
desire even daily to behold it.
"For some have no knowledge of God; I speak this to move you to shame."
See how again he transfers his accusations to others. For he said not, "You
have no knowledge," but, "some have no knowledge." Because disbelieving the
resurrection is the temper of one not fully aware that the power of God is
irresistable and sufficient for all things. For if out of the things which are not He
made the things that are, much more will He be able to raise again those which
have been dissolved.
And because he had touched them to the quick and exceedingly mocked
them, accusing them of gluttony, of folly, of madness; mitigating those
expressions, he says, "I speak to move you to shame," that is, to set upright, to
bring back, to make you better, by this shame of yours. For he feared lest if he
cut too deep, he should cause them to start away.

5. But let us not consider these things as spoken to them only, but as
addressed now also to all who labor under the same disease, and live a corrupt
life. Since in truth not they who hold corrupt doctrines only, but they too who are
holden of grievous sins, are both drunken and frantic. Wherefore also to them
may it be justly said, "Awake," and especially to those who are weighed down by
the lethargy of avarice; who rob wickedly. For there is a robbery which is good,
the robbery of Heaven, which injures not. And although in respect of money it is
impossible for one to become rich, unless another first become poor: yet in
spiritual things this is not so, but wholly the reverse: it is impossible that any
should become rich without making another's store plentiful. For if you help no
one, you will not be able to grow wealthy. Thus, whereas in temporal things
imparting causes diminution: in spiritual things, on the contrary, imparting works
increase, and the not imparting, this produces great poverty and brings on
extreme punishment. And this is signified by him who buried the talent. Yea, and
he too who has a word of wisdom, by imparting to another increases his own
abundance, by making many wise: but he that buries it at home, deprives himself
of his abundance by neglecting to win the profit of the many. Again, he that had
other gifts, by healing many augmented his own gift: and was neither himself
emptied by the imparting, and filled many others with his own spiritual gift. And
in all spiritual things this rule abides unshaken. Thus also in the Kingdom, he
that makes many partakers with himself of the Kingdom will hereby the more
completely have the fruits of it in return: but he that studies not to have any
partaker will himself be cast out of those many blessings. For if the wisdom of
this world of sense is not spent, though ten thousand are forcibly seizing it; nor
does the artificer by making many artificers lose his own skill; much less does he
who seizes the Kingdom make it less, but then will our riches be increased when
we call many to us for that purpose.
Let us seize then the things which cannot be spent but increase while we
seize them: let us seize the things which admit of none to defraud us of them by
false accusation, none to envy us for them. For so, if there were a place which