at that time the only inhabitants of the earth. Still even then this restrained him
not, but he cast away all from his mind, and stationed himself in the ranks of the
devil; for he it was who then led the war upon Cain's side. For inasmuch as it
was not enough for him that man had become liable to death, by the manner of
the death he tried to make the tragedy still greater, and persuaded him to become
a fratricide. For he was urgent and in travail to see the sentence carried into
effect, as never satisfied with our ills. As if any one who had got an enemy in
prison, and saw him under sentence, were to press, before he was out of the city,
to see him butchered within it, and would not wait even the fitting time, so did
the devil then, though he had heard that man must return to earth, travail with
desire to see something worse, even a son dying before his father, and a brother
destroying a brother, and a premature and violent slaughter. See you what great
service envy has done him? How it has filled the insatiate spirit of the devil, and
has prepared for him a table great as he desired to see?
Let us then escape from the disease; for it is not possible, indeed it is not, to
escape from the fire prepared for the devil, unless we get free from this sickness.
But free we shall get to be if we lay to mind how Christ loved us, and also how
He bade us love one another. Now what love did He show for us? His precious
Blood did He shed for us when we were enemies, and had done the greatest
wrong to Him. This do thou also do in your brother's case (for this is the end of
His saying "A new commandment I give unto you, That ye so love one another as
I have loved you") [John 13:34]; or rather even so the measure does not come to
a stand. For it was in behalf of His enemies that He did this. And are you
unwilling to shed your blood for your brother? Why then do you even shed his
blood, disobeying the commandment even to reversing it? Yet what He did was
not as a due: but you, if you do it, are but fulfilling a debt. Since he too, who,
after receiving the ten thousand talents, demanded the hundred pence, was
punished not merely for the fact that he demanded them, but because even by the
kindness done him he had not become any better, and did not even follow where
his Lord had begun, or remit the debt. For on the part of the servant the thing

done was but a debt after all, if it had been done. For all things that we do, we do
towards the payment of a debt. And this is why Himself said, "When you have
done all, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our
duty to do." [Luke 17:10] If then we display charity, if we give our goods to
them that need, we are fulfilling a debt; and that not only in that it was He who
first began the acts of goodness, but because it is His goods that we are
distributing if we ever do give. Why then deprive yourself of what He wills you
to have the right of? For the reason why He bade you give them to another was
that you might have them yourself. For so long as you have them to yourself
even you yourself hast them not. But when you have given to another, then have
you received them yourself. What charm then will do as much as this? Himself
poured forth His Blood for His enemies: but we not even money for our
benefactor. He did so with His Blood that was His own: we will not even with
money that is not ours. He did it before us, we not even after His example. He
did it for our salvation, we will not do it even for our own advantage. For He is
not to have any advantage from our love toward man, but the whole gain accrues
unto us. For this is the very reason why we are bidden to give away our goods,
that we may not be thrown out of them. For as a person who gives a little child
money and bids him hold it fast, or give it the servant to keep, that it may not be
for whoever will to snatch it away, so also does God. For He says, Give to him
that needs, lest some one should snatch it away from you, as an informer, for
instance, or a calumniator, or a thief, or, after all these are avoided, death. For so
long as you hold it yourself, you have no safe hold of it. But if you give it Me
through the poor, I keep it all for you exactly, and in fit season will return it with
great increase. For it is not to take it away that I receive it, but to make it a larger
amount and to keep it more exactly, that I may have it preserved for you against
that time, in which there is no one to lend or to pity. What then can be more
hard-hearted, than if we, after such promises, cannot make up our minds to lend
to him? Yes, it is for this that we go before Him destitute and naked and poor,
not having the things committed to our charge, because we do not deposit them