servant: for his paralysis is sufficient to brace up our souls: for no one can be so
supine and indolent after having observed the magnitude of that calamity as not
to endure bravely all evils which may befall him, even if they are more
intolerable than all that were ever known. For not only his soundness but also his
sickness has become a cause of the greatest benefit to us: for his cure has
stimulated the souls of the hearers to speak the praise of the Lord, and his
sickness and infirmity has encouraged you to patience, and urged you to match
his zeal; or rather it has exhibited to you the lovingkindness of God. For the
actual deliverance of the man to such a malady, and the protracted duration of his
infirmity is a sign of the greatest care for his welfare. For as a gold refiner
having cast a piece of gold into the furnace suffers it to be proved by the fire
until such time as he sees it has become purer: even so God permits the souls of
men to be tested by troubles until they become pure and transparent and have
reaped much profit from this process of sifting: wherefore this is the greatest
species of benefit.
2. Let us not then be disturbed, neither dismayed, when trials befall us. For
if the gold refiner sees how long he ought to leave the piece of gold in the
furnace, and when he ought to draw it out, and does not allow it to remain in the
fire until it is destroyed and burnt up: much more does God understand this, and
when He sees that we have become more pure, He releases us from our trials so
that we may not be overthrown and cast down by the multiplication of our evils.
Let us then not be repining, or faint-hearted, when some unexpected thing befalls
us; but let us suffer Him who knows these things accurately, to prove our hearts
by fire as long as He pleases: for He does this for a useful purpose and with a
view to the profit of those who are tried.
On this account a certain wise man admonishes us saying "My Son, if you
come to serve the Lord prepare your soul for temptation, set your heart aright
and constantly endure and make not haste in time of trouble;" [Sirach 1:1-2]
"yield to Him" he says, "in all things," for He knows exactly when it is right to
pluck us out of the furnace of evil. We ought therefore everywhere to yield to

Him and always to give thanks, and to bear all things contentedly, whether He
bestows benefits or chastisement upon us, for this also is a species of benefit. For
the physician, not only when he bathes and nourishes the patient and conducts
him into pleasant gardens, but also when he uses cautery and the knife, is a
physician all the same: and a father not only when he caresses his son, but also
when he expels him from his house, and when he chides and scourges him, is a
father all the same, no less than when he praises him. Knowing therefore that
God is more tenderly loving than all physicians, do not enquire too curiously
concerning His treatment nor demand an account of it from Him, but whether He
is pleased to let us go free or whether He punishes, let us offer ourselves for
either alike; for He seeks by means of each to lead us back to health, and to
communion with Himself, and He knows our several needs, and what is
expedient for each one, and how and in what manner we ought to be saved, and
along that path He leads us. Let us then follow wherever He bids us, and let us
not too carefully consider whether He commands us to go by a smooth and easy
path, or by a difficult and rugged one: as in the case of this paralytic. It was one
species of benefit indeed that his soul should be purged by the long duration of
his suffering, being delivered to the fiery trial of affliction as to a kind of
furnace; but it was another benefit no less than this that God was present with
him in the midst of the trials, and afforded him great consolation. He it was who
strengthened him, and upheld him, and stretched forth a hand to him, and
suffered him not to fall. But when you hear that it was God Himself do not
deprive the paralytic of his meed of praise, neither him nor any other man who is
tried and yet steadfastly endures. For even if we be infinitely wise, even if we
are mightier and stronger than all men, yet in the absence of His grace we shall
not be able to withstand even the most ordinary temptation. And why do I speak
of such insignificant and abject beings as we are? For even if one were a Paul, or
a Peter, or a James, or a John, yet if he should be deprived of the divine help he
would easily be put to shame, overthrown, and laid prostrate. And on behalf of
these I will read you the words of Christ Himself: for He says to Peter "Behold