SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.8.

are furthest removed from it, proves the greatness of reason's
power. This is how temperance comes to be a principal virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: The impetuousness of anger is caused by an
accident, for instance, a painful hurt; wherefore it soon passes,
although its impetus be great. On the other hand, the impetuousness
of the desire for pleasures of touch proceeds from a natural cause,
wherefore it is more lasting and more general, and consequently its
control regards a more principal virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: The object of hope is higher than the object of
desire, wherefore hope is accounted the principal passion in the
irascible. But the objects of desires and pleasures of touch move the
appetite with greater force, since they are more natural. Therefore
temperance, which appoints the mean in such things, is a principal
virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether temperance is the greatest of the

virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that temperance is the greatest of the
virtues. For Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 43) that "what we observe and
seek most in temperance is the safeguarding of what is honorable,
and the regard for what is beautiful." Now virtue deserves praise for
being honorable and beautiful. Therefore temperance is the greatest
of the virtues.
Objection 2: Further, the more difficult the deed the greater the
virtue. Now it is more difficult to control desires and pleasures of
touch than to regulate external actions, the former pertaining to
temperance and the latter to justice. Therefore temperance is a
greater virtue than justice.
Objection 3: Further, seemingly the more general a thing is, the more
necessary and the better it is. Now fortitude is about dangers of
death which occur less frequently than pleasures of touch, for these
occur every day; so that temperance is in more general use than
fortitude. Therefore temperance is a more excellent virtue than
fortitude.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Rhet. i, 9) that the "greatest
virtues are those which are most profitable to others, for which
reason we give the greatest honor to the brave and the just."
I answer that, As the Philosopher declares (Ethic. i, 2) "the good of
the many is more of the godlike than the good of the individual,"
wherefore the more a virtue regards the good of the many, the better
it is. Now justice and fortitude regard the good of the many more
than temperance does, since justice regards the relations between
one man and another, while fortitude regards dangers of battle which
are endured for the common weal: whereas temperance moderates
only the desires and pleasures which affect man himself. Hence it is
evident that justice and fortitude are more excellent virtues than
temperance: while prudence and the theological virtues are more
excellent still.
Reply to Objection 1: Honor and beauty are especially ascribed to
temperance, not on account of the excellence of the good proper to