FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.2.

### ARTICLE 1. Whether the first sin of our first parent is

contracted by his descendants, by way of origin?
Objection 1: It would seem that the first sin of our first parent is not
contracted by others, by way of origin. For it is written (Ezech.
18:20): "The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father." But he
would bear the iniquity if he contracted it from him. Therefore no one
contracts any sin from one of his parents by way of origin.
Objection 2: Further, an accident is not transmitted by way of origin,
unless its subject be also transmitted, since accidents do not pass
from one subject to another. Now the rational soul which is the
subject of sin, is not transmitted by way of origin, as was shown in
the FP, Question 118, Article 2. Therefore neither can any sin be
transmitted by way of origin.
Objection 3: Further, whatever is transmitted by way of human
origin, is caused by the semen. But the semen cannot cause sin,
because it lacks the rational part of the soul, which alone can be a
cause of sin. Therefore no sin can be contracted by way of origin.
Objection 4: Further, that which is more perfect in nature, is more
powerful in action. Now perfect flesh cannot infect the soul united to
it, else the soul could not be cleansed of original sin, so long as it is
united to the body. Much less, therefore, can the semen infect the
soul.
Objection 5: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 5): "No one
finds fault with those who are ugly by nature, but only those who are
so through want of exercise and through carelessness." Now those
are said to be "naturally ugly," who are so from their origin.
Therefore nothing which comes by way of origin is blameworthy or
sinful.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 5:12): "By one man sin
entered into this world, and by sin death." Nor can this be
understood as denoting imitation or suggestion, since it is written
(Wis. 2:24): "By the envy of the devil, death came into this world." It
follows therefore that through origin from the first man sin entered
into the world.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.2.

I answer that, According to the Catholic Faith we are bound to hold
that the first sin of the first man is transmitted to his descendants, by
way of origin. For this reason children are taken to be baptized soon
after their birth, to show that they have to be washed from some
uncleanness. The contrary is part of the Pelagian heresy, as is clear
from Augustine in many of his books [Retract. i, 9; De Pecc. Merit. et
Remiss. ix; Contra Julian. iii, 1; De Dono Persev. xi, xii.]
In endeavoring to explain how the sin of our first parent could be
transmitted by way of origin to his descendants, various writers have
gone about it in various ways. For some, considering that the
subject of sin is the rational soul, maintained that the rational soul is
transmitted with the semen, so that thus an infected soul would
seem to produce other infected souls. Others, rejecting this as
erroneous, endeavored to show how the guilt of the parent's soul
can be transmitted to the children, even though the soul be not
transmitted, from the fact that defects of the body are transmitted
from parent to child---thus a leper may beget a leper, or a gouty man
may be the father of a gouty son, on account of some seminal
corruption, although this corruption is not leprosy or gout. Now
since the body is proportionate to the soul, and since the soul's
defects redound into the body, and vice versa, in like manner, say
they, a culpable defect of the soul is passed on to the child, through
the transmission of the semen, albeit the semen itself is not the
subject of the guilt.
But all these explanations are insufficient. Because, granted that
some bodily defects are transmitted by way of origin from parent to
child, and granted that even some defects of the soul are transmitted
in consequence, on account of a defect in the bodily habit, as in the
case of idiots begetting idiots; nevertheless the fact of having a
defect by the way of origin seems to exclude the notion of guilt,
which is essentially something voluntary. Wherefore granted that the
rational soul were transmitted, from the very fact that the stain on
the child's soul is not in its will, it would cease to be a guilty stain
binding its subject to punishment; for, as the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iii, 5), "no one reproaches a man born blind; one rather takes
pity on him."
Therefore we must explain the matter otherwise by saying that all
men born of Adam may be considered as one man, inasmuch as they
have one common nature, which they receive from their first parents;
even as in civil matters, all who are members of one community are