## Homily 71 on Matthew

Matt. XXII. 34-36.
"But when the Pharisees had heard that He had put the Sadducees to
silence, they were gathered together; and one of them, which was a lawyer,
asked Him a question, tempting Him, and saying, Master, which is the great
commandment in the law?"
Again does the evangelist express the cause, for which they ought to have
held their peace, and marks their boldness by this also. How and in what way?
Because when those others were put to silence, these again assail Him. For when
they ought even for this to hold their peace, they strive to urge further their
former endeavors, and put forward the lawyer, not desiring to learn, but making
a trial of Him, and ask, "What is the first commandment?"
For since the first commandment was this, "You shall love the Lord your
God," thinking that He would afford them some handle, as though He would
amend it, for the sake of showing that Himself too was God, they propose the
question. What then says Christ? Indicating from what they were led to this;
from having no charity, from pining with envy, from being seized by jealousy,
He says, "You shall love the Lord your God. This is the first and great
commandment. And the second is like this, You shall love your neighbor as
yourself." [Matthew 22:37-39]
But wherefore "like this?" Because this makes the way for that, and by it is
again established; "For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to
the light;" [John 3:20] and again, "The fool has said in his heart, There is no
God." And what in consequence of this? "They are corrupt, and become
abominable in their ways." And again, "The love of money is the root of all evils;
which while some coveted after they have erred from the faith;" [1 Timothy 6:10]
and, "He that loves me, will keep my commandment."

But His commandments, and the sum of them, are, "You shall love the Lord
your God, and your neighbor as yourself." If therefore to love God is to love
one's neighbor, "For if you love me," He says, "O Peter, feed my sheep,"
[John 21:16-17] but to love one's neighbor works a keeping of the
commandments, with reason does He say, "On these hang all the law and the
prophets." [Matthew 22:40]
So therefore what He did before, this He does here also. I mean, that both
there, when asked about the manner of the resurrection, He also taught a
resurrection, instruct ing them beyond what they inquired; and here, being asked
the first commandment, He rehearses the second also, which is not much inferior
to that (for though second, it is like that), intimating to them, whence the
question had arisen, that it was from hatred. "For charity envies not."
[1 Corinthians 13:4] By this He shows Himself to be submissive both to the law
and to the prophets.
But wherefore does Matthew say that he asked, tempting Him, but Mark the
contrary? "For when Jesus," he says, "saw that he answered discreetly, He said
unto him, You are not far from the kingdom of God." [Mark 12:34]
They are not contradicting each other, but indeed fully agreeing. For he
asked indeed, tempting, at the beginning, but being benefitted by the answer, was
commended. For not at the beginning did He commend him, but when he had
said, "That to love his neighbor is more than whole burnt sacrifices," then He
says, "You are not far from the kingdom;" because he overlooked low things, and
embraced the first principle of virtue. For indeed all those are for the sake of
this, as well the Sabbath as the rest.
And not even so did He make His commendation perfect, but yet deficient.
For His saying, "You are not far off," indicates that he is yet falling short, that he
might seek after what was deficient.
But if, when He said, "There is one God, and there is none other but He,"
He commended him, wonder not, but by this too observe, how He answers
according to the opinion of them that come unto Him. For although men say ten