SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.2.

devise some heresy for itself, that it may appear to have had a
reason for separating from the Church."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether schism is a graver sin than unbelief?

Objection 1: It would seem that schism is a graver sin than unbelief.
For the graver sin meets with a graver punishment, according to Dt.
25:2: "According to the measure of the sin shall the measure also of
the stripes be." Now we find the sin of schism punished more
severely than even the sin of unbelief or idolatry: for we read (Ex.
32:28) that some were slain by the swords of their fellow men on
account of idolatry: whereas of the sin of schism we read (Num.
16:30): "If the Lord do a new thing, and the earth opening her mouth
swallow them down, and all things that belong to them, and they go
down alive into hell, you shall know that they have blasphemed the
Lord God." Moreover the ten tribes who were guilty of schism in
revolting from the rule of David were most severely punished (4 Kgs.
17). Therefore the sin of schism is graver than the sin of unbelief.
Objection 2: Further, "The good of the multitude is greater and more
godlike than the good of the individual," as the Philosopher states
(Ethic. i, 2). Now schism is opposed to the good of the multitude,
namely, ecclesiastical unity, whereas unbelief is contrary to the
particular good of one man, namely the faith of an individual.
Therefore it seems that schism is a graver sin than unbelief.
Objection 3: Further, a greater good is opposed to a greater evil,
according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 10). Now schism is opposed
to charity, which is a greater virtue than faith to which unbelief is
opposed, as shown above (Question 10, Article 2; Question 23,
Article 6). Therefore schism is a graver sin than unbelief.
On the contrary, That which results from an addition to something
else surpasses that thing either in good or in evil. Now heresy
results from something being added to schism, for it adds corrupt
doctrine, as Jerome declares in the passage quoted above (Article 1,
ad 3). Therefore schism is a less grievous sin than unbelief.
I answer that, The gravity of a sin can be considered in two ways:
first, according to the species of that sin, secondly, according to its
circumstances. And since particular circumstances are infinite in
number, so too they can be varied in an infinite number of ways:
wherefore if one were to ask in general which of two sins is the
graver, the question must be understood to refer to the gravity

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.38, C.3.

derived from the sin's genus. Now the genus or species of a sin is
taken from its object, as shown above (FS, Question 72, Article 1; FS,
Question 73, Article 3). Wherefore the sin which is opposed to the
greater good is, in respect of its genus, more grievous, for instance a
sin committed against God is graver than a sin committed against
one's neighbor.
Now it is evident that unbelief is a sin committed against God
Himself, according as He is Himself the First Truth, on which faith is
founded; whereas schism is opposed to ecclesiastical unity, which
is a participated good, and a lesser good than God Himself.
Wherefore it is manifest that the sin of unbelief is generically more
grievous than the sin of schism, although it may happen that a
particular schismatic sins more grievously than a particular
unbeliever, either because his contempt is greater, or because his
sin is a source of greater danger, or for some similar reason.
Reply to Objection 1: It had already been declared to that people by
the law which they had received that there was one God, and that no
other God was to be worshipped by them; and the same had been
confirmed among them by many kinds of signs. Consequently there
was no need for those who sinned against this faith by falling into
idolatry, to be punished in an unwonted manner: it was enough that
they should be punished in the usual way. On the other hand, it was
not so well known among them that Moses was always to be their
ruler, and so it behooved those who rebelled against his authority to
be punished in a miraculous and unwonted manner.
We may also reply by saying that the sin of schism was sometimes
more severely punished in that people, because they were inclined
to seditions and schisms. For it is written (1 Esdra 4:15): "This city
since days gone by has rebelled against its kings: and seditions and
wars were raised therein." Now sometimes a more severe
punishment is inflicted for an habitual sin (as stated above, FS,
Question 105, Article 2, ad 9), because punishments are medicines
intended to keep man away from sin: so that where there is greater
proneness to sin, a more severe punishment ought to be inflicted. As
regards the ten tribes, they were punished not only for the sin of
schism, but also for that of idolatry as stated in the passage quoted.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as the good of the multitude is greater
than the good of a unit in that multitude, so is it less than the
extrinsic good to which that multitude is directed, even as the good