crowding. There is a serene harbor. They are as lights shining from a lofty place
to mariners afar off. They are stationed at the port, drawing all men to their own
calm, and preserving from shipwreck those who gaze on them, and not letting
those walk in darkness who look there. Go to them, and make friends with them,
embrace their holy feet, more honorable to touch than the heads of others. If
some clasp the feet of statues, because they bear but a likeness of the king, will
you not clasp his feet who has Christ within him, and be saved? The Saints' feet
are holy, though they are poor men, but not even the head of the profane is
honorable. Such efficacy is there in the feet of the Saints, that when they shake
off the dust of their feet, they inflict punishment. When a saint is among us, let
us not be ashamed of anything that belongs to him. And all are saints, who unite
a holy life with a right faith and though they do not work miracles nor cast out
devils, still they are saints.
Go then to their tabernacles. To go to the monastery of a holy man is to
pass, as it were, from earth to heaven. You see not there what is seen in a private
house. That company is free from all impurity. There is silence and profound
quiet. The words "mine and yours" are not in use among them. And if you
remain there a whole day or even two, the more pleasure you will enjoy. There,
as soon as it is day, or rather before day, the cock crows, and you see it not as
you may see it in a house, the servants snoring, the doors shut, all sleeping like
the dead, while the muleteer without is ringing his bells. There is nothing of all
this. All, immediately shaking off sleep, reverently rise when their President
calls them, and forming themselves into a holy choir, they stand, and lifting up
their hands all at once sing the sacred hymns. For they are not like us, who
require many hours to shake off sleep from our heavy heads. We indeed, as soon
as we are waked, sit some time stretching our limbs, go as nature calls, then
proceed to wash our face and our hands; afterwards we take our shoes and
clothes, and a deal of time is spent.
It is not so there. No one calls for his servant, for each waits upon himself:
neither does he require many clothes, nor need to shake off sleep. For as soon as

he opens his eyes, he is like one who has been long awake in collectedness. For
when the heart is not stifled within by excess of food, it soon recovers itself, and
is immediately wakeful. The hands are always pure; for his sleep is composed
and regular. No one among them is found snoring or breathing hard, or tossing
about in sleep, or with his body exposed; but they lie in sleep as decently as
those who are awake, and all this is the effect of the orderly state of their souls.
These are truly saints and angels among men. And marvel not when you hear
these things. For their great fear of God suffers them not to go down into the
depths of sleep, and to drown their minds, but it falls lightly upon them, merely
affording them rest. And as their sleep is, such are their dreams, not full of wild
fancies and monstrous visions.
But, as I said, at the crowing of the cock their President comes, and gently
touching the sleeper with his foot, rouses them all. For there are none sleeping
naked. Then as soon as they have arisen they stand up, and sing the prophetic
hymns with much harmony, and well composed tunes. And neither harp nor pipe
nor other musical instrument utters such sweet melodies, as you hear from the
singing of these saints in their deep and quiet solitudes. And the songs
themselves too are suitable, and full of the love of God. "In the night," they say,
"lift up your hands unto God. With my soul have I desired You in the night, yea
with my spirit within me will I seek You early," [Isaiah 26:9] And the Psalms of
David, that cause fountains of tears to flow. For when he sings, "I am weary with
my groaning, all the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with my
tears" [Psalm 6:6]: and, again, "I have eaten ashes like bread." [Psalm 102:9]
"What is man that you are mindful of him?" [Psalm 8:4] "Man is like to vanity,
his days are as a shadow that passes away." [Psalm 144:4] "Be not afraid when
one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased" [Psalm 49:16]; and,
"Who makes men to be of one mind in a house" [Psalm 68:6]: and, "Seven times
a day do I praise You, because of Your righteous judgments" [Psalm 119:164]:
and, "At midnight will I rise to give thanks unto You, because of Your righteous
judgments" [Psalm 119:62]: and, "God will redeem my soul from the power of