"Suffugatur:" some read "suffocatur;" and Harvey proposes "suffragatur," as the representative of the Greek !"#$%&'().
The meaning in any case is, that while ideas are instantaneously formed in the human mind, they can be expressed through means
of words only fractionally, and by successive utterances.

mystery, when they have simply transferred what all understand to the only-begotten Word of God;
and while they style Him unspeakable and unnameable, they nevertheless set forth the production
and formation of His first generation, as if they themselves had assisted at His birth, thus assimilating
Him to the word of mankind formed by emissions.
7. But we shall not be wrong if we affirm the same thing also concerning the substance of
matter, that God produced it. For we have learned from the Scriptures that God holds the supremacy
over all things. But whence or in what way He produced it, neither has Scripture anywhere declared;
nor does it become us to conjecture, so as, in accordance with our own opinions, to form endless
conjectures concerning God, but we should leave such knowledge in the hands of God Himself. In
like manner, also, we must leave the cause why, while all things were made by God, certain of His
creatures sinned and revolted from a state of submission to God, and others, indeed the great
majority, persevered, and do still persevere, in [willing] subjection to Him who formed them, and
also of what nature those are who sinned, and of what nature those who persevere,—[we must, I
say, leave the cause of these things] to God and His Word, to whom alone He said, "Sit at my right
hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool." But as for us, we still dwell upon the earth,
and have not yet sat down upon His throne. For although the Spirit of the Saviour that is in Him
"searcheth all things, even the deep things of God," yet as to us "there are diversities of gifts,
differences of administrations, and diversities of operations;" and we, while upon the earth, as
Paul also declares, "know in part, and prophesy in part." Since, therefore, we know but in part,
we ought to leave all sorts of [difficult] questions in the hands of Him who in some measure, [and
that only,] bestows grace on us. That eternal fire, [for instance,] is prepared for sinners, both the
Lord has plainly declared, and the rest of the Scriptures demonstrate. And that God foreknew that
this would happen, the Scriptures do in like manner demonstrate, since He prepared eternal fire
from the beginning for those who were [afterwards] to transgress [His commandments]; but the
cause itself of the nature of such transgressors neither has any Scripture informed us, nor has an
apostle told us, nor has the Lord taught us. It becomes us, therefore, to leave the knowledge of this
matter to God, even as the Lord does of the day and hour [of judgment], and not to rush to such an
extreme of danger, that we will leave nothing in the hands of God, even though we have received
only a measure of grace [from Him in this world]. But when we investigate points which are above
us, and with respect to which we cannot reach satisfaction, [it is absurd] that we should display
such an extreme of presumption as to lay open God, and things which are not yet discovered, as