Ver. 4. "Grace and peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ
our Saviour."
Because he had called him his son, he adds, "from God the Father," to
elevate his mind by showing whose son he was, and by not only naming the
common faith, but by adding "our Father," he implies that he has this honor
equally with himself. Moral . Observe also how he offers the same prayers for
the Teacher, as for the disciples and the multitude. For indeed he needs such
prayers as much, or rather more than they, by how much he has greater enmities
to encounter, and is more exposed to the necessity of offending God. For the
higher is the dignity, the greater are the dangers of the priestly office. For one
good act in his episcopal office is sufficient to raise him to heaven and one error
to sink him to hell itself. For, to pass over all other cases of daily occurrence, if
he happens, either from friendship or any other cause, to have advanced an
unworthy person to a Bishopric, and have committed to him the rule of a great
city, see to how great a flame he renders himself obnoxious. For not only will he
have to account for the souls that are lost, for they are lost through the man's
irreligion, but for all that is done amiss by the other. For he that is irreligious in a
private station will be much more so when he is raised to power. It is much
indeed, if a pious man continue such after his elevation to rule. For he is then
more strongly assailed by vainglory, and the love of wealth, and self-will, when
office gives him the power; and by offenses, insults, and reproaches, and
numberless other evils. If therefore any one be irreligious, he will become more
so when raised to office; and he who appoints such a ruler will be answerable for
all the offenses committed by him, and for the whole people. But if it is said of
him who gives offense to one soul, "It were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea"
[Matthew 18:6]; what will he have to suffer who offends so many souls, whole
cities and populations, and multitudes of families, men, women, children,
citizens, and husbandmen, the inhabitants of the city itself, and of all places
subject to it? To say thrice as much more is to say nothing, so severe is the

vengeance and the punishment to which he will be obnoxious. So that a Bishop
especially needs the grace and peace of God. For if without these he governs the
people, all is ruined and lost, for want of those helms. And though he be skilled
in the art of steering, he will sink the vessel and those that sail in it, if he has not
these helms, "the grace and peace of God."
Hence I am struck with astonishment at those who desire so great a burden.
Wretched and unhappy man, do you see what it is you desire? If you are by
yourself, unknown and undistinguished, though you commit ten thousand faults,
you have only one soul for which to give an account, and for it alone will you be
answerable. But when you are raised to this office, consider for how many
persons you are obnoxious to punishment. Hear what Paul says, "Obey them that
have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls as
they that must give account." [Hebrews 13:17] But do you desire honor and
power? But what pleasure is there in this honor? I confess, I see not. For to be a
ruler indeed is not possible, since it depends upon those under your rule to obey
or not. And to any one who considers the matter closely; it will appear that a
Bishop does not so much come to rule, as to serve a multitude of masters, who
are of opposite desires and sentiments. For what one commends, another blames;
what this man censures, that admires. To whom therefore shall he listen, with
whom shall he comply? It is impossible! And the slave that is bought with
money complains if his master's commands are contrary to each other. But
should you grieve, when so many masters give the contrary orders, you are
condemned even for this, and all mouths are opened against you. Tell me then, is
this honor, is this rule, is this power?
One who holds the Episcopal office has required a contribution of money.
He who is unwilling to contribute not only withholds it, but that he may not
seem to withhold it from indifference, he accuses his Bishop. He is a thief, he
says, a robber, he engulfs the goods of the poor, he devours the rights of the
needy. Cease your calumnies! How long will you say these things? Will you not
contribute? No one compels you, there is no constraint. Why do you revile him