FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

lower world owe their variety chiefly to the movement of the moon;
wherefore this feast was kept at the new moon: and not at the full
moon, to avoid the worship of idolaters who used to offer sacrifices
to the moon at that particular time. And these two blessings are
bestowed in common on the whole human race; and hence they
were repeated more frequently.
The other five feasts were celebrated once a year: and they
commemorated the benefits which had been conferred especially on
that people. For there was the feast of the "Passover" in the first
month to commemorate the blessing of being delivered out of Egypt.
The feast of "Pentecost" was celebrated fifty days later, to recall the
blessing of the giving of the Law. The other three feasts were kept in
the seventh month, nearly the whole of which was solemnized by
them, just as the seventh day. For on the first of the seventh month
was the feast of "Trumpets," in memory of the delivery of Isaac,
when Abraham found the ram caught by its horns, which they
represented by the horns which they blew. The feast of Trumpets
was a kind of invitation whereby they prepared themselves to keep
the following feast which was kept on the tenth day. This was the
feast of "Expiation," in memory of the blessing whereby, at the
prayer of Moses, God forgave the people's sin of worshipping the
calf. After this was the feast of "Scenopegia" or of "Tents," which
was kept for seven days, to commemorate the blessing of being
protected and led by God through the desert, where they lived in
tents. Hence during this feast they had to take "the fruits of the
fairest tree," i.e. the citron, "and the trees of dense foliage", i.e. the
myrtle, which is fragrant, "and the branches of palm-trees, and
willows of the brook," which retain their greenness a long time; and
these are to be found in the Land of promise; to signify that God had
brought them through the arid land of the wilderness to a land of
delights. On the eighth day another feast was observed, of
"Assembly and Congregation," on which the people collected the
expenses necessary for the divine worship: and it signified the
uniting of the people and the peace granted to them in the Land of
promise.
The figurative reason for these feasts was that the continual sacrifice
of the lamb foreshadowed the perpetuity of Christ, Who is the "Lamb
of God," according to Heb. 13:8: "Jesus Christ yesterday and today,
and the same for ever." The Sabbath signified the spiritual rest
bestowed by Christ, as stated in Heb. 4. The Neomenia, which is the
beginning of the new moon, signified the enlightening of the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

primitive Church by Christ's preaching and miracles. The feast of
Pentecost signified the Descent of the Holy Ghost on the apostles.
The feast of Trumpets signified the preaching of the apostles. The
feast of Expiation signified the cleansing of the Christian people
from sins: and the feast of Tabernacles signified their pilgrimage in
this world, wherein they walk by advancing in virtue. The feast of
Assembly or Congregation foreshadowed the assembly of the
faithful in the kingdom of heaven: wherefore this feast is described
as "most holy" (Lev. 23:36). These three feasts followed immediately
on one another, because those who expiate their vices should
advance in virtue, until they come to see God, as stated in Ps. 83:8.