Isa. xxvi. 19.

Isa. l. 6.

Isa. lxv. 2.

Comp. book iii. cap. xx. 4 and book iv. cap xxii. 1.

darkness over the earth in the clear day; and I will turn your feast days into mourning, and all your
songs into lamentation," plainly announced that obscuration of the sun which at the time of His
crucifixion took place from the sixth hour onwards, and that after this event, those days which were
their festivals according to the law, and their songs, should be changed into grief and lamentation
when they were handed over to the Gentiles. Jeremiah, too, makes this point still clearer, when he
thus speaks concerning Jerusalem: "She that hath born [seven] languisheth; her soul hath become
weary; her sun hath gone down while it was yet noon; she hath been confounded, and suffered
reproach: the remainder of them will I give to the sword in the sight of their enemies."
13. Those of them, again, who spoke of His having slumbered and taken sleep, and of His
having risen again because the Lord sustained Him, and who enjoined the principalities of heaven
to set open the everlasting doors, that the King of glory might go in, proclaimed beforehand His
resurrection from the dead through the Father's power, and His reception into heaven. And when
they expressed themselves thus, "His going forth is from the height of heaven, and His returning
even to the highest heaven; and there is no one who can hide himself from His heat," they
announced that very truth of His being taken up again to the place from which He came down, and
that there is no one who can escape His righteous judgment. And those who said, "The Lord hath
reigned; let the people be enraged: [even] He who sitteth upon the cherubim; let the earth be
moved," were thus predicting partly that wrath from all nations which after His ascension came
upon those who believed in Him, with the movement of the whole earth against the Church; and
partly the fact that, when He comes from heaven with His mighty angels, the whole earth shall be
shaken, as He Himself declares, "There shall be a great earthquake, such as has not been from the
beginning." And again, when one says, "Whosoever is judged, let him stand opposite; and
whosoever is justified, let him draw near to the servant of God;" and, "Woe unto you, for ye
shall wax old as doth a garment, and the moth shall eat you up;" and, "All flesh shall be humbled,
and the Lord alone shall be exalted in the highest,"—it is thus indicated that, after His passion
and ascension, God shall cast down under His feet all who were opposed to Him, and He shall be
exalted above all, and there shall be no one who can be justified or compared to Him.

Ps. xxiv. 7.

Or "son."

14. And those of them who declare that God would make a new covenant with men, not such
as that which He made with the fathers at Mount Horeb, and would give to men a new heart and a
new spirit; and again, "And remember ye not the things of old: behold, I make new things which
shall now arise, and ye shall know it; and I will make a way in the desert, and rivers in a dry land,
to give drink to my chosen people, my people whom I have acquired, that they may show forth my
praise,"—plainly announced that liberty which distinguishes the new covenant, and the new
wine which is put into new bottles, [that is], the faith which is in Christ, by which He has
proclaimed the way of righteousness sprung up in the desert, and the streams of the Holy Spirit in
a dry land, to give water to the elect people of God, whom He has acquired, that they might show
forth His praise, but not that they might blaspheme Him who made these things, that is, God.
15. And all those other points which I have shown the prophets to have uttered by means of so
long a series of Scriptures, he who is truly spiritual will interpret by pointing out, in regard to every
one of the things which have been spoken, to what special point in the dispensation of the Lord is
referred, and [by thus exhibiting] the entire system of the work of the Son of God, knowing always
the same God, and always acknowledging the same Word of God, although He has [but] now been
manifested to us; acknowledging also at all times the same Spirit of God, although He has been
poured out upon us after a new fashion in these last times, [knowing that He descends] even from
the creation of the world to its end upon the human race simply as such, from whom those who
believe God and follow His word receive that salvation which flows from Him. Those, on the other
hand, who depart from Him, and despise His precepts, and by their deeds bring dishonour on Him
who made them, and by their opinions blaspheme Him who nourishes them, heap up against
themselves most righteous judgment. He therefore (i.e., the spiritual man) sifts and tries them
all, but he himself is tried by no man: he neither blasphemes his Father, nor sets aside His
dispensations, nor inveighs against the fathers, nor dishonours the prophets, by maintaining that
they were [sent] from another God [than he worships], or again, that their prophecies were derived
from different sources.