maintaining both sound doctrines and an upright life, we may without offense
pass through this life present, and be enabled to attain unto the good things
which God has promised to them that love Him, through the grace and mercy of
His only-begotten Son, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be
glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 48 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXII. 17-20
"And it came to pass, that, when I had come again to Jerusalem, even while
I prayed in the temple, I was in a trance; and saw him saying unto me, Make
haste, and get you quickly out of Jerusalem: for they will not receive your
testimony concerning me. And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat
in every synagogue them that believed on you: and when the blood of your
martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death,
and kept the raiment of them that slew him."
See how he thrusts himself (into danger), I came, he says, after that vision,
"to Jerusalem. I was in a trance," etc. Again, this is without witness: but
observe, the witness follows from the result. He said, "They will not receive your
testimony:" they did not receive it. And yet from calculations of reason the
surmise should have been this, that they would assuredly receive him. For I was
the man that made war upon the Christians: so that they ought to have received
him. Here he establishes two things: both that they are without excuse, since
they persecuted him contrary to all likelihood or calculation of reason; and, that
Christ was God, as prophesying things contrary to expectation, and as not
looking to past things, but fore-knowing the things to come. How then does He
say, "He shall bear My name before the Gentiles and kings and children of
Israel?" [Acts 9:15] Not, certainly persuade. Besides which, on other occasions
we find the Jews were persuaded, but here they were not. Where most of all they
ought to have been persuaded, as knowing his former zeal (in their cause), here
they were not persuaded. "And when the blood of Your martyr Stephen," etc. See
where again his discourse terminates, namely, in the forcible main point ([εἰς τὸ
ἱσχυρὸν κεφάλαιον]): that it was he that persecuted, and not only persecuted but
killed, nay, had he ten thousand hands ([μυρίαις χερσὶν ἀναιρὥν]) would have

used them all to kill Stephen. He reminded them of the murderous spirit
heinously indulged (by him and them). Then of course above all they would not
endure him, since this convicted them; and truly the prophecy was having its
fulfilment: great the zeal, vehement the accusation, and the Jews themselves
witnesses of the truth of Christ! "And he said unto me, Depart: for I will send
you far hence unto the Gentiles. And they gave him audience unto this word, and
then lifted up their voices, and said, Away with such a fellow from the earth: for
it is not fit that he should live." (v. 21, 22.) The Jews would not endure to hear
out all his harangue, but excessively fired by their wrath, they shouted, it says,
"Away with him; for it is not fit that he should live. And as they cried out, and
cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air, the tribune commanded him to
be brought into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by scourging;
that he might know wherefore they cried so against him." (v. 23, 24.) Whereas
both the tribune ought to have examined whether these things were so— yes, and
the Jews themselves too— or, if they were not so, to have ordered him to be
scourged, he "bade examine him by scourging, that he might know for what
cause they so clamored against him." And yet he ought to have learned from
those clamorers, and to have asked whether they laid hold upon anything of the
things spoken: instead of that, without more ado he indulges his arbitrary will
and pleasure, and acts with a view to gratify them: for he did not look to this,
how he should do a righteous thing, but only how he might stop their rage
unrighteous as it was. "And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the
centurion that stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman
and uncondemned?" [Acts 22:25] Paul lied not, God forbid: for he was a
Roman: if there was nothing else, he would have been afraid (to pretend this),
lest he should be found out, and suffer a worse punishment. (See Sueton. Vit.
Claud. §25.) And observe he does not say it peremptorily ([ἁ] [πλὥς]), but, "Is it
lawful for you?" The charges brought are two, both its being without
examination, and his being a Roman. They held this as a great privilege, at that
time: for they say that (it was only) from the time of Hadrian that all were named