two as He rent the rocks, to have cleft him asunder like the veil; but He would
not lead him away from his design by compulsion, but by choice. Wherefore He
washed his feet; and not even by this was that wretched and miserable man
shamed.
"Before the feast of the Passover," it says, "Jesus knowing that His hour had
come." Not then "knowing," but (it means) that He did what He did having
"known" long ago. "That He should depart." Magnificently the Evangelist calls
His death, "departure." "Having loved His own, He loved them unto the end." Do
you see how when about to leave them He shows greater love? For the, "having
loved, He loved them unto the end," shows that he omitted nothing of the things
which it was likely that one who earnestly loved would do. Why, then did He not
this from the beginning? He works the greatest things last, so as to render more
intense their attachment, and to lay up for them beforehand much comfort,
against the terrible things that were about to fall on them. St. John calls them
"His own," in respect of personal attachment, since he calls others also "His
own," in respect of the work of creation; as when he says, "His own received
Him not." [John 1:11] But what means, "which were in the world"? Because the
dead also were "His own," Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the men of that sort, but
they were not in the world. Do you see that He is the God both of the Old and
New (Testament)? But what means, "He loved them unto the end"? It stands for,
"He continued loving them unceasingly," and this the Evangelist mentions as a
sure proof of great affection. Elsewhere indeed He spoke of another (proof), the
laying down life for His friends; but that had not yet come to pass. And
wherefore did He this thing "now"? Because it was far more wonderful at a time
when He appeared more glorious in the sight of all men. Besides, He left them
no small consolation now that He was about to depart, for since they were going
to be greatly grieved, He by these means introduces also comfort to the grief.

John 13:2
"And supper being ended, the devil having now put it into the heart of Judas to
betray Him."
This the Evangelist has said amazed, showing that Jesus washed the man
who had already chosen to betray Him. This also proves his great wickedness,
that not even the having shared the salt restrained him, (a thing which is most
able to restrain wickedness;) not the fact that even up to the last day, his Master
continued to bear with him.

John 13:3
"Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into His hands, and that He
had come from God, and went to God."
Here the Evangelist says, even wondering, that one so great, so very great,
who came from God and went to Him, who rules over all, did this thing, and
disdained not even so to undertake such an action. And by the "giving over,"
methinks St. John means the salvation of the faithful. For when He says, "All
things are given over to Me of My Father" [Matthew 11:27], He speaks of this
kind of giving over; as also in another place He says, "Yours they were, and You
gave them Me" [John 17:6]; and again, "No man can come unto Me except the
Father draw him" [John 6:44]; and, "Except it be given him from heaven." [John
3:27] The Evangelist then either means this, or that Christ would be nothing
lessened by this action, since He came from God, and went to God, and
possessed all things. But when you hear of "giving over," understand it in no
human sense, for it shows how He honors the Father, and His unanimity with
Him. For as the Father gives over to Him, so He to the Father. And this Paul
declares, saying, "When He shall have given over the kingdom to God, even the
Father." [1 Corinthians 15:24] But St. John has said it here in a more human
sense, showing His great care for them, and declaring His unutterable love, that
He now cared for them as for His own; teaching them the mother of all good,
even humblemindedness, which He said was both the beginning and the end of
virtue. And not without a reason is added the, "He came from God and went to
God": but that we may learn that He did what was worthy of One who came
thence and went there, trampling down all pride.