SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.4.

twofold consideration leads him thereto. The one is the
consideration of God's goodness and loving kindness, according to
Ps. 72:28, "It is good for me to adhere to my God, to put my hope in
the Lord God": and this consideration wakens love [dilectio] which is
the proximate cause of devotion. The other consideration is that of
man's own shortcomings, on account of which he needs to lean on
God, according to Ps. 120:1,2, "I have lifted up my eyes to the
mountains, from whence help shall come to me: my help is from the
Lord, Who made heaven and earth"; and this consideration shuts out
presumption whereby man is hindered from submitting to God,
because he leans on His strength.
Reply to Objection 1: The consideration of such things as are of a
nature to awaken our love [dilectio] of God, causes devotion;
whereas the consideration of foreign matters that distract the mind
from such things is a hindrance to devotion.
Reply to Objection 2: Matters concerning the Godhead are, in
themselves, the strongest incentive to love [dilectio] and
consequently to devotion, because God is supremely lovable. Yet
such is the weakness of the human mind that it needs a guiding
hand, not only to the knowledge, but also to the love of Divine things
by means of certain sensible objects known to us. Chief among
these is the humanity of Christ, according to the words of the
Preface [Preface for Christmastide], "that through knowing God
visibly, we may be caught up to the love of things invisible."
Wherefore matters relating to Christ's humanity are the chief
incentive to devotion, leading us thither as a guiding hand, although
devotion itself has for its object matters concerning the Godhead.
Reply to Objection 3: Science and anything else conducive to
greatness, is to man an occasion of self-confidence, so that he does
not wholly surrender himself to God. The result is that such like
things sometimes occasion a hindrance to devotion; while in simple
souls and women devotion abounds by repressing pride. If, however,
a man perfectly submits to God his science or any other perfection,
by this very fact his devotion is increased.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether joy is an effect of devotion?

Objection 1: It would seem that joy is not an effect of devotion. As
stated above (Article 3, ad 2), Christ's Passion is the chief incentive
to devotion. But the consideration thereof causes an affliction of the
soul, according to Lam. 3:19, "Remember my poverty . . . the
wormwood and the gall," which refers to the Passion, and afterwards
(Lam. 3:20) it is said: "I will be mindful and remember, and my soul
shall languish within me." Therefore delight or joy is not the effect of
devotion.
Objection 2: Further, devotion consists chiefly in an interior sacrifice
of the spirit. But it is written (Ps. 50:19): "A sacrifice to God is an
afflicted spirit." Therefore affliction is the effect of devotion rather
than gladness or joy.
Objection 3: Further, Gregory of Nyssa says (De Homine xii) [Orat.
funebr. de Placilla Imp.] that "just as laughter proceeds from joy, so
tears and groans are signs of sorrow." But devotion makes some
people shed tears. Therefore gladness or joy is not the effect of
devotion.
On the contrary, We say in the Collect [Thursday after fourth Sunday
of Lent]: "That we who are punished by fasting may be comforted by
a holy devotion."
I answer that, The direct and principal effect of devotion is the
spiritual joy of the mind, though sorrow is its secondary and indirect
effect. For it has been stated (Article 3) that devotion is caused by a
twofold consideration: chiefly by the consideration of God's
goodness, because this consideration belongs to the term, as it
were, of the movement of the will in surrendering itself to God, and
the direct result of this consideration is joy, according to Ps. 76:4, "I
remembered God, and was delighted"; but accidentally this
consideration causes a certain sorrow in those who do not yet enjoy
God fully, according to Ps. 41:3, "My soul hath thirsted after the
strong living God," and afterwards it is said (Ps. 41:4): "My tears
have been my bread," etc. Secondarily devotion is caused as stated
(Article 3), by the consideration of one's own failings; for this
consideration regards the term from which man withdraws by the
movement of his devout will, in that he trusts not in himself, but