FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.5.

as Gregory of Nyssa says [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxiv.].
Reply to Objection 1: Choice presupposes counsel by reason of its
judgment or decision. Consequently when the judgment or decision
is evident without inquiry, there is no need for the inquiry of counsel.
Reply to Objection 2: In matters that are evident, the reason makes
no inquiry, but judges at once. Consequently there is no need of
counsel in all that is done by reason.
Reply to Objection 3: When a thing can be accomplished by one
means, but in different ways, doubt may arise, just as when it can be
accomplished by several means: hence the need of counsel. But
when not only the means, but also the way of using the means, is
fixed, then there is no need of counsel.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.14, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the process of counsel is one of

analysis?
Objection 1: It would seem that the process of counsel is not one of
analysis. For counsel is about things that we do. But the process of
our actions is not one of analysis, but rather one of synthesis, viz.
from the simple to the composite. Therefore counsel does not
always proceed by way of analysis.
Objection 2: Further, counsel is an inquiry of the reason. But reason
proceeds from things that precede to things that follow, according to
the more appropriate order. Since then, the past precedes the
present, and the present precedes the future, it seems that in taking
counsel one should proceed from the past and present to the future:
which is not an analytical process. Therefore the process of counsel
is not one of analysis.
Objection 3: Further, counsel is only of such things as are possible
to us, according to Ethic. iii, 3. But the question as to whether a
certain thing is possible to us, depends on what we are able or
unable to do, in order to gain such and such an end. Therefore the
inquiry of counsel should begin from things present.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 3) that "he who
takes counsel seems to inquire and analyze."
I answer that, In every inquiry one must begin from some principle.
And if this principle precedes both in knowledge and in being, the
process is not analytic, but synthetic: because to proceed from
cause to effect is to proceed synthetically, since causes are more
simple than effects. But if that which precedes in knowledge is later
in the order of being, the process is one of analysis, as when our
judgment deals with effects, which by analysis we trace to their
simple causes. Now the principle in the inquiry of counsel is the end,
which precedes indeed in intention, but comes afterwards into
execution. Hence the inquiry of counsel must needs be one of
analysis, beginning that is to say, from that which is intended in the
future, and continuing until it arrives at that which is to be done at
once.
Reply to Objection 1: Counsel is indeed about action. But actions