teach apostasy from Moses to all the Jews which are among the Gentiles, by
telling them not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs."
[Acts 21:21] "What is it therefore? The multitude must needs come together: for
they will hear that you have come. Do therefore this that we say to you" (v. 22,
23): they say these things as advising, not as commanding. "We have four men
which have a vow on them; them take, and purify yourself with them, and be at
charges with them." Make your defence in act, not in word— "that they may
shave themselves," it says, "and all may know that those things, whereof they
were informed concerning you, are nothing; but that you yourself also walkest
orderly, and keepest the law" (v. 23, 24): they say not, "teachest," but, of
superabundance, "that you yourself also keepest the law." For of course not this
was the matter of chief interest, whether he did not teach others, but, that he did
himself observe the law. "What then" (he might say), "if the Gentiles should
learn it? I shall injure them." How so? Say they, seeing that even we, the
teachers of the Jews, have sent unto them. "As touching the Gentiles which
believe, we have written and concluded that they observe no such thing, save
only that they keep themselves from things offered to idols, and from blood, and
from strangled, and from fornication." [Acts 21:25] Here with a kind of
remonstrance ([ἐ] [ντρεπτικὥς]), As "we," say they, commanded them, although
we are preachers to the Jews, so do thou, although a preacher to the Gentiles,
cooperate with us. Observe Paul: he does not say, "Well, but I can bring forward
Timothy, whom I circumcised: well, but I can satisfy them by what I have to say
(of myself):" but he complied, and did all: for in fact thus was it expedient (to
do). For it was one thing to take (effectual) measures for clearing himself, and
another to have done these things without the knowledge of any (of the parties).
It was a step open to no suspicion, the fact of his even bearing the expenses.
"Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them entered
into the temple, signifying the accomplishment of the days of purification, until
that an offering should be offered for every one of them." [Acts 21:26]
"Signifying," [διαγγέλλων], i.e. [καταγγέλλων], publicly notifying: so that it was

he who made himself conspicuous. "And when the seven days were about to be
completed, the Jews from Asia"— for (his arrival) most keeps times with theirs
— "when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people, and laid hands on
him, crying out, Men of Israel, help: This is the man, that teaches all men
everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place: and further brought
Greeks also into the temple, and has polluted this holy place." (v. 27, 28.) Mark
their habitual conduct, how turbulent we everywhere find it, how men who with
or without reason make a clamor in the midst. "For they had seen before with
him in the city Trophimus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had
brought into the temple. And all the city was moved, and the people ran
together: and they took Paul, and drew him out of the temple and immediately
the doors were shut." (v. 29, 30.) "Men of Israel," it says, "help: this is the man
that (teaches) against the people, and the law, and this place."— the things
which most trouble them, the Temple and the Law. And Paul does not tax the
Apostles with being the cause of these things to him. "And they drew him," it
says, "out of the Temple: and the doors were shut." For they wished to kill him;
and therefore were dragging him out, to do this with greater security. "And as
they went about to kill him, tidings came unto the tribune of the cohort, that all
Jerusalem was in an uproar. Who immediately took soldiers and centurions, and
ran down unto them: and when they saw the tribune and the soldiers, they left
beating of Paul. Then the tribune came near, and took him, and commanded him
to be bound with two chains; and demanded who he was, and what he had done.
And some cried one thing, some another, among the multitude." [Acts 21:31-34]
But the tribune having come down delivered him, and "commanded him to be
bound with two chains:" (hereby) appeasing the anger of the people. "And when
he could not know the certainty for the tumult, he commanded him to be carried
into the castle. And when he came upon the stairs, so it was, that he was borne of
the soldiers for the violence of the people. For the multitude of the people
followed after, crying, Away with him!" [Acts 21:34-36] What means, "Away
with him?" that is, what they say with us according to the Roman custom, To the