mathematical lessons, nor anything of the kind; but if it be required to gain or
collect anything spiritual, you call the matter a waste of time. And how shall you
not anger God, if you find leisure and assign a season for everything else, and
yet think it a troublesome and unseasonable thing for your children to take in
hand what relates to Him?
Do not so, brethren, do not so. It is this very age that most of all needs the
hearing these things; for from its tenderness it readily stores up what is said; and
what children hear is impressed as a seal on the wax of their minds. Besides, it is
then that their life begins to incline to vice or virtue; and if from the very gates
and portals one lead them away from iniquity, and guide them by the hand to the
best road, he will fix them for the time to come in a sort of habit and nature, and
they will not, even if they be willing, easily change for the worse, since this
force of custom draws them to the performance of good actions. So that we shall
see them become more worthy of respect than those who have grown old, and
they will be more useful in civil matters, displaying in youth the qualities of the
aged.
For, as I before said, it cannot be that they who enjoy the hearing of such
things as these, and who are in the company of such an Apostle, should depart
without receiving some great and remarkable advantage, be it man, woman, or
youth, that partakes of this table. If we train by words the animals which we
have, and so tame them, how much more shall we effect this with men by this
spiritual teaching, when there is a wide difference between the remedy in each
case, and the subject healed as well. For neither is there so much fierceness in us
as in the brutes, since theirs is from nature, ours from choice; nor is the power of
the words the same, for the power of the first is that of the human intellect, the
power of the second is that of the might and grace of the Spirit. Let then the man
who despairs of himself consider the tame animals, and he shall no longer be
thus affected; let him come continually to this house of healing, let him hear at
all times the laws of the Spirit, and on retiring home let him write down in his
mind the things which he has heard; so shall his hopes be good and his

confidence great, as he feels his progress by experience. For when the devil sees
the law of God written in the soul, and the heart become tablets to write it on, he
will not approach any more. Since wherever the king's writing is, not engraved
on a pillar of brass, but stamped by the Holy Ghost on a mind loving God, and
bright with abundant grace, that (evil one) will not be able even to look at it, but
from afar will turn his back upon us. For nothing is so terrible to him and to the
thoughts which are suggested by him as a mind careful about Divine matters,
and a soul which ever hangs over this fountain. Such an one can nothing present
annoy, even though it be displeasing; nothing puff up or make proud, even
though it be favorable; but amidst all this storm and surge it will even enjoy a
great calm.
2. For confusion arises within us, not from the nature of circumstances, but
from the infirmity of our minds; for if we were thus affected by reason of what
befalls us, then, (as we all sail the same sea, and it is impossible to escape waves
and spray,) all men must needs be troubled; but if there are some who stand
beyond the influence of the storm and the raging sea, then it is clear that it is not
circumstances which make the storm, but the condition of our own mind. If
therefore we so order the mind that it may bear all things contentedly, we shall
have no storm nor even a ripple, but always a clear calm.
After professing that I should say nothing on these points, I know not how I
have been carried away into such a length of exhortation. Pardon my prolixity;
for I fear, yes, I greatly fear lest this zeal of ours should ever become weaker.
Did I feel confident respecting it, I would not now have said to you anything on
these matters, since it is sufficient to make all things easy to you. But it is time in
what follows to proceed to the matters proposed for consideration today; that
you may not come weary to the contest. For we have contests against the
enemies of the truth, against those who use every artifice to destroy the honor of
the Son of God, or rather their own. This remains for ever as it now is, nothing
lessened by the blaspheming tongue, but they, by seeking eagerly to pull down
Him whom they say they worship, fill their faces with shame and their souls