and we must bring forward those who to a large extent surpass all others, and
soar as much above them in excellence of spirit as Saul overtopped the whole
Hebrew nation in bodily stature: or rather far more. [1 Samuel 10:23] For in this
case let me not take the height of shoulders as the standard of inquiry; but let the
distinction between the pastor and his charge be as great as that between rational
man and irrational creatures, not to say even greater, inasmuch as the risk is
concerned with things of far greater importance. He indeed who has lost sheep,
either through the ravages of wolves, or the attacks of robbers, or through
murrain, or any other disaster befalling them, might perhaps obtain some
indulgence from the owner of the flock; and even if the latter should demand
satisfaction the penalty would be only a matter of money: but he who has human
beings entrusted to him, the rational flock of Christ, incurs a penalty in the first
place for the loss of the sheep, which goes beyond material things and touches
his own life: and in the second place he has to carry on a far greater and more
difficult contest. For he has not to contend with wolves, nor to dread robbers, nor
to consider how he may avert pestilence from the flock. With whom then has he
to fight? With whom has he to wrestle? Listen to the words of St. Paul. "We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers,
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in
high places." [Ephesians 6:12] Do you see the terrible multitude of enemies, and
their fierce squadrons, not steel clad, but endued with a nature which is of itself
an equivalent for a complete suit of armor. Would you see yet another host, stern
and cruel, beleaguering this flock? This also you shall behold from the same post
of observation. For he who has discoursed to us concerning the others, points out
these enemies also to us, speaking in a certain place on this wise: "The works of
the flesh are manifest, which are these, fornication, adultery, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults," [2 Corinthians 12:20] and many
more besides; for he did not make a complete list, but left us to understand the
rest from these. Moreover, in the case of the shepherd of irrational creatures,

those who wish to destroy the flock, when they see the guardian take to flight,
cease making war upon him, and are contented with the seizure of the cattle: but
in this case, even should they capture the whole flock, they do not leave the
shepherd unmolested, but attack him all the more, and wax bolder, ceasing not
until they have either overthrown him, or have themselves been vanquished.
Again, the afflictions of sheep are manifest, whether it be famine, or pestilence,
or wounds, or whatsoever else it may be which distresses them, and this might
help not a little towards the relief of those who are oppressed in these ways. And
there is yet another fact greater than this which facilitates release from this kind
of infirmity. And what is that? The shepherds with great authority compel the
sheep to receive the remedy when they do not willingly submit to it. For it is
easy to bind them when cautery or cutting is required, and to keep them inside
the fold for a long time, whenever it is expedient, and to bring them one kind of
food instead of another, and to cut them off from their supplies of water, and all
other things which the shepherds may decide to be conducive to their health they
perform with great ease.
3. But in the case of human infirmities, it is not easy in the first place for a
man to discern them, for no man "knows the things of a man, save the spirit of
man which is in him." [1 Corinthians 2:11] How then can any one apply the
remedy for the disease of which he does not know the character, often indeed
being unable to understand it even should he happen to sicken with it himself?
And even when it becomes manifest, it causes him yet more trouble: for it is not
possible to doctor all men with the same authority with which the shepherd treats
his sheep. For in this case also it is necessary to bind and to restrain from food,
and to use cautery or the knife: but the reception of the treatment depends on the
will of the patient, not of him who applies the remedy. For this also was
perceived by that wonderful man (St. Paul) when he said to the Corinthians—
"Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy."
[2 Corinthians 1:24] For Christians above all men are not permitted forcibly to
correct the failings of those who sin. Secular judges indeed, when they have