23:10] The tribune is afraid of his being pulled in pieces, now that he has said
that he is a Roman: and the matter was not without danger. Do you observe that
Paul had a right to profess himself a Roman? Else, neither would (the tribune)
have been afraid now. So it remains that the soldiers must bear him off by force.
But when the wretches saw all to be without avail, they take the whole matter
into their own hands, as they would fain have done before, but were prevented:
and their wickedness stops nowhere, though it received so many checks: and yet
how many things were providentially ordered, on purpose that they might settle
down from their rage, and learn those things through which they might possibly
recover themselves! But none the less do they set upon him. Sufficient for proof
of his innocence was even this, that the man was saved when at the point to be
pulled in pieces, and that with these so great dangers about him, he escaped them
all. "And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer,
Paul: for as you have testified of Me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness
also at Rome. And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and
bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink till
they had killed Paul. And they were more than forty which had made this
conspiracy." [Acts 23:11-13] "They bound themselves under a curse," it says.
See how vehement and revengeful they are in their malice! What means, "bound
under a curse?" Why then those men are accused forever, seeing they did not
kill Paul. And forty together. For such is the nature of that nation: when there
needs concerting together for a good object, not even two concur with each
other: but when it is for an evil object, the entire people does it. And they admit
the rulers also as accomplices. "And they came to the chief priests and elders,
and said, We have bound ourselves under a great curse that we will eat nothing
until we have slain Paul. Now therefore ye with the council signify to the tribune
that he bring him down unto you tomorrow, as though ye would enquire
something more perfectly concerning him: and we, or ever he come near, are
ready to kill him. And when Paul's sister's son heard of their lying in wait, he
went and entered into the castle, and told Paul. Then Paul called one of the

centurions unto him, and said, Bring this young man unto the tribune: For he
has a certain thing to tell him. So he took him, and brought him to the tribune,
and said, Paul the prisoner called me unto him, and prayed me to bring this
young man unto you, who has something to say unto you. Then the tribune took
him by the hand, and went with him aside privately, and asked him, What is that
you have to tell me? And he said, the Jews have agreed to desire you that you
would bring down Paul tomorrow into the council, as though they would enquire
somewhat of him more perfectly. But do not thou yield unto them for there lie in
wait for him of them more than forty men, which have bound themselves with an
oath, that they will neither eat nor drink till they have killed him: and now are
they ready, looking for a promise from you. So the tribune then let the young man
depart, and charged him, See thou tell no man that you have showed these things
to me." [Acts 23:14-22]. Again he is saved by man's forethought. And observe:
Paul lets no man learn this, not even the centurion, that the matter might not
become known. And the centurion having come, reported to the tribune. And it
is well done of the tribune also, that he bids him keep it secret, that it might not
become known: moreover he gives his orders to the centurions only, at the time
when the thing was to be done: and so Paul is sent into Cæsarea, that there too he
might discourse in a greater theatre and before a more splendid audience: that so
the Jews may not be able to say, "If we had seen Paul, we would have believed—
if we had heard him teaching." Therefore this excuse too is cut off from them.
"And the Lord," it said, "stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer: for as you
have testified of Me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome." (Yet)
even after He has appeared to him, He again suffers him to be saved by man's
means. And one may well be astonished at Paul; he was not taken aback, neither
said, "Why, what is this? Have I then been deceived by Christ?" but he believed:
yet, because he believed, he did not therefore sleep: no; what was in his own
power by means of human wisdom, he did not abandon. "Bound themselves by a
curse:" it was a kind of necessity that those men fastened on themselves by the
curse. "That they would neither eat nor drink." Behold fasting the mother of