David, "Did I not give you all your master's goods?" [2 Samuel 12:8] Whenever
then you see a young man that has received a paternal inheritance without labor
and continues wicked, be assured that his punishment is increased and the
vengeance is made more intense. Let us not then emulate these; but if any man
has succeeded to virtue, if any man has obtained spiritual wealth, [him let us
emulate]. For (it is said) "Woe to them that trust in their riches" [cf.Psalm 49:6]:
"Blessed are they that fear the Lord." [Psalm 128:1] To which of these, tell me,
would you belong? Doubtless to those who are pronounced blessed. Therefore
emulate these, not the other, that you also may obtain the good things which are
laid up for them. Which may we all obtain, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom
to the Father be glory together with the Holy Ghost, now and for ever, and world
without end. Amen.

## Homily 21 on Hebrews

Hebrews 10:32-34
" But call to remembrance the former days, in which after you were
illuminated, you endured a great fight of afflictions; partly, while you were made
a gazing stock both by reproaches and afflictions, and partly while ye became
companions of them that were so used. For you had compassion on those who
were in bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing that you
have for yourselves in heaven a better and an enduring substance."
1. The best Physicians after they have made a deep incision, and have
increased the pains by the wound, soothing the afflicted part, and giving rest and
refreshment to the disturbed soul, proceed not to make a second incision, but
rather soothe that which has been made with gentle remedies, and such as are
suited to remove the violence of the pain. This Paul also did after he had shaken
their souls, and pierced them with the recollection of Hell, and convinced then,
that he must certainly perish, who does despite to the grace of God, and after he
had shown from the laws of Moses, that they also shall perish, and the more
[fearfully], and confirm it by other testimonies, and had said, "It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the Living God" [Hebrews 10:31]: then, lest the
soul desponding through excessive fear, should be swallowed up with grief, he
soothes them by commendations and exhortation, and gives them zeal derived
from their own conduct. For, he says, "call to remembrance the former days, in
which after ye had been enlightened, you endured a great fight of afflictions."
Powerful is the exhortation from deeds [already done]: for he who begins a work
ought to go forward and add to it. As if he had said, when you were brought in
[to the Church], when you were in the rank of learners, you displayed so great
readiness, so great nobleness; but now it is no longer so. And he who

encourages, does thus especially encourage them from their own example.
And he did not simply say, "ye endured a fight" but a "great" [fight].
Moreover he did not say "temptations" but "fight," which is an expression of
commendation and of very great praise.
Then he also enumerates them particularly, amplifying his discourse, and
multiplying his praise. How? "Partly" (he says) "while you were made a gazingstock by reproaches and afflictions"; for reproach is a great thing, and calculated
to pervert the soul, and to darken the judgment. For hear what the prophet says:
"While they daily say unto me, Where is your God?" [Psalm 42:10] And again,
"If the enemy had reproached me, I would have borne it." [Psalm 55:12] For
since the human race is exceedingly vainglorious, therefore it is easily overcome
by this.
And he did not simply say "by reproaches," but that even with great
intensity, being "made a gazing-stock." For when a person is reproached alone, it
is indeed painful, but far more so when in presence of all. For tell me how great
the evil was when men who had left the meanness of Judaism, and gone over, as
it were, to the best course of life, and despised the customs of their fathers, were
ill treated by their own people, and had no help.
2. I cannot say (he says) that you suffered these things indeed and were
grieved, but you even rejoiced exceedingly. And this he expressed by saying,
"Whilst ye became companions of them that were so used," and he brings
forward the Apostles themselves. Not only (he means) were ye not ashamed of
your own sufferings, but you even shared with others who were suffering the
same things. This too is the language of one who is encouraging them. He said
not, 'Bear my afflictions, share with me,' but respect your own.
"You had compassion on them that were in bonds." You see that he is
speaking concerning himself and the rest who were in prison. Thus ye did not
account "bonds" to be bonds: but as noble wrestlers so stood ye: for not only ye
needed no consolation in your own [distresses], but even became a consolation
to others.