he says include them. For what he says is this, "Your salvation is not our work
alone, but your own as well; for both we in preaching to you the word endure
affliction, and you in receiving it endure the very same; we to impart to you that
which we received, you to receive what is imparted and not to let it go." Now
what humility can compare with this, seeing that those who fell so far short of
him he raises to the same dignity of endurance? For he says, "Which worked in
the enduring of the same sufferings;" for not through believing only comes your
salvation, but also through the suffering and enduring the same things with us.
For like as a pugilist is an object of admiration, when he does but show himself
and is in good training and has his skill within himself, but when he is in action ,
enduring blows and striking his adversary, then most of all shines forth, because
that then his good training is most put in action , and the proof of his skill
evidently shown; so truly is your salvation also then more especially put into
action , that is, is displayed, increased, heightened, when it has endurance, when
it suffers and bears all things nobly. So then the work of salvation consists not in
doing evil, but in suffering evil. Moreover he says not, "which works," but,
"which is wrought ," to show that together with their own willingness of mind,
grace also which wrought in them did contribute much.

2 Corinthians 1:7
"And our hope for you is steadfast." That is, though ye should suffer ills
innumerable, we are confident that you will not turn round , either upon your
own trials or upon our persecutions. For so far are we from suspecting you of
being confounded on account of our sufferings that even when yourselves are in
peril, we are then confident concerning you.
2. Do you see how great had been their advance since the former Epistle?
For he has here witnessed of them far greater things than of the Macedonians,
whom throughout that Epistle he extols and commends. For on their [the
Macedonians'] account he feared and says, "We sent," unto you, "Timothy...to

establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith, that no man be moved
by these afflictions, for yourselves know that hereunto we are appointed." [1
Thessalonians 3:2-3] And again: "For this cause when I could no longer forbear,
I sent to know your faith, lest by any means the tempter has tempted you: and
our labor should be in vain." [2 Corinthians 1:5] But of these [the Corinthians]
he says nothing of this kind, but quite the contrary, "Our hope for you is
steadfast."

2 Corinthians 1:6-7
"Or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation.
Knowing that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so also are you of the
comfort."
That for their sakes the Apostles were afflicted, he showed when he said,
"whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation:" he wishes
also to show that for their sakes also they were comforted. He said this indeed
even a little above, although somewhat generally , thus; "Blessed be God, Who
comforts us in all our afflictions, that we may be able to comfort them which are
in any affliction." He repeats it here too in other words more clearly and more
home to their needs. "For whether we be comforted," says he, "it is for your
comfort." What he means is this; our comfort becomes your refreshment, even
though we should not comfort you by word. If we be but a little refreshed, this
avails for encouragement to you; and if we be ourselves comforted, this becomes
your comfort. For as you consider our sufferings your own, so do ye also make
our comfort your own. For surely it cannot be that, when you share in worse
fortune with us, you will not share in the better. If then ye share in everything, as
in tribulation so in comfort, you will in no wise blame us for this delay and
slowness in coming, because that both for your sakes we are in tribulation and
for your sakes in comfort. For lest any should think this a hard saying, "for your
sakes we thus suffer," he adds, "for your sakes also we are comforted," and "not