whereof He has given assurance to all men, in that He has raised Him from the
dead." [Acts 17:31] He speaks nothing concerning "the form of God"
[Philippians 2:6], nor that He was "equal to Him," nor that He was the
"brightness of His glory." [Hebrews 1:3] And with reason. The time for words
like these was not yet come; but it would have contented him that they should in
the meanwhile admit that He was Man, and that He rose again from the dead.
Christ Himself acted in the same manner, from whom Paul having learned, used
this reserve. For He did not at once reveal to us His Divinity, but was at first held
to be a Prophet and a good man; but afterwards His real nature was shown by
His works and words. On this account Peter too at first used this method, (for
this was the first sermon that he made to the Jews;) and because they were not
yet able clearly to understand anything respecting His Godhead, he dwelt on the
arguments relating to His Incarnation; that their ears being exercised in these,
might open a way to the rest of his teaching. And if any one will go through all
the sermon from the beginning, he will find what I say very observable, for he
(Peter) calls Him "Man," and dwells on the accounts of His Passion, His
Resurrection, and His generation according to the flesh. Paul too when he says,
"Who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh" [Romans 1:3], only
teaches us that the word "made" is taken with a view to His Incarnation, as we
allow. But the son of thunder is now speaking to us concerning His Ineffable and
Eternal Existence, and therefore he leaves the word "made" and puts "was"; yet
if He were created, this point he needs must most especially have determined.
For if Paul feared that some foolish persons might suppose that He shall be
greater than the Father, and have Him who begot Him made subject to Him, (for
this is the reason why the Apostle in sending to the Corinthians writes, "But
when He says, All things are put under Him, it is manifest that He is excepted
which did put all things under Him," yet who could possibly imagine that the
Father, even in common with all things, will be subject to the Son?) if, I say, he
nevertheless feared these foolish imaginations, and says, "He is excepted that did
put all things under Him;" much more if the Son of God were indeed created,

ought John to have feared lest any one should suppose Him uncreated, and to
have taught on this point before any other.
But now, since He was Begotten, with good reason neither John nor any
other, whether apostle or prophet, has asserted that He was created. Neither had
it been so would the Only-Begotten Himself have let it pass unmentioned. For
He who spoke of Himself so humbly from condescension would certainly not
have been silent on this matter. And I think it not unreasonable to suppose, that
He would be more likely to have the higher Nature, and say nothing of it, than
not having it to pass by this omission, and fail to make known that He had it not.
For in the first case there was a good excuse for silence, namely, His desire to
teach mankind humility by being silent as to the greatness of His attributes; but
in the second case you can find no just excuse for silence. For why should He
who declined many of His real attributes have been, if He were created, silent as
to His having been made? He who, in order to teach humility, often uttered
expressions of lowliness, such as did not properly belong to Him, much more if
He had been indeed created, would not have failed to speak of this. Do you not
see Him, in order that none may imagine Him not to have been begotten, doing
and saying everything to show that He was so, uttering words unworthy both of
His dignity and His essence, and descending to the humble character of a
Prophet? For the expression, "As I hear, I judge" [John 5:30]; and that other, "He
has told Me what I should say, and what I should speak" [John 12:49], and the
like, belong merely to a prophet. If now, from His desire to remove this
suspicion, He did not disdain to utter words thus lowly, much more if He were
created would He have said many like words, that none might suppose Him to be
uncreated; as, "Think not that I am begotten of the Father; I am created, not
begotten, nor do I share His essence." But as it is, He does the very contrary, and
utters words which compel men, even against their will and desire, to admit the
opposite opinion. As, "I am in the Father, and the Father in Me" [John 14:11];
and, "Have I been so long time with you, and yet have you not known Me,
Philip? He that has seen Me, has seen the Father." [John 14:9] And, "That all