John 1:17
"The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ."
And what means that, says he, "Of His fullness have all we received"? For
to this we must for a while direct our discourse. He possesses not, says he, the
gift by participation, but is Himself the very Fountain and very Root of all good,
very Life, and very Light, and very Truth, not retaining within Himself the riches
of His good things, but overflowing with them unto all others, and after the
overflowing remaining full, in nothing diminished by supplying others, but
streaming ever forth, and imparting to others a share of these blessings, He
remains in sameness of perfection. What I possess is by participation, (for I
received it from another) and is a small portion of the whole, as it were a poor
rain-drop compared with the untold abyss or the boundless sea; or rather not
even can this instance fully express what we attempt to say, for if you take a drop
from the sea, you have lessened the sea itself, though the diminution be
imperceptible. But of that Fountain we cannot say this; how much soever a man
draw, It continues undiminished. We therefore must needs proceed to another
instance, a weak one also, and not able to establish what we seek, but which
guides us better than the former one to the thought now proposed to us.
Let us suppose that there is a fountain of fire; that from that fountain ten
thousand lamps are kindled, twice as many, thrice as many, ofttimes as many;
does not the fire remain at the same degree of fullness even after its imparting of
its virtue to such members? It is plain to every man that it does. Now if in the
case of bodies which are made up of parts, and are diminished by abstraction,
one has been found of such a nature, that after supplying to others something
from itself it sustains no loss, much more will this take place with that
incorporeal and uncompounded Power. If in the instance given, that which is
communicated is substance and body, is divided yet does not suffer division,
when our discourse is concerning an energy, and an energy too of an incorporeal

substance, it is much more probable that this will undergo nothing of the sort.
And therefore John said, "Of His fullness have all we received," and joins his
own testimony to that of the Baptist; for the expression, "Of his fullness have we
all received," belongs not to the forerunner but to the disciple; and its meaning is
something like this: "Think not," he says, "that we, who long time companied
with Him, and partook of His food and table, bear witness through favor," since
even John, who did not even know Him before, who had never even been with
Him, but merely saw Him in company with others when he was baptizing cried
out, "He was before me," having from that source received all; and all we the
twelve, the three hundred, the three thousand, the five thousand, the many
myriads of Jews, all the fullness of the faithful who then were, and now are, and
hereafter shall be, have "received of His fullness." What have we received?
"grace for grace," says he. What grace, for what? For the old, the new. For there
was a righteousness, and again a righteousness, ("Touching the righteousness
which is in the law," says Paul "blameless.") [Philippians 3:6] There was a faith,
there is a faith. ("From faith to faith.") [Romans 1:17] There was an adoption,
there is an adoption. ("To whom pertains the adoption.") [Romans 9:4] There
was a glory, there is a glory. ("For if that which was done away was glorious,
much more that which remains is glorious.") [2 Corinthians 3:11] There was a
law, and there is a law. ("For the law of the Spirit of life has made me free.")
[Romans 8:2] There was a service, and there is a service. ("To whom pertains the
service" [Romans 9:4] and again: "Serving God in the Spirit.") [Philippians 3:3]
There was a covenant, and there is a covenant. ("I will make with you a new
covenant, not according to the covenant which I made with your fathers.")
[Jeremiah 31:31] There was a sanctification, and there is a sanctification: there
was a baptism, and there is a Baptism: there was a sacrifice, and there is a
Sacrifice: there was a temple, and there is a temple: there was a circumcision,
and there is a circumcision; and so too there was a "grace," and there is a
"grace." But the words in the first case are used as types, in the second as
realities, preserving a sameness of sound, though not of sense. So in patterns and