men even against their will to arrogance; these are all taken away. For they
themselves light their fire, they themselves cleave the logs, themselves cook,
themselves minister to those that come there.
No one can be heard insulting there, nor seen insulted, nor commanded, nor
giving commands; but all are devoted to those that are waited on, and every one
washes the strangers' feet, and there is much contention about this. And he does
it, not inquiring who it is, neither if he be a slave, nor if he be free; but in the
case of every one fulfills this service. No man there is great nor mean. What
then? Is there confusion? Far from it, but the highest order. For if any one be
mean, he that is great sees not this, but has accounted himself again to be inferior
even to him, and so becomes great.
There is one table for all, both for them that are served, and for them that
serve; the same food, the same clothes, the same dwellings, the same manner of
life. He is great there, who eagerly seizes the mean task. There is not mine and
yours, but this expression is exterminated, that is a cause of countless wars.
4. And why do you marvel, if there be one manner of life and table and
dress for all, since indeed there is even one soul to all, not in substance only (for
this is with all men also), but in love? How then should it ever be lifted up itself
against itself? There is no wealth and poverty there, honor and dishonor; how
then should haughtiness and arrogance find an entrance? For they are indeed
little and great in respect of their virtue; but, as I have said, no one sees this. He
that is little, feels not pain, as despised; for neither is there any one to despise
him; and should any one spurn him, this above all are they taught, to be
despised, to be spurned, to be set at nought, in word and in deed. And with the
poor and maimed do they associate, and their tables are full of these guests; so
that for this are they worthy of the heavens. And one tends the wounds of the
mutilated, another leads the blind by the hand, a third bears him that is lamed of
his leg.
There is no multitude of flatterers or parasites there; or rather they know not
even what flattery is; whence then could they be lifted up at any time? For there

is great equality among them, wherefore also there is much facility for virtue.
For by these are they of an inferior sort better instructed, than if they were
compelled to give up the first place to them.
For like as the impetuous man derives instruction from him that is smitten,
and submits to it; so the ambitious from him that claims not glory, but despises
it. This they do there abundantly, and as the strife is great with us to obtain the
first place, so great is it with them not to obtain it, but utterly to refuse it; and
great is their earnest desire who shall have the advantage in honoring, not in
being honored.
And besides, even their very employments persuade them to practise
moderation, and not to be high-swollen. For who, I pray you, digging in the
earth, and watering, and planting, or making baskets, or weaving sackcloth, or
practising any other handy works, will ever be proud? Who dwelling in poverty
and wrestling with hunger, will ever be sick of this disease? There is not one.
Therefore humility is easy to them. And like as here, it is a hard thing to be
lowly minded, for the multitude of them who applaud and admire us, so there it
is exceedingly easy.
And that man gives heed only to the wilderness, and sees birds flying, and
trees waving, and a breeze blowing, and streams rushing through glens. Whence
then should he be lifted up who dwells in solitude so great?
Not however that therefore we have from this an excuse, in that we are
proud when living in the midst of men. For surely Abraham, when amidst
Canaanites, said, "I am but dust and ashes;" [Genesis 18:27] and David, when in
the midst of camps, "I am a worm, and no man;" and the apostle, in the midst of
the world, "I am not meet to be called an apostle." [1 Corinthians 15:9] What
comfort shall we have then; what plea, when even, having such great examples,
we do not practise moderation? For even as they are worthy of countless crowns,
having been the first that went the way of virtue, even so are we deserving of
countless punishments, who not even after those that are departed, and are set
before us in books, no nor even after these that are living, and held in admiration