but all of God?
Ver. 15. "So then, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which you
were taught, whether by word, or by Epistle of ours."
Hence it is manifest, that they did not deliver all things by Epistle, but many
things also unwritten, and in like manner both the one and the other are worthy
of credit. Therefore let us think the tradition of the Church also worthy of credit.
It is a tradition, seek no farther. Here he shows that there were many who were
shaken.
Ver. 16, 17. "Now our Lord Jesus Christ Himself, and God our Father,
which loved us, and gave us eternal comfort and good hope through grace,
comfort your hearts, and establish them in every good work and word."
Again a prayer after an admonition. For this is truly to benefit. "Which
loved us," he says, "and gave us eternal comfort and good hope through grace."
Where now are those who lessen the Son, because He is named in the grace of
the Laver after the Father? For, lo, here it is the contrary. "Which loved us," he
says, "and gave us eternal comfort." Of what sort then is this? Even the hope of
things future. Do you see how by the method of prayer he stirs up their mind,
giving them the unspeakable care of God for pledges and signs. "Comfort your
heart," he says, "in every good work and word," that is, through every good
work and word. For this is the comfort of Christians, to do something good and
pleasing to God. See how he brings down their spirit. "Which gave us comfort,"
he says, "and good hope through grace." At the same time he makes them also
full of good hopes with respect to future things. For if He has given so many
things by grace, much more things future. I indeed, he says, have spoken, but the
whole is of God. "Stablish"; confirm you, that you be not shaken, nor turned
aside. For this is both His work and ours, so that it is in the way both of
doctrines, and of actions. For this is comfort, to be established. For when any
one is not turned aside, he bears all things, whatever may happen to him, with
much longsuffering; whereas if his mind be shaken, he will no longer perform
any good or noble action, but like one whose hands are paralyzed, so also his

soul is shaken, when it is not fully persuaded that it is advancing to some good
end.
Chap. iii. 1. "Finally, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may
run and be glorified, even as also it is with you."
He indeed had prayed for them, that they might be established; and now he
asks of them, entreating them to pray for him, not that he may not incur danger,
for to this he was appointed, but that "the word of the Lord may run and be
glorified, even as also it is with you." And the request is accompanied with
commendation. "Even as also it is with you."
Ver. 2. "And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men; for
all have not faith."
This is the manner of one showing also his dangers as to which especially
he besought them. "From unreasonable and evil men," he says, "for all have not
faith." Thus he is speaking of those who contradict the Preaching, who oppose
and contend against the doctrines. For this he has intimated by saying, "For all
men have not faith." And here he seems to me not to glance at dangers, but at the
men who contradicted and hindered his word, as did Alexander the coppersmith. For he says, "he greatly withstood our words." [2 Timothy 4:15] That is,
there are some to whom it is given. As if he were speaking of a paternal
inheritance, that "it is not for all to serve in the Palace." And at the same time he
also excites them, as already having such ground of confidence as to be able
both to deliver their Teacher from dangers, and to facilitate his preaching.
Therefore we also say the same things. Let no one condemn us of
arrogance, nor from an excessive humility deprive us of so great an assistance.
For neither do we speak from the same motive from which Paul spoke. For he
indeed said these things from a wish to comfort his disciples; but we to reap
some great and good fruit. And we are very confident, if you all be willing with
one mind to stretch forth your hands to God in behalf of our littleness, that you
will succeed in all things. Thus let us make war with our enemies with prayers
and supplications. For if thus the ancients made war with men in arms, much