[Genesis 22:12] plainly showing through both cases, that He does not delight in
such sacrifices.
8. But the malignant demon was labouring hard now again to produce such
a tragedy. Therefore he impelled Jonathan to the trespass. For if any one of the
soldiers had transgressed the law, it seemed to him no great evil that would have
been done; but now being insatiate of human ills, and never able to get his fill of
our calamities, he thought it would be no grand exploit if he effected only a
simple murder. And if he could not also pollute the king's right hand with the
murder of his child, he considered that he had achieved no great matter. And
why do I speak of child-murder? For he, the wicked one, thought that by this
means he should compass a slaughter even more accursed than that. For if he
had sinned wittingly, and been sacrificed, this would only have been childmurder; but now sinning ignorantly, (for he had not heard of the oath), if he had
been slain, he would have made the anguish of his father double; for he would
have had both to sacrifice a son, and a son who had done no wrong. But now to
proceed with the rest of the history; "When he had eaten," it is said, "His eyes
saw clearly." And here it condemns the king of great folly; showing that hunger
had almost blinded the whole army, and diffused much darkness over their eyes.
Afterwards some one of the soldiers, perceiving the action, says, "Your father
swore an oath upon all the people, saying, cursed be the man who eats any food
today. And the people were faint. And Jonathan said, My father has made away
with the land." What does he mean by the word, "made away with?" Why, that
he had ruined, or destroyed them all. Hence, when the oath was transgressed, all
kept silence, and no one dared to bring forth the criminal; and this became
afterwards no small matter of blame, for not only are those who break an oath,
but those also who are privy to it and conceal it, partakers of the crime.
9. But let us see what follows; "And Saul said, Let us go down after the
strangers, and spoil them. And the priest said, Let us draw near hither unto
God." [1 Samuel 14:36] For in old times God led forth the people to battle; and
without His consent no one dared to engage in the fight, and war was with them

a matter of religion. For not from weakness of body, but from their sins they
were conquered, whenever they were conquered; and not by might and courage,
but by favour from above they prevailed, whenever they did prevail. Victory and
defeat were also to them a means of training, and a school of virtue. And not to
them only, but to their adversaries; for this was made evident to them too, that
the fate of battle with the Jews was decided not by the nature of their arms, but
by the life and good works of the warriors. The Midianites at least perceiving
this, and knowing that people to be invincible, and that to have attacked them
with arms and engines of war would have been fruitless, and that it was only
possible to conquer them by sin, having decked out handsome virgins, and set
them in the array, excited the soldiers to lasciviousness, endeavouring by means
of fornication to deprive them of God's assistance; which accordingly happened.
For when they had fallen into sin, they became an easy prey to all; and those
whom weapons, and horses, and soldiers, and so many engines availed not to
capture, sin by its nature delivered over bound to their enemies. Shields, and
spears, and darts were all alike found useless; but beauty of visage and
wantonness of soul overpowered these brave men.
10. Therefore one gives this admonition; "Observe not the beauty of a
strange woman, and meet not a woman addicted to fornication.
[Ecclesiastes 9:8, 3] For honey distils from the lips of an harlot, which at the
time may seem smooth to your throat, but afterward you will find it more bitter
than gall, and sharper than a two-edged sword." [Proverbs 5:3-4] For the harlot
knows not how to love, but only to ensnare; her kiss has poison, and her mouth a
pernicious drug. And if this does not immediately appear, it is the more
necessary to avoid her on that account, because she veils that destruction, and
keeps that death concealed, and suffers it not to become manifest at the first. So
that if any one pursues pleasure, and a life full of gladness, let him avoid the
society of fornicating women, for they fill the minds of their lovers with a
thousand conflicts and tumults, setting in motion against them continual strifes
and contentions, by means of their words, and all their actions. And just as it is