even after its creation, as that it was "invisible and unformed," as yet covered by
the waters and in confusion. So in the case of Elkanah he does not merely say
that "there was a man," but adds also whence he was, "of Armathaim Zophim."
But in the case of "the Word," it is not so. I am ashamed to try these cases, one
against the other, for if we find fault with those who do so in the case of men,
when there is a great difference in the virtue of those who are so tried, though in
truth their substance be one; where the difference both of nature and of
everything else is so infinite, is it not the extremest madness to raise such
questions? But may He who is blasphemed by them be merciful to us. For it was
not we who invented the necessity of such discussions, but they who war against
their own salvation laid it on us.
What then do I say? That this first "was," applied to "the Word," is only
indicative of His eternal Being, (for "In the beginning," he says, "was the
Word,") and that the second "was," ("and the Word was with God,") denotes His
relative Being. For since to be eternal and without beginning is most peculiar to
God, this he puts first; and then, lest any one hearing that He was "in the
beginning," should assert, that He was "unbegotten" also, he immediately
remedies this by saying, before he declares what He was, that He was "with
God." And he has prevented any one from supposing, that this "Word" is simply
such a one as is either uttered or conceived, by the addition, as I beforesaid, of
the article, as well as by this second expression. For he does not say, was "in
God," but was "with God": declaring to us His eternity as to person. Then, as he
advances, he has more clearly revealed it, by adding, that this "Word" also "was
God."
"But yet created," it may be said. What then hindered him from saying, that
"In the beginning God made the Word"? At least Moses speaking of the earth
says, not that "in the beginning was the earth," but that "He made it," and then it
was. What now hindered John from saying in like manner, that "In the beginning
God made the Word"? For if Moses feared lest any one should assert that the
earth was uncreated, much more ought John to have feared this respecting the

Son, if He was indeed created. The world being visible, by this very
circumstance proclaims its Maker, ("the heavens," says the Psalmist, "declare
the glory of God" [Psalm 19:1]), but the Son is invisible, and is greatly,
infinitely, higher than all creation. If now, in the one instance, where we needed
neither argument nor teaching to know that the world is created, yet the prophet
sets down this fact clearly and before all others; much more should John have
declared the same concerning the Son, if He had really been created.
"Yes," it may be said, "but Peter has asserted this clearly and openly."
Where and when? "When speaking to the Jews he said, that 'God has made Him
both Lord and Christ.'" [Acts 2:36] Why do you not add what follows, "That
same Jesus whom you have crucified"? Or do you not know that of the words,
part relate to His unmixed Nature, part to His Incarnation? But if this be not the
case, and you will absolutely understand all as referring to the Godhead, then
you will make the Godhead capable of suffering; but if not capable of suffering,
then not created. For if blood had flowed from that divine and ineffable Nature,
and if that Nature, and not the flesh, had been torn and cut by the nails upon the
cross, on this supposition your quibbling would have had reason; but if not even
the devil himself could utter such a blasphemy, why do you feign to be ignorant
with ignorance so unpardonable, and such as not the evil spirits themselves
could pretend? Besides the expressions "Lord" and "Christ" belong not to His
Essence, but to His dignity; for the one refers to His Power, the other to his
having been anointed. What then would you say con cerning the Son of God?
For if he were even, as you assert, created, this argument could not have place.
For He was not first created and afterwards God chose Him, nor does He hold a
kingdom which could be thrown aside, but one which belongs by nature to His
Essence; since, when asked if He were a King, He answers, "To this end was I
born." [John 18:37] But Peter speaks as concerning one chosen, because his
argument wholly refers to the Dispensation.
4. And why do you wonder if Peter says this? For Paul, reasoning with the
Athenians, calls Him "Man" only, saying, "By that Man whom He has ordained,