1 Corinthians 11:7
"For a man indeed ought not to have his head veiled, forasmuch as he is the
image and glory of God."
This is again another cause. "Not only," so he speaks, "because he has
Christ to be His Head ought he not to cover the head, but because also he rules
over the woman." For the ruler when he comes before the king ought to have the
symbol of his rule. As therefore no ruler without military girdle and cloak,
would venture to appear before him that has the diadem: so neither do thou
without the symbols of your rule, (one of which is the not being covered,) pray
before God, lest you insult both yourself and Him that has honored you.
And the same thing likewise one may say regarding the woman. For to her
also is it a reproach, the not having the symbols of her subjection. "But the
woman is the glory of the man." Therefore the rule of the man is natural.
5. Then, having affirmed his point, he states again other reasons and causes
also, leading you to the first creation, and saying thus:

1 Corinthians 11:8
"For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man."
But if to be of any one, is a glory to him of whom one is, much more the
being an image of him.

1 Corinthians 11:9
"For neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the
man."
This is again a second superiority, nay, rather also a third, and a fourth, the
first being, that Christ is the head of us, and we of the woman; a second, that we
are the glory of God, but the woman of us; a third, that we are not of the woman,
but she of us; a fourth, that we are not for her, but she for us.

1 Corinthians 11:10
"For this cause ought the woman to have a sign of authority on her head."
"For this cause:" what cause, tell me? "For all these which have been
mentioned," says he; or rather not for these only, but also "because of the
angels." "For although thou despise your husband," says he, "yet reverence the
angels."
It follows that being covered is a mark of subjection and authority. For it
induces her to look down and be ashamed and preserve entire her proper virtue.
For the virtue and honor of the governed is to abide in his obedience.
Again: the man is not compelled to do this; for he is the image of his Lord:
but the woman is; and that reasonably. Consider then the excess of the
transgression when being honored with so high a prerogative, you put yourself to
shame, seizing the woman's dress. And you do the same as if having received a
diadem, you should cast the diadem from your head, and instead of it take a
slave's garment.

1 Corinthians 11:11
"Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman, nor the woman
without the man, in the Lord."
Thus, because he had given great superiority to the man, having said that
the woman is of him and for him and under him; that he might neither lift up the
men more than was due nor depress the women, see how he brings in the
correction, saying, "Howbeit neither is the man without the woman, nor the
woman without the man, in the Lord." "Examine not, I pray," says he, "the first
things only, and that creation. Since if you enquire into what comes after, each
one of the two is the cause of the other; or rather not even thus each of the other,
but God of all." Wherefore he says, "neither is the man without the woman, nor
the woman without the man, in the Lord."