diseases their evil nature? Whence is frenzy? Whence is lethargy? Is it not from
carelessness? If physical disorders have their origin in choice, much more those
which are voluntary. Whence is drunkenness? Is it not from intemperance of
soul? Is not frenzy from excess of fever? And is not fever from the elements too
abundant in us? And is not this superabundance of elements from our
carelessness? For when either from deficiency or excess we carry any of the
things within us beyond the bounds of moderation, we kindle that fire. Again, if
when the fire is kindled, we continue to neglect it, we make a conflagration for
ourselves, which we are not able to extinguish. So is it also with vice. When we
do not restrain it at its beginning, nor cut it off, we cannot afterwards reach to the
end of it, but it becomes too great for our power. Wherefore, I beseech you, let
us do everything that we may never become drowsy. Do you not see that when
sentinels have only given way a little to sleep, they derive no advantage from
their long watch, for by that little they have ruined the whole, having given
perfect security to him who is prepared to steal. For as we do not see thieves in
the same way that they see us, so also the devil most of all is ever instant, and
lying in wait, and grinding his teeth. Let us not then slumber. Let us not say, on
this side there is nothing, on that side nothing; we are often plundered from a
quarter whence we did not expect it. So it is with vice; we perish from a quarter
whence we did not expect it. Let us look carefully round upon all things, let us
not be drunken, and we shall not sleep. Let us not be luxurious, and we shall not
slumber. Let us not be mad for external things, and we shall continue in sobriety.
Let us discipline ourselves on every side. And as men who walk upon a tight
rope cannot be off their guard ever so little, for that little causes great mischief:
for the man losing his balance is at once precipitated down and perishes; so
neither is it possible for us to be off our guard. We walk upon a narrow road
intercepted by precipices on either side, not admitting of two feet at the same
time. Do you see not how much carefulness is necessary? Do you see not how
those who travel on such roads guard not only their feet, but their eyes also? For
if he should choose to gaze on one side, though his foot stand firm, his eye

becoming dizzy from the depth, plunges the whole body down. But he must take
heed to himself and to his steps; wherefore he says, "neither to the right hand,
nor to the left." [Proverbs 4:27] Great is the depth of vice, high the precipices,
much darkness below. Let us take heed to the narrow way, let us walk with fear
and trembling. No one, who is traveling such a road, is dissolved in laughter nor
heavy with drunkenness, but travels such a road with sobriety and fasting. No
one traveling such a road carries with him any superfluities; for he would be
contented even lightly equipped to be able to escape. No one entangles his own
feet, but leaves them disengaged, and free to move.
But we, chaining ourselves down with numberless cares, and carrying with
us the numberless burdens of this life, staring about, and loosely rambling, how
do we expect to travel in that narrow road? He has not merely said that "narrow
is the way" [Matthew 7:14], but with wonder, "how narrow is the way," that is,
exceedingly narrow. And this we also do in things that are quite objects of
wonder. And "straitened," he says, "is the way which leads unto life." And he
has well said it. For when we are bound to give an account of our thoughts, and
words, and actions, and all things, truly it is narrow. But we ourselves make it
more narrow, spreading out and widening ourselves, and shuffling out our feet.
For the narrow way is difficult to every one, but especially to him who is
incumbered with fat, as he who makes himself lean will not perceive its
narrowness. So that he who has practiced himself in being pinched, will not be
discouraged at its pressure.
Let not any one therefore expect that he shall see heaven with ease. For it
cannot be. Let no one hope to travel the narrow road with luxury, for it is
impossible. Let no one traveling in the broad way hope for life. When therefore
you see such and such an one luxuriating in baths, in a sumptuous table, or in
other matters having troops of attendants; think not yourself unhappy, as not
partaking of these things, but lament for him, that he is traveling the way to
destruction. For what is the advantage of this way, when it ends in tribulation?
And what is the injury of that straitness, when it leads to rest? Tell me, if any one