"Is not puffed up." For so we see many who think highly of themselves on
the score of these very excellencies; for example, on not being envious, nor
grudging, nor mean-spirited, nor rash: these evils being incidental not to wealth
and poverty only, but even to things naturally good. But love perfectly purges
out all. And consider: he that is long-suffering is not of course also kind. But if
he be not kind, the thing becomes a vice, and he is in danger of falling into
malice. Therefore she supplies a medicine, I mean kindness, and preserves the
virtue pure. Again, the kind person often becomes over-complaisant; but this
also she corrects. For "love," says he, "vaunts not itself, is not puffed up:" the
kind and long-suffering is often ostentatious; but she takes away this vice also.
And see how he adorns her not only from what she has, but also from what
she has not. For he says that she both brings in virtue, and extirpates vice, nay
rather she suffers it not to spring up at all. Thus he said not, "She envies, indeed,
but overcomes envy;" nor, "is arrogant, but chastises that passion;" but, "envies
not, vaunts not itself, is not puffed up;" which truly is most to be admired, that
even without toil she accomplishes her good things, and without war and battlearray her trophy is set up: she not permitting him that possesses her to toil and so
to attain the crown, but without labor conveying to him her prize. For where
there is not passion to contend against sober reason, what labor can there be?
2. "Does not behave itself unseemly. " "Nay, why," says he, "do I say, she 'is
not puffed up,' when she is so far from that feeling, that in suffering the most
shameful things for him whom she loves, she does not even count the thing an
unseemliness?" Again, he did not say, "she suffers unseemliness but bears the
shame nobly," but, "she does not even entertain any sense at all of the shame."
For if the lovers of money endure all manner of reproaches for the sake of that
sordid traffic of theirs, and far from hiding their faces, do even exult in it: much
more he that has this praiseworthy love will refuse nothing whatsoever for the
safety's sake of those whom he loves: nay, nor will any thing that he can suffer
shame him.
And that we may not fetch our example from any thing base, let us examine

this same statement in its application to Christ, and then we shall see the force of
what has been said. For our Lord Jesus Christ was both spit upon and beaten
with rods by pitiful slaves; and not only did He not count it an unseemliness, but
He even exulted and called the thing glory; and bringing in a robber and
murderer with Himself before the rest into paradise, and discoursing with a
harlot, and this when the standers-by all accused Him, He counted not the thing
to be disgraceful, but both allowed her to kiss His feet, and to bedew His body
with her tears, and to wipe them away with her hair, and this amid a company of
spectators who were foes and enemies; "for love does nothing unseemly."
Therefore also fathers, though they be the first of philosophers and orators,
are not ashamed to lisp with their children; and none of those who see them find
fault with them, but the thing is esteemed so good and right as to be even worthy
of prayer. And again, should they become vicious, the parents keep on
correcting, caring for them, abridging the reproaches they incur, and are not
ashamed. For love "does nothing unseemly," but as it were with certain golden
wings covers up all the offenses of the beloved.
Thus also Jonathan loved David; and hearing his father say, [1 Samuel
20:30] "Thou son of damsels that have run away from their homes , thou
womanly bred, " he was not ashamed, though the words be full of great reproach.
For what he means is this: "Thou son of mean harlots who are mad after men,
who run after the passers-by, thou unnerved and effeminate wretch, who hast
nothing of a man, but livest to the shame of yourself and the mother who bare
you." What then? Did he grieve at these things, and hide his face, and turn away
from his beloved? Nay, quite the contrary; he displayed his fondness as an
ornament. And yet the one was at that time a king, and a king's son, even
Jonathan; the other a fugitive and a wanderer, I mean, David. But not even thus
was he ashamed of his friendship. For love does not behave itself unseemly. Yea,
this is its wonderful quality that not only it suffers not the injured to grieve and
feel galled, but even disposes him to rejoice. Accordingly, he too, of whom we
are speaking, after all these things, just as though he had a crown put on him,