but by a Divine power and by the Passion of Christ. This power is
called metaphorically the Church's key, and is the key of "ministry."
Reply to Objection 1: The door of heaven, considered in itself, is ever
open, but it is said to be closed to someone, on account of some
obstacle against entering therein, which is in himself. The obstacle
which the entire human nature inherited from the sin of the first man
was removed by Christ's Passion; hence, after the Passion, John
saw an opened door in heaven. Yet that door still remains closed to
this or that man, on account of the original sin which he has
contracted, or the actual sin which he has committed: hence we
need the sacraments and the keys of the Church.
Reply to Objection 2: This refers to His closing Limbo, so that
thenceforth no one should go there, and to His opening of Paradise,
the obstacle of nature being removed by His Passion.
Reply to Objection 3: The key whereby hell is opened and closed, is
the power of bestowing grace, whereby hell is opened to man, so
that he is taken out from sin which is the door of hell, and closed, so
that by the help of grace man should no more fall into sin. Now the
power of bestowing grace belongs to God alone, wherefore He kept
this key to Himself. But the key of the kingdom is also the power to
remit the debt of temporal punishment, which debt prevents man
from entering the kingdom Consequently the key of the kingdom can
be given to man rather than the key of hell, for they are not the same,
as is clear from what has been said. For a man may be set free from
hell by the remission of the debt of eternal punishment, without
being at once admitted to the kingdom, on account of his yet owing a
debt of temporal punishment.
It may also be replied, as some state, that the key of heaven is also
the key of hell, since if one is opened to a man, the other, for that
very reason, is closed to him, but it takes its name from the better of
the two.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the key is the power of binding and

loosing, etc.?
Objection 1: It would seem that the key is not the power of binding
and loosing, whereby "the ecclesiastical judge has to admit the
worthy to the kingdom and exclude the unworthy" therefrom, as
stated in the text (Sent. iv, D, 16). For the spiritual power conferred in
a sacrament is the same as the character. But the key and the
character do not seem to be the same, since by the character man is
referred to God, whereas by the key he is referred to his subjects.
Therefore the key is not a power.
Objection 2: Further, an ecclesiastical judge is only one who has
jurisdiction, which is not given at the same time as orders. But the
keys are given in the conferring of orders. Therefore there should
have been no mention of the ecclesiastical judge in the definition of
the keys.
Objection 3: Further, when a man has something of himself, he
needs not to be reduced to act by some active power. Now a man is
admitted to the kingdom from the very fact that he is worthy.
Therefore it does not concern the power of the keys to admit the
worthy to the kingdom.
Objection 4: Further, sinners are unworthy of the kingdom. But the
Church prays for sinners, that they may go to heaven. Therefore she
does not exclude the unworthy, but admits them, so far as she is
concerned.
Objection 5: Further, in every ordered series of agents, the last end
belongs to the principal and not to the instrumental agent. But the
principal agent in view of man's salvation is God. Therefore
admission to the kingdom, which is the last end, belongs to Him, and
not to those who have the keys, who are as instrumental or
ministerial agents.
I answer that, According to the Philosopher (De Anima ii, text. 33),
"powers are defined from their acts." Wherefore, since the key is a
kind of power, it should be defined from its act or use, and reference
to the act should include its object from which it takes its species,
and the mode of acting whereby the power is shown to be well