saying of a heathen poet. I know that you have become much weaker for the
struggle with the Evil One; I know that you are standing in the very midst of the
flame of pleasures; but if you will say to the enemy "We do not serve your
pleasures, and we do not bow down to the root of all your evils;" if you will bend
your eye upward, the Saviour will even now shake out the fire, and will burn up
those who have flung you into it, and will send to you in the midst of the furnace
a cloud, and dew, and a rustling breeze, so that the fire may not lay hold of your
thought or your conscience. Only do not consume yourself with fire. For the
arms and engines of besiegers have often been unable to destroy the fortification
of cities, but the treachery of one or two of the citizens dwelling inside has
betrayed them to the enemy without any trouble on his part. And now if none of
your thoughts within betray you, should the Evil One bring countless engines
against you from without he will bring them in vain.
4. You have by the grace of God many and great men who sympathize with
your trouble, who encourage you to the fight, who tremble for your soul—
Valerius the holy man of God, Florentius who is in every respect his brother,
Porphyrius who is wise with the wisdom of Christ, and many others. These are
daily mourning, and praying for you without ceasing; and they would have
obtained what they asked for, long ago, if only you had been willing to withdraw
yourself a little space out of the hands of the enemy. Now then is it not strange
that, while others do not even now despair of your salvation, but are continually
praying that they may have their member restored to them, you yourself, having
once fallen, art unwilling to get up again, and remainest prostrate, all but crying
aloud to the enemy: "Slay me, smite me, spare not?" "Does he who falls not rise
up again?" [Jeremiah 8:4] speaks the divine oracle. But you are striving against
this and contradicting it; for if one who has fallen despairs it is as much as to say
that he who falls does not rise up again. I entreat you do not so great a wrong to
yourself; do not pour upon us such a flood of sorrow. I do not say at the present
time, when you have not yet completed your twentieth year, but even if, after
achieving many things, and spending your whole life in Christ you had, in

extreme old age, experienced this attack, even then it would not have been right
to despair, but to call to mind the robber who was justified on the cross, the
labourers who wrought about the eleventh hour, and received the wages of the
whole day. But as it is not well that those who have fallen near the very
extremity of life should abandon hope, if they be sober minded, so on the other
hand it is not safe to feed upon this hope, and say, Here for a while, I will enjoy
the sweets of life, but afterwards, when I have worked for a short time, I shall
receive the wages of the whole working time. For I recollect hearing you often
say, when many were exhorting you to frequent the schools; "But what if I bring
my life to a bad end in a short space of time, how shall I depart to Him who has
said 'Delay not to turn to the Lord, nor put off day after day?'" [Sirach 5:8]
Recover this thought, and stand in fear of the thief; for by this name Christ calls
our departure hence, because it comes upon us unawares. Consider the anxieties
of life which befall us, both those which are personal to ourselves, and which are
common to us with others, the fear of rulers, the envy of citizens, the danger
which often hangs over us imperilling even life itself, the labours, the distresses,
the servile flatteries, such as are unbecoming even to slaves if they be earnest
minded men, the fruit of our labours coming to an end in this world, a fact which
is the most distressing of all. It has been the lot indeed of many to miss the
enjoyment of the things for which they have laboured, and after having
consumed the prime of their manhood in labours and perils, just when they
hoped that they should receive their reward they have departed taking nothing
with them. For if, after undergoing many dangers, and completing many
campaigns, one will scarcely look upon an earthly king with confidence, how
will any one be able to behold the heavenly king, if he has lived and fought for
another all his time.
5. Would you have me speak of the domestic cares of wife, and children
and slaves? It is an evil thing to wed a very poor wife, or a very rich one; for the
former is injurious to the husband's means, the latter to his authority and
independence. It is a grievous thing to have children, still more grievous not to