right hand, while temporal nourishment belongs on the left,
according to Prov. 3:16: "In her left hand (are) riches and glory." And
the priestly power is midway between temporal goods and spiritual
wisdom; because thereby both spiritual wisdom and temporal goods
are dispensed.
Another literal signification may be assigned. For the ark contained
the tables of the Law, in order to prevent forgetfulness of the Law,
wherefore it is written (Ex. 24:12): "I will give thee two tables of
stone, and the Law, and the commandments which I have written:
that thou mayest teach them" to the children of Israel. The rod of
Aaron was placed there to restrain the people from insubordination
to the priesthood of Aaron; wherefore it is written (Num. 17:10):
"Carry back the rod of Aaron into the tabernacle of the testimony,
that it may be kept there for a token of the rebellious children of
Israel." The manna was kept in the ark to remind them of the benefit
conferred by God on the children of Israel in the desert; wherefore it
is written (Ex. 16:32): "Fill a gomor of it, and let it be kept unto
generations to come hereafter, that they may know the bread
wherewith I fed you in the wilderness." The candlestick was set up to
enhance the beauty of the temple, for the magnificence of a house
depends on its being well lighted. Now the candlestick had seven
branches, as Josephus observes (Antiquit. iii, 7,8), to signify the
seven planets, wherewith the whole world is illuminated. Hence the
candlestick was placed towards the south; because for us the
course of the planets is from that quarter. The altar of incense was
instituted that there might always be in the tabernacle a sweetsmelling smoke; both through respect for the tabernacle, and as a
remedy for the stenches arising from the shedding of blood and the
slaying of animals. For men despise evil-smelling things as being
vile, whereas sweet-smelling things are much appreciated. The table
was place there to signify that the priests who served the temple
should take their food in the temple: wherefore, as stated in Mt. 12:4,
it was lawful for none but the priests to eat the twelve loaves which
were put on the table in memory of the twelve tribes. And the table
was not placed in the middle directly in front of the propitiatory, in
order to exclude an idolatrous rite: for the Gentiles, on the feasts of
the moon, set up a table in front of the idol of the moon, wherefore it
is written (Jer. 7:18): "The women knead the dough, to make cakes to
the queen of heaven."
In the court outside the tabernacle was the altar of holocausts, on
which sacrifices of those things which the people possessed were

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

offered to God: and consequently the people who offered these
sacrifices to God by the hands of the priest could be present in the
court. But the priests alone, whose function it was to offer the people
to God, could approach the inner altar, whereon the very devotion
and holiness of the people was offered to God. And this altar was put
up outside the tabernacle and in the court, to the exclusion of
idolatrous worship: for the Gentiles placed altars inside the temples
to offer up sacrifices thereon to idols.
The figurative reason for all these things may be taken from the
relation of the tabernacle to Christ, who was foreshadowed therein.
Now it must be observed that to show the imperfection of the figures
of the Law, various figures were instituted in the temple to betoken
Christ. For He was foreshadowed by the "propitiatory," since He is "a
propitiation for our sins" (1 Jn. 2:2). This propitiatory was fittingly
carried by cherubim, since of Him it is written (Heb. 1:6): "Let all the
angels of God adore Him." He is also signified by the ark: because
just as the ark was made of setim-wood, so was Christ's body
composed of most pure members. More over it was gilded: for Christ
was full of wisdom and charity, which are betokened by gold. And in
the ark was a golden pot, i.e. His holy soul, having manna, i.e. "all
the fulness of the Godhead" (Col. 2:9). Also there was a rod in the
ark, i.e. His priestly power: for "He was made a . . . priest for
ever" (Heb. 6:20). And therein were the tables of the Testament, to
denote that Christ Himself is a lawgiver. Again, Christ was signified
by the candlestick, for He said Himself (Jn. 8:12): "I am the Light of
the world"; while the seven lamps denoted the seven gifts of the
Holy Ghost. He is also betokened in the table, because He is our
spiritual food, according to Jn. 6:41,51: "I am the living bread": and
the twelve loaves signified the twelve apostles, or their teaching. Or
again, the candlestick and table may signify the Church's teaching,
and faith, which also enlightens and refreshes. Again, Christ is
signified by the two altars of holocausts and incense. Because all
works of virtue must be offered to us to God through Him; both
those whereby we afflict the body, which are offered, as it were, on
the altar of holocausts; and those which, with greater perfection of
mind, are offered to God in Christ, by the spiritual desires of the
perfect, on the altar of incense, as it were, according to Heb. 13:15:
"By Him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise always to God."
Reply to Objection 7: The Lord commanded an altar to be made for
the offering of sacrifices and gifts, in honor of God, and for the
upkeep of the ministers who served the tabernacle. Now concerning