153. In the presence of God, during a recollected reading of the text, it is good to ask, for example:
“Lord, what does this text say to me? What is it about my life that you want to change by this text?

What troubles me about this text? Why am I not interested in this? Or perhaps: What do I find
pleasant in this text? What is it about this word that moves me? What attracts me? Why does it
attract me?” When we make an effort to listen to the Lord, temptations usually arise. One of them
is simply to feel troubled or burdened, and to turn away. Another common temptation is to think
about what the text means for other people, and so avoid applying it to our own life. It can also
happen that we look for excuses to water down the clear meaning of the text. Or we can wonder if
God is demanding too much of us, asking for a decision which we are not yet prepared to make.
This leads many people to stop taking pleasure in the encounter with God’s word; but this would
mean forgetting that no one is more patient than God our Father, that no one is more
understanding and willing to wait. He always invites us to take a step forward, but does not
demand a full response if we are not yet ready. He simply asks that we sincerely look at our life
and present ourselves honestly before him, and that we be willing to continue to grow, asking from
him what we ourselves cannot as yet achieve.

An ear to the people

154. The preacher also needs to keep his ear to the people and to discover what it is that the
faithful need to hear. A preacher has to contemplate the word, but he also has to contemplate his
people. In this way he learns “of the aspirations, of riches and limitations, of ways of praying, of
loving, of looking at life and the world, which distinguish this or that human gathering,” while
paying attention “to actual people, to using their language, their signs and symbols, to answering
the questions they ask”. He needs to be able to link the message of a biblical text to a human
situation, to an experience which cries out for the light of God’s word. This interest has nothing to
do with shrewdness or calculation; it is profoundly religious and pastoral. Fundamentally it is a
“spiritual sensitivity for reading God’s message in events”, and this is much more than simply
finding something interesting to say. What we are looking for is “what the Lord has to say in this or
that particular circumstance”. Preparation for preaching thus becomes an exercise in
evangelical discernment, wherein we strive to recognize – in the light of the Spirit – “a call which
God causes to resound in the historical situation itself. In this situation, and also through it, God
calls the believer”.

155. In this effort we may need but think of some ordinary human experience such as a joyful
reunion, a moment of disappointment, the fear of being alone, compassion at the sufferings of
others, uncertainty about the future, concern for a loved one, and so forth. But we need to develop
a broad and profound sensitivity to what really affects other people’s lives. Let us also keep in
mind that we should never respond to questions that nobody asks. Nor is it fitting to talk about the
latest news in order to awaken people’s interest; we have television programmes for that. It is
possible, however, to start with some fact or story so that God’s word can forcefully resound in its
call to conversion, worship, commitment to fraternity and service, and so forth. Yet there will
always be some who readily listen to a preacher’s commentaries on current affairs, while not
letting themselves be challenged.