until this shall take place, and in order that it may take place,—because
we adapt the faith of belief to things which have a beginning, as in things
eternal we hope for the truth of contemplation, lest the faith of mortal life
should be at discord with the truth of eternal life,—the Truth itself, coeternal with the Father, took a beginning from earth,2 when the Son of
God so came as to become the Son of man, and to take to Himself our
faith, that He might thereby lead us on to His own truth, who so
undertook our mortality, as not to lose His own eternity. For truth stands
to faith in the relation in which eternity stands to that which has a
beginning. Therefore, we must needs so be cleansed, that we may come to
have such a beginning as remains eternal, that we may not have one.
beginning in faith, and another in truth. Neither could we pass to things
eternal from the condition of having a beginning, unless we were
transferred, by union of the eternal to ourselves through our own
beginning, to His own eternity. Therefore our faith has, in some measure,
now followed thither, whither He in whom we have believed has
ascended; born, dead, risen again, taken up. Of these four things, we
knew the first two in ourselves. For we know that men both have a
beginning and die. But the remaining two, that is, to be raised, and to be
taken up, we rightly hope will be in us, because we have believed them
done in Him. Since, therefore, in Him that, too, which had a beginning
has passed over to eternity, in ourselves also it will so pass over, when
faith shall have arrived at truth. For to those who thus believe, in order
that they might remain in the word of faith, and being thence led on to
the truth, and through that to eternity, might be freed from death, He
speaks thus: "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed."
And as though they would ask, With what fruit? He proceeds to say, "And
ye shall know the truth." And again, as though they would say, Of what
good is truth to mortal men? "And the truth," He says, "shall make you
free." From what, except from death, from corruptions from
changeableness? Since truth remains immortal, incorrupt, unchangeable.
But true immortality, true incorruptibility, true unchangeableness, is
eternity itself.

### CHAP. 19.—IN WHAT MANNER THE SON WAS SENT AND TO HIS EQUALITY WITH THE FATHER.

25. Behold, then, why the Son of God was sent; nay, rather behold what it
is for the Son of God to be sent. Whatever things they were which were
wrought in time, with a view to produce faith, whereby we might be
cleansed so as to contemplate truth, in things that have a beginning,
which have been put forth from eternity, and are referred back to
eternity: these were either testimonies of this mission, or they were the
mission itself of the Son of God. But some of these testimonies
announced Him beforehand as to come, some testified that He had come
already. For that He was made a creature by whom the whole creation
was made, must needs find a witness in the whole creation. For except
one were preached by the sending of many  one would not be
bound to, the sending away of many. And unless there were such
testimonies as should seem to be great to those who are lowly, it would
not be believed, that He being great should make men great, who as lowly
was sent to the lowly. For the heaven and the earth and all things in them
are incomparably greater works of the Son of God, since all things were
made by Him, than the signs and the portents which broke forth in
testimony of Him. But yet men, in order that, being lowly, they might
believe these great things to have been wrought by Him, trembled at
those lowly things, as if they had been great.
26. "When, therefore, the fullness of time was come, God sent forth His
Son, made of a woman, made under the Law;" to such a degree lowly, that
He was "made;" in this way therefore sent, in that He was made. If,
therefore, the greater sends the less, we too, acknowledge Him to have
been made less; and in so far less, in so far as made; and in so far made,
in so far as sent. For "He sent forth His Son made of a woman." And yet,
because all things were made by Him, not only before He was made and
sent, but before all things were at all, we confess the same to be equal to
the sender, whom we call less, as having been sent. In what way, then,
could He be seen by the fathers, when certain angelical visions were
shown to them, before that fullness of time at which it was fitting He
should be sent, and so before He was sent, at a time when not yet sent He
was seen as He is equal with the Father? For how does He say to Philip,
by whom He was certainly seen as by all the rest, and even by those by