John 17:22
"And the glory which You gave Me, I have given them."
That by miracles, that by doctrines, and, that they should be of one soul; for
this is glory, that they should be one, and greater even than miracles. As men
admire God because there is no strife or discord in That Nature, and this is His
greatest glory, "so too let these," He says, "from this cause become glorious."
"And how," says some one, "does He ask the Father to give this to them, when
He says that He Himself gives it?" Whether His discourse be concerning
miracles, or unanimity, or peace, He is seen Himself to have given these things
to them; whence it is clear that the petition is made for the sake of their comfort.

John 17:23
"I in them, and You in Me."
"How gave He the glory?" By being in them, and having the Father with
Him, so as to weld them together. But in another place He speaks not so; He says
not that the Father comes by Him, but, "that He and the Father come, and take
up their abode with him," "there" removing the suspicion of Sabellius, "here" that
of Arius.
"That they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may know that
You have sent Me." [John 14:23]
He says these latter words immediately after the other, to show that peace
has more power to attract men than a miracle; for as it is the nature of strife to
separate, so it is that of agreement to weld together.
"And I have loved them as You have loved Me."
Here again the "as" means, as far as it is possible for a man to be loved; and
the sure proof of His love is His giving Himself for them. After having told them
that they shall be in safety, that they shall not be overturned, that they shall be
holy, that many shall believe through them, that they shall enjoy great glory, that
not He alone loved them, but the Father also; He next tells them of what shall be
after their sojourning here, concerning the prizes and crowns laid up for them.

John 17:24
"Father, I will that they also whom You have given Me, be with Me where I am."
"Then dost Thou gain by prayer, and dost Thou not yet possess that
concerning which they enquired continually, saying, 'Where are You going?'
What sayest Thou? How then did You say to them, 'You shall sit upon twelve
thrones'? [Matthew 19:28] How did You promise other things more and
greater?" Do you see that He says all in the way of condescension? Since how
would He have said, "You shall follow afterwards"? [John 13:36] But He speaks
thus with a view to a fuller conviction and demonstration of His love.
"That they may behold My glory which You have given Me."
This again is a sign of His being of one mind with the Father, of a higher
character than those former, for He says, "Before the foundation of the world,"
yet has it also a certain condescension; for, "You have given Me," He says. Now
if this be not the case, I would gladly ask the gainsayers a question. He that
gives, gives to one subsisting; did the Father then, having first begotten the Son,
afterwards give Him glory, having before allowed Him to be without glory? And
how could this be reasonable? Seest that the "He gave," is, "He begot"?
3. But why said He not, "That they may share My glory," instead of, "That
they may be hold My glory"? Here He implies, that all that rest is, the looking on
the Son of God. This certainly it is which causes them to be glorified; as Paul
says, "With open face mirroring the glory of the Lord." [2 Corinthians 3:18] For
as they who look on the sunbeams, and enjoy a very clear atmosphere, draw their
enjoyment from their sight, so then also, and in much greater degree, this will
cause us pleasure. At the same time also He shows, that what they should behold
was not the body then seen, but some awful Substance.