Deut. xxxii. 9.

goodness, giving you rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with food and
gladness." But that all his Epistles are consonant to these declarations, I shall, when expounding
the apostle, show from the Epistles themselves, in the right place. But while I bring out by these
proofs the truths of Scripture, and set forth briefly and compendiously things which are stated in
various ways, do thou also attend to them with patience, and not deem them prolix; taking this into
account, that proofs [of the things which are] contained in the Scriptures cannot be shown except
from the Scriptures themselves.
10. And still further, Stephen, who was chosen the first deacon by the apostles, and who, of all
men, was the first to follow the footsteps of the martyrdom of the Lord, being the first that was
slain for confessing Christ, speaking boldly among the people, and teaching them, says: "The God
of glory appeared to our father Abraham, É and said to him, Get thee out of thy country, and from
thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall show thee; É and He removed him into this land,
wherein ye now dwell. And He gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot
on; yet He promised that He would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him. É
And God spake on this wise, That his seed should sojourn in a strange land, and should be brought
into bondage, and should be evil-entreated four hundred years; and the nation whom they shall
serve will I judge, says the Lord. And after that shall they come forth, and serve me in this place.
And He gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so [Abraham] begat Isaac." And the rest of
his words announce the same God, who was with Joseph and with the patriarchs, and who spake
with Moses.
11. And that the whole range of the doctrine of the apostles proclaimed one and the same God,
who removed Abraham, who made to him the promise of inheritance, who in due season gave to
him the covenant of circumcision, who called his descendants out of Egypt, preserved outwardly
by circumcision—for he gave it as a sign, that they might not be like the Egyptians—that He was
the Maker of all things, that He was the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that He was the God of
glory,—they who wish may learn from the very words and acts of the apostles, and may contemplate
the fact that this God is one, above whom is no other. But even if there were another god above
Him, we should say, upon [instituting] a comparison of the quantity [of the work done by each],
that the latter is superior to the former. For by deeds the better man appears, as I have already
remarked; and, inasmuch as these men have no works of their father to adduce, the latter is shown
to be God alone. But if any one, "doting about questions," do imagine that what the apostles
have declared about God should be allegorized, let him consider my previous statements, in which
I set forth one God as the Founder and Maker of all things, and destroyed and laid bare their
allegations; and he shall find them agreeable to the doctrine of the apostles, and so to maintain what