The Greek text of this section is preserved both by Epiphanius (Hær. xxxiv. 1) and by Hippolytus (Philosoph., vi. 39,
40). Their citation are somewhat discordant, and we therefore follow the old Latin version.

Epiphanius now gives the Greek text verbatim, to which, therefore, we return.

[Comp. Acts xvi. 16.]

I am, and I what thou art. Establish the germ of light in thy nuptial chamber. Receive from me a
spouse, and become receptive of him, while thou art received by him. Behold Charis has descended
upon thee; open thy mouth and prophesy." On the woman replying, "I have never at any time
prophesied, nor do I know how to prophesy;" then engaging, for the second time, in certain
invocations, so as to astound his deluded victim, he says to her, "Open thy mouth, speak whatsoever
occurs to thee, and thou shalt prophesy." She then, vainly puffed up and elated by these words, and
greatly excited in soul by the expectation that it is herself who is to prophesy, her heart beating
violently [from emotion], reaches the requisite pitch of audacity, and idly as well as impudently
utters some nonsense as it happens to occur to her, such as might be expected from one heated by
an empty spirit. (Referring to this, one superior to me has observed, that the soul is both audacious
and impudent when heated with empty air.) Henceforth she reckons herself a prophetess, and
expresses her thanks to Marcus for having imparted to her of his own Charis. She then makes the
effort to reward him, not only by the gift of her possessions (in which way he has collected a very
large fortune), but also by yielding up to him her person, desiring in every way to be united to him,
that she may become altogether one with him.
4. But already some of the most faithful women, possessed of the fear of God, and not being
deceived (whom, nevertheless, he did his best to seduce like the rest by bidding them prophesy),
abhorring and execrating him, have withdrawn from such a vile company of revellers. This they
have done, as being well aware that the gift of prophecy is not conferred on men by Marcus, the
magician, but that only those to whom God sends His grace from above possess the
divinely-bestowed power of prophesying; and then they speak where and when God pleases, and
not when Marcus orders them to do so. For that which commands is greater and of higher authority
than that which is commanded, inasmuch as the former rules, while the latter is in a state of
subjection. If, then, Marcus, or any one else, does command,— as these are accustomed continually
at their feasts to play at drawing lots, and [in accordance with the lot] to command one another to
prophesy, giving forth as oracles what is in harmony with their own desires,—it will follow that
he who commands is greater and of higher authority than the prophetic spirit, though he is but a
man, which is impossible. But such spirits as are commanded by these men, and speak when they
desire it, are earthly and weak, audacious and impudent, sent forth by Satan for the seduction and
perdition of those who do not hold fast that well-compacted faith which they received at first through
the Church.
5. Moreover, that this Marcus compounds philters and love-potions, in order to insult the persons
of some of these women, if not of all, those of them who have returned to the Church of God— a
thing which frequently occurs—have acknowledged, confessing, too, that they have been defiled
by him, and that they were filled with a burning passion towards him. A sad example of this occurred
in the case of a certain Asiatic, one of our deacons, who had received him (Marcus) into his house.
His wife, a woman of remarkable beauty, fell a victim both in mind and body to this magician, and,
for a long time, travelled about with him. At last, when, with no small difficulty, the brethren had