the former captivity of his passions;) just so in this instance also, I should not
call death's being stayed from feeding on the bodies of men a splendid victory,
but rather that the bodies heretofore holden by him should be snatched away
from him.
But if they should still be contentious and should say that these things were
spoken of the soul's death, how is this "destroyed last?" since in the case of each
one at his Baptism it has been destroyed perfectly. If however you speak of the
body, the expression is admissible; I mean, such a saying as that it will be "last
destroyed."
But if any should doubt why discoursing of the resurrection, he did not
bring forward the bodies which rose again in the time of our Lord, our answer
might be the following: that this could not be alleged in behalf of the
resurrection. For to point out those who after rising died again, suited not one
employed in proving that death is entirely destroyed. Yea, this is the very reason
why he said that he is "destroyed last," that you might never more suspect his
rising again. For when sin is taken away, much more shall death cease: it being
out of all reason when the fountain is dried up, that the stream flowing from it
should still subsist; and when the root is annihilated, that the fruit should remain.
13. Since then in the last day the enemies of God shall be destroyed,
together with death and the devil and the evil spirits, let us not be dejected at the
prosperity of the enemies of God. For the enemies of the Lord in the moment of
their glory and exaltation fail; "yea, like smoke have they failed away." [Psalm
37:20] When you see any enemy of God wealthy, with armed attendants and
many flatterers, be not cast down, but lament, weep, call upon God, that He may
enrol him among His friends: and the more he prospers being God's enemy, so
much the more do thou mourn for him. For sinners we ought always to bewail,
but especially when they enjoy wealth and abundance of good days; even as one
should the sick, when they eat and drink to excess.
But there are some, who when they hear these words are of so unhappy a
disposition, as to sigh bitterly thereupon, and say, "Tears are due to me who have

nothing." You have well said, "who have nothing," not because you have not
what another has, but because you account the thing such as to be called happy;
yea, for this cause are you worthy of infinite lamentations: even as, if a person
living in health should count happy him that is sick and lying on a soft couch,
this latter is not near so wretched and miserable as he, because he has no sense
of his own advantages. Just such a result one may observe in these men's case
also: nay, and hereby our whole life is confounded and disordered. For these
sayings have undone many, and betrayed them to the devil, and made them more
pitiable than such as are wasted with famine. Yea, that those who long after
more, are more wretched than mendicants, as being possessed with a greater and
bitterer sorrow than they, is evident from what follows.
A drought once overtook our city, and all were trembling for the last of
evils, and were beseeching God to rid them of this fear. And one might see then
that which was spoken of by Moses; [Deuteronomy 28:23] "the heavens become
brass," and a death, of all deaths the most horrible, waited for every day. But
afterwards, when it seemed good to the merciful God, beyond all expectation
there was wafted down from heaven a great and plentiful rain, and thenceforth
all were in holiday and feasting, as having come up from the very gates of death.
But in the midst of so great blessings and the common gladness of all, one of
those exceedingly wealthy people went about with a gloomy and downcast
countenance, quite dead with sorrow; and when many enquired the reason,
wherefore in the common joy of all men he alone is sorrowful, he could not even
keep within him his savage passion, but goaded by the tyranny of the disease,
declared before them all the reason. "Why," says he, "having in my possession
ten thousand measures of wheat, I have no means of disposing of them left."
Shall we then count him happy, tell me, for these words, for which he deserved
to be stoned? Him that was more cruel than any wild beast, the common enemy?
What do you say, man? Are you sad because all did not perish, that you might
gather gold? Have you not heard what Solomon says, [Proverbs 11:26] "He that
withholds grain, the people shall curse him?" but goest about a common enemy