## Homily 38 on Matthew

Matthew 11:25-26.
" At that time Jesus answered and said, I make acknowledgment unto You,
O Father, Lord of Heaven and earth; because You have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it
seemed good in Your sight."
Do you see, how many ways He leads them on to the faith? First,
[Matthew 11:7-11] by His praises of John. For by pointing to him as a great and
marvellous one, He proved likewise all his sayings credible, whereby he used to
draw them on to the knowledge of Him. Secondly, [Matthew 11:12] by saying,
"The kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force;" for
this is the language of one who is pressing and urging them. Thirdly,
[Matthew 6:13] by signifying that the number of the prophets was finished; for
this too manifested Himself to be the person that was announced beforehand by
them. Fourthly, [Matthew 6:14-19] by pointing out that whatsoever things should
be done by him, were all accomplished; at which time also He made mention of
the parable of the children. Fifthly, by His upbraiding them that had not believed,
and by His alarming and threatening them greatly. [Matthew 11:20-24] Sixthly,
by His giving thanks for them that believed. For the expression, "I make
acknowledgment to You," here is, "I thank You." "I thank You," He says,
"because You have hid these things from the wise and prudent."
What then? Does He rejoice in destruction, and in the others not having
received this knowledge? By no means; but this is a most excellent way of His to
save men, His not forcing them that utterly reject, and are not willing to receive
His sayings; that, since they were not bettered by His call, but fell back, and
despised it, His casting them out might cause them to fall into a longing for these
things. And so likewise the attentive would grow more earnest.

And while His being revealed to these was fit matter of joy, His
concealment from those was no more of joy but of tears. Thus at any rate He
acts, where He weeps for the city. Not therefore because of this does He rejoice,
but because what wise men knew not, was known to these. As when Paul says,
"I thank God, that you were servants of sin, but you obeyed from the heart the
form of doctrine which was delivered unto you." You see, neither does Paul
therefore rejoice, because they were "servants of sin," but because being such,
they had been so highly favored.
Now by the "wise," here, He means the Scribes, and the Pharisees. And
these things He says, to make the disciples more earnest, and to show what had
been vouchsafed to the fishermen, when all those others had missed of it. And in
calling them "wise," He means not the true and commendable wisdom, but this
which they seemed to have through natural shrewdness. Wherefore neither did
He say, "you have revealed it to fools," but "to babes;" to unsophisticated, that
is, to simple-minded men; and He implies that so far from their missing these
privileges contrary to their desert, it was just what might be expected. And He
instructs us throughout, to be free from pride, and to follow after simplicity. For
this cause Paul also expressed it with more exceeding earnestness, writing on
this wise: "If any man among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become
a fool, that he may be wise." [1 Corinthians 3:18] For thus is God's grace
manifested.
But wherefore does He give thanks to the Father, although of course it was
Himself who wrought this? As He prays and intercedes with God, showing His
great love towards us, in the same way does He this too: for this also is of much
love. And He signifies, that not from Him only had they fallen away, but also
from the Father. Thus, what He said, speaking to His disciples, "Cast not the
holy things unto dogs," [Matthew 7:6] this He Himself anticipated them in
performing.
Moreover He signifies hereby both His own principal will, and that of the
Father; His own, I say, by His giving thanks and rejoicing at what had taken