SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.141, C.3.

concupiscence, if indulged, gathers strength: wherefore Augustine
says (Confess. viii, 5): "Lust served became a custom, and custom
not resisted became necessity." Thirdly, as to the remedy which is
applied to both. For a child is corrected by being restrained; hence it
is written (Prov. 23:13,14): "Withhold not correction from a child . . .
Thou shalt beat him with a rod, and deliver his soul from Hell." In like
manner by resisting concupiscence we moderate it according to the
demands of virtue. Augustine indicates this when he says (Music. vi,
11) that if the mind be lifted up to spiritual things, and remain fixed
"thereon, the impulse of custom," i.e. carnal concupiscence, "is
broken, and being suppressed is gradually weakened: for it was
stronger when we followed it, and though not wholly destroyed, it is
certainly less strong when we curb it." Hence the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iii, 12) that "as a child ought to live according to the direction
of his tutor, so ought the concupiscible to accord with reason."
Reply to Objection 1: This argument takes the term "childish" as
denoting what is observed in children. It is not in this sense that the
sin of intemperance is said to be childish, but by way of likeness, as
stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: A desire may be said to be natural in two ways.
First, with regard to its genus, and thus temperance and
intemperance are about natural desires, since they are about desires
of food and sex, which are directed to the preservation of nature.
Secondly, a desire may be called natural with regard to the species
of the thing that nature requires for its own preservation; and in this
way it does not happen often that one sins in the matter of natural
desires, for nature requires only that which supplies its need, and
there is no sin in desiring this, save only where it is desired in
excess as to quantity. This is the only way in which sin can occur
with regard to natural desires, according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
iii, 11).
There are other things in respect of which sins frequently occur, and
these are certain incentives to desire devised by human curiosity
[Question 167], such as the nice [curiosa] preparation of food, or the
adornment of women. And though children do not affect these things
much, yet intemperance is called a childish sin for the reason given
above.
Reply to Objection 3: That which regards nature should be nourished
and fostered in children, but that which pertains to the lack of reason

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.141, C.3.

in them should not be fostered, but corrected, as stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.141, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether cowardice is a greater vice than

intemperance?
Objection 1: It would seem that cowardice is a greater vice than
intemperance. For a vice deserves reproach through being opposed
to the good of virtue. Now cowardice is opposed to fortitude, which
is a more excellent virtue than temperance, as stated above (Article
2; Question 141, Article 8). Therefore cowardice is a greater vice than
intemperance.
Objection 2: Further, the greater the difficulty to be surmounted, the
less is a man to be reproached for failure, wherefore the Philosopher
says (Ethic. vii, 7) that "it is no wonder, in fact it is pardonable, if a
man is mastered by strong and overwhelming pleasures or pains."
Now seemingly it is more difficult to control pleasures than other
passions; hence it is stated in Ethic. ii, 3, that "it is more difficult to
contend against pleasure than against anger, which would seem to
be stronger than fear." Therefore intemperance, which is overcome
by pleasure, is a less grievous sin than cowardice, which is
overcome by fear.
Objection 3: Further, it is essential to sin that it be voluntary. Now
cowardice is more voluntary than intemperance, since no man
desires to be intemperate, whereas some desire to avoid dangers of
death, which pertains to cowardice. Therefore cowardice is a more
grievous sin than intemperance.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 12) that
"intemperance seems more akin to voluntary action than cowardice."
Therefore it is more sinful.
I answer that, one may be compared with another in two ways. First,
with regard to the matter or object; secondly, on the part of the man
who sins: and in both ways intemperance is a more grievous sin
than cowardice.
First, as regards the matter. For cowardice shuns dangers of death,
to avoid which the principal motive is the necessity of preserving
life. On the other hand, intemperance is about pleasures, the desire
of which is not so necessary for the preservation of life, because, as
stated above (Article 2, ad 2), intemperance is more about certain