SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.53, C.3.

the execution itself. Hence it is becoming that laziness should arise
from sloth, which is "an oppressive sorrow," i.e. hindering, the mind
from action [Question 35, Article 1; FS, Question 35, Article 8].
Reply to Objection 2: Omission regards the external act, for it
consists in failing to perform an act which is due. Hence it is
opposed to justice, and is an effect of negligence, even as the
execution of a just deed is the effect of right reason.
Reply to Objection 3: Negligence regards the act of command, which
solicitude also regards. Yet the negligent man fails in regard to this
act otherwise than the inconstant man: for the inconstant man fails
in commanding, being hindered as it were, by something, whereas
the negligent man fails through lack of a prompt will.
Reply to Objection 4: The fear of God helps us to avoid all sins,
because according to Prov. 15:27, "by the fear of the Lord everyone
declineth from evil." Hence fear makes us avoid negligence, yet not
as though negligence were directly opposed to fear, but because
fear incites man to acts of reason. Wherefore also it has been stated
above (FS, Question 44, Article 2) when we were treating of the
passions, that "fear makes us take counsel."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.53, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether negligence can be a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that negligence cannot be a mortal sin.
For a gloss of Gregory [Moral. ix. 34] on Job 9:28, "I feared all my
works," etc. says that "too little love of God aggravates the former,"
viz. negligence. But wherever there is mortal sin, the love of God is
done away with altogether. Therefore negligence is not a mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, a gloss on Ecclus. 7:34, "For thy negligences
purify thyself with a few," says: "Though the offering be small it
cleanses the negligences of many sins." Now this would not be, if
negligence were a mortal sin. Therefore negligence is not a mortal
sin.
Objection 3: Further, under the law certain sacrifices were
prescribed for mortal sins, as appears from the book of Leviticus.
Yet no sacrifice was prescribed for negligence. Therefore negligence
is not a mortal sin.
On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 19:16): "He that neglecteth his
own life shall die."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2, ad 3), negligence arises out
of a certain remissness of the will, the result being a lack of
solicitude on the part of the reason in commanding what it should
command, or as it should command. Accordingly negligence may
happen to be a mortal sin in two ways. First on the part of that which
is omitted through negligence. If this be either an act or a
circumstance necessary for salvation, it will be a mortal sin.
Secondly on the part of the cause: for if the will be so remiss about
Divine things, as to fall away altogether from the charity of God,
such negligence is a mortal sin, and this is the case chiefly when
negligence is due to contempt.
But if negligence consists in the omission of an act or circumstance
that is not necessary for salvation, it is not a mortal but a venial sin,
provided the negligence arise, not from contempt, but from some
lack of fervor, to which venial sin is an occasional obstacle.
Reply to Objection 1: Man may be said to love God less in two ways.
First through lack of the fervor of charity, and this causes the