senseless and prodigal, when he has succeeded to a paternal inheritance, is
precipitated headlong by this very thing, having none of the practical wisdom
requisite for the economy of wealth; but if he be intelligent, and gentle, and
sober, and moderate, managing his paternal estate as is befitting, he becomes by
this means more illustrious and distinguished: so must it also necessarily happen
in our case. When we have acquired spiritual understanding, when we have all
attained to "perfect manhood," and the measure of full stature; then He puts us in
possession of all that He has promised: but now as little children He chastens us,
together with consolation and soothing. And this is not the only advantage of
receiving the tribulation beforehand, but there is also another, not less than this.
For the man who first of all lives luxuriously, and then has to expect punishment
after his luxurious living, has not even a sense of his present luxury, merely by
reason of the expectation of impending woes; but he who is first in a sorrowful
state, if he is anticipating the enjoyment of good things afterwards, overlooks
present difficulties, in the hope of the good things which are to come. Not only,
then, on account of our security, but also for our pleasure and consolation has He
ordained that the things which are grievous should be first; in order that being
lightened with the hope of futurity, we should be rendered insensible to what is
present. And this Paul would show and make plain, when he said, "Our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen." [2 Corinthians 4:17-18] He calls tribulation light, not
because of the intrinsic nature of things that are grievous, but because of the
expectation of good things to come. For even as the merchant is indifferent to the
labour that attends navigation, being buoyed up with the hope of a cargo; and as
the boxer bravely sustains the blows on his head, looking to the crown beyond;
so also indeed do we, earnestly gazing towards heaven, and the good things that
are in the heavens, whatever evils come on us, sustain them all with fortitude,
being nerved with the good hope of the things to come.
12. Therefore let us go home, taking with us this saying; for though it be

simple and short, it nevertheless contains much of the doctrine of spiritual
wisdom. He who is in a state of grief and tribulation, has a sufficient
consolation; he who lives in luxury and abundance, has that which may greatly
sober him. For when as you sit at the table you are reminded of this saying, you
will speedily shrink from drunkenness and gluttony; learning through this
sentence, how needful it is for us to be striving; and you will say with yourself,
"Paul lived in bonds and in dungeons, but I in drunkenness and at a luxurious
table! What pardon then shall I obtain?" This also is a fit saying for women;
since those who are fond of ornament, and expensive dresses, and bind
themselves about with gold on every side, when they remember this chain, will
hate, I feel assured, and abominate that adorning of themselves; and will hasten
to such bonds as these. For those ornaments have often been the cause of
manifold evils, and introduced a thousand quarrels into a family, and have bred
envy, and jealousy, and hatred. But these loosed the sins of the wide world,
affrighted demons, and drove away the devil. With these, while tarrying in
prison, he persuaded the jailor; with these he attracted Agrippa himself; with
these he procured many disciples. Therefore he said, "Wherein I suffer trouble as
an evil-doer unto bonds, but the word of God is not bound." [2 Timothy 2:9] For
just as it is not possible to bind a sunbeam, or to shut it up within the house, so
neither the preaching of the word; and what was much more, the teacher was
bound, and yet the word flew abroad; he inhabited the prison, and yet his
doctrine rapidly winged its way every where throughout the world!
Knowing these things then, let us not be depressed, when adverse affairs
meet us, but then let us be more strong, then more powerful; "for tribulation
works patience." [Romans 5:3] Let us not grieve for the calamities which befall
us, but let us in all things give thanks unto God!
13. We have completed the second week of the fast, but this we should not
consider; for going through the fast does not consist in merely going through the
time, but in going through it with amendment of manners. Let us consider this;
whether we have become more diligent; whether we have corrected any of our