FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.3.

is the same as the real mean, in so far, to wit as justice gives to each
one his due, neither more nor less. But the other moral virtues deal
with interior passions wherein the right cannot be established in the
same way, since men are variously situated in relation to their
passions; hence the rectitude of reason has to be established in the
passions, with due regard to us, who are moved in respect of the
passions.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections. For the first two
arguments take the rational mean as being in the very act of reason,
while the third argues from the mean of justice.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the intellectual virtues observe the

mean?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intellectual virtues do not
observe the mean. Because moral virtue observes the mean by
conforming to the rule of reason. But the intellectual virtues are in
reason itself, so that they seem to have no higher rule. Therefore the
intellectual virtues do not observe the mean.
Objection 2: Further, the mean of moral virtue is fixed by an
intellectual virtue: for it is stated in Ethic. ii, 6, that "virtue observes
the mean appointed by reason, as a prudent man would appoint it." If
therefore intellectual virtue also observe the mean, this mean will
have to be appointed for them by another virtue, so that there would
be an indefinite series of virtues.
Objection 3: Further, a mean is, properly speaking, between
contraries, as the Philosopher explains (Metaph. x, text. 22,23). But
there seems to be no contrariety in the intellect; since contraries
themselves, as they are in the intellect, are not in opposition to one
another, but are understood together, as white and black, healthy
and sick. Therefore there is no mean in the intellectual virtues.
On the contrary, Art is an intellectual virtue; and yet there is a mean
in art (Ethic. ii, 6). Therefore also intellectual virtue observes the
mean.
I answer that, The good of anything consists in its observing the
mean, by conforming with a rule or measure in respect of which it
may happen to be excessive or deficient, as stated above (Article 1).
Now intellectual virtue, like moral virtue, is directed to the good, as
stated above (Question 56, Article 3). Hence the good of an
intellectual virtue consists in observing the mean, in so far as it is
subject to a measure. Now the good of intellectual virtue is the true;
in the case of contemplative virtue, it is the true taken absolutely
(Ethic. vi, 2); in the case of practical virtue, it is the true in conformity
with a right appetite.
Now truth apprehended by our intellect, if we consider it absolutely,
is measured by things; since things are the measure of our intellect,
as stated in Metaph. x, text. 5; because there is truth in what we think