FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.11.

materially, for the reason given above.
At the same time in both these respects, the human will is
conformed to the Divine, in a certain degree. Because inasmuch as it
is conformed to the Divine will in the common aspect of the thing
willed, it is conformed thereto in the point of the last end. While,
inasmuch as it is not conformed to the Divine will in the thing willed
materially, it is conformed to that will considered as efficient cause;
since the proper inclination consequent to nature, or to the particular
apprehension of some particular thing, comes to a thing from God as
its efficient cause. Hence it is customary to say that a man's will, in
this respect, is conformed to the Divine will, because it wills what
God wishes him to will.
There is yet another kind of conformity in respect of the formal
cause, consisting in man's willing something from charity, as God
wills it. And this conformity is also reduced to the formal conformity,
that is in respect of the last end, which is the proper object of
charity.
Reply to Objection 1: We can know in a general way what God wills.
For we know that whatever God wills, He wills it under the aspect of
good. Consequently whoever wills a thing under any aspect of good,
has a will conformed to the Divine will, as to the reason of the thing
willed. But we know not what God wills in particular: and in this
respect we are not bound to conform our will to the Divine will.
But in the state of glory, every one will see in each thing that he
wills, the relation of that thing to what God wills in that particular
matter. Consequently he will conform his will to God in all things not
only formally, but also materially.
Reply to Objection 2: God does not will the damnation of a man,
considered precisely as damnation, nor a man's death, considered
precisely as death, because, "He wills all men to be saved" (1 Tim.
2:4); but He wills such things under the aspect of justice. Wherefore
in regard to such things it suffices for man to will the upholding of
God's justice and of the natural order.
Wherefore the reply to the Third Objection is evident.
To the first argument advanced in a contrary sense, it should be said

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.11.

that a man who conforms his will to God's, in the aspect of reason of
the thing willed, wills what God wills, more than the man, who
conforms his will to God's, in the point of the very thing willed;
because the will tends more to the end, than to that which is on
account of the end.
To the second, it must be replied that the species and form of an act
are taken from the object considered formally, rather than from the
object considered materially.
To the third, it must be said that there is no opposition of wills when
several people desire different things, but not under the same
aspect: but there is opposition of wills, when under one and the
same aspect, one man wills a thing which another wills not. But
there is no question of this here.