John 14:22
"How is it that You will manifest Yourself unto us?"
Do you see that their soul was close pressed with fear? For he was
confounded and troubled, and thought that as we see dead men in a dream, so He
also would be seen. In order therefore that they might not imagine this, hear
what He says.

John 14:23
"I and the Father will come unto him, and make Our abode with him."
All but saying, "As the Father reveals Himself, so also do I." And not in
this way only He removed the suspicion, but also by saying, "We will make Our
abode with him," a thing which does not belong to dreams. But observe, I pray
you, the disciple confounded, and not daring to say plainly what he desired to
say. For he said not, "Woe to us, that Thou diest, and will come to us as the dead
come"; he spoke not thus; but, "How is it that You will show Yourself to us, and
not unto the world?" Jesus then says, that "I accept you, because ye keep My
commandments." In order that they might not, when they should see Him
afterwards, deem Him to be an apparition, therefore He says these things
beforehand. And that they might not deem that He would appear to them so as I
have said, He tells them also the reason, "Because ye keep My commandments";
He says that the Spirit also will appear in like manner. Now if after having
companied with Him so long time, they cannot yet endure that Essence, or rather
cannot even imagine It, what would have been their case had He appeared thus
to them at the first? On this account also He ate with them, that the action might
not seem to be an illusion. For if they thought this when they saw Him walking
on the waters, although His wonted form was seen by them, and He was not far
distant, what would they have imagined had they suddenly seen Him arisen
whom they had seen taken and swathed? Wherefore He continually tells them
that He will appear, and why He will appear, and how, that they may not suppose
Him to be an apparition.

John 14:24
"He that loves Me not keeps not My sayings; and the word which you hear is not
Mine, but the Father's which sent Me."
"So that he that hears not these sayings not only does not love Me, but
neither does he love the Father." For if this is the sure proof of love, the hearing
the commandments, and these are of the Father, he that hears them loves not the
Son only, but the Father also. "And how is the word 'yours' and 'not yours'?"
This means, "I speak not without the Father, nor say anything of Myself contrary
to what seems good to Him."

John 14:25
"These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you."
Since these sayings were not clear, and since some they did not understand,
and doubted about the greater number, in order that they might not be again
confused, and say, "What commands?" He released them from all their
perplexity, saying,