Vossius and others read "primus" instead of "prius," but on defective ms. authority.

4. This manner of speech may perhaps be plausible or persuasive to those who know not God,
and who liken Him to needy human beings, and to those who cannot immediately and without
assistance form anything, but require many instrumentalities to produce what they intend. But it
will not be regarded as at all probable by those who know that God stands in need of nothing, and
that He created and made all things by His Word, while He neither required angels to assist Him
in the production of those things which are made, nor of any power greatly inferior to Himself, and
ignorant of the Father, nor of any defect or ignorance, in order that he who should know Him might
become man. But He Himself in Himself, after a fashion which we can neither describe nor
conceive, predestinating all things, formed them as He pleased, bestowing harmony on all things,
and assigning them their own place, and the beginning of their creation. In this way He conferred
on spiritual things a spiritual and invisible nature, on super-celestial things a celestial, on angels
an angelical, on animals an animal, on beings that swim a nature suited to the water, and on those
that live on the land one fitted for the land—on all, in short, a nature suitable to the character of
the life assigned them—while He formed all things that were made by His Word that never wearies.
5. For this is a peculiarity of the pre-eminence of God, not to stand in need of other instruments
for the creation of those things which are summoned into existence. His own Word is both suitable
and sufficient for the formation of all things, even as John, the disciple of the Lord, declares
regarding Him: "All things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made." Now,
among the "all things" our world must be embraced. It too, therefore, was made by His Word, as
Scripture tells us in the book of Genesis that He made all things connected with our world by His
Word. David also expresses the same truth [when he says] "For He spake, and they were made; He
commanded, and they were created." Whom, therefore, shall we believe as to the creation of the
world—these heretics who have been mentioned that prate so foolishly and inconsistently on the
subject, or the disciples of the Lord, and Moses, who was both a faithful servant of God and a
prophet? He at first narrated the formation of the world in these words: "In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth," and all other things in succession; but neither gods nor angels
[had any share in the work].
Now, that this God is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Paul the apostle also has declared,
[saying,] "There is one God, the Father, who is above all, and through all things, and in us all."
I have indeed proved already that there is only one God; but I shall further demonstrate this from
the apostles themselves, and from the discourses of the Lord. For what sort of conduct would it be,
but it may be doubted if this is really the case. Perhaps Massuet's rendering of the clause, "that that man might be formed who
should know Him," is, after all, preferable to that given above.