made whole on the Sabbath, and how He did defend Himself for having performed an act of healing
on that day; how He taught His disciples not to aspire to the uppermost rooms; how we should
invite the poor and feeble, who cannot recompense us; the man who knocked during the night to
obtain loaves, and did obtain them, because of the urgency of his importunity; how, when [our
Lord] was sitting at meat with a Pharisee, a woman that was a sinner kissed His feet, and anointed
them with ointment, with what the Lord said to Simon on her behalf concerning the two debtors;
also about the parable of that rich man who stored up the goods which had accrued to him, to whom
it was also said, "In this night they shall demand thy soul from thee; whose then shall those things
be which thou hast prepared?" and similar to this, that of the rich man, who was clothed in purple
and who fared sumptuously, and the indigent Lazarus; also the answer which He gave to His
disciples when they said, "Increase our faith;" also His conversation with Zaccheus the
publican; also about the Pharisee and the publican, who were praying in the temple at the same
time; also the ten lepers, whom He cleansed in the way simultaneously; also how He ordered
the lame and the blind to be gathered to the wedding from the lanes and streets; also the parable
of the judge who feared not God, whom the widow's importunity led to avenge her cause; and
about the fig-tree in the vineyard which produced no fruit. There are also many other particulars
to be found mentioned by Luke alone, which are made use of by both Marcion and Valentinus.
And besides all these, [he records] what [Christ] said to His disciples in the way, after the
resurrection, and how they recognised Him in the breaking of bread.
4. It follows then, as of course, that these men must either receive the rest of his narrative, or
else reject these parts also. For no persons of common sense can permit them to receive some things
recounted by Luke as being true, and to set others aside, as if he had not known the truth. And if
indeed Marcion's followers reject these, they will then possess no Gospel; for, curtailing that
according to Luke, as I have said already, they boast in having the Gospel [in what remains]. But
the followers of Valentinus must give up their utterly vain talk; for they have taken from that
[Gospel] many occasions for their own speculations, to put an evil interpretation upon what he has

Luke xvii.

well said. If, on the other hand, they feel compelled to receive the remaining portions also, then,
by studying the perfect Gospel, and the doctrine of the apostles, they will find it necessary to repent,
that they may be saved from the danger [to which they are exposed].

### Chapter XV.—Refutation of the Ebionites, who disparaged the authority of St. Paul, from
the writings of St. Luke, which must be received as a whole. Exposure of the hypocrisy, deceit,
and pride of the Gnostics. The apostles and their disciples knew and preached one God, the
Creator of the world.
1. But again, we allege the same against those who do not recognise Paul as an apostle: that
they should either reject the other words of the Gospel which we have come to know through Luke
alone, and not make use of them; or else, if they do receive all these, they must necessarily admit
also that testimony concerning Paul, when he (Luke) tells us that the Lord spoke at first to him
from heaven: "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me? I am Jesus Christ, whom thou persecutest;"
and then to Ananias, saying regarding him: "Go thy way; for he is a chosen vessel unto Me, to bear
My name among the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel. For I will show him, from this
time, how great things he must suffer for My name's sake." Those, therefore, who do not accept
of him [as a teacher], who was chosen by God for this purpose, that he might boldly bear His name,
as being sent to the forementioned nations, do despise the election of God, and separate themselves
from the company of the apostles. For neither can they contend that Paul was no apostle, when he
was chosen for this purpose; nor can they prove Luke guilty of falsehood, when he proclaims the
truth to us with all diligence. It may be, indeed, that it was with this view that God set forth very
many Gospel truths, through Luke's instrumentality, which all should esteem it necessary to use,
in order that all persons, following his subsequent testimony, which treats upon the acts and the
doctrine of the apostles, and holding the unadulterated rule of truth, may be saved. His testimony,
therefore, is true, and the doctrine of the apostles is open and stedfast, holding nothing in reserve;
nor did they teach one set of doctrines in private, and another in public.
2. For this is the subterfuge of false persons, evil seducers, and hypocrites, as they act who are
from Valentinus. These men discourse to the multitude about those who belong to the Church,
whom they do themselves term "vulgar," and "ecclesiastic." By these words they entrap the
more simple, and entice them, imitating our phraseology, that these [dupes] may listen to them the
word Catholic. See Bingham, Antiquities, book x. cap. iv. sect 11.]