SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.5.

Reply to Objection 2: Even as God does nothing contrary to nature
(since "the nature of a thing is what God does therein," according to
a gloss on Rm. 11), and yet does certain things contrary to the
wonted course of nature; so to God can command nothing contrary
to virtue since virtue and rectitude of human will consist chiefly in
conformity with God's will and obedience to His command, although
it be contrary to the wonted mode of virtue. Accordingly, then, the
command given to Abraham to slay his innocent son was not
contrary to justice, since God is the author of life an death. Nor again
was it contrary to justice that He commanded the Jews to take things
belonging to the Egyptians, because all things are His, and He gives
them to whom He will. Nor was it contrary to chastity that Osee was
commanded to take an adulteress, because God Himself is the
ordainer of human generation, and the right manner of intercourse
with woman is that which He appoints. Hence it is evident that the
persons aforesaid did not sin, either by obeying God or by willing to
obey Him.
Reply to Objection 3: Though man is not always bound to will what
God wills, yet he is always bound to will what God wills him to will.
This comes to man's knowledge chiefly through God's command,
wherefore man is bound to obey God's commands in all things.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether subjects are bound to obey their

superiors in all things?
Objection 1: It seems that subjects are bound to obey their superiors
in all things. For the Apostle says (Col. 3:20): "Children, obey your
parents in all things," and farther on (Col. 3:22): "Servants, obey in
all things your masters according to the flesh." Therefore in like
manner other subjects are bound to obey their superiors in all
things.
Objection 2: Further, superiors stand between God and their
subjects, according to Dt. 5:5, "I was the mediator and stood
between the Lord and you at that time, to show you His words." Now
there is no going from extreme to extreme, except through that
which stands between. Therefore the commands of a superior must
be esteemed the commands of God, wherefore the Apostle says
(Gal. 4:14): "You . . . received me as an angel of God, even as Christ
Jesus" and (1 Thess. 2:13): "When you had received of us the word
of the hearing of God, you received it, not as the word of men, but,
as it is indeed, the word of God." Therefore as man is bound to obey
God in all things, so is he bound to obey his superiors.
Objection 3: Further, just as religious in making their profession take
vows of chastity and poverty, so do they also vow obedience. Now a
religious is bound to observe chastity and poverty in all things.
Therefore he is also bound to obey in all things.
On the contrary, It is written (Acts 5:29): "We ought to obey God
rather than men." Now sometimes the things commanded by a
superior are against God. Therefore superiors are not to be obeyed
in all things.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 1,4), he who obeys is moved
at the bidding of the person who commands him, by a certain
necessity of justice, even as a natural thing is moved through the
power of its mover by a natural necessity. That a natural thing be not
moved by its mover, may happen in two ways. First, on account of a
hindrance arising from the stronger power of some other mover;
thus wood is not burnt by fire if a stronger force of water intervene.
Secondly, through lack of order in the movable with regard to its
mover, since, though it is subject to the latter's action in one respect,