SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.34, C.2.

Now this sorrow is always evil, sometimes in itself, sometimes in its
effect. For sorrow is evil in itself when it is about that which is
apparently evil but good in reality, even as, on the other hand,
pleasure is evil if it is about that which seems to be good but is, in
truth, evil. Since, then, spiritual good is a good in very truth, sorrow
about spiritual good is evil in itself. And yet that sorrow also which is
about a real evil, is evil in its effect, if it so oppresses man as to draw
him away entirely from good deeds. Hence the Apostle (2 Cor. 2:7)
did not wish those who repented to be "swallowed up with overmuch
sorrow."
Accordingly, since sloth, as we understand it here, denotes sorrow
for spiritual good, it is evil on two counts, both in itself and in point
of its effect. Consequently it is a sin, for by sin we mean an evil
movement of the appetite, as appears from what has been said
above (Question 10, Article 2; FS, Question 74, Article 4).
Reply to Objection 1: Passions are not sinful in themselves; but they
are blameworthy in so far as they are applied to something evil, just
as they deserve praise in so far as they are applied to something
good. Wherefore sorrow, in itself, calls neither for praise nor for
blame: whereas moderate sorrow for evil calls for praise, while
sorrow for good, and again immoderate sorrow for evil, call for
blame. It is in this sense that sloth is said to be a sin.
Reply to Objection 2: The passions of the sensitive appetite may
either be venial sins in themselves, or incline the soul to mortal sin.
And since the sensitive appetite has a bodily organ, it follows that on
account of some bodily transmutation a man becomes apt to commit
some particular sin. Hence it may happen that certain sins may
become more insistent, through certain bodily transmutations
occurring at certain fixed times. Now all bodily effects, of
themselves, dispose one to sorrow; and thus it is that those who fast
are harassed by sloth towards mid-day, when they begin to feel the
want of food, and to be parched by the sun's heat.
Reply to Objection 3: It is a sign of humility if a man does not think
too much of himself, through observing his own faults; but if a man
contemns the good things he has received from God, this, far from
being a proof of humility, shows him to be ungrateful: and from such
like contempt results sloth, because we sorrow for things that we
reckon evil and worthless. Accordingly we ought to think much of

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.34, C.2.

the goods of others, in such a way as not to disparage those we
have received ourselves, because if we did they would give us
sorrow.
Reply to Objection 4: Sin is ever to be shunned, but the assaults of
sin should be overcome, sometimes by flight, sometimes by
resistance; by flight when a continued thought increases the
incentive to sin, as in lust; for which reason it is written (1 Cor. 6:18):
"Fly fornication"; by resistance, when perseverance in the thought
diminishes the incentive to sin, which incentive arises from some
trivial consideration. This is the case with sloth, because the more
we think about spiritual goods, the more pleasing they become to us,
and forthwith sloth dies away.