removed by reason of the divine dispensation: and as long as that
indissolubility remains the saying of the Apostle holds.
Accordingly to reply to the arguments on either side:
Reply to Objection 1: It was lawful for a husband to have several
wives at one time by virtue of the divine dispensation: wherefore
having put one away he could marry another even though the former
marriage were not dissolved. But it was never lawful for a wife to
have several husbands. Wherefore the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 2: In this saying of Augustine manner [mos] does
not signify custom but good manners; in the same sense a person is
said to have manners [morigeratus] because he has good manners;
and "moral" philosophy takes its name from the same source.
Reply to Objection 3: Our Lord shows the superabundance of the
New Law over the Old in respect of the counsels, not only as regards
those things which the Old Law permitted, but also as regards those
things which were forbidden in the Old Law, and yet were thought by
many to be permitted on account of the precepts being incorrectly
explained---for instance that of the hatred towards our enemies. and
so is it in the matter of divorce.
Reply to Objection 4: The saying of our Lord refers to the time of the
New Law, when the aforesaid permission was recalled. In the same
way we are to understand the statement of Chrysostom [Hom. xii in
Opus Imperfectum], who says that "a man who divorces his wife
according to the law is guilty of four crimes: for in God's sight he is a
murderer," in so far as he has the purpose of killing his wife unless
he divorce her; "and because he divorces her without her having
committed fornication," in which case alone the law of the Gospel
allows a man to put away his wife; "and again, because he makes her
an adulteress, and the man whom she marries an adulterer."
Reply to Objection 5: A gloss observes here: "She is defiled and
abominable, namely in the judgment of him who first put her away as
being defiled," and consequently it does not follow that she is defiled
absolutely speaking; or she is said to be defiled just as a person who
had touched a dead or leprous body was said to be unclean with the
uncleanness, not of sin, but of a certain legal irregularity. Wherefore
a priest could not marry a widow or a divorced woman.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a husband could lawfully take back the

wife he had divorced?
Objection 1: It would seem that a husband could lawfully take back
the wife he had divorced. For it is lawful to undo what was ill done.
But for the husband to divorce his wife was ill done. Therefore it was
lawful for him to undo it, by taking back his wife.
Objection 2: Further, it has always been lawful to be indulgent to the
sinner, because this is a moral precept, which obtains in every law.
Now the husband by taking back the wife he had divorced was
indulgent to one who had sinned. Therefore this also was lawful.
Objection 3: Further, the reason given (Dt. 24:4) for its being
unlawful to take back a divorced wife was "because she is defiled."
But the divorced wife is not defiled except by marrying another
husband. Therefore at least it was lawful to take back a divorced wife
before she married again.
On the contrary, It is said (Dt. 24:4) that "the former husband cannot
take her again," etc.
I answer that, In the law concerning the bill of divorce two things
were permitted, namely for the husband to put away the wife, and for
the divorced wife to take another husband; and two things were
commanded, namely that the bill of divorce should be written, and
secondly that the husband who divorced his wife could not take her
back. According to those who hold the first opinion (Article 3) this
was done in punishment of the woman who married again, and that it
was by this sin that she was defiled: but according to the others it
was done that a husband might not be too ready to divorce his wife if
he could nowise take her back afterwards.
Reply to Objection 1: In order to prevent the evil committed by a man
in divorcing his wife, it was ordered that the husband could not take
back his divorced wife, as stated above: and for this reason it was
ordered by God.
Reply to Objection 2: It was always lawful to be indulgent to the
sinner as regards the unkindly feelings of the heart, but not as
regards the punishment appointed by God.