6. Such fictitious tenets of evolution which repudiate all that is absolute, firm and immutable, have
paved the way for the new erroneous philosophy which, rivaling idealism, immanentism and
pragmatism, has assumed the name of existentialism, since it concerns itself only with existence of
individual things and neglects all consideration of their immutable essences.

7. There is also a certain historicism, which attributing value only to the events of man's life,
overthrows the foundation of all truth and absolute law, both on the level of philosophical speculations
and especially to Christian dogmas.

8. In all this confusion of opinion it is some consolation to Us to see former adherents of rationalism
today frequently desiring to return to the fountain of divinely communicated truth, and to
acknowledge and profess the word of God as contained in Sacred Scripture as the foundation of
religious teaching. But at the same time it is a matter of regret that not a few of these, the more
firmly they accept the word of God, so much the more do they diminish the value of human reason,
and the more they exalt the authority of God the Revealer, the more severely do they spurn the
teaching office of the Church, which has been instituted by Christ, Our Lord, to preserve and interpret
divine revelation. This attitude is not only plainly at variance with Holy Scripture, but is shown to be
false by experience also. For often those who disagree with the true Church complain openly of their
disagreement in matters of dogma and thus unwillingly bear witness to the necessity of a living
Teaching Authority.

9. Now Catholic theologians and philosophers, whose grave duty it is to defend natural and
supernatural truth and instill it in the hearts of men, cannot afford to ignore or neglect these more or
less erroneous opinions. Rather they must come to understand these same theories well, both
because diseases are not properly treated unless they are rightly diagnosed, and because sometimes
even in these false theories a certain amount of truth is contained, and, finally, because these theories
provoke more subtle discussion and evaluation of philosophical and theological truths.

10. If philosophers and theologians strive only to derive such profit from the careful examination of
these doctrines, there would be no reason for any intervention by the Teaching Authority of the
Church. However, although We know that Catholic teachers generally avoid these errors, it is
apparent, however, that some today, as in apostolic times, desirous of novelty, and fearing to be
considered ignorant of recent scientific findings, try to withdraw themselves from the sacred Teaching
Authority and are accordingly in danger of gradually departing from revealed truth and of drawing
others along with them into error.