SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.34, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether sloth should be accounted a capital

vice?
Objection 1: It would seem that sloth ought not to be accounted a
capital vice. For a capital vice is one that moves a man to sinful acts,
as stated above (Question 34, Article 5). Now sloth does not move
one to action, but on the contrary withdraws one from it. Therefore it
should not be accounted a capital sin.
Objection 2: Further, a capital sin is one to which daughters are
assigned. Now Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) assigns six daughters to
sloth, viz. "malice, spite, faint-heartedness, despair, sluggishness in
regard to the commandments, wandering of the mind after unlawful
things." Now these do not seem in reality to arise from sloth. For
"spite" is, seemingly the same as hatred, which arises from envy, as
stated above (Question 34, Article 6); "malice" is a genus which
contains all vices, and, in like manner, a "wandering" of the mind
after unlawful things is to be found in every vice; "sluggishness"
about the commandments seems to be the same as sloth, while
"faint-heartedness" and "despair" may arise from any sin. Therefore
sloth is not rightly accounted a capital sin.
Objection 3: Further, Isidore distinguishes the vice of sloth from the
vice of sorrow, saying (De Summo Bono ii, 37) that in so far as a man
shirks his duty because it is distasteful and burdensome, it is
sorrow, and in so far as he is inclined to undue repose, it is sloth:
and of sorrow he says that it gives rise to "spite, faint-heartedness,
bitterness, despair," whereas he states that from sloth seven things
arise, viz. "idleness, drowsiness, uneasiness of the mind,
restlessness of the body, instability, loquacity, curiosity." Therefore
it seems that either Gregory or Isidore has wrongly assigned sloth as
a capital sin together with its daughters.
On the contrary, The same Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) states that sloth
is a capital sin, and has the daughters aforesaid.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 84, Articles 3,4), a
capital vice is one which easily gives rise to others as being their
final cause. Now just as we do many things on account of pleasure,
both in order to obtain it, and through being moved to do something
under the impulse of pleasure, so again we do many things on

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.34, C.5.

account of sorrow, either that we may avoid it, or through being
exasperated into doing something under pressure thereof.
Wherefore, since sloth is a kind of sorrow, as stated above (Article 2;
FS, Question 85, Article 8), it is fittingly reckoned a capital sin.
Reply to Objection 1: Sloth by weighing on the mind, hinders us from
doing things that cause sorrow: nevertheless it induces the mind to
do certain things, either because they are in harmony with sorrow,
such as weeping, or because they are a means of avoiding sorrow.
Reply to Objection 2: Gregory fittingly assigns the daughters of
sloth. For since, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 5,6) "no
man can be a long time in company with what is painful and
unpleasant," it follows that something arises from sorrow in two
ways: first, that man shuns whatever causes sorrow; secondly, that
he passes to other things that give him pleasure: thus those who
find no joy in spiritual pleasures, have recourse to pleasures of the
body, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. x, 6). Now in the
avoidance of sorrow the order observed is that man at first flies from
unpleasant objects, and secondly he even struggles against such
things as cause sorrow. Now spiritual goods which are the object of
the sorrow of sloth, are both end and means. Avoidance of the end is
the result of "despair," while avoidance of those goods which are the
means to the end, in matters of difficulty which come under the
counsels, is the effect of "faint-heartedness," and in matters of
common righteousness, is the effect of "sluggishness about the
commandments." The struggle against spiritual goods that cause
sorrow is sometimes with men who lead others to spiritual goods,
and this is called "spite"; and sometimes it extends to the spiritual
goods themselves, when a man goes so far as to detest them, and
this is properly called "malice." In so far as a man has recourse to
eternal objects of pleasure, the daughter of sloth is called
"wandering after unlawful things." From this it is clear how to reply
to the objections against each of the daughters: for "malice" does
not denote here that which is generic to all vices, but must be
understood as explained. Nor is "spite" taken as synonymous with
hatred, but for a kind of indignation, as stated above: and the same
applies to the others.
Reply to Objection 3: This distinction between sorrow and sloth is
also given by Cassian (De Instit. Caenob. x, 1). But Gregory more
fittingly (Moral. xxxi, 45) calls sloth a kind of sorrow, because, as
stated above (Article 2), sorrow is not a distinct vice, in so far as a