been one among many servants, to live in the bosom of his Lord, for this belongs
only to a true Son, to one who has much confidence towards His Father, and who
is in nothing inferior to Him.
Would you learn also His eternity? Hear what Moses says concerning the
Father. When he asked what he was commanded to answer should the Jews
enquire of him, "Who it was that had sent him," he heard these words: "Say, I
AM has sent me." [Exodus 3:14] Now the expression "I AM," is significative of
Being ever, and Being without beginning, of Being really and absolutely. And
this also the expression, "Was in the beginning," declares, being indicative of
Being ever; so that John uses this word to show that the Son Is from everlasting
to everlasting in the bosom of the Father. For that you may not from the
sameness of name, suppose that He is some one of those who are made sons by
grace, first, the article is added, distinguishing Him from those by grace. But if
this does not content you, if you still look earthwards, hear a name more absolute
than this, "Only-Begotten." If even after this you still look below, "I will not
refuse," says he, (St. John,) "to apply to God a term belonging to man, I mean
the word 'bosom,' only suspect nothing degrading." Do you see the
lovingkindness and carefulness of the Lord? God applies to Himself unworthy
expressions, that even so you may see through them, and have some great and
lofty thought of Him; and do you tarry below? For tell me, wherefore is that
gross and carnal word "bosom" employed in this place? Is it that we may
suppose God to be a body? Away, he by no means says so. Why then is it
spoken? For if by it neither the genuineness of the Son is established, nor that
God is not a body, the word, because it serves no purpose, is superfluously
thrown in. Why then is it spoken? For I shall not desist from asking you this
question. Is it not very plain, that it is for no other reason but that by it we might
understand the genuineness of the Only-Begotten, and His Co-eternity with the
Father?
3. "He has declared Him," says John. What has he declared? That "no man
has seen God at any time"? That "God is one"? But this all the other prophets

testify, and Moses continually exclaims, "The Lord your God is one Lord"
[Deuteronomy 6:4]; and Esaias, "Before Me there was no God formed, neither
shall there be after me." [Isaiah 43:10] What more then have we learned from
"the Son which is in the bosom of the Father"? What from "the Only-Begotten"?
In the first place, these very words were uttered by His working; in the next
place, we have received a teaching that is far clearer, and learned that "God is a
spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in truth" [John
4:24]; and again, that it is impossible to see God; "that no man knows" Him,
"save the Son" [Matthew 11:27]; that He is the Father of the true and OnlyBegotten; and all other things that are told us of Him. But the word "has
declared" shows the plainer and clearer teaching which He gave not to the Jews
only but to all the world, and established. To the prophets not even all the Jews
gave heed, but to the Only-Begotten Son of God all the world yielded and
obeyed. So the "declaration" in this place shows the greater clearness of His
teaching, and therefore also He is called "Word," and "Angel of great Counsel."
Since then we have been vouchsafed a larger and more perfect teaching,
God having no longer spoken by the prophets, but "having in these last days
spoken to us by His Son" [Hebrews 1:1], let us show forth a conversation far
higher than theirs, and suitable to the honor bestowed on us. Strange would it be
that He should have so far lowered Himself, as to choose to speak to us no
longer by His servants, but by His own mouth, and yet we should show forth
nothing more than those of old. They had Moses for their teacher, we, Moses'
Lord. Let us then exhibit a heavenly wisdom worthy of this honor, and let us
have nothing to do with earth. It was for this that He brought His teaching from
heaven above, that He might remove our thoughts there, that we might be
imitators of our Teacher according to our power. But how may we become
imitators of Christ? By acting in everything for the common good, and not
merely seeking our own. "For even Christ," says Paul, "pleased not Himself, but
as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached You fell on Me."
[Romans 15:3; Psalm 69:9] Let no one therefore seek his own. In truth, a man