creation.
Reply to Objection 1: The soul's simple essence is as the material
element, while its participated existence is its formal element; which
participated existence necessarily co-exists with the soul's essence,
because existence naturally follows the form. The same reason
holds if the soul is supposed to be composed of some spiritual
matter, as some maintain; because the said matter is not in
potentiality to another form, as neither is the matter of a celestial
body; otherwise the soul would be corruptible. Wherefore the soul
cannot in any way be made of pre-existent matter.
Reply to Objection 2: The production of act from the potentiality of
matter is nothing else but something becoming actually that
previously was in potentiality. But since the rational soul does not
depend in its existence on corporeal matter, and is subsistent, and
exceeds the capacity of corporeal matter, as we have seen (Question
75, Article 2), it is not educed from the potentiality of matter.
Reply to Objection 3: As we have said, there is no comparison
between the rational soul and other forms.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the rational soul is produced by God

immediately?
Objection 1: It would seem that the rational soul is not immediately
made by God, but by the instrumentality of the angels. For spiritual
things have more order than corporeal things. But inferior bodies are
produced by means of the superior, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv).
Therefore also the inferior spirits, who are the rational souls, are
produced by means of the superior spirits, the angels.
Objection 2: Further, the end corresponds to the beginning of things;
for God is the beginning and end of all. Therefore the issue of things
from their beginning corresponds to the forwarding of them to their
end. But "inferior things are forwarded by the higher," as Dionysius
says (Eccl. Hier. v); therefore also the inferior are produced into
existence by the higher, and souls by angels.
Objection 3: Further, "perfect is that which can produce its like," as
is stated Metaph. v. But spiritual substances are much more perfect
than corporeal. Therefore, since bodies produce their like in their
own species, much more are angels able to produce something
specifically inferior to themselves; and such is the rational soul.
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 2:7) that God Himself "breathed
into the face of man the breath of life."
I answer that, Some have held that angels, acting by the power of
God, produce rational souls. But this is quite impossible, and is
against faith. For it has been proved that the rational soul cannot be
produced except by creation. Now, God alone can create; for the first
agent alone can act without presupposing the existence of anything;
while the second cause always presupposes something derived from
the first cause, as above explained (Question 75, Article 3): and
every agent, that presupposes something to its act, acts by making a
change therein. Therefore everything else acts by producing a
change, whereas God alone acts by creation. Since, therefore, the
rational soul cannot be produced by a change in matter, it cannot be
produced, save immediately by God.
Thus the replies to the objections are clear. For that bodies produce
their like or something inferior to themselves, and that the higher