THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.3.

not sent to seek thee': which shows that they sought him among the
nations in the neighborhood of Judea."
On this point, however, credence is to be given rather to Dionysius,
who is an eyewitness as to this having occurred by the moon
eclipsing the sun. For he says (Ep. ad Polycarp): "Without any doubt
we saw the moon encroach on the sun," he being in Egypt at the
time, as he says in the same letter. And in this he points out four
miracles. The first is that the natural eclipse of the sun by
interposition of the moon never takes place except when the sun and
moon are in conjunction. But then the sun and moon were in
opposition, it being the fifteenth day, since it was the Jewish
Passover. Wherefore he says: "For it was not the time of
conjunction."---The second miracle is that whereas at the sixth hour
the moon was seen, together with the sun, in the middle of the
heavens, in the evening it was seen to be in its place, i.e. in the east,
opposite the sun. Wherefore he says: "Again we saw it," i.e. the
moon, "return supernaturally into opposition with the sun," so as to
be diametrically opposite, having withdrawn from the sun "at the
ninth hour," when the darkness ceased, "until evening." From this it
is clear that the wonted course of the seasons was not disturbed,
because the Divine power caused the moon both to approach the
sun supernaturally at an unwonted season, and to withdraw from the
sun and return to its proper place according to the season. The third
miracle was that the eclipse of the sun naturally always begins in
that part of the sun which is to the west and spreads towards the
east: and this is because the moon's proper movement from west to
east is more rapid than that of the sun, and consequently the moon,
coming up from the west, overtakes the sun and passes it on its
eastward course. But in this case the moon had already passed the
sun, and was distant from it by the length of half the heavenly circle,
being opposite to it: consequently it had to return eastwards towards
the sun, so as to come into apparent contact with it from the east,
and continue in a westerly direction. This is what he refers to when
he says: "Moreover, we saw the eclipse begin to the east and spread
towards the western edge of the sun," for it was a total eclipse, "and
afterwards pass away." The fourth miracle consisted in this, that in a
natural eclipse that part of the sun which is first eclipsed is the first
to reappear (because the moon, coming in front of the sun, by its
natural movement passes on to the east, so as to come away first
from the western portion of the sun, which was the first part to be
eclipsed), whereas in this case the moon, while returning
miraculously from the east to the west, did not pass the sun so as to