one had inscribed upon himself even his name when breaking off from the
common body, even so the thing done was profane and extreme wickedness.
And if in his case it were wickedness, much more in the case of those who were
inferior to him.
2. Since therefore this custom was broken through, a custom most excellent
and most useful; (for it was a foundation of love, and a comfort to poverty, and a
corrective of riches, and an occasion of the highest philosophy, and an
instruction of humility) since however he saw so great advantages in a way to be
destroyed, he naturally addresses them with severity, thus saying: "But in giving
you this charge, I praise you not." For in the former charge, as there were many
who kept (the ordinances), he began otherwise, saying thus: "Now I praise you
that you remember me in all things:" but here contrariwise, "But in giving you
this charge, I praise you not." And here is the reason why he placed it not after
the rebuke of them that eat the idol-sacrifices. But because that was unusually
harsh he interposes the discourse about wearing of long hair, that he might not
have to pass from one set of vehement reproofs to others again of an invidious
kind and so appear too harsh: and then he returns to the more vehement tone, and
says, "But in giving you this charge, I praise you not." What is this? That which
I am about to tell you of. What is, "giving you this charge, I praise you not?" "I
do not approve you," says he, "because you have reduced me to the necessity of
giving advice: I do not praise you, because you have required instruction in
regard to this, because you have need of an admonition from me." Do you
perceive how from his beginning he signifies that what was done was very
profane? For when he that errs ought not to require so much as a hint to prevent
his erring, the error would seem to be unpardonable.
And why do you not praise? Because "ye come together," says he, "not for
the better but for the worse;" i.e., because ye do not go forward unto virtue. For
it were meet that your liberality should increase and become manifold, but you
have taken rather from the custom which already prevailed, and have so taken
from it as even to need warning from me, in order that you may return to the

former order.
Further, that he might not seem to say these things on account of the poor
only, he does not at once strike in to the discourse concerning the tables, lest he
render his rebuke such as they might easily come to think slightly of, but he
searches for an expression most confounding and very fearful. For what says he?

1 Corinthians 11:18
"For first of all, when you come together in the Church, I hear that
divisions exist among you."
And he says not, "For fear that you do not sup together in common;" "for I
hear that you feast in private, and not with the poor:" but what was most
calculated thoroughly to shake their minds, that he set down, the name of
division, which was the cause of this mischief also: and so he reminded them
again of that which was said in the beginning of the Epistle, and was "signified
by them of the house of Chloe." [1 Corinthians 1:11] "And I partly believe it."
Thus, lest they should say, "But what if the accusers speak falsely?" he
neither says, "I believe it," lest he should rather make them reckless; nor again,
on the other hand, "I disbelieve it," lest he should seem to reprove without cause,
but, "I partly believe it," says he, i.e., "I believe it in a small part;" making them
anxious and inviting them to return to correction.