upon him assail the soul of the sick man, and distract his mind with many
anxieties. Whenever he sees his children, he thinks of their fatherless condition;
whenever he looks from them to his wife, he considers her widowhood; when he
sees the servants, he beholds the desolation of the whole house; when he comes
back to himself, he calls to mind his own present life, and being about to be torn
from it, experiences a great cloud of despondency. Of such a kind is the soul of
him who is about to be initiated. Then in the midst of its tumult and confusion,
the Priest enters, more formidable than the fever itself, and more distressing than
death to the relatives of the sick man. For the entrance of the Presbyter is thought
to be a greater reason for despair than the voice of the physician despairing of
his life, and that which suggests eternal life seems to be a symbol of death. But I
have not yet put the finishing stroke to these ills. For in the midst of relatives
raising a tumult and making preparations, the soul has often taken its flight,
leaving the body desolate; and in many cases, while it was present it was useless,
for when it neither recognizes those who are present, nor hears their voice, nor is
able to answer those words by which it will make that blessed covenant with the
common master of us all, but is as a useless log, or a stone, and he who is about
to be illuminated lies there differing nothing from a corpse, what is the profit of
initiation in a case of such insensibility?
2. For he who is about to approach these holy and dread mysteries must be
awake and alert, must be clean from all cares of this life, full of much selfrestraint, much readiness; he must banish from his mind every thought foreign to
the mysteries, and on all sides cleanse and prepare his home, as if about to
receive the king himself. Such is the preparation of your mind: such are your
thoughts; such the purpose of your soul. Await therefore a return worthy of this
most excellent decision from God, who overpowers with His recompense those
who show forth obedience to Him. But since it is necessary for his fellow
servants to contribute of their own, then we will contribute of our own; yea
rather not even are these things our own, but these too are our Master's. "For
what have you," says He, "that thou did not receive? But if you received it, why

do you glory, as if you had not received it?" [1 Corinthians 4:7] I wished to say
this first of all, why in the world our fathers, passing by the whole year, settled
that the children of the Church should be initiated at this season; and for what
reason, after the instruction from us, removing your shoes and raiment, unclad
and unshod, with but one garment on, they conduct you to hear the words of the
exorcisers. For it is not thoughtlessly and rashly that they have planned this dress
and this season for us. But both these things have a certain mystic and secret
reason. And I wish to say this to you. But I see that our discourse now constrains
us to something more necessary to say what baptism is, and for what reason it
enters into our life, and what good things it conveys to us.
But, if you will, let us discourse about the name which this mystic cleansing
bears: for its name is not one, but very many and various. For this purification is
called the laver of regeneration. "He saved us," he says, "through the laver of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost." [Titus 3:5] It is called also
illumination, and this St. Paul again has called it, "For call to remembrance the
former days in which after you were illuminated ye endured a great conflict of
sufferings;" [Hebrews 10:32] and again, "For it is impossible for those who were
once illuminated, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and then fell away, to
renew them again unto repentance." [Hebrews 6:4-6] It is called also, baptism:
"For as many of you as were baptized into Christ did put on Christ."
[Galatians 3:27] It is called also burial: "For we were buried" says he, "with him,
through baptism, into death." [Romans 6:4] It is called circumcision: "In whom
you were also circumcised, with a circumcision not made with hands, in the
putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh." [Galatians 2:11] It is called a
cross: "Our old man was crucified with him that the body of sin might be done
away." [Romans 6:6] It is also possible to speak of other names besides these,
but in order that we should not spend our whole time over the names of this free
gift, come, return to the first name, and let us finish our discourse by declaring
its meaning; but in the meantime, let us extend our teaching a little further. There
is that laver by means of the baths, common to all men, which is wont to wipe