So, therefore, it is evident that the first reason or, principle of plurality or division is from
affirmation and negation, as the order of origin of such plurality is understood, because first there
must be understanding of being and non-being, by which first divisions are constituted, and by
this, there are the many.

Hence, just as first being, inasmuch as it is undivided, is immediately recognized as one, so after
division of being and non-being there is immediate recognition of the plurality of first simple
beings. The nature of diversity, moreover, follows upon plurality according as there remains in it
the virtue of its cause, that is, the opposition of being and nonbeing. Therefore one of many
diverse things is said to be related to another because it is not that other. And since a second
cause does not produce its effect except by virtue of a first cause, therefore the plurality of first
causes does not make division and plurality in secondary, composite beings unless there remains
in that plurality the virtue of prime opposition, which is between being and non-being, by reason
of which it has the nature of diversity; and thus the diversity of first causes produces the
diversity of second.

According to this, it is true, as Boethius says, that otherness is the principle of plurality. indeed,
otherness is to be found in things because there is diversity among them. However, although
division precedes plurality of first causes, diversity does not; because ' division does not require
the being of things divided among themselves, since division is by affirmation and negation, but
diversity does require each to be a distinct being; wherefore it presupposes plurality. Hence it is
in no way possible that the cause of the plurality of first beings should be diversity, unless
diversity is employed as meaning division.

Boethius, therefore, is speaking of the plurality of composite beings, as is evident from the fact
that he presents a proof involving those things that are diverse according to genus or species or
number, and these kinds of diversity exist only in composite beings. For anything which is in a
genus must be composed of genus and difference. Those, therefore, who declare the Father and
Son to be unequal make declaration of composition, at least according to reason, inasmuch as
they say the Father and Son agree in this, that they are God, but differ in the fact that they are
unequal.

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: In these words, number is shown to be prior to other created things, such as
the elements and other such beings; but it is not prior to other notions, such as affirmation and
negation or division and the like. Moreover, not every kind of number is prior to all created
beings, but only number which is the cause of each thing, namely, God Himself, who, according
to Augustine, is Number, giving species to every creature.