does, no less than the resurrection, prove him to be God, yea, no less than His
miracles— the fact that He calls these to Him. For surpassing goodness is, above
all things, peculiarly God's own. Therefore also He says, "None is good save
one, that is, God." [Luke 18:19] Only let us not take this goodness for an
occasion of negligence. For He also punishes as God. In fact, the very
punishments here spoken of, He brought them to pass, even He who said, "Every
one who shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved." I speak of the fate of
Jerusalem; that intolerable punishment: of which I will tell you some few of the
particulars, useful to us in our contest, both with the Marcionites and many other
heretics. For, since they distinguish between Christ a good God, and that evil
God [of the Old Testament], let us see who it was that effected these things. The
evil God, taking vengeance for Christ? Or not so? How then alien to Him? But
was it the good God? Nay, but it is demonstrated that both the Father and the
Son did these things. The Father in many places; for instance, when He says in
the parable of the vineyard, ["He will miserably destroy those wicked
husbandmen" [Matthew 21:41]; again in the parable of the marriage feast, the
King is said] to send His armies [Matthew 22:7]: and the Son, when He says,
"But those Mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before Me." [Luke 19:27] * * *. And they sent, saying, We
will not have You to reign over us. Would you like then to hear the things which
actually came to pass? Moreover, Christ Himself also speaks of the future
tribulations, than which never any thing more dreadful came to pass; never any
thing more ruthless, my beloved, than the deeds then done! And He Himself
declared it. For what could you wish to see more grievous than these? * * *—
probed them with their daggers! — * * * But shall I relate to you the shocking
case of the woman, that tragic tale? * * * (Joseph. B. J. vi. 3. 4.) Did not the
actual events cast all misery into the shade? But shall I tell you of famines and
pestilences? One might speak of horrors without number: nature was unknown;
law unknown; they outdid wild beasts in ferocity. True, these miseries came by
the fate of wars; but because God, because Christ so willed it to be. These facts

will apply both against the Marcionites and against those who do not believe that
there is a hell: for they are sufficient to silence their impudence. Are not these
calamities more severe than the Babylonian? Are not these sufferings more
grievous than the famines of that time? Yes, for ["never was the like from the
beginning of the world"] "no, nor ever shall be such." [Matthew 24:21] And this
was Christ's own declaration. In what sense then, think ye, is it said that Christ
remitted them their sin? Perhaps it seems a commonplace question: but do ye
solve it.— It is not possible to show anywhere, even in fiction, any thing like
what the reality was here. And had it been a Christian that wrote this history, the
matter might be regarded with suspicion: but if he was a Jew, and a Jewish
zealot, and after the Gospel, how can the meaning of the facts be otherwise than
palpable to all men? For you will see the man, how, everywhere, he always
extols the concerns of the Jews.— There is therefore a hell, O man! And God is
good.— Aye, did you shudder at hearing these horrors? But these, which take
place here, are nothing in comparison with what shall be in that world. Once
more I am compelled to seem harsh, disagreeable, stern. But what can I do? I am
set to this: just as a severe schoolmaster is set to be hated by his scholars: so are
we. For would it not be strange indeed, that, while those who have a certain post
assigned them by kings do that which is appointed them, however disagreeable
the task may be, we, for fear of your censure, should leave our appointed task
undone? Another has a different work. Of you, many have it for their work, to
show mercy, to act humanely, to be pleasant and agreeable to the persons to
whom you are benefactors. But to those to whom we do good, we seem stern and
severe, troublesome and disagreeable. For we do good, not by the pleasure we
give, but by the pain we inflict. So it is also with the physician: though he indeed
is not excessively disagreeable, for the benefit afforded by his art is had
immediately; ours hereafter. So again the magistrate is odious to the disorderly
and seditious; so the legislator is vexatious to them for whom he makes laws.
But not so he that invites to enjoyment, not so he that prepares public festivities
and entertainments, and puts all the people in garlands: no, these are men that