wealth, and raised above glory and passion and concupiscence, and in short all
such affections: moreover, what unanimity there is among them now; nowhere
any envying as there was before, nor any of the old hankering after the
preeminence, but all virtue brought in them to its last finish, and shining through
all, with surpassing lustre, that charity, concerning which the Lord had given so
many charges saying, "In this shall all men know that you are My disciples, if
you love one another." [John 13:35] And then, besides, there are doctrines to be
found here, which we could not have known so surely as we now do, if this
Book had not existed, but the very crowning point of our salvation would be
hidden, alike for practice of life and for doctrine.
The greater part, however, of this work is occupied with the acts of Paul,
who "laboured more abundantly than they all." [1 Corinthians 15:10] And the
reason is, that the author of this Book, that is, the blessed Luke, was his
companion: a man, whose high qualities, sufficiently visible in many other
instances, are especially shown in his firm adherence to his Teacher, whom he
constantly followed. Thus at a time when all had forsaken him, one gone into
Galatia, another into Dalmatia, hear what he says of this disciple: "Only Luke is
with me." [2 Timothy 4:10] And giving the Corinthians a charge concerning him,
he says, "Whose praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches." [2
Corinthians 8:18] Again, when he says, "He was seen of Cephas, then of the
twelve," and, "according to the Gospel which you received" (1 Corinthians 15:5,
1), he means the Gospel of this Luke. So that there can be no mistake in
attributing this work to him: and when I say, to him, I mean, to Christ. And why
then did he not relate every thing, seeing he was with Paul to the end? We may
answer, that what is here written, was sufficient for those who would attend, and
that the sacred writers ever addressed themselves to the matter of immediate
importance, whatever it might be at the time: it was no object with them to be
writers of books: in fact, there are many things which they have delivered by
unwritten tradition. Now while all that is contained in this Book is worthy of
admiration, so is especially the way the Apostles have of coming down to the

wants of their hearers: a condescension suggested by the Spirit who has so
ordered it, that the subject on which they chiefly dwell is that which pertains to
Christ as man. For so it is, that while they discourse so much about Christ, they
have spoken but little concerning His Godhead; it was mostly of the Manhood
that they discoursed, and of the Passion, and the Resurrection, and the
Ascension. For the thing required in the first instance was this, that it should be
believed that He was risen, and ascended into heaven. As then the point on
which Christ himself most insisted was, to have it known that He had come from
the Father, so is it this writer's principal object to declare, that Christ was risen
from the dead, and was received up into Heaven, and that He went to God, and
came from God. For, if the fact of His coming from God were not first believed,
much more, with the Resurrection and Ascension added thereto, would the Jews
have found the entire doctrine incredible. Wherefore gently and by degrees he
leads them on to higher truths. Nay, at Athens Paul even calls Him man simply,
without saying more [Acts 17:31]. For if, when Christ Himself spoke of His
equality with the Father, they often attempted to stone Him, and called Him a
blasphemer for this reason, it was little to be expected that they would receive
this doctrine from the fishermen, and that too, with the Cross coming before it.
But why speak of the Jews, seeing that even the disciples often upon
hearing the more sublime doctrines were troubled and offended? Therefore also
He told them, "I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them
now." [John 16:12] If those could not, who had been so long time with Him, and
had been admitted to so many secrets, and had seen so many wonders, how was
it to be expected that men, but newly dragged away from altars, and idols, and
sacrifices, and cats, and crocodiles (for such did the Gentiles worship), and from
the rest of their evil ways, should all at once receive the more sublime matters of
doctrine? And how in particular should Jews, hearing as they did every day of
their lives, and having it ever sounded in their ears, "The Lord your God is one
Lord, and beside Him is none other" [Deuteronomy 6:4]: who also had seen Him
hanging nailed on the Cross, nay, had themselves crucified and buried Him, and