Homily 46 on the Gospel of John
John 6:41-42
"The Jews then murmured at Him, because He said, I am the Bread which came
down from heaven; and they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose
father and mother we know? How is it then that He says, I came down from
heaven?"
1. " Whose god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame"
[Philippians 3:19], said Paul of certain persons, writing to the Philippians. Now
that the Jews were of this character is clear, both from what has gone before, and
from what they came and said to Christ. For when He gave them bread, and
filled their bellies, they said that He was a Prophet, and sought to make Him a
King: but when He taught them concerning spiritual food, concerning eternal
life, when He led them away from objects of sense, and spoke to them of a
resurrection, and raised their thoughts to higher matters, when most they ought
to have admired, they murmur and start away. And yet, if He was that Prophet as
they before asserted, declaring that he it was of whom Moses had said, "A
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like me, unto
Him shall you hearken" [Deuteronomy 18:15]; they ought to have hearkened to
Him when He said, "I came down from heaven"; yet they hearkened not, but
murmured. They still reverenced Him, because the miracle of the loaves was
recent, and therefore they did not openly gainsay Him, but by murmuring
expressed their displeasure, that He did not give them the meal which they
desired. And murmuring they said, "Is not this the son of Joseph?" Whence it is
plain, that as yet they knew not of His strange and marvelous Generation. And so
they still say that He is the son of Joseph, and are not rebuked; and He says not
to them, "I am not the Son of Joseph"; not because He was his son, but because
they were not as yet able to hear of that marvelous Birth. And if they could not

bear to hear in plain terms of His birth according to the flesh, much less could
they hear of that ineffable Birth which is from above. If He revealed not that
which was lower to them, much less would He commit to them the other.
Although this greatly offended them, that He was born from a mean and
common father, still He revealed not to them the truth, lest in removing one
cause of offense He should create another. What then said He when they
murmured?

John 6:44
"No man can come unto Me, except the Father which has sent Me draw Him."
The Manichæans spring upon these words, saying, "that nothing lies in our
own power"; yet the expression shows that we are masters of our will. "For if a
man comes to Him," says some one, "what need is there of drawing?" But the
words do not take away our free will, but show that we greatly need assistance.
And He implies not an unwilling comer, but one enjoying much succor. Then He
shows also the manner in which He draws; for that men may not, again, form
any material idea of God, He adds,