SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.79, C.2.

then annexed to justice we have "gratitude" which "consists in
recollecting the friendship and kindliness shown by others, and in
desiring to pay them back," as Tully states (De invent. ii, 53)---and
sometimes in evil things, and then to justice is annexed "revenge,"
whereby, as Tully states (De invent. ii, 53), "we resist force, injury or
anything obscure by taking vengeance or by self-defense."
There is another due that is necessary in the sense that it conduces
to greater rectitude, although without it rectitude may be ensured.
This due is the concern of "liberality," "affability" or "friendship," or
the like, all of which Tully omits in the aforesaid enumeration
because there is little of the nature of anything due in them.
Reply to Objection 1: The revenge taken by authority of a public
power, in accordance with a judge's sentence, belongs to
commutative justice: whereas the revenge which a man takes on his
own initiative, though not against the law, or which a man seeks to
obtain from a judge, belongs to the virtue annexed to justice.
Reply to Objection 2: Macrobius appears to have considered the two
integral parts of justice, namely, "declining from evil," to which
"innocence" belongs, and "doing good," to which the six others
belong. Of these, two would seem to regard relations between
equals, namely, "friendship" in the external conduct and "concord"
internally; two regard our relations toward superiors, namely, "piety"
to parents, and "religion" to God; while two regard our relations
towards inferiors, namely, "condescension," in so far as their good
pleases us, and "humanity," whereby we help them in their needs.
For Isidore says (Etym. x) that a man is said to be "humane, through
having a feeling of love and pity towards men: this gives its name to
humanity whereby we uphold one another." In this sense
"friendship" is understood as directing our external conduct towards
others, from which point of view the Philosopher treats of it in Ethic.
iv, 6. "Friendship" may also be taken as regarding properly the
affections, and as the Philosopher describes it in Ethic. viii and ix. In
this sense three things pertain to friendship, namely, "benevolence"
which is here called "affection"; "concord," and "beneficence" which
is here called "humanity." These three, however, are omitted by
Tully, because, as stated above, they have little of the nature of a
due.
Reply to Objection 3: "Obedience" is included in observance, which
Tully mentions, because both reverential honor and obedience are

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.79, C.2.

due to persons who excel. "Faithfulness whereby a man's acts agree
with his words" [Cicero, De Repub. iv, De Offic. i, 7], is contained in
"truthfulness" as to the observance of one's promises: yet
"truthfulness" covers a wider ground, as we shall state further on
(Question 109, Articles 1,3). "Discipline" is not due as a necessary
duty, because one is under no obligation to an inferior as such,
although a superior may be under an obligation to watch over his
inferiors, according to Mt. 24:45, "A faithful and wise servant, whom
his lord hath appointed over his family": and for this reason it is
omitted by Tully. It may, however, be included in humanity
mentioned by Macrobius; and equity under epieikeia or under
"friendship."
Reply to Objection 4: This enumeration contains some belonging to
true justice. To particular justice belongs "justice of exchange,"
which he describes as "the habit of observing equality in
commutations." To legal justice, as regards things to be observed by
all, he ascribes "legislative justice," which he describes as "the
science of political commutations relating to the community." As
regards things which have to be done in particular cases beside the
general laws, he mentions "common sense" or "good judgment,"
which is our guide in such like matters, as stated above (Question
51, Article 4) in the treatise on prudence: wherefore he says that it is
a "voluntary justification," because by his own free will man
observes what is just according to his judgment and not according
to the written law. These two are ascribed to prudence as their
director, and to justice as their executor. Eusebeia [piety] means
"good worship" and consequently is the same as religion, wherefore
he says that it is the science of "the service of God" (he speaks after
the manner of Socrates who said that 'all the virtues are sciences')
[Aristotle, Ethic. vi, 13]: and "holiness" comes to the same, as we
shall state further on (Question 81, Article 8). Eucharistia (gratitude)
means "good thanksgiving," and is mentioned by Macrobius:
wherefore Isidore says (Etym. x) that "a kind man is one who is ready
of his own accord to do good, and is of gentle speech": and
Andronicus too says that "kindliness is a habit of voluntary
beneficence." "Liberality" would seem to pertain to "humanity."
Reply to Objection 5: Epieikeia is annexed, not to particular but to
legal justice, and apparently is the same as that which goes by the
name of eugnomosyne [common sense].