SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.8.

obligation affects, not the thing that already has been or is, but the
action of the swearer, in the point of his swearing to what is or was
already true; whereas, on the contrary, in the oath that is made about
something to be done by us, the obligation falls on the thing
guaranteed by oath. For a man is bound to make true what he has
sworn, else his oath lacks truth.
Now if this thing be such as not to be in his power, his oath is
lacking in judgment of discretion: unless perchance what was
possible when he swore become impossible to him through some
mishap. as when a man swore to pay a sum of money, which is
subsequently taken from him by force or theft. For then he would
seem to be excused from fulfilling his oath, although he is bound to
do what he can, as, in fact, we have already stated with regard to the
obligation of a vow (Question 88, Article 3, ad 2). If, on the other
hand, it be something that he can do, but ought not to, either
because it is essentially evil, or because it is a hindrance to a good,
then his oath is lacking in justice: wherefore an oath must not be
kept when it involves a sin or a hindrance to good. For in either case
"its result is evil" [Bede, Homil. xix, in Decoll. S. Joan. Bapt.]
Accordingly we must conclude that whoever swears to do something
is bound to do what he can for the fulfilment of truth; provided
always that the other two accompanying conditions be present,
namely, judgment and justice.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not the same with a simple assertion, and
with an oath wherein God is called to witness: because it suffices for
the truth of an assertion, that a person say what he proposes to do,
since it is already true in its cause, namely, the purpose of the doer.
But an oath should not be employed, save in a matter about which
one is firmly certain: and, consequently, if a man employ an oath, he
is bound, as far as he can, to make true what he has sworn, through
reverence of the Divine witness invoked, unless it leads to an evil
result, as stated.
Reply to Objection 2: An oath may lead to an evil result in two ways.
First, because from the very outset it has an evil result, either
through being evil of its very nature (as, if a man were to swear to
commit adultery), or through being a hindrance to a greater good, as
if a man were to swear not to enter religion, or not to become a
cleric, or that he would not accept a prelacy, supposing it would be
expedient for him to accept, or in similar cases. For oaths of this

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.8.

kind are unlawful from the outset: yet with a difference: because if a
man swear to commit a sin, he sinned in swearing, and sins in
keeping his oath: whereas if a man swear not to perform a greater
good, which he is not bound to do withal, he sins indeed in swearing
(through placing an obstacle to the Holy Ghost, Who is the inspirer
of good purposes), yet he does not sin in keeping his oath, though
he does much better if he does not keep it.
Secondly, an oath leads to an evil result through some new and
unforeseen emergency. An instance is the oath of Herod, who swore
to the damsel, who danced before him, that he would give her what
she would ask of him. For this oath could be lawful from the outset,
supposing it to have the requisite conditions, namely, that the
damsel asked what it was right to grant. but the fulfilment of the oath
was unlawful. Hence Ambrose says (De Officiis i, 50): "Sometimes it
is wrong to fulfil a promise, and to keep an oath; as Herod, who
granted the slaying of John, rather than refuse what he had
promised."
Reply to Objection 3: There is a twofold obligation in the oath which
a man takes under compulsion: one, whereby he is beholden to the
person to whom he promises something; and this obligation is
cancelled by the compulsion, because he that used force deserves
that the promise made to him should not be kept. The other is an
obligation whereby a man is beholden to God, in virtue of which he
is bound to fulfil what he has promised in His name. This obligation
is not removed in the tribunal of conscience, because that man
ought rather to suffer temporal loss, than violate his oath. He can,
however, seek in a court of justice to recover what he has paid, or
denounce the matter to his superior even if he has sworn to the
contrary, because such an oath would lead to evil results since it
would be contrary to public justice. The Roman Pontiffs, in absolving
men from oaths of this kind, did not pronounce such oaths to be
unbinding, but relaxed the obligation for some just cause.
Reply to Objection 4: When the intention of the swearer is not the
same as the intention of the person to whom he swears, if this be
due to the swearer's guile, he must keep his oath in accordance with
the sound understanding of the person to whom the oath is made.
Hence Isidore says (De Summo Bono ii, 31): "However artful a man
may be in wording his oath, God Who witnesses his conscience
accepts his oath as understood by the person to whom it is made."
And that this refers to the deceitful oath is clear from what follows: