neither could believe that He was a mere man, because of the things spoken
concerning Him; nor on the other hand receive it that He was Son of God, seeing
Him as he did in hunger. Whence being m perplexity he utters ambiguous
sounds. And much as when coming to Adam at the beginning, he feigns things
that are not, that he may learn the things that are; even so here also, not knowing
clearly the unutterable mystery of the Economy, and who He may be that has
come, he attempts to weave other nets, whereby he thought to know that which
was hidden and obscure. And what says he? "If Thou be Son of God, command
that these stones be made bread." He said not, because you are an hungered, but,
"if Thou be Son of God;" thinking to cheat Him with his compliments.
Wherefore also he was silent touching the hunger, that he might not seem to be
alleging it, and upbraiding Him. For not knowing the greatness of the Economy
which was going on, he supposed this to be a reproach to Him. Wherefore
flattering Him craftily, he makes mention of His dignity only.
What then says Christ? To put down his pride, and to signify that there was
nothing shameful in what had happened, nor unbecoming His wisdom; that
which the other had passed over in silence to flatter Him, He brings forward and
sets it forth, saying, "Man shall not live by bread alone." [Matthew 4:4]
So that He begins with the necessity of the belly. But mark, I pray you, the
craft of that wicked demon, and whence he begins his wrestlings, and how he
does not forget his proper art. For by what means he cast out also the first man,
and encompassed him with thousands of other evils, with the same means here
likewise he weaves his deceit; I mean, with incontinence of the belly. So too
even now one may hear many foolish ones say their bad words by thousands
because of the belly. But Christ, to show that the virtuous man is not compelled
even by this tyranny to do anything that is unseemly, first hungers, then submits
not to what is enjoined Him; teaching us to obey the devil in nothing. Thus,
because the first man did hereby both offend God, and transgress the law, as
much and more does He teach you:— though it be no transgression which he
commands, not even so to obey.

And why say I, "transgression"? "Why, even though something expedient be
suggested by the devils, do not thou," says He, "even so give heed unto them."
Thus, for instance, He stopped the mouths of those devils also, proclaiming Him
Son of God. And Paul too again [Acts 16:18] rebuked them, crying this selfsame thing; and yet what they said was profitable; but he more abundantly
dishonoring them, and obstructing their plot against us, drove them away even
when doctrines of salvation were preached by them, closing up their mouths, and
bidding them be silent.
And therefore neither in this instance did He consent to what was said. But
what says He? "Man shall not live by bread alone." Now His meaning is like
this: "God is able even by a word to nourish the hungry man;" bringing him a
testimony out of the ancient Scripture, and teaching us, though we hunger, yea,
whatever we suffer, never to fall away from our Lord.
But if a man say, "still He should have displayed Himself;" I would ask
him, with what intent, and for what reason? For not at all that he might believe
did the other so speak, but that he might, as he thought, over-argue Him into
unbelief. Since the first of mankind were in this way beguiled and over-argued
by him, not putting earnest faith in God. For the contrary of what God had said
he promised them, and puffed them up with vain hopes, and brought them to
unbelief, and so cast them out of the blessings they actually possessed. But
Christ signifies Himself not to have consented, either to him then or afterwards
to the Jews his partisans, in their demand of signs: invariably instructing us,
whatever we may have power to do, yet to do nothing vainly and at random; nor
even when want urges to obey the devil.
4. What then does this accursed one? Overcome, and unable to persuade
Him to do his bidding, and that when pressed by such violent hunger, he
proceeds to another thing, saying,
"If Thou be Son of God, cast Yourself down; for it is written, He shall give
His angels charge concerning You, and in their hands they shall bear You up."
[Matthew 4:6]