5. If a cause is removed, so is its effect. Now it happens that every accident is removed from a
subject either actually or by thought. If, therefore, an accident were the principle of plurality
according to number and diversity, it would happen that the same things would sometimes be
numerically one and sometimes diverse, either actually or by thought.

6. What is posterior is never the cause of what is prior. But among all accidents, quantity holds
first place, as Boethius says in Lib. praedicam. Among quantities, however, number is prior
since it is more simple and more abstract. Therefore an accident cannot be the principle of
plurality according to number.

#### Sed contra

On the contrary is the statement made byy Porphyry, that a collection of accidents which are not
to be found in another produces the individual. But what is the principle of individuation is the
principle of numerical plurality; therefore accidents are the principle of plurality according to
number.

Again, in the individual, there is found nothing except matter, form, and accidents. Diversity of
form, however, does not produce diversity according to number, but according to species, as is
said in X Metaph. Now, diversity of matter produces diversity of genus. For the Philosopher
says in X Metaph. that those things differ in genus in which there is not common matter, or
generation of one into the other (mutual generation). Therefore diversity according to number
cannot be produced except by diversity of accidents.

Moreover, what is found as common in many things that are specifically different is not the
cause of diversity according to number, because the division of genus into species precedes the
division of species into individuals; but matter is found to be common in things that are different
in species because the same matter is possessed by contrary forms, otherwise beings having
contrary forms would not be transmuted one into the other; therefore matter is not the principle of
individuation according to number, and neither is form, as has been noted at the beginning.
Hence it remains that accidents are the cause of this kind of diversity.

Again, in the genus of substance there is found only genus and difference; but the individuals of
one species differ neither in genus, nor by reason of substantial differences; therefore they do not
differ except because of accidental differences.

Response. I answer: For the clarification of this question and of those other questions treated of
in the text of Boethius, it is necessary to see what may be the cause of the threefold diversity
spoken of in the text.

Now, since in the individual composite in the genus of substance there are only three things
(matter, form, and the composite), it must be that in each of these things the causes of their
diversities are to be found. Accordingly it must be evident that diversity of genus is reduced to
diversity of matter; but diversity according to species is reduced to diversity of form; whereas
diversity according to number is owing partly to diversity of matter, and partly to accidental
diversity.