the Son of the Father, and the Spirit of both Father and Son. For although
the memory in the case of man, and especially that memory which beasts
have not—viz. the memory by which things intelligible are so contained as
that they have not entered that memory through the bodily senses—has in
this image of the Trinity, in proportion to its own small measure, a
likeness of the Father, incomparably unequal, yet of some sort, whatever
it be: and likewise the understanding in the case of man, which by the
purpose of the thought is formed thereby, when that which is known is
said, and there is a word of the heart belonging to no tongue, has in its
own great disparity some likeness of the Son; and love in the case of man
proceeding from knowledge, and combining memory and understanding,
as though common to parent and offspring, whereby it is understood to
be neither parent nor offspring, has in that image, some, however
exceedingly unequal, likeness of the Holy Spirit: it is nevertheless not the
case, that, as in that image of the Trinity, these three are not one man, but
belong to one man, so in the Highest Trinity itself, of which this is an
image, these three belong to one God, but they are one God, and these are
three persons, not one. A thing certainly wonderfully ineffable, or
ineffably wonderful, that while this image of the Trinity is one person, but
the Highest Trinity itself is three persons, yet that Trinity of three persons
is more indivisible than this of one. For that , in the nature of the
Divinity, or perhaps better Deity, is that which it is, and is mutually and
always unchangeably equal: and there was no time when it was not, or
when it was otherwise; and there will be no time when it will not be, or
when it will be otherwise. But these three that are in the inadequate
image, although they are not separate in place, for they are not bodies, yet
are now in this life mutually separate in magnitude. For that there are
therein no several bulks, does not hinder our seeing that memory is
greater than understanding in one man, but the contrary in another; and
that in yet another these two are overpassed by the greatness of love; and
this whether the two themselves are or are not equal to one another. And
so each two by each one, and each one by each two, and each one by each
one: the less are surpassed by the greater. And when they have been
healed of all infirmity, and are mutually equal, not even then will that
thing which by grace will not be changed, be made equal to that which by
nature cannot change, because the creature cannot be equalled to the
Creator, and when it shall be healed from all infirmity, will be changed.

44. But when the sight shall have come which is promised anew to us face
to face, we shall see this not only incorporeal but also absolutely
indivisible and truly unchangeable Trinity far more clearly and certainly
than we now see its image which we ourselves are: and yet they who see
through this glass and in this enigma, as it is permitted in this life to see,
are not those who behold in their own mind the things which we have set
in order and pressed upon them; but those who see this as if an image, so
as to be able to refer what they see, in some way be it what it may, to Him
whose image it is, and to see that also by conjecturing, which they see
through the image by beholding, since they cannot yet see face to face.
For the apostle does not say, We see now a glass, but, We see now
through a glass.