here not so, but seeing as we do innumerable patients, we go through the medical
treatment of them in a latent manner. For not by dragging into publicity those
who have sinned do we thus noise abroad the sins committed by them; but after
putting forth our teaching, as common to all, we leave it entirely to the
conscience of the hearers; so that each may draw to himself from what is said the
suitable medicine for his own wound. For there proceeds the word of doctrine
from the tongue of the speaker, containing accusation of wickedness, praise of
virtue, blame of lewdness, commendation of chasteness, censure of pride, praise
of gentleness, just as a medicine of varied and manifold ingredients,
compounded from every kind; and to take what is applicable to himself and
salutary is the part of each of the hearers. The word then issues openly, and
settling into the conscience of each, secretly both affords the healing treatment
which comes from it, and before the malady has been divulged, has often
restored health.
4. You at all events heard yesterday how I extolled the power of prayer,
how I reproached those who pray with listlessness; without having publicly
exposed one of them. Those then who were conscious to themselves of
earnestness, accepted that commendation of prayer, and became still more
earnest by the praises, while those who were conscious to themselves of
listlessness, accepted on the other hand the rebuking, and put off their
carelessness. But neither these nor those do we know; and this ignorance is
serviceable to both— how, I now tell you. He who has heard the commendations
of prayer and is conscious to himself of earnestness, were he to have many
witnesses of the commendations, would have lapsed towards pride; but, as it is,
by having secretly accepted the praise, he is removed from all arrogance. On the
other hand he who is conscious to himself of listlessness, having heard the
accusation, has become better from the accusation, as having no one of men a
witness of the rebuking; and this was of no ordinary profit to him. For on
account of the being flurried at the opinion of the vulgar, so long as we may
think that we escape notice in our wickedness, we exert ourselves to become

better; but when we have become notorious to all, and have lost the consolation
derived from the escaping notice, we grow more shameless and remiss rather.
And just as sores become more painful by being unbandaged and frequently
exposed to cold air, so also the soul after having sinned, if in the presence of
many it be rebuked for what it has done amiss, grows thereby more shameless.
In order therefore that this might not take place, the word administered its
medicine to you covertly. And that you may understand that the gain which this
covert treatment has is great, hear what the Christ says. "If your brother have
committed a fault against you convince him of it," and he did not say "between
him and the whole town," nor, "between you and the whole people," but "only
between you and him." Let the accusation, he says, be unwitnessed to, in order
that the change to amendment may be made easy of digestion. A great good
surely, the making the advice unpublished. Sufficient is the conscience,
sufficient that incorruptible judge. It is not so much thou who rebukest him who
has done wrong as his own conscience (that accuser is the sharper), nor do you
do it with the more exact knowledge of the faults committed. Add not therefore
wound to wound by exposing him who has done wrong; but administer for
yourself the counsel unwitnessed. This therefore we are doing now— the very
thing that Paul also did, framing the indictment against him who among the
Corinthians had sinned without citing of witnesses. And hear how. "On this
account," he says, "brethren, I have applied these figures of speech to myself and
Apollos." And yet not he himself nor Apollos were they who had rent the people
in schism and divided the Church; but all the same he concealed the accusation,
and just as by some masks, by hiding the countenances of the defendants by his
own and Apollos' names, he afforded them power to amend of that wickedness.
And again, "Lest in some way after I have come God humble me, and I may have
to mourn many of those who have before sinned, and have not repented over the
uncleanness and lasciviousness which they had committed." See how here also
he indefinitely mentions those who had sinned, in order that he might not, by
openly bringing the accusation, render the soul of those who had sinned more