were never partakers of a divine instruction. And this is not the only difference,
but the fact that in that case a servant went to them, in this the master; and that
man came and proclaimed an overthrow; but this man declared the glad tidings
of a kingdom of heaven. Which of these was it the more likely, would believe?
The barbarians, and ignorant, and they who had never partaken of divine
teaching, or they who had from their earliest age been trained in prophetic
books? To every one, it is plain, that the Jews would be more likely to believe.
But the contrary took place. And these disbelieved the Master when he preached
a kingdom of heaven, but those believed their fellow-servant when he threatened
an overthrow: in order that their goodness, and these men's folly might be
manifested to a greater degree. Is there a Demon? A Devil? Chance? Or Fate?
Has not each become the cause to himself both of evil, and of virtue? For if they
themselves were not to be liable to account, he would not have said that they
shall judge this generation. Nor would he have said that the Queen of the South
would condemn the Jews. For then indeed not only will one people condemn
another people, but one man will often judge a whole people, when they who, it
is allowed, might readily have been deceived, are found to remain undeceived,
and they who ought in every way to have the advantage, turn out to be worsted.
On this account, we made mention of Adam and of Job, for there is necessity to
revert to that subject, so as to put the finish to our discourse. He attacked Adam
indeed by means of mere words, but Job by means of deeds. For the one he
denuded of all his wealth, and deprived of his children. But from this man he
took not away anything, great or little of his possessions. But let us rather
examine the very words and the method of the plot. "The serpent came" says he
"and said to the woman, What is it that God has said, ye shall not eat of every
tree which is in the garden?" Here it is a serpent; there a woman, in the case of
Job: mean while great is the difference between the counsellors. The one is a
servant, the other a partner of the man's life. She is a helpmate, but the other is
under subjection. Do you see how unpardonable this is? Eve indeed, the servant
in subjection deceived: but him not even his partner, and helpmate could

overthrow. But let us see what he saith. "What is this that God has said, you
shall not eat of every tree?" Assuredly indeed God did not say this but the
opposite. See the villany of the Devil. He said that which was not spoken, in
order that he might learn what was spoken. What then did the woman? She
ought to have silenced him, she ought not to have exchanged a word with him.
In foolishness she declared the judgment of the Master. Thereby she afforded the
Devil a powerful handle.
4. See what an evil it is to commit ourselves rashly to our enemies, and to
conspirators against us. On this account Christ used to say, "Give not holy things
to the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before the swine, lest they turn and rend
you." And this happened in the case of Eve. She gave the holy things to the dog,
to the swine. He trod under foot the words: and turned and rent the woman. And
see how he works evil. "You shall not die the death" says he.
Give me your attention on this point, that the woman was able to
understand the deceit. For he immediately announced his enmity, and his warfare
against God, he immediately contradicted Him. Let it be so. Before this you
declared the judgment to one who wished to learn it. After this why did you
follow one who said the opposite? God said "you shall die the death." The Devil
made answer to this and said "you shall not die the death." What could be clearer
than this warfare? From what other quarter ought one to learn the enemy and the
foe, than from his answer returned to God? She ought then immediately to have
fled from the bait, she ought to have started back from the snare. "You shall not
die the death," says he "for God knows, that on the day on which you eat, your
eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods." In hope of a greater promise she
cast away the goods in her hand. He promised that he would make them Gods,
and cast them down into the tyranny of death. Whence then O woman did you
believe the Devil? What good did you discern? Was not the trustworthiness of
the lawgiver sufficient to prove that the one was God, both creator and framer of
the world, and the other the Devil and an enemy? And I do not say the Devil.
You thought that he was a mere serpent. Ought a serpent to claim such equality