FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.5.

one in genus or species are many simply, and one in a certain
respect: since to be one in genus or species is to be one according
to the consideration of the reason.
Now just as in the genus of natural things, a whole is composed of
matter and form (e.g. man, who is one natural being, though he has
many parts, is composed of soul and body); so, in human acts, the
act of a lower power is in the position of matter in regard to the act of
a higher power, in so far as the lower power acts in virtue of the
higher power moving it: for thus also the act of the first mover is as
the form in regard to the act of its instrument. Hence it is evident that
command and the commanded act are one human act, just as a
whole is one, yet in its parts, many.
Reply to Objection 1: If the distinct powers are not ordained to one
another, their acts are diverse simply. But when one power is the
mover of the other, then their acts are, in a way, one: since "the act
of the mover and the act of the thing moved are one act" (Phys. iii, 3).
Reply to Objection 2: The fact that command and the commanded
act can be separated from one another shows that they are different
parts. Because the parts of a man can be separated from one
another, and yet they form one whole.
Reply to Objection 3: In those things that are many in parts, but one
as a whole, nothing hinders one part from preceding another. Thus
the soul, in a way, precedes the body; and the heart, the other
members.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the act of the will is commanded?

Objection 1: It would seem that the act of the will is not commanded.
For Augustine says (Confess. viii, 9): "The mind commands the mind
to will, and yet it does not." But to will is the act of the will. Therefore
the act of the will is not commanded.
Objection 2: Further, to receive a command belongs to one who can
understand the command. But the will cannot understand the
command; for the will differs from the intellect, to which it belongs to
understand. Therefore the act of the will is not commanded.
Objection 3: Further, if one act of the will is commanded, for the
same reason all are commanded. But if all the acts of the will are
commanded, we must needs proceed to infinity; because the act of
the will precedes the act of reason commanding, as stated above
(Article 1); for if that act of the will be also commanded, this
command will be precedes by another act of the reason, and so on to
infinity. But to proceed to infinity is not possible. Therefore the act of
the will is not commanded.
On the contrary, Whatever is in our power, is subject to our
command. But the acts of the will, most of all, are in our power;
since all our acts are said to be in our power, in so far as they are
voluntary. Therefore the acts of the will are commanded by us.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), command is nothing else
than the act of the reason directing, with a certain motion, something
to act. Now it is evident that the reason can direct the act of the will:
for just as it can judge it to be good to will something, so it can
direct by commanding man to will. From this it is evident that an act
of the will can be commanded.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (Confess. viii, 9) when the
mind commands itself perfectly to will, then already it wills: but that
sometimes it commands and wills not, is due to the fact that it
commands imperfectly. Now imperfect command arises from the fact
that the reason is moved by opposite motives to command or not to
command: wherefore it fluctuates between the two, and fails to
command perfectly.