but acquiring it from sensible things through the bodily senses, as
will be explained later on (Question 84, Article 6; Question 89, Article
1). Now whenever we find something imperfect in any genus we
must presuppose something perfect in that genus. Therefore in the
intellectual nature there are some perfectly intellectual substances,
which do not need to acquire knowledge from sensible things.
Consequently not all intellectual substances are united to bodies;
but some are quite separated from bodies, and these we call angels.
Reply to Objection 1: As was said above (Question 50, Article 1) it
was the opinion of some that every being is a body; and
consequently some seem to have thought that there were no
incorporeal substances existing except as united to bodies; so much
so that some even held that God was the soul of the world, as
Augustine tells us (De Civ. Dei vii). As this is contrary to Catholic
Faith, which asserts that God is exalted above all things, according
to Ps. 8:2: "Thy magnificence is exalted beyond the heavens";
Origen, while refusing to say such a thing of God, followed the above
opinion of others regarding the other substances; being deceived
here as he was also in many other points, by following the opinions
of the ancient philosophers. Bernard's expression can be explained,
that the created spirit needs some bodily instrument, which is not
naturally united to it, but assumed for some purpose, as will be
explained (Article 2). Augustine speaks, not as asserting the fact, but
merely using the opinion of the Platonists, who maintained that there
are some aerial animals, which they termed demons.
Reply to Objection 2: Gregory calls the angel a rational animal
metaphorically, on account of the likeness to the rational nature.
Reply to Objection 3: To give life effectively is a perfection simply
speaking; hence it belongs to God, as is said (1 Kgs. 2:6): "The Lord
killeth, and maketh alive." But to give life formally belongs to a
substance which is part of some nature, and which has not within
itself the full nature of the species. Hence an intellectual substance
which is not united to a body is more perfect than one which is
united to a body.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether angels assume bodies?

Objection 1: It would seem that angels do not assume bodies. For
there is nothing superfluous in the work of an angel, as there is
nothing of the kind in the work of nature. But it would be superfluous
for the angels to assume bodies, because an angel has no need for a
body, since his own power exceeds all bodily power. Therefore an
angel does not assume a body.
Objection 2: Further, every assumption is terminated in some union;
because to assume implies a taking to oneself [ad se sumere]. But a
body is not united to an angel as to a form, as stated (Article 1);
while in so far as it is united to the angel as to a mover, it is not said
to be assumed, otherwise it would follow that all bodies moved by
the angels are assumed by them. Therefore the angels do not
assume bodies.
Objection 3: Further, angels do not assume bodies from the earth or
water, or they could not suddenly disappear; nor again from fire,
otherwise they would burn whatever things they touched; nor again
from air, because air is without shape or color. Therefore the angels
do not assume bodies.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xvi) that angels
appeared to Abraham under assumed bodies.
I answer that, Some have maintained that the angels never assume
bodies, but that all that we read in Scripture of apparitions of angels
happened in prophetic vision---that is, according to imagination. But
this is contrary to the intent of Scripture; for whatever is beheld in
imaginary vision is only in the beholder's imagination, and
consequently is not seen by everybody. Yet Divine Scripture from
time to time introduces angels so apparent as to be seen commonly
by all; just as the angels who appeared to Abraham were seen by
him and by his whole family, by Lot, and by the citizens of Sodom; in
like manner the angel who appeared to Tobias was seen by all
present. From all this it is clearly shown that such apparitions were
beheld by bodily vision, whereby the object seen exists outside the
person beholding it, and can accordingly be seen by all. Now by
such a vision only a body can be beheld. Consequently, since the
angels are not bodies, nor have they bodies naturally united with