because matter, considered in itself, is quite unchangeable, since it
has a potential existence, and has nothing but the nature of a
subject, and because quantity and size are extraneous to the
essence of matter itself. Wherefore multiplication of matter is quite
unintelligible, as long as the matter itself remains the same without
anything added to it; unless it receives greater dimensions. This
implies rarefaction, which is for the same matter to receive greater
dimensions, as the Philosopher says (Phys. iv). To say, therefore,
that the same matter is enlarged, without being rarefied, is to
combine contradictories ---viz. the definition with the absence of the
thing defined.
Wherefore, as no rarefaction is apparent in such multiplication of
matter, we must admit an addition of matter: either by creation, or
which is more probable, by conversion. Hence Augustine says
(Tract. xxiv in Joan.) that "Christ filled five thousand men with five
loaves, in the same way as from a few seeds He produces the
harvest of corn"---that is, by transformation of the nourishment.
Nevertheless, we say that the crowds were fed with five loaves, or
that woman was made from the rib, because an addition was made to
the already existing matter of the loaves and of the rib.
Reply to Objection 2: The rib belonged to the integral perfection of
Adam, not as an individual, but as the principle of the human race;
just as the semen belongs to the perfection of the begetter, and is
released by a natural and pleasurable operation. Much more,
therefore, was it possible that by the Divine power the body of the
woman should be produced from the man's rib.
From this it is clear how to answer the third objection.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the woman was formed immediately by

God?
Objection 1: It would seem that the woman was not formed
immediately by God. For no individual is produced immediately by
God from another individual alike in species. But the woman was
made from a man who is of the same species. Therefore she was not
made immediately by God.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine (De Trin. iii, 4) says that corporeal
things are governed by God through the angels. But the woman's
body was formed from corporeal matter. Therefore it was made
through the ministry of the angels, and not immediately by God.
Objection 3: Further, those things which pre-exist in creatures as to
their causal virtues are produced by the power of some creature, and
not immediately by God. But the woman's body was produced in its
causal virtues among the first created works, as Augustine says
(Gen. ad lit. ix, 15). Therefore it was not produced immediately by
God.
On the contrary, Augustine says, in the same work: "God alone, to
Whom all nature owes its existence, could form or build up the
woman from the man's rib."
I answer that, As was said above (Article 2, ad 2), the natural
generation of every species is from some determinate matter. Now
the matter whence man is naturally begotten is the human semen of
man or woman. Wherefore from any other matter an individual of the
human species cannot naturally be generated. Now God alone, the
Author of nature, can produce an effect into existence outside the
ordinary course of nature. Therefore God alone could produce either
a man from the slime of the earth, or a woman from the rib of man.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument is verified when an individual is
begotten, by natural generation, from that which is like it in the same
species.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ix, 15), we do
not know whether the angels were employed by God in the formation
of the woman; but it is certain that, as the body of man was not