([πολὺς ὁ τοῦ διαβόλου φορυτός]) of garbage is then introduced.
I know indeed that I shall appear ridiculous in finding fault with these
things; and shall incur the charge of great folly with the generality, as disturbing
the ancient laws: for, as I said before, great is the deceptive power of custom.
But nevertheless, I will not cease repeating these things: for there is, there is
surely a chance, that although not all, yet some few will receive our saying and
will choose to be laughed to scorn with us, rather than we laugh with them such
a laughter as deserves tears and overflowing punishment and vengeance.
For how can it be other than worthy of the utmost condemnation that a
damsel who has spent her life entirely at home and been schooled in modesty
from earliest childhood, should be compelled on a sudden to cast off all shame,
and from the very commencement of her marriage be instructed in imprudence;
and find herself put forward in the midst of wanton and rude men, and unchaste,
and effeminate? What evil will not be implanted in the bride from that day forth?
Immodesty, petulance, insolence, the love of vain glory: since they will naturally
go on and desire to have all their days such as these. Hence our women become
expensive and profuse; hence are they void of modesty, hence proceed their
unnumbered evils.
And tell me not of the custom: for if it be an evil thing, let it not be done
even once: but if good, let it be done constantly. For tell me, is not committing
fornication evil? Shall we then allow just once this to be done? By no means.
Why? Because though it be done only once, it is evil all the same. So also that
the bride be entertained in this way, if it be evil, let it not be done even once; but
if it be not evil, let it even be done always.
"What then," says one, "do you find fault with marriage? Tell me." That be
far from me. I am not so senseless: but the things which are so unworthily
appended to marriage, the painting the face, the coloring the eyebrows, and all
the other niceness of that kind. For indeed from that day she will receive many
lovers even before her destined consort.
"But many will admire the woman for her beauty." And what of that? Even

if discreet, she will hardly avoid evil suspicion; but if careless, she will be
quickly overtaken, having got that very day a starting point in dissolute behavior.
Yet though the evils are so great, the omission of these proceedings is called
an insult, by certain who are no better than brute beasts, and they are indignant
that the woman is not exhibited to a multitude, that she is not set forth as a stage
spectacle, common to all beholders: whereas most assuredly they should rather
count it insult when these things do take place; and a laughing stock, and a farce.
For even now I know that men will condemn me of much folly and make me a
laughing stock: but the derision I can bear when any gain accrues from it. For I
should indeed be worthy of derision, if while I was exhorting to contempt of the
opinion of the many, I myself, of all men, were subdued by that feeling.
Behold then what follows from all this. Not in the day only but also in the
evening, they provide on purpose men that have well drunk, besotted, and
inflamed with luxurious fare, to look upon the beauty of the damsel's
countenance; nor yet in the house only but even through the market-place do
they lead her in pomp to make an exhibition; conducting her with torches late in
the evening so as that she may be seen of all: by their doings recommending
nothing else than that henceforth she put off all modesty. And they do not even
stop here; but with shameful words do they conduct her. And this with the
multitude is a law. And runaway slaves and convicts, thousands of them and of
desperate character, go on with impunity uttering whatever they please, both
against her and against him who is going to take her to his home. Nor is there
any thing solemn, but all base and full of indecency. Will it not be a fine lesson
in chastity for the bride to see and hear such things? [Savile reads this sentence
with a question.] And there is a sort of diabolical rivalry among these profligates
to outdo one another in their zealous use of reproaches and foul words, whereby
they put the whole company out of countenance, and those go away victorious
who have found the largest store of railings and the greatest indecencies to throw
at their neighbors.
Now I know that I am a troublesome, sort of person and disagreeable, and