FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.9.

Reply to Objection 1: Privation is twofold. One is privation "as a
result" [privatum esse], and this leaves nothing, but takes all away:
thus blindness takes away sight altogether; darkness, light; and
death, life. Between this privation and the contrary habit, there can
be no medium in respect of the proper subject. The other is privation
"in process" [privari]: thus sickness is privation of health; not that it
takes health away altogether, but that it is a kind of road to the entire
loss of health, occasioned by death. And since this sort of privation
leaves something, it is not always the immediate contrary of the
opposite habit. In this way evil is a privation of good, as Simplicius
says in his commentary on the Categories: because it does not take
away all good, but leaves some. Consequently there can be
something between good and evil.
Reply to Objection 2: Every object or end has some goodness or
malice, at least natural to it: but this does not imply moral goodness
or malice, which is considered in relation to the reason, as stated
above. And it is of this that we are here treating.
Reply to Objection 3: Not everything belonging to an action belongs
also to its species. Wherefore although an action's specific nature
may not contain all that belongs to the full complement of its
goodness, it is not therefore an action specifically bad; nor is it
specifically good. Thus a man in regard to his species is neither
virtuous nor wicked.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether an individual action can be indifferent?

Objection 1: It would seem that an individual action can be
indifferent. For there is no species that does not, cannot, contain an
individual. But an action can be indifferent in its species, as stated
above (Article 8). Therefore an individual action can be indifferent.
Objection 2: Further, individual actions cause like habits, as stated in
Ethic. ii, 1. But a habit can be indifferent: for the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iv, 1) that those who are of an even temper and prodigal
disposition are not evil; and yet it is evident that they are not good,
since they depart from virtue; and thus they are indifferent in respect
of a habit. Therefore some individual actions are indifferent.
Objection 3: Further, moral good belongs to virtue, while moral evil
belongs to vice. But it happens sometimes that a man fails to ordain
a specifically indifferent action to a vicious or virtuous end.
Therefore an individual action may happen to be indifferent.
On the contrary, Gregory says in a homily (vi in Evang.): "An idle
word is one that lacks either the usefulness of rectitude or the
motive of just necessity or pious utility." But an idle word is an evil,
because "men . . . shall render an account of it in the day of
judgment" (Mt. 12:36): while if it does not lack the motive of just
necessity or pious utility, it is good. Therefore every word is either
good or bad. For the same reason every other action is either good
or bad. Therefore no individual action is indifferent.
I answer that, It sometimes happens that an action is indifferent in its
species, but considered in the individual it is good or evil. And the
reason of this is because a moral action, as stated above (Article 3),
derives its goodness not only from its object, whence it takes its
species; but also from the circumstances, which are its accidents, as
it were; just as something belongs to a man by reason of his
individual accidents, which does not belong to him by reason of his
species. And every individual action must needs have some
circumstance that makes it good or bad, at least in respect of the
intention of the end. For since it belongs to the reason to direct; if an
action that proceeds from deliberate reason be not directed to the
due end, it is, by that fact alone, repugnant to reason, and has the
character of evil. But if it be directed to a due end, it is in accord with