power.
We must, however, observe a difference among these powers. The
nutritive and the augmentative have their effect where they exist,
since the body itself united to the soul grows and is preserved by the
augmentative and nutritive powers which exist in one and the same
soul. But the generative power has its effect, not in one and the
same body but in another; for a thing cannot generate itself.
Therefore the generative power, in a way, approaches to the dignity
of the sensitive soul, which has an operation extending to extrinsic
things, although in a more excellent and more universal manner; for
that which is highest in an inferior nature approaches to that which
is lowest in the higher nature, as is made clear by Dionysius (Div.
Nom. vii). Therefore, of these three powers, the generative has the
greater finality, nobility, and perfection, as the Philosopher says (De
Anima ii, 4), for it belongs to a thing which is already perfect to
"produce another like unto itself." And the generative power is
served by the augmentative and nutritive powers; and the
augmentative power by the nutritive.
Reply to Objection 1: Such forces are called natural, both because
they produce an effect like that of nature, which also gives existence,
quantity and preservation (although the above forces accomplish
these things in a more perfect way); and because those forces
perform their actions instrumentally, through the active and passive
qualities, which are the principles of natural actions.
Reply to Objection 2: Generation of inanimate things is entirely from
an extrinsic source; whereas the generation of living things is in a
higher way, through something in the living thing itself, which is the
semen containing the principle productive of the body. Therefore
there must be in the living thing a power that prepares this semen;
and this is the generative power.
Reply to Objection 3: Since the generation of living things is from a
semen, it is necessary that in the beginning an animal of small size
be generated. For this reason it must have a power in the soul,
whereby it is brought to its appropriate size. But the inanimate body
is generated from determinate matter by an extrinsic agent; therefore
it receives at once its nature and its quantity, according to the
condition of the matter.

Reply to Objection 4: As we have said above (Article 1), the
operation of the vegetative principle is performed by means of heat,
the property of which is to consume humidity. Therefore, in order to
restore the humidity thus lost, the nutritive power is required,
whereby the food is changed into the substance of the body. This is
also necessary for the action of the augmentative and generative
powers.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the five exterior senses are properly

distinguished?
Objection 1: It would seem inaccurate to distinguish five exterior
senses. But there are many kinds of accidents. Therefore, as powers
are distinguished by their objects, it seems that the senses are
multiplied according to the number of the kinds of accidents.
Objection 2: Further, magnitude and shape, and other things which
are called "common sensibles," are "not sensibles by accident," but
are contradistinguished from them by the Philosopher (De Anima ii,
6). Now the diversity of objects, as such, diversifies the powers.
Since, therefore, magnitude and shape are further from color than
sound is, it seems that there is much more need for another
sensitive power than can grasp magnitude or shape than for that
which grasps color or sound.
Objection 3: Further, one sense regards one contrariety; as sight
regards white and black. But the sense of touch grasps several
contraries; such as hot or cold, damp or dry, and suchlike. Therefore
it is not a single sense but several. Therefore there are more than
five senses.
Objection 4: Further, a species is not divided against its genus. But
taste is a kind of touch. Therefore it should not be classed as a
distinct sense of touch.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 1): "There is no
other besides the five senses."
I answer that, The reason of the distinction and number of the
senses has been assigned by some to the organs in which one or
other of the elements preponderate, as water, air, or the like. By
others it has been assigned to the medium, which is either in
conjunction or extrinsic and is either water or air, or such like.
Others have ascribed it to the various natures of the sensible
qualities, according as such quality belongs to a simple body or
results from complexity. But none of these explanations is apt. For
the powers are not for the organs, but the organs for the powers;
wherefore there are not various powers for the reason that there are
various organs; on the contrary, for this has nature provided a