not submit without pain to be torn from this present life. For had He not uttered
any of these things, it might have been said that if He were a man He ought to
have experienced human feelings. And what are these? In the case of one about
to be crucified, fear and agony, and pain in being torn from present life: for a
sense of the charm which surrounds present things is implanted in human nature:
on this account wishing to prove the reality of the fleshly clothing, and to give
assurance of the incarnation He manifests the actual feelings of man with full
demonstration.
This is one consideration, but there is another no less important. And what
is this? Christ having come to earth wished to instruct men in all virtue: now the
instructor teaches not only by word, but also by deed: for this is the teacher's best
method of teaching. A pilot for instance when he makes the apprentice sit by his
side shows him how he handles the rudder, but he also joins speech to action,
and does not depend upon words alone or example alone: in like manner also an
architect when he has placed by his side the man who is intended to learn from
him how a wall is constructed, shows him the way by means of action as well as
by means of oral teaching; so also with the weaver, and embroiderer, and gold
refiner, and coppersmith—and every kind of art has teachers who instruct both
orally and practically. Inasmuch then as Christ Himself came to instruct us in all
virtue, He both tells us what ought to be done, and does it. "For," he says, "he
who does and teaches the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven."
[Matthew 5:19] Now observe; He commanded men to be lowly-minded, and
meek, and He taught this by His words: but see how He also teaches it by His
deeds. For having said "Blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are the meek,"
[Matthew 5:3-4] He shows how these virtues ought to be practised. How then
did He teach them? He took a towel and girded Himself and washed the
disciples' feet. [John 13:4-5] What can match this lowliness of mind? For He
teaches this virtue no longer by His words only but also by His deeds. Again He
teaches meekness and forbearance by His acts. How so? He was struck on the
face by the servant of the high priest, and said "If I have spoken evil bear witness

of the evil: but if well why do you smite me?" [John 18:23] He commanded men
to pray for their enemies: this also again He teaches by means of His acts: for
when He had ascended the cross He said "Father forgive them for they know not
what they do." [Luke 23:34] As therefore He commanded men to pray so does
He Himself pray, instructing you to do so by his own unflagging utterances of
prayer. Again He commanded us to do good to those who hate us, and to deal
fairly with those who treat us despitefully: [Matthew 5:44] and this He did by his
own acts: for he cast devils out of the Jews, who said that He Himself was
possessed by a devil, He bestowed benefits on His persecutors, He fed those who
were forming designs against Him, He conducted into His kingdom those who
were desiring to crucify Him. Again He said to His disciples "Get you no gold
nor silver neither brass in your purses," [Matthew 10:9] thus training them for
poverty: and this also He taught by His example, thus saying, "Foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has not where to lay His
head." [Matthew 8:20] And He had neither table nor dwelling nor anything else
of that kind: not because He was at a loss to obtain them, but because He was
instructing men to go in that path. After the same manner then he taught them
also to pray. They said to Him "Teach us to pray." [Luke 11:1] Therefore also He
prays, in order that they may learn to pray. But it was necessary for them not
merely to learn to pray but also how they ought to pray: for this reason He
delivered to them a prayer in this form: "Our Father which art in Heaven
hallowed be your name, Your kingdom come: Your will be done, as in Heaven, so
on earth. Give us this day our daily bread: and forgive us our debts as we also
forgive our debtors: and lead us not into temptation:" [Luke 11:2-4] that is into
danger, into snares. Since then He commanded them to pray "lead us not into
temptation," He instructs them in this very precept by putting it in practice
Himself, saying "Father if it be possible, let this cup pass away from me," thus
teaching all the saints not to plunge into dangers, not to fling themselves into
them but to wait for their approach, and to exhibit all possible courage, only not
to rush forwards themselves, or to be the first to advance against terrors. Why so,