relaxes their strength, how they exercise themselves every day in the palæstra,
under a master, and by rule? Imitate them, or rather exhibit even greater
eagerness, for the prizes are not equal: many are those who would hinder you;
live by rule: many are the things which relax your strength; make its feet agile:
for it is possible so to do, it comes not naturally, but by our will. Let us bring it
to lightness, lest our swiftness of foot be hindered by the weight of other things.
Teach your feet to be sure, for there are many slippery places, and if you fall,
straightway you lose much. But yet if you fall, rise up again. Even thus may you
obtain the victory. Never attempt slippery things, and you will not fall; walk
upon firm ground, up with your head, up with your eyes; these commands the
trainers give to those who run. Thus your strength is supported; but if you stoop
downward, you fall; you are relaxed. Look upward, where the prize is; the sight
of the prize increases the determination of our will. The hope of taking it suffers
not to perceive the toils, it makes the distance appear short. And what is this
prize? No palm branch; but what? The kingdom of heaven, everlasting rest,
glory together with Christ, the inheritance, brotherhood, ten thousand good
things, which it is impossible to name. It is impossible to describe the beauty of
that prize; he who has it alone knows it, and he who is about to receive it. It is
not of gold, it is not set with jewels, it is far more precious. Gold is mire, in
comparison with that prize, precious stones are mere bricks in comparison with
its beauty. If you have this, and takest your departure to heaven, you will be able
to walk there with great honor; the angels will reverence you, when you bear this
prize, with much confidence will you approach them all. "In Christ Jesus." See
the humility of his mind; this I do, says he, "in Christ Jesus," for it is impossible
without an impulse from Him to pass over so vast an interval: we have need of
much aid, of a mighty alliance; He has willed that you should struggle below, on
high He crowns you. Not as in this world; the crown is not here, where the
contest is; but the crown is in that bright place. See ye not, even here, that the
most honored of the wrestlers and charioteers are not crowned in the course
below, but the king calls them up, and crowns them there? Thus too is it here, in

heaven you receive the prize.
Ver. 15. "Let us, therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded," says he.
"And if in anything you are otherwise minded, even this shall God reveal unto
you." What sort of thing? That we should "forget the things which are behind."
Wherefore it belongs to him who is perfect not to consider himself perfect. How
therefore do you say, "as many as are perfect"? For tell me, are we minded as
you are? For if you have not attained nor art perfected, how do you command
those that are perfect to be so minded as you are, who art not yet perfect? Yea,
for this, says he, is perfection. And "if you are in anything otherwise minded,
even this shall God reveal unto you." That is, if any one considers that he has
attained all excellence. He puts them on their guard, not by speaking directly, but
what says he? "If in anything you are otherwise minded, even this shall God
reveal unto you." See how humbly he says this! God shall teach you, i.e. God
shall persuade you, not teach you; for Paul was teaching, but God shall lead
them on. And he said not, shall lead you on, but "shall reveal," that this may
rather seem to spring from ignorance. These words were spoken not concerning
doctrines, but concerning perfection of life, and our not considering ourselves to
be perfect, for he who considers that he has apprehended all, has nothing.
Ver. 16. "Only, whereunto we have already attained, by that same rule let us
walk, let us mind the same thing."
"Only, whereunto we have attained." What means this? Let us hold fast, he
says, that in which we have succeeded; love, concord, and peace: for in this we
have succeeded. "Whereto we have attained: to walk by the same rule, to mind
the same thing." "Whereunto we have attained," i.e. in this we have already
succeeded. Do you see, that he wills that his precepts should be a rule to us? And
a rule admits neither addition, nor subtraction, since that destroys its being a
rule. "By the same rule," i.e. by the same faith, within the same limits.
Ver. 17. "Brethren, be ye imitators of me, and mark them which so walk
even as you have us for an ensample."
He had said above, "beware of dogs," from such he had led them away; he