FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

the construction of the altar the Lord issued a twofold precept. One
was at the beginning of the Law (Ex. 20:24, seqq.) when the Lord
commanded them to make "an altar of earth," or at least "not of
hewn stones"; and again, not to make the altar high, so as to make it
necessary to "go up" to it "by steps." This was in detestation of
idolatrous worship: for the Gentiles made their altars ornate and
high, thinking that there was something holy and divine in such
things. For this reason, too, the Lord commanded (Dt. 16:21): "Thou
shalt plant no grove, nor any tree near the altar of the Lord thy God":
since idolaters were wont to offer sacrifices beneath trees, on
account of the pleasantness and shade afforded by them. There was
also a figurative reason for these precepts. Because we must
confess that in Christ, Who is our altar, there is the true nature of
flesh, as regards His humanity---and this is to make an altar of earth;
and again, in regard to His Godhead, we must confess His equality
with the Father---and this is "not to go up" to the altar by steps.
Moreover we should not couple the doctrine of Christ to that of the
Gentiles, which provokes men to lewdness.
But when once the tabernacle had been constructed to the honor of
God, there was no longer reason to fear these occasions of idolatry.
Wherefore the Lord commanded the altar of holocausts to be made
of brass, and to be conspicuous to all the people; and the altar of
incense, which was visible to none but the priests. Nor was brass so
precious as to give the people an occasion for idolatry.
Since, however, the reason for the precept, "Thou shalt not go up by
steps unto My altar" (Ex. 20:26) is stated to have been "lest thy
nakedness be discovered," it should be observed that this too was
instituted with the purpose of preventing idolatry, for in the feasts of
Priapus the Gentiles uncovered their nakedness before the people.
But later on the priests were prescribed the use of loin-cloths for the
sake of decency: so that without any danger the altar could be
placed so high that the priests when offering sacrifices would go up
by steps of wood, not fixed but movable.
Reply to Objection 8: The body of the tabernacle consisted of boards
placed on end, and covered on the inside with curtains of four
different colors, viz. twisted linen, violet, purple, and scarlet twice
dyed. These curtains, however, covered the sides only of the
tabernacle; and the roof of the tabernacle was covered with violetcolored skins; and over this there was another covering of rams'
skins dyed red; and over this there was a third curtain made of

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

goats' hair, which covered not only the roof of the tabernacle, but
also reached to the ground and covered the boards of the tabernacle
on the outside. The literal reason of these coverings taken altogether
was the adornment and protection of the tabernacle, that it might be
an object of respect. Taken singly, according to some, the curtains
denoted the starry heaven, which is adorned with various stars; the
curtain (of goats' skin) signified the waters which are above the
firmament; the skins dyed red denoted the empyrean heaven, where
the angels are; the violet skins, the heaven of the Blessed Trinity.
The figurative meaning of these things is that the boards of which
the tabernacle was constructed signify the faithful of Christ, who
compose the Church. The boards were covered on the inner side by
curtains of four colors: because the faithful are inwardly adorned
with the four virtues: for "the twisted linen," as the gloss observes,
"signifies the flesh refulgent with purity; violet signifies the mind
desirous of heavenly things; purple denotes the flesh subject to
passions; the twice dyed scarlet betokens the mind in the midst of
the passions enlightened by the love of God and our neighbor." The
coverings of the building designate prelates and doctors, who ought
to be conspicuous for their heavenly manner of life, signified by the
violet colored skins: and who should also be ready to suffer
martyrdom, denoted by the skins dyed red; and austere of life and
patient in adversity, betokened by the curtains of goats' hair, which
were exposed to wind and rain, as the gloss observes.
Reply to Objection 9: The literal reason for the sanctification of the
tabernacle and vessels was that they might be treated with greater
reverence, being deputed, as it were, to the divine worship by this
consecration. The figurative reason is that this sanctification
signified the sanctification of the living tabernacle, i.e. the faithful of
whom the Church of Christ is composed.
Reply to Objection 1:: Under the Old Law there were seven temporal
solemnities, and one continual solemnity, as may be gathered from
Num. 28,29. There was a continual feast, since the lamb was
sacrificed every day, morning and evening: and this continual feast
of an abiding sacrifice signified the perpetuity of Divine bliss. Of the
temporal feasts the first was that which was repeated every week.
This was the solemnity of the "Sabbath," celebrated in memory of
the work of the creation of the universe. Another solemnity, viz. the
"New Moon," was repeated every month, and was observed in
memory of the work of the Divine government. For the things of this