faithful servant, an excellent husbandman.
Together with these things remind her also of the women of old, of Sarah,
of Rebecca, both of the fair and of them that were not so, and point out how all
equally practised modesty. For even Leah, the wife of the patriarch, not being
fair, was not constrained to devise any such thing, but although she were
uncomely, and not very much beloved by her husband, she neither devised any
such thing, nor marred her countenance, but continued to preserve the
lineaments thereof undisfigured, and this though brought up by Gentiles.
But thou that art a believing woman, you that hast Christ for your head, are
you bringing in upon us a satanic art? And do you not call to mind the water that
dashed over your countenance, the sacrifice that adorns your lips, the blood that
has reddened your tongue? For if you would consider all these things, though
thou were fond of dress to the ten thousandth degree, you will not venture nor
endure to put upon you that dust and those cinders. Learn that you have been
joined unto Christ, and refrain from this unseemliness. For neither is He
delighted with these colorings, but He seeks after another beauty, of which He is
in an exceeding degree a lover, I mean, that in the soul. This the prophet likewise
has charged you to cherish, and has said, "So shall the King have pleasure in
your beauty."
Let us not therefore be curious in making ourselves unseemly. For neither is
any one of God's works imperfect, nor does it need to be set right by you. For
not even if to an image of the emperor, after it was set up, any one were to seek
to add his own work, would the attempt be safe, but he will incur extreme
danger. Well then, man works and you add not; but does God work, and do you
amend it? And do you not consider the fire of hell? Do you not consider the
destitution of your soul? For on this account it is neglected, because all your care
is wasted on the flesh.
But why do I speak of the soul? For to the very flesh everything falls out
contrary to what you have sought. Consider it. Do you wish to appear beautiful?
This shows you uncomely. Do you wish to please your husband? This rather

grieves him; and causes not him only, but strangers also, to become your
accusers. Would you appear young? This will quickly bring you to old age.
Would you wish to array yourself honorably? This makes you to be ashamed.
For such an one is ashamed not only before those of her own rank, but even
those of her maids who are in her secret, and those of her servants who know;
and, above all, before herself.
But why need I say these things? For that which is more grievous than all I
have now omitted, namely, that you dost offend God; you undermine modesty,
kindlest the flame of jealousy, emulatest the harlot women at their brothel.
All these things then consider, you women, and laugh to scorn the pomp of
Satan and the craft of the devil; and letting go this adorning, or rather
disfiguring, cultivate that beauty in your own souls which is lovely even to
angels and desired of God, and delightful to your husbands; that you may attain
both unto present glory, and unto that which is to come. To which God grant that
we may all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.