2 Corinthians 11:5
"For I reckon that I am not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles," no
longer making comparison of himself with them, but with Peter and the rest. 'So
that if they know more than I do, [they know more] than they also.' And observe
how here also he shows modesty. For he did not say, 'the Apostles said nothing
more than I,' but what? "I reckon," so I deem, "that I am not a whit behind the
very chiefest Apostles." For since this also appeared to bespeak an inferiority in
him, that those having preceded him were of greater name; and more respect was
entertained for them, and these persons were intending to foist themselves in;
therefore he makes this comparison of himself with them with the dignity that
becomes him. Therefore he also mentions them with encomiums, not speaking
simply of "the Apostles," but "the very chiefest," meaning Peter and James and
John.

2 Corinthians 11:6
3. "But though I be rude in speech, yet am I not in knowledge."
For since those that corrupted the Corinthians had the advantage in this, that
they were not rude; he mentions this also, showing that he was not ashamed of,
but even prided himself upon it. And he said not, "But though I be rude in
speech," yet so also are they , for this would have seemed to be accusing them as
well as himself, and exalting these: but he overthrows the thing itself, the
wisdom from without. And indeed in his former Epistle he contends even
vehemently about this thing, saying that it not only contributes nothing to the
Preaching, but it even throws a shadow on the glory of the Cross; [1 Corinthians
2:1] for he says, I came not with excellency of speech or of wisdom unto you,
lest the cross of Christ should be made void; [1 Corinthians 1:17] and many
other things of the same kind; because "in knowledge" they were "rude," which
is also the extremest form of rudeness. When therefore it was necessary to
institute a comparison in those things which were great, he compares himself
with the Apostles: but when to show that which appeared to be a deficiency, he
no longer does this, but grapples with the thing itself and shows that it was a
superiority. And when indeed no necessity urged him, he says that he is "the
least of the Apostles," and not worthy even of the title; but here again when
occasion called, he says that he is "not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles."
For he knew that this would most advantage the disciples. Wherefore also he
adds,
"Nay, in every thing we have made it manifest among all men to youward."
For here again he accuses the false Apostles as "walking in craftiness." [2
Corinthians 4:2] And he said this of himself before also, that he did not live after
the outward appearance, nor preach handling the word deceitfully [2 Corinthians
4:2] and corrupting it. But those men were one thing and appeared another. But