His will is to do so with your consent, that you may say with Paul, "I die daily,"
[1 Corinthians 15:31] He can take away your glory without your consent, and
bring you low: but He will have it from you with your own goodwill, that you
may have a recompense. He can make you poor, though unwilling, but He will
have you willingly become such, that He may weave crowns for you. Do you see
God's mercy to man? Do you see our own brutish stupidity?
What if you have come to great dignity, and hast at any time obtained some
office of Church government? Be not high-minded. You have not acquired the
glory, but God has put it on you. As if it were another's, therefore, use it
sparingly; neither abusing it nor using it upon unsuitable things, nor puffed up,
nor appropriating it unto yourself; but esteem yourself to be poor and inglorious.
For never—had you been entrusted with a king's purple to keep—never would it
have become you to abuse the robe and spoil it, but with the more exactness to
keep it for the giver. Is utterance given you? Be not puffed up; be not arrogant;
for the gracious gift is not yours. Be not grudging about your Master's good, but
distribute them among your fellow-servants; and neither be thou elated with
these things as if they were your own, nor be sparing as to the distribution of
them. Again, if you have children, they are God's which you have. If such be
your thought, you will both be thankful for having them, and if bereft you will
not take it hard. Such was Job when he said, [Job 1:21] "The Lord gave, the Lord
has taken away."
For we have all things from Christ. Both existence itself we have through
Him, and life, and breath, and light, and air, and earth. And if He were to exclude
us from any one of these, we are lost and undone. For [1 Peter 2:11] "we are
sojourners and pilgrims." And all this about "mine," and "yours," is bare words
only, and does not stand for things. For if you do but say the house is yours, it is
a word without a reality: since the very air, earth, matter, are the Creator's; and
so are you too yourself, who hast framed it; and all other things also. But
supposing the use to be yours, even this is uncertain, not on account of death
alone, but also before death, because of the instability of things.

6. These things then continually picturing to ourselves, let us lead strict
lives; and we shall gain two of the greatest advantages. For first, we shall be
thankful both when we have and when we are bereaved; and we shall not be
enslaved to things which are fleeting by, and things not our own. For whether it
be wealth that He takes, He has taken but His own; or honor, or glory, or the
body, or the life itself: be it that He takes away your son, it is not your son that
He has taken, but His own servant. For you formed him not, but He made him.
Thou but ministered to his appearing; the whole was God's own work. Let us
give thanks therefore that we have been counted worthy to be His ministers in
this matter. But what? Would you have had him for ever? This again proves you
grudging, and ignorant that it was another's child which you had, and not your
own. As therefore those who part resignedly are but aware that they have what
was not theirs; so whoever gives way to grief is in fact counting the King's
property his own. For, if we are not our own, how can they be ours? I say, we:
for in two ways we are His, both on account of our creation, and also on account
of the faith. Wherefore David says, "My substance is with You:" [ὑπόστασις]
Septuagint "hope" rec. vers. of. ver. 6; Psalm 139:14 and Paul too, "For in Him
we live and move and have our being:" [Acts 17:28] and plying the argument
about the faith, he says, [1 Corinthians 6:19-20] "You are not your own," and
"you were bought with a price." For all things are God's. When then He calls and
chooses to take, let us not, like grudging servants, fly from the reckoning, nor
purloin our Master's goods. Your soul is not yours; and how can your wealth be
yours? How is it then that you spend on what is unnecessary the things which are
not yours? Do you not know that for this we are soon to be put on our trial, that
is, if we have used them badly? But seeing that they are not our's but our
Master's, it were right to expend them upon our fellow-servants. It is worth
considering that the omission of this was the charge brought against that rich
man: and against those also who had not given food to the Lord. [Luke 14:21.
Matthew 25:42]
7. Say not then, "I am but spending my own, and of my own I live