been imperishable, and restored in safety, with the addition of much lustre, the
deposit entrusted to it. For like kings from some royal court, even so did those
children come forth from the furnace, no one having the patience to look any
longer at the king, but all transferring their eyes from him to the strange
spectacle, and neither the diadem nor the purple robe, nor any other feature of
royal pomp, attracted the multitudes of unbelievers so much as the sight of those
faithful ones, who tarried long in the fire, and then came out of it as men might
have done who had undergone this in a dream. For the most fragile of all our
features, I mean the hair, prevailed more mightily than adamant against the alldevouring flame. And the fact that when they were cast into the midst of the fire
they suffered no harm was not the only wonder, but the further fact that they
were speaking the whole time. Now all who have witnessed persons burning are
aware, that if they keep their lips fast closed, they can hold out for a short time at
least against the conflagration; but if any one chances to open his mouth, the
soul instantly takes its flight from the body. Nevertheless after such great
miracles had taken place, and all who were present and beheld were amazed, and
those who were absent had been informed of the fact by means of letters, the
king who instructed others remained himself without amendment, and went back
again to his former wickedness. And yet even then God did not punish him, but
was still long-suffering, counselling him both by means of visions and by His
prophet. But when he was not made anywise better by any of these things, then
at last God inflicted punishment upon him, not by way of avenging himself on
account of his former deeds, but as cutting off the occasion of future evils, and
checking the advance of wickedness, and He did not inflict even this
permanently, but after having chastised him for a few years, He restored him
again to his former honour, without having suffered any loss from his
punishment, but on the contrary having gained the greatest possible good; a firm
hold upon faith in God, and repentance on account of his former misdeeds.
[Daniel iv]
6. For such is the loving-kindness of God; He never turns his face away

from a sincere repentance, but if any one has pushed on to the very extremity of
wickedness, and chooses to return thence towards the path of virtue, God accepts
and welcomes, and does everything so as to restore him to his former position.
And He does what is yet more merciful; for even should any one not manifest
complete repentance, he does not pass by one which is small and insignificant,
but assigns a great reward even to this; which is evident from what Esaias the
prophet says concerning the people of the Jews, speaking on this wise: "On
account of his sin I put him to pain for a little while, and smote him, and turned
my face away from him, and he was pained, and walked sorrowfully, and then I
healed him, and comforted him." And we might cite as another witness that most
ungodly king, who was given over to sin by the influence of his wife: yet when
he only sorrowed, and put on sackcloth, and condemned his offenses, he so won
for himself the mercy of God, as to be released from all the evils which were
impending over him. For God said to Elias "Do you see how Ahab is pricked in
the heart before my face? I will not bring the evil upon him in his own days,
because he has wept before me." And after this again, Manasses, having
exceeded all in fury and tyranny, and having subverted the legal form of
worship, and shut up the temple, and caused the deceit of idolatry to flourish,
and having become more ungodly than all who were before him, when he
afterwards repented, was ranked among the friends of God. Now if, looking to
the magnitude of his own iniquities, he had despaired of restoration and
repentance, he would have missed all which he afterwards obtained: but as it
was, looking to the boundlessness of God's tender mercy instead of the enormity
of his transgressions, and having broken in sunder the bonds of the devil, he rose
up and contended with him, and finished the good course. [2 Chronicles 33:1019] And not only by what was done to these men, but also by the words of the
prophet does God destroy the counsels of despair, speaking on this wise: "Today,
if you will hear His voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation." Now
that expression "today," may be uttered at every time of life, even on the verge of
old age, if you desire it: for repentance is judged not by quantity of time, but by