Homily 75 on the Gospel of John
John 14:15-17
"If you love Me, keep My commandments. And I will pray the Father, and He
shall give you another Comforter, that He may abide with you forever; even the
Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees Him not, neither
knows Him."
1. We need everywhere works and actions, not a mere show of words. For
to say and to promise is easy for any one, but to act is not equally easy. Why
have I made these remarks? Because there are many at this time who say that
they fear and love God, but in their works show the contrary; but God requires
that love which is shown by works. Wherefore He said to the disciples, "If you
love Me, keep My commandments." For after He had told them, "Whatsoever you
shall ask, I will do it," that they might not deem the mere "asking" to be availing,
He added, "If you love Me," "then," He says, "I will do it." And since it was
likely that they would be troubled when they heard that, "I go to the Father," He
tells them "to be troubled now is not to love, to love is to obey My words. I have
given you a commandment that you love one another, that you do so to each
other as I have done to you; this is love, to obey these My words, and to yield to
Him who is the object of your love."
"And I will ask the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter."
Again His speech is one of condescension. For since it was probable, that they
not yet knowing Him would eagerly seek His society, His discourse, His
presence in the flesh, and would admit of no consolation when He was absent,
what says He? "I will ask the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter,"
that is, "Another like Me." Let those be ashamed who have the disease of
Sabellius, who hold not the fitting opinion concerning the Spirit. For the marvel
of this discourse is this, that it has stricken down contradictory heresies with the

same blow. For by saying "another," He shows the difference of Person, and by
"Paraclete," the connection of Substance. But why said He, "I will ask the
Father"? Because had He said, "I will send Him," they would not have so much
believed and now the object is that He should be believed. For afterwards He
declares that He Himself sends Him, saying, "Receive the Holy Ghost" [John
20:22]; but in this place He tells them that He asks the Father, so as to render His
discourse credible to them. Since John says of Him, "Of His fullness have all we
received" [John 1:16]; but what He had, how receives He from another? And
again, "He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire." [Luke 3:16]
"But what had He more than the Apostles, if He was about to ask It of His Father
in order to give It to others, when they often even without prayer appear to have
done thus?" And how, if It is sent according to request from the Father, does It
descend of Itself? And how is that which is everywhere present sent by Another,
that which "divides to every man severally as He will" [1 Corinthians 12:11], and
which says with authority, "Separate Me Paul and Barnabas"? [Acts 13:2]
Those ministers were ministering unto God, yet still It called them
authoritatively to Its own work; not that It called them to any different work, but
in order to show Its power. "What then," says some one, "is, 'I will ask the
Father?'?" (He says it) to show the time of Its coming. For when He had
cleansed them by the sacrifice, then the Holy Ghost lighted upon them. "And
why, while He was with them, came it not?" Because the sacrifice was not yet
offered. But when afterwards sin had been loosed, and they were being sent forth
to dangers, and were stripping themselves for the contest, then need was that the
Anointer should come. "But why did not the Spirit come immediately after the
Resurrection?" In order that being greatly desirous of It, they might receive It
with great joy. For as long as Christ was with them, they were not in tribulation;
but when He departed, being made defenseless and thrown into much fear, they
would receive It with much readiness.
"He remains with you." This shows that even after death It departs not. But
lest when they heard of the "Paraclete," they should imagine a second