SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.4.

watchings, in fastings, in chastity." Fourthly, it is directed to
almsgiving, wherefore it is written (Eph. 4:28): "He that stole, let him
now steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands
the thing which is good, that he may have something to give to him
that suffereth need." Accordingly, in so far as manual labor is
directed to obtaining food, it comes under a necessity of precept in
so far as it is necessary for that end: since that which is directed to
an end derives its necessity from that end, being, in effect, so far
necessary as the end cannot be obtained without it. Consequently he
who has no other means of livelihood is bound to work with his
hands, whatever his condition may be. This is signified by the words
of the Apostle: "If any man will not work, neither let him eat," as
though to say: "The necessity of manual labor is the necessity of
meat." So that if one could live without eating, one would not be
bound to work with one's hands. The same applies to those who
have no other lawful means of livelihood: since a man is understood
to be unable to do what he cannot do lawfully. Wherefore we find that
the Apostle prescribed manual labor merely as a remedy for the sin
of those who gained their livelihood by unlawful means. For the
Apostle ordered manual labor first of all in order to avoid theft, as
appears from Eph. 4:28, "He that stole, let him now steal no more;
but rather let him labor, working with his hands." Secondly, to avoid
the coveting of others' property, wherefore it is written (1 Thess.
4:11): "Work with your own hands, as we commanded you, and that
you walk honestly towards them that are without." Thirdly, to avoid
the discreditable pursuits whereby some seek a livelihood. Hence he
says (2 Thess. 3:10-12): "When we were with you, this we declared to
you: that if any man will not work, neither let him eat. For we have
heard that there are some among you who walk disorderly, working
not at all, but curiously meddling" (namely, as a gloss explains it,
"who make a living by meddling in unlawful things). Now we charge
them that are such, and beseech them . . . that working with silence,
they would eat their own bread." Hence Jerome states (Super epist.
ad Galat. [Preface to Bk. ii of Commentary]) that the Apostle said this
"not so much in his capacity of teacher as on account of the faults of
the people."
It must, however, be observed that under manual labor are
comprised all those human occupations whereby man can lawfully
gain a livelihood, whether by using his hands, his feet, or his tongue.
For watchmen, couriers, and such like who live by their labor, are
understood to live by their handiwork: because, since the hand is
"the organ of organs" [De Anima iii, 8], handiwork denotes all kinds