reproof of them. That is, because they were "offended in Him," He by setting
forth their case and leaving it to their own conscience alone, and by calling no
witness of this His accusation, but only themselves that knew it all, did thus also
draw them the more unto Himself, in saying, Blessed is he, whosoever shall not
be offended in me. For indeed His secret meaning was of them when He said
this.
3. But in order to our making the truth more evident to you by the
comparison of the several statements, producing not only our own sayings, but
also what is stated by others; we must needs add some account of them.
What then do some affirm? That this which we have stated was not the
cause, but that John was in ignorance, yet not in ignorance of all; but that He was
the Christ, he knew, but whether He was also to die for mankind, he knew not,
therefore he said, "Are You He that should come?" that is, He that is to descend
into hell. But this is not tenable; for neither of this was John ignorant. This at
least he proclaimed even before all the others, and bare record of this first,
"Behold," says he, "the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world."
[John 1:29] Now he called Him a lamb, as proclaiming the cross, and again in
saying, "That takes away the sin of the world," he declared this same thing. For
not otherwise than by the cross did He effect this; as Paul likewise said: "And the
handwriting which was contrary to us, even it He took out of the way, nailing it
to His cross." And his saying too, "He shall baptize you with the Spirit,"
[Matthew 3:11] is that of one who was foretelling the events after the
resurrection.
Well: that He was to rise again, he knew, say they, and that He was to give
the Holy Ghost; but that He should likewise be crucified, he knew not. How then
was He to rise again, who had not suffered, nor been crucified? And how was
this man greater than a prophet, who knew not even what the prophets knew?
For that he was greater than a prophet, even Christ Himself bare record,
[Matthew 11:9] but that the prophets knew of the passion is surely plain to every
one. For so Isaiah says, "He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep

before her shearer is dumb." [Isaiah 53:7] And before this testimony also he
says, "There shall be a root of Jesse, and He that shall rise again to rule the
Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles trust." [Isaiah 11:10] Then speaking of His
passion, and of the ensuing glory, he added, "And His rest shall be honor." And
this prophet foretold not only that He should be crucified, but also with whom.
"For," says he, "He was numbered with the transgressors." [Isaiah 53:12] And
not this only, but that He should not even plead for Himself; "For this man," he
says, "opens not His mouth:" and that He should be unjustly condemned; "For in
His humiliation," says he, "His judgment was taken away." And before this
again, David both says this, and describes the judgment hall. "Why," says he, "do
the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth
stand up, and the rulers are gathered together against the Lord, and against His
anointed." And elsewhere he mentions also the image of the cross, saying on this
wise, "They pierced my hand and my feet," and those things which the soldiers
were emboldened to do, he adds with all exactness, "For they parted my
garments," says he, "among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots." And
elsewhere again he says, that they also offered Him vinegar; "For they gave me,"
says He, "gall for my meat, and for my thirst they made me drink vinegar."
So then the prophets, so many years before, speak of the hall of judgment,
and of the condemnation, and of them that were crucified with Him, and of the
division of the garments, and of the lot cast upon them, and of many more things
besides (for indeed it is unnecessary to allege all now, lest we make our
discourse long): and was this man, greater than them all, ignorant of all these
things? Nay, how should this be reasonable?
And why did he not say, "Are you He that should come to hell," but simply,
"He that should come?" Although this were far more absurd than the others, I
mean their saying, "he therefore said these things, that he might preach there
also after his departure." To whom it were seasonable to say, "Brethren, be not
children in understanding, howbeit in malice be ye children."
[1 Corinthians 14:20] For the present life indeed is the season for right