this, the wiser without doubt will he become. But on account of the verse,
"The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not,"
faith certainly was necessary, whereby that which was not seen might be
believed. For by "darkness" he intended to signify the hearts of mortals
turned away from light of this kind, and hardly able to behold it; for
which reason he subjoins, "There was a man sent from God, whose name
was John. The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that
all men through Him might believe." But here we come to a thing that
was done in time, and belongs to knowledge, which is comprised in the
cognizance of facts. And we think of the man John under that phantasy
which is impressed on our memory from the notion of human nature.
And whether men believe or not, they think this in the same manner. For
both alike know what man is, the outer part of whom, that is, his body,
they have learned through the eyes of the body; but of the inner, that is,
the soul, they possess the knowledge in themselves, because they also
themselves are men, and through intercourse with men; so that they are
able to think what is said, "There was a man, whose name was John,"
because they know the names also by interchange of speech. But that
which is there also, viz. "sent from God," they who hold at all, hold by
faith; and they who do not hold it by faith, either hesitate through doubt,
or deride it through unbelief. Yet both, if they are not in the number of
those over-foolish ones, who say in their heart "There is no God," when
they, hear these words, think both things, viz. both what God is, and what
it is to be sent from God; and if they do not do this as the things
themselves really are, they do it at any rate as they can.
3. Further, we know from other sources the faith itself which a man sees
to be in his own heart, if he believes, or not to be there, if he does not
believe: but not as we know bodies, which we see with the bodily eyes,
and think of even when absent through the images of themselves which
we retain in memory; nor yet as those things which we have not seen, and
which we frame howsoever we can in thought from those which we have
seen, and commit them to memory, that we may recur to them when we
will, in order that therein we may similarly by recollection discern them,
or rather discern the images of them, of what sort soever these are which
we have fixed there; nor again as a living man, whose soul we do not
indeed see, but conjecture from our own, and from corporeal motions

gaze also in thought upon the living man, as we have learnt him by sight.
Faith is not so seen in the heart in which it is, by him whose it is; but
most certain knowledge holds it fast, and conscience proclaims it.
Although therefore we are bidden to believe on this account, because we
cannot see what we are bidden to believe; nevertheless we see faith itself
in ourselves, when that faith is in us; because faith even in absent things
is present, and faith in things which are without us is within, and faith in
things which are not seen is itself seen, and itself none the less comes into
the hearts of men in time; and if any cease to be faithful and become
unbelievers, then it perishes from them. And sometimes faith is
accommodated even to falsehoods; for we sometimes so speak as to say, I
put faith in him, and he deceived me. And this kind of faith, if indeed it
too is to be called faith, perishes from the heart without blame, when
truth is found and expels it. But faith in things that are true, passes, as
one should wish it to pass, into the things themselves. For we must not
say that faith perishes, when those things which were believed are seen.
For is it indeed still to be called faith, when faith, according to the
definition in the Epistle to the Hebrews, is the evidence of things not
seen?
4. In the words which follow next, "The same came for a witness, to bear
witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe;" the action,
as we have said, is one done in time. For to bear witness even to that
which is eternal, as is that light that is intelligible, is a thing done in time.
And of this it was that John came to bear witness, who "was not that
Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light." For he adds "That was
the true Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world. He was
in the world, and the world was made by Him, and the world knew Him
not. He came unto His own, and His own received Him not." Now they
who know the Latin language, understand all these words, from those
things which they know: and of these, some have become known to us
through the senses of the body, as man, as the world itself, of which the
greatness is so evident to our sight; as again the sounds of the words
themselves, for hearing also is a sense of the body; and some through the
reason of the mind, as that which is said, "And His own received Him
not;" for this means, that they did not believe in Him; and what belief is,
we do not know by any sense of the body, but by the reason of the mind.