SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.157, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the Philosopher suitably assigns the

species of anger?
Objection 1: It would seem that the species of anger are unsuitably
assigned by the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 5) where he says that some
angry persons are "choleric," some "sullen," and some "illtempered" or "stern." According to him, a person is said to be
"sullen" whose anger "is appeased with difficulty and endures a long
time." But this apparently pertains to the circumstance of time.
Therefore it seems that anger can be differentiated specifically in
respect also of the other circumstances.
Objection 2: Further, he says (Ethic. iv, 5) that "ill-tempered" or
"stern" persons "are those whose anger is not appeased without
revenge, or punishment." Now this also pertains to the
unquenchableness of anger. Therefore seemingly the ill-tempered is
the same as bitterness.
Objection 3: Further, our Lord mentions three degrees of anger,
when He says (Mt. 5:22): "Whosoever is angry with his brother, shall
be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his
brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council, and whosoever shall
say" to his brother, "Thou fool." But these degrees are not referable
to the aforesaid species. Therefore it seems that the above division
of anger is not fitting.
On the contrary, Gregory of Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxi]
says "there are three species of irascibility," namely, "the anger
which is called wrath," and "ill-will" which is a disease of the mind,
and "rancour." Now these three seem to coincide with the three
aforesaid. For "wrath" he describes as "having beginning and
movement," and the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 5) ascribes this to
"choleric" persons: "ill-will" he describes as "an anger that endures
and grows old," and this the Philosopher ascribes to "sullenness";
while he describes "rancour" as "reckoning the time for vengeance,"
which tallies with the Philosopher's description of the "ill-tempered."
The same division is given by Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 16).
Therefore the aforesaid division assigned by the Philosopher is not
unfitting.
I answer that, The aforesaid distinction may be referred either to the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.157, C.6.

passion, or to the sin itself of anger. We have already stated when
treating of the passions (FS, Question 46, Article 8) how it is to be
applied to the passion of anger. And it would seem that this is chiefly
what Gregory of Nyssa and Damascene had in view. Here, however,
we have to take the distinction of these species in its application to
the sin of anger, and as set down by the Philosopher.
For the inordinateness of anger may be considered in relation to two
things. First, in relation to the origin of anger, and this regards
"choleric" persons, who are angry too quickly and for any slight
cause. Secondly, in relation to the duration of anger, for that anger
endures too long; and this may happen in two ways. In one way,
because the cause of anger, to wit, the inflicted injury, remains too
long in a man's memory, the result being that it gives rise to a lasting
displeasure, wherefore he is "grievous" and "sullen" to himself. In
another way, it happens on the part of vengeance, which a man
seeks with a stubborn desire: this applies to "ill-tempered" or "stern"
people, who do not put aside their anger until they have inflicted
punishment.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not time, but a man's propensity to anger,
or his pertinacity in anger, that is the chief point of consideration in
the aforesaid species.
Reply to Objection 2: Both "sullen" and "ill-tempered" people have a
long-lasting anger, but for different reasons. For a "sullen" person
has an abiding anger on account of an abiding displeasure, which he
holds locked in his breast; and as he does not break forth into the
outward signs of anger, others cannot reason him out of it, nor does
he of his own accord lay aside his anger, except his displeasure
wear away with time and thus his anger cease. On the other hand,
the anger of "ill-tempered" persons is long-lasting on account of
their intense desire for revenge, so that it does not wear out with
time, and can be quelled only by revenge.
Reply to Objection 3: The degrees of anger mentioned by our Lord
do not refer to the different species of anger, but correspond to the
course of the human act [FS, Question 46, Article 8, Objection 3]. For
the first degree is an inward conception, and in reference to this He
says: "Whosoever is angry with his brother." The second degree is
when the anger is manifested by outward signs, even before it
breaks out into effect; and in reference to this He says: "Whosoever
shall say to his brother, Raca!" which is an angry exclamation. The