faith, you of the works of the Law. And it is owing to this obstinacy of yours that
you have in every way (Mar. and several manuscripts all) been given up. For,
"they being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their
own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
God." [Romans 10:3] The clearing up then of the whole passage, to give the
whole sense summarily, is here brought out by that blessed person. But that this
may be clearer, let us investigate the things he says also one by one; this
knowing, that what the blessed Paul aimed at was, to show by all that he said
that God only knows who are worthy, and no man whatever knows, even if he
seem to know ever so well, but that in this sentence of his there are sundry
aberrations. For He that knows the secrets of the hearts, He only knows for a
certainty who deserve a crown, and who punishment and vengeance. Hence it is
that many of those, by men esteemed good, He convicts and punishes, and those
suspected to be bad He crowns, after showing it not to be so; thus forming his
sentence not after the judgment of us slaves, but after his own keen and
uncorrupt decision, and not waiting for the issue of actions to look at the wicked
and him who is not so therefrom. But that we may not make the subject more
obscure, again let us go to the very words of the Apostle.
Ver. 10. "And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one."
I might, he implies, have mentioned the children by Keturah besides, but I
do not. But to gain the victory from a vantage ground it is those born of one and
the same father, and mother too, that I bring forward. For they were both sprung
from Rebecca, and from Isaac the true-born, the elect, the son honored above all,
of whom He said, "In Isaac shall your seed be called," who became "the father
of us all;" but if he was our father, then should his sons have been our fathers;
yet it was not so. You see how this happens not in Abraham's case only, but also
in that of his son himself, and how it is faith and virtue in all cases that is
conspicuous, and gives the real relationship its character. For hence we learn that
it is not only from the manner of birth, but owing to their being worthy of the
father's virtue, that the children are called children of him. For if it were only

owing to the manner of the birth, then ought Esau to have enjoyed the same as
Jacob did. For he also was from a womb as good as dead, and his mother was
barren. Yet this was not the only thing required, but the character too, which fact
contributes no common amount of practical instruction for us. And he does not
say that one is good and another bad, and so the former was honored; lest this
kind of argument should be wielded against him, "What, are those of the
Gentiles good men rather than those of the circumcision?" For even supposing
the truth of the matter was so, still he does not state it yet, as that would have
seemed to be vexatious. But it is upon God's knowledge that he has cast the
whole, and this no one would venture to gainsay, though he were ever so frantic.
"For the children being not yet born," he says, "it was said unto her, The elder
shall serve the younger." And he shows that noble birth after the flesh is of no
avail, but we must seek for virtue of soul, which even before the works of it God
knows of. For "the children," he says, "being not yet born, nor having done any
good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, it was
said unto her that the elder shall serve the younger:" for this was a sign of
foreknowledge, that they were chosen from the very birth. That the election
made according to foreknowledge, might be manifestly of God, from the first
day He at once saw and proclaimed which was good and which not. Do not then
tell me that you have read the Law (he means) and the Prophets, and hast been a
servant for such a long time. For He that knows how to assay the soul, knows
which is worthy of being saved. Yield then to the incomprehensibleness of the
election. For it is He alone Who knows how to crown aright. How many, for
instance, seemed better than St. Matthew; to go by the exhibition of works then
visible. But He that knows things undeclared, and is able to assay the mind's
aptitude, knew the pearl though lying in the mire, and after passing by others,
and being well pleased with the beauty of this, He elected it, and by adding to
the noble born free-will grace from Himself, He made it approved. For if in the
case of these arts which are perishable, and indeed in other matters, those that
are good judges do not use the grounds on which the uninstructed form their