immediately gives them that at which they rejoiced: for He adds: "But you shall
receive power, after that the Holy Ghost has come upon you; and you shall be
witnesses unto Me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto
the uttermost part of the earth." [Acts 1:8] Then, that they may make no more
enquiries, straightway He was received up. Thus, just as on the former occasion
He had darkened their minds by awe, and by saying, "I know not;" here also He
does so by being taken up. For great was their eagerness on the subject, and they
would not have desisted; and yet it was very necessary that they should not learn
this. For tell me, which do the Gentiles most disbelieve? That there will be a
consummation of the world, or that God has become man, and issued from the
Virgin? But I am ashamed of dwelling on this point, as if it were about some
difficult matter. Then again, that the disciples might not say, Why do you leave
the matter in suspense? He adds, "Which the Father has put in His own power."
And yet He declared the Father's power and His to be one: as in the saying, "For
as the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, even so the Son quickens
whom He will." [John 5:21] If where need is to work, Thou actest with the same
power as the Father; where it behooves to know, dost Thou not know with the
same power? Yet certainly to raise up the dead is much greater than to learn the
day. If the greater be with power, much more the other.
But just as when we see a child crying, and pertinaciously wishing to get
something from us that is not expedient for him, we hide the thing, and show
him our empty hands, and say, "See, we have it not:" the like has Christ here
done with the Apostles. But as the child, even when we show him [our empty
hands], persists with his crying, conscious he has been deceived, and then we
leave him, and depart, saying, "Such an one calls me:" and we give him
something else instead, in order to divert him from his desire, telling him it is a
much finer thing than the other, and then hasten away; in like manner Christ
acted. The disciples asked to have something, and He said He had it not. And on
the first occasion he frightened them. Then again they asked to have it now: He
said He had it not; and He did not frighten them now, but after having shown

[the empty hands], He has done this, and gives them a plausible reason: "Which
the Father," He says, "has put in his own power." What? Thou not know the
things of the Father! You know Him, and not what belongs to Him! And yet You
have said, "None knows the Father but the Son" [Luke 10:25]; and, "The Spirit
searches all things, yea, the deep things of God" [1 Corinthians 2:10]; and Thou
not know this! But they feared to ask Him again, lest they should hear Him say,
"Are ye also without understanding?" [Matthew 15:26] For they feared Him now
much more than before. "But you shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost
has come upon you." As in the former instance He had not answered their
question (for it is the part of a teacher to teach not what the disciple chooses, but
what is expedient for him to learn), so in this, He tells them beforehand, for this
reason, what they ought to know, that they may not be troubled. In truth, they
were yet weak. But to inspire them with confidence, He raised up their souls,
and concealed what was grievous. Since he was about to leave them very shortly,
therefore in this discourse He says nothing painful. But how? He extols as great
the things which would be painful: all but saying, "'Fear not': for you shall
receive power, after that the Holy Ghost has come upon you; and you shall be
witnesses unto Me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria." For
since he had said, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the
Samaritans enter ye not" [Matthew 10:5], what there He left unsaid, He here
adds, "And to the uttermost part of the earth;" and having spoken this, which
was more fearful than all the rest, then that they may not again question Him, He
held His peace. "And having this said, while they beheld, He was taken up; and a
cloud received Him out of their sight" [Acts 1:9]. Do you see that they did
preach and fulfil the Gospel? For great was the gift He had bestowed on them. In
the very place, He says, where you are afraid, that is, in Jerusalem, there preach
ye first, and afterwards unto the uttermost part of the earth. Then for assurance
of what He had said, "While they beheld, He was taken up." Not "while they
beheld" did He rise from the dead, but "while they beheld, He was taken up."
Inasmuch, however, as the sight of their eyes even here was not all-sufficient; for