SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.13.

suddenly go so far as to commit a mortal sin, but is disposed thereto
by some previous negligence, for which reason venial sins are said
to be dispositions to mortal sin, as stated above (FS, Question 88,
Article 3). Nevertheless he falls, and loses charity through the one
mortal sin if he commits it.
Since, however, he adds: "If some slight slip should occur, and he
recover himself quickly he does not appear to fall altogether," we
may reply in another way, that when he speaks of a man being
emptied and falling away altogether, he means one who falls so as to
sin through malice; and this does not occur in a perfect man all at
once.
Reply to Objection 2: Charity may be lost in two ways; first, directly,
by actual contempt, and, in this way, Peter did not lose charity.
Secondly, indirectly, when a sin is committed against charity,
through some passion of desire or fear; it was by sinning against
charity in this way, that Peter lost charity; yet he soon recovered it.
The Reply to the Third Objection is evident from what has been said.
Reply to Objection 4: Not every inordinate affection for things
directed to the end, i.e., for created goods, constitutes a mortal sin,
but only such as is directly contrary to the Divine will; and then the
inordinate affection is contrary to charity, as stated.
Reply to Objection 5: Charity denotes union with God, whereas faith
and hope do not. Now every mortal sin consists in aversion from
God, as stated above (Gen. ad lit. viii, 12). Consequently every moral
sin is contrary to charity, but not to faith and hope, but only certain
determinate sins, which destroy the habit of faith or of hope, even as
charity is destroyed by every moral sin. Hence it is evident that
charity cannot remain lifeless, since it is itself the ultimate form
regarding God under the aspect of last end as stated above
(Question 23, Article 8).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.1.

## QUESTION 25 — OF THE OBJECT OF CHARITY

Prologue
We must now consider the object of charity; which consideration will
be twofold: (1) The things we ought to love out of charity: (2) The
order in which they ought to be loved. Under the first head there are
twelve points of inquiry:
(1) Whether we should love God alone, out of charity, or should we
love our neighbor also?
(2) Whether charity should be loved out of charity?
(3) Whether irrational creatures ought to be loved out of charity?
(4) Whether one may love oneself out of charity?
(5) Whether one's own body?
(6) Whether sinners should be loved out of charity?
(7) Whether sinners love themselves?
(8) Whether we should love our enemies out of charity?
(9) Whether we are bound to show them tokens of friendship?
(10) Whether we ought to love the angels out of charity?
(11) Whether we ought to love the demons?
(12) How to enumerate the things we are bound to love out of charity.