THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.4.

stated above (Article 1), the debt of punishment incurred by previous
sins does not return on account of a subsequent sin, as resulting
from the acts of the subsequent sin. Wherefore the amount of the
debt that returns must be according to the gravity of the subsequent
sin.
It is possible, however, for the gravity of the subsequent sin to equal
the gravity of all previous sins. But it need not always be so, whether
we speak of the gravity which a sin has from its species (since the
subsequent sin may be one of simple fornication, while the previous
sins were adulteries, murders, or sacrileges); or of the gravity which
it incurs through the ingratitude connected with it. For it is not
necessary that the measure of ingratitude should be exactly equal to
the measure of the favor received, which latter is measured
according to the greatness of the sins previously pardoned. Because
it may happen that in respect of the same favor, one man is very
ungrateful, either on account of the intensity of his scorn for the
favor received, or on account of the gravity of the offense committed
against the benefactor, while another man is slightly ungrateful,
either because his scorn is less intense, or because his offense
against the benefactor is less grave. But the measure of ingratitude
is proportionately equal to the measure of the favor received: for
supposing an equal contempt of the favor, or an equal offense
against the benefactor, the ingratitude will be so much the greater,
as the favor received is greater.
Hence it is evident that the debt of punishment incurred by a
subsequent sin need not always be equal to that of previous sins;
but it must be in proportion thereto, so that the more numerous or
the greater the sins previously pardoned, the greater must be the
debt of punishment incurred by any subsequent mortal sin whatever.
Reply to Objection 1: The favor of the pardon of sins takes its
absolute quantity from the quantity of the sins previously pardoned:
but the sin of ingratitude does not take its absolute quantity from the
measure of the favor bestowed, but from the measure of the
contempt or of the offense, as stated above: and so the objection
does not prove.
Reply to Objection 2: A slave who has been given his freedom is not
brought back to his previous state of slavery for any kind of
ingratitude, but only when this is grave.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: He whose forgiven sins return to him on
account of subsequent ingratitude, incurs the debt for all, in so far
as the measure of his previous sins is contained proportionally in
his subsequent ingratitude, but not absolutely, as stated above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the ingratitude whereby a subsequent sin