Latin, of course, in the text.

but the twelfth one was healed, it would then be a plausible thing to say that the woman was a type
of these. But since she suffered during eleven years, and [all that time] obtained no cure, but was
healed in the twelfth year, in what way can she be a type of the twelfth of the Æons, eleven of
whom, [according to hypothesis,] did not suffer at all, but the twelfth alone participated in suffering?
For a type and emblem is, no doubt, sometimes diverse from the truth [signified] as to matter and
substance; but it ought, as to the general form and features, to maintain a likeness [to what is
typified], and in this way to shadow forth by means of things present those which are yet to come.
2. And not only in the case of this woman have the years of her infirmity (which they affirm to
fit in with their figment) been mentioned, but, lo! another woman was also healed, after suffering
in like manner for eighteen years; concerning whom the Lord said, "And ought not this daughter
of Abraham, whom Satan has bound during eighteen years, to be set free on the Sabbath-day?"
If, then, the former was a type of the twelfth Æon that suffered, the latter should also be a type of
the eighteenth Æon in suffering. But they cannot maintain this; otherwise their primary and original
Ogdoad will be included in the number of Æons who suffered together. Moreover, there was also
a certain other person healed by the Lord, after he had suffered for eight-and-thirty years: they
ought therefore to affirm that the Æon who occupies the thirty-eighth place suffered. For if they
assert that the things which were done by the Lord were types of what took place in the Pleroma,
the type ought to be preserved throughout. But they can neither adapt to their fictitious system the
case of her who was cured after eighteen years, nor of him who was cured after thirty-eight years.
Now, it is in every way absurd and inconsistent to declare that the Saviour preserved the type in
certain cases, while He did not do so in others. The type of the woman, therefore, [with the issue
of blood] is shown to have no analogy to their system of Æons.

### Chapter XXIV.—Folly of the arguments derived by the heretics from numbers, letters, and
syllables.
1. This very thing, too, still further demonstrates their opinion false, and their fictitious system
untenable, that they endeavour to bring forward proofs of it, sometimes through means of numbers
and the syllables of names, sometimes also through the letter of syllables, and yet again through
those numbers which are, according to the practice followed by the Greeks, contained in [different]
letters;—[this, I say,] demonstrates in the clearest manner their overthrow or confusion, as well
and obscure.

as the untenable and perverse character of their [professed] knowledge. For, transferring the name
Jesus, which belongs to another language, to the numeration of the Greeks, they sometimes call it
"Episemon," as having six letters, and at other times "the Plenitude of the Ogdoads," as containing
the number eight hundred and eighty-eight. But His [corresponding] Greek name, which is "Soter,"
that is, Saviour, because it does not fit in with their system, either with respect to numerical value
or as regards its letters, they pass over in silence. Yet surely, if they regard the names of the Lord,
as, in accordance with the preconceived purpose of the Father, by means of their numerical value
and letters, indicating number in the Pleroma, Soter, as being a Greek name, ought by means of its
letters and the numbers [expressed by these], in virtue of its being Greek, to show forth the mystery
of the Pleroma. But the case is not so, because it is a word of five letters, and its numerical value
is one thousand four hundred and eight. But these things do not in any way correspond with their
Pleroma; the account, therefore, which they give of transactions in the Pleroma cannot be true.
2. Moreover, Jesus, which is a word belonging to the proper tongue of the Hebrews, contains,
as the learned among them declare, two letters and a half, and signifies that Lord who contains
heaven and earth; for Jesus in the ancient Hebrew language means "heaven," while again "earth"
is expressed by the words sura usser. The word, therefore, which contains heaven and earth is
just Jesus. Their explanation, then, of the Episemon is false, and their numerical calculation is also
manifestly overthrown. For, in their own language, Soter is a Greek word of five letters; but, on
the other hand, in the Hebrew tongue, Jesus contains only two letters and a half. The total which
they reckon up, viz., eight hundred and eighty-eight, therefore falls to the ground. And throughout,
the Hebrew letters do not correspond in number with the Greek, although these especially, as being
the more ancient and unchanging, ought to uphold the reckoning connected with the names. For
these ancient, original, and generally called sacred letters of the Hebrews are ten in number (but
little light upon it. We may merely state that !"# seems to be regarded as containing in itself the initials of the three words $%!&$'#,
Jehovah; ()#*+'", heaven; and ,%-%.'!, and earth.
unintelligible.
Hebrew characters, still used by the priests after the square Chaldaic letters had been generally adopted. Harvey thinks that
sacerdotales represents the Greek ()*#+,%-*./, "meaning letters as popularly used in common computation."