FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.4.

society. Now when a man ordains his action directly for the good or
evil of the whole society, retribution is owed to him, before and
above all, by the whole society; secondarily, by all the parts of
society. Whereas when a man does that which conduces to his own
benefit or disadvantage, then again is retribution owed to him, in so
far as this too affects the community, forasmuch as he is a part of
society: although retribution is not due to him, in so far as it
conduces to the good or harm of an individual, who is identical with
the agent: unless, perchance, he owe retribution to himself, by a sort
of resemblance, in so far as man is said to be just to himself.
It is therefore evident that a good or evil action deserves praise or
blame, in so far as it is in the power of the will: that it is right or
sinful, according as it is ordained to the end; and that its merit or
demerit depends on the recompense for justice or injustice towards
another.
Reply to Objection 1: A man's good or evil actions, although not
ordained to the good or evil of another individual, are nevertheless
ordained to the good or evil of another, i.e. the community.
Reply to Objection 2: Man is master of his actions; and yet, in so far
as he belongs to another, i.e. the community, of which he forms part,
he merits or demerits, inasmuch as he disposes his actions well or
ill: just as if he were to dispense well or ill other belongings of his, in
respect of which he is bound to serve the community.
Reply to Objection 3: This very good or evil, which a man does to
himself by his action, redounds to the community, as stated above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a human action is meritorious or

demeritorious before God, according as it is good or evil?
Objection 1: It would seem that man's actions, good or evil, are not
meritorious or demeritorious in the sight of God. Because, as stated
above (Article 3), merit and demerit imply relation to retribution for
good or harm done to another. But a man's action, good or evil, does
no good or harm to God; for it is written (Job 35:6,7): "If thou sin,
what shalt thou hurt Him? . . . And if thou do justly, what shalt thou
give Him?" Therefore a human action, good or evil, is not
meritorious or demeritorious in the sight of God.
Objection 2: Further, an instrument acquires no merit or demerit in
the sight of him that uses it; because the entire action of the
instrument belongs to the user. Now when man acts he is the
instrument of the Divine power which is the principal cause of his
action; hence it is written (Is. 10:15): "Shall the axe boast itself
against him that cutteth with it? Or shall the saw exalt itself against
him by whom it is drawn?" where man while acting is evidently
compared to an instrument. Therefore man merits or demerits
nothing in God's sight, by good or evil deeds.
Objection 3: Further, a human action acquires merit or demerit
through being ordained to someone else. But not all human actions
are ordained to God. Therefore not every good or evil action
acquires merit or demerit in God's sight.
On the contrary, It is written (Eccles. 12:14): "All things that are
done, God will bring into judgment . . . whether it be good or evil."
Now judgment implies retribution, in respect of which we speak of
merit and demerit. Therefore every human action, both good and
evil, acquires merit or demerit in God's sight.
I answer that, A human action, as stated above (Article 3), acquires
merit or demerit, through being ordained to someone else, either by
reason of himself, or by reason of the community: and in each way,
our actions, good and evil, acquire merit or demerit, in the sight of
God. On the part of God Himself, inasmuch as He is man's last end;
and it is our duty to refer all our actions to the last end, as stated
above (Question 19, Article 10). Consequently, whoever does an evil
deed, not referable to God, does not give God the honor due to Him