SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.2.

the term of an act of justice, without taking into account the way in
which it is done by the agent: whereas in the other virtues nothing is
declared to be right unless it is done in a certain way by the agent.
For this reason justice has its own special proper object over and
above the other virtues, and this object is called the just, which is
the same as "right." Hence it is evident that right is the object of
justice.
Reply to Objection 1: It is usual for words to be distorted from their
original signification so as to mean something else: thus the word
"medicine" was first employed to signify a remedy used for curing a
sick person, and then it was drawn to signify the art by which this is
done. In like manner the word "jus" [right] was first of all used to
denote the just thing itself, but afterwards it was transferred to
designate the art whereby it is known what is just, and further to
denote the place where justice is administered, thus a man is said to
appear "in jure", and yet further, we say even that a man, who has
the office of exercising justice, administers the jus even if his
sentence be unjust.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as there pre-exists in the mind of the
craftsman an expression of the things to be made externally by his
craft, which expression is called the rule of his craft, so too there preexists in the mind an expression of the particular just work which the
reason determines, and which is a kind of rule of prudence. If this
rule be expressed in writing it is called a "law," which according to
Isidore (Etym. v, 1) is "a written decree": and so law is not the same
as right, but an expression of right.
Reply to Objection 3: Since justice implies equality, and since we
cannot offer God an equal return, it follows that we cannot make Him
a perfectly just repayment. For this reason the Divine law is not
properly called "jus" but "fas," because, to wit, God is satisfied if we
accomplish what we can. Nevertheless justice tends to make man
repay God as much as he can, by subjecting his mind to Him
entirely.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether right is fittingly divided into natural right

and positive right?
Objection 1: It would seem that right is not fittingly divided into
natural right and positive right. For that which is natural is
unchangeable, and is the same for all. Now nothing of the kind is to
be found in human affairs, since all the rules of human right fail in
certain cases, nor do they obtain force everywhere. Therefore there
is no such thing as natural right.
Objection 2: Further, a thing is called "positive" when it proceeds
from the human will. But a thing is not just, simply because it
proceeds from the human will, else a man's will could not be unjust.
Since then the "just" and the "right" are the same, it seems that there
is no positive right.
Objection 3: Further, Divine right is not natural right, since it
transcends human nature. In like manner, neither is it positive right,
since it is based not on human, but on Divine authority. Therefore
right is unfittingly divided into natural and positive.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 7) that "political
justice is partly natural and partly legal," i.e. established by law.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1) the "right" or the "just" is a
work that is adjusted to another person according to some kind of
equality. Now a thing can be adjusted to a man in two ways: first by
its very nature, as when a man gives so much that he may receive
equal value in return, and this is called "natural right." In another
way a thing is adjusted or commensurated to another person, by
agreement, or by common consent, when, to wit, a man deems
himself satisfied, if he receive so much. This can be done in two
ways: first by private agreement, as that which is confirmed by an
agreement between private individuals; secondly, by public
agreement, as when the whole community agrees that something
should be deemed as though it were adjusted and commensurated
to another person, or when this is decreed by the prince who is
placed over the people, and acts in its stead, and this is called
"positive right."
Reply to Objection 1: That which is natural to one whose nature is