CHAPTERS XLI-XLV (A Summary by Fr. Rickaby)

187): "This perfect progress towards conjunction with the supreme intelligence comes of
zealous study of the speculative sciences, whereby true intellectual notions are
acquired, and false opinions are excluded, such opinions lying beyond the line of this
progress, like monstrous births outside of the line of the operation of nature. To this
advance men help one another by helping one another in the speculative sciences.
When then all things now potentially intelligible come to be in us actually understood,
then the active intellect: will be perfectly conjoined with us as a form, and we shall
understand by it perfectly. Hence, since it belongs to the active intellect to understand
substances existing apart, we shall then understand those separately subsistent beings
as we now understand the notions of speculative science; and this will be man's final
happiness, in which man shall be as a god" (Chap. XLIII). If any one used such
language in our time, we should understand him to mean by continuatio, or union with
the supreme intelligence, as regards the individual, his instruction up to the level of the
science of his age; and as regards the age itself, the maintenance of the level of
science reached by the previous generation, and the further raising of that level. But it is
not safe to make out an ancient author to have meant exactly what his words would
mean, if spoken now. St Thomas gives a reference to the commentary of Averroes on
Aristotle, De anima, III, a reference which I have duly followed up. I find that Averroes
quotes Alexander and Avempace, disagreeing with them both. St Thomas, I believe, is
indebted to Averroes for his knowledge of Alexander and Avempace. Now nowhere in
Averroes, nor in either of the two authors whom he quotes, do I find any reference
whatever to separate substances personified as thinking intelligences, or angels, -- nor,
for that matter, in Aristotle either. The discussion had its origin in an unfulfilled promise
of Aristotle (De Anima III, vii, 10) to enquire, ara endechetai ton kechorismenon ti noein
onta auton me kechorismenon megethous; (is it possible for the mind, without being
itself separate from extended body, to understand any of the things that are so
separated?) To interpret ta kechorismena to mean `pure spirits' seems going a long way
beyond Aristotle, who probably meant no more than `products of high abstraction': nor
did Averroes, commenting on the third book of the De anima, or Alexander, or
Avempace, as quoted in that commentary, mean anything more. The transformation of
these high abstractions (kechorismena) into thinking beings, pure spirits, or angels,
was, I conjecture, the work of the Neo-Averroists, whom St Thomas encountered at the
University of Paris. It is with these Averroists, not with Averroes him self, that St
Thomas mainly contends in these chapters. The argument is intricate, the theory which
it impugns obsolete, nor is it worth while further to detain the modern reader with the
discussion. No man now living expects to `pick the brains' of angels, and so find
happiness in this life by sharing an angel's natural knowledge of God. Nor did Averroes,
so far as his comments on the De anima show, dream of anything so absurd. Lest any
one should think the expression `to pick the brains of angels' a travesty, I quote the
Latin of St Thomas: Si igitur per cognitionem intellectivam, quae est ex phantasmatibus,
possit pervenire aliquis nostrum ad intelligendas substantias separatas, possibile erit
quod aliquis in hac vita intelligat ipsas substantias separatas, et per consequens
videndo ipsas substantias separatas participabis modum illius cognitionis quo
substantia separata intelligens se intelligit Deum (Chap. XLI). This is the translation: "If
then by intellectual knowledge, got out of impressions on the phantasy, any one of us
could arrive to understand subsistent beings existing apart [i.e., pure spirits], it would be