THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.5.

motion, nor is it contained therein as in a place, as is evident from
what was stated above (Article 1, ad 2), it must be said then that it
begins to be there by conversion of the substance of bread into
itself.
Yet this change is not like natural changes, but is entirely
supernatural, and effected by God's power alone. Hence Ambrose
says (De Sacram. iv): "See how Christ's word changes nature's laws,
as He wills: a man is not wont to be born save of man and woman:
see therefore that against the established law and order a man is
born of a Virgin": and (De Myster. iv): "It is clear that a Virgin begot
beyond the order of nature: and what we make is the body from the
Virgin. Why, then, do you look for nature's order in Christ's body,
since the Lord Jesus was Himself brought forth of a Virgin beyond
nature?" Chrysostom likewise (Hom. xlvii), commenting on Jn. 6:64:
"The words which I have spoken to you," namely, of this sacrament,
"are spirit and life," says: i.e. "spiritual, having nothing carnal, nor
natural consequence; but they are rent from all such necessity which
exists upon earth, and from the laws here established."
For it is evident that every agent acts according as it is in act. But
every created agent is limited in its act, as being of a determinate
genus and species: and consequently the action of every created
agent bears upon some determinate act. Now the determination of
every thing in actual existence comes from its form. Consequently,
no natural or created agent can act except by changing the form in
something; and on this account every change made according to
nature's laws is a formal change. But God is infinite act, as stated in
the FP, Question 7, Article 1; Question 26, Article 2; hence His action
extends to the whole nature of being. Therefore He can work not only
formal conversion, so that diverse forms succeed each other in the
same subject; but also the change of all being, so that, to wit, the
whole substance of one thing be changed into the whole substance
of another. And this is done by Divine power in this sacrament; for
the whole substance of the bread is changed into the whole
substance of Christ's body, and the whole substance of the wine into
the whole substance of Christ's blood. Hence this is not a formal, but
a substantial conversion; nor is it a kind of natural movement: but,
with a name of its own, it can be called "transubstantiation."
Reply to Objection 1: This objection holds good in respect of formal
change, because it belongs to a form to be in matter or in a subject;
but it does not hold good in respect of the change of the entire

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.5.

substance. Hence, since this substantial change implies a certain
order of substances, one of which is changed into the other, it is in
both substances as in a subject, just as order and number.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument also is true of formal conversion
or change, because, as stated above (ad 1), a form must be in some
matter or subject. But this is not so in a change of the entire
substance; for in this case no subject is possible.
Reply to Objection 3: Form cannot be changed into form, nor matter
into matter by the power of any finite agent. Such a change,
however, can be made by the power of an infinite agent, which has
control over all being, because the nature of being is common to
both forms and to both matters; and whatever there is of being in the
one, the author of being can change into whatever there is of being
in the other, withdrawing that whereby it was distinguished from the
other.