3. Having thus stated the general [princi ple], he afterwards tests it by
individuals. For a man of note is equivalent to the world. This at all events he
afterwards hinted. For when he had matched it against one or two hundred
persons, and then saw the smallness of the number, he afterwards says, "by
whom the world was outweighed in worth." [Hebrews 11:38]
And observe whom he puts first, him who was ill-treated, and that by a
brother. It was their own affliction, "For you also" (he says) "have suffered like
things of your own countrymen." [1 Thessalonians 2:14] And by a brother who
had been nothing wronged, but who envied him on God's account; showing that
they also are looked on with an evil eye and envied. He honored God, and died
because he honored Him: and has not yet attained to a resurrection. But his
readiness is manifest, and his part has been done, but God's part has not yet been
carried out towards him.
And by a "more excellent sacrifice" in this place, he means that which is
more honorable, more splendid, more necessary.
And we cannot say (he says) that it was not accepted. He did accept it, and
said unto Cain, ["Have you] not [sinned], if you rightly offer, but dost not rightly
divide?" [Genesis 4:7, Septuagint] So then Abel both rightly offered, and rightly
divided. Nevertheless for this, what recompense did he receive? He was slain by
his brother's hand: and that sentence which his father endured on account of sin,
this he first received who was upright. And he suffered so much the more
grievously because it was from a brother, and he was the first [to suffer].
And he did these things rightly looking to no man. For to whom could he
look, when he so honored God? To his father and his mother? But they had
outraged Him in return for His benefits. To his brother then? But he also had
dishonored [God]. So that by himself he sought out what was good.
And he that is worthy of so great honor, what does he suffer? He is put to
death. And how too was he otherwise "testified of that he was righteous"? It is
said, that fire came down and consumed the sacrifices. For instead of ["And the
Lord] had respect to Abel and to his sacrifices" [Genesis 4:4], the Syriac said,

"And He set them on fire." He therefore who both by word and deed bore witness
to the righteous man and sees him slain for His sake, did not avenge him, but left
him to suffer.
But your case is not such: for how could it be? You who have both prophets
and examples, and encouragements innumerable, and signs and miracles
accomplished? Hence that was faith indeed. For what miracles did he see, that he
might believe he should have any recompense of good things? Did he not choose
virtue from Faith alone?
What is, "and by it he being dead yet speaks"? That he might not cast them
into great despondency, he shows that he has in part obtained a recompense.
How? 'The influence coming from him is great, he means, "and he yet speaks";
that is, [Cain] slew him, but he did not with him slay his glory and memory. He
is not dead; therefore neither shall you die. For by how much the more grievous
a man's sufferings are, so much the greater is his glory.'
How does he "yet speak"? This is a sign both of his being alive, and of his
being by all celebrated, admired, counted blessed. For he who encourages others
to be righteous, speaks. For no speech avails so much, as that man's suffering. As
then heaven by its mere appearance speaks, so also does he by being had in
remembrance. Not if he had made proclamation of himself, not if he had ten
thousand tongues, and were alive, would he have been so admired as now. That
is, these things do not take place with impunity, nor lightly, neither do they pass
away.