rise in glory," which refers to clarity, as evidenced by the previous
context where the glory of the rising bodies is compared to the
clarity of the stars. Therefore the bodies of the saints will be
lightsome.
I answer that, It is necessary to assert that after the resurrection the
bodies of the saints will be lightsome, on account of the authority of
Scripture which makes this promise. But the cause of this clarity is
ascribed by some to the fifth or heavenly essence, which will then
predominate in the human body. Since, however, this is absurd, as
we have often remarked (Question 84, Article 1), it is better to say
that this clarity will result from the overflow of the soul's glory into
the body. For whatever is received into anything is received not
according to the mode of the source whence it flows, but according
to the mode of the recipient. Wherefore clarity which in the soul is
spiritual is received into the body as corporeal. And consequently
according to the greater clarity of the soul by reason of its greater
merit, so too will the body differ in clarity, as the Apostle affirms (1
Cor. 15:41). Thus in the glorified body the glory of the soul will be
known, even as through a crystal is known the color of a body
contained in a crystal vessel, as Gregory says on Job 28:17, "Gold or
crystal cannot equal it."
Reply to Objection 1: Avicenna is speaking of a body that has clarity
through the nature of its component parts. It is not thus but rather by
merit of virtue that the glorified body will have clarity.
Reply to Objection 2: Gregory compares the glorified body to gold
on account of clarity, and to crystal on account of its transparency.
Wherefore seemingly we should say that they will be both
transparent and lightsome; for that a lightsome body be not
transparent is owing to the fact that the clarity of that body results
from the density of the lightsome parts, and density is opposed to
transparency. Then, however, clarity will result from another cause,
as stated above: and the density of the glorified body will not deprive
it of transparency, as neither does the density of a crystal deprive
crystal.
Some, on the other hand, say that they are compared to crystal, not
because they are transparent, but on account of this likeness, for as
much as that which is enclosed in crystal is visible, so the glory of
the soul enclosed in the glorified body will not be hidden. But the
first explanation is better, because it safeguards better the dignity of

the glorified body, and is more consistent with the words of Gregory.
Reply to Objection 3: The glory of the body will not destroy nature
but will perfect it. Wherefore the body will retain the color due to it by
reason of the nature of its component parts, but in addition to this it
will have clarity resulting from the soul's glory. Thus we see bodies
which have color by their nature aglow with the resplendence of the
sun, or from some other cause extrinsic or intrinsic.
Reply to Objection 4: Even as the clarity of glory will overflow from
the soul into the body according to the mode of the body, and is
there otherwise than in the soul, so again it will overflow into each
part of the soul according to the mode of that part. Hence it is not
unreasonable that the different parts should have clarity in different
ways, according as they are differently disposed thereto by their
nature. Nor is there any comparison with the other gifts of the body,
for the various parts of the body are not differently disposed in their
regard.