this life he can behold the best intelligible object; and that is God.
Above this happiness there is still another, which we look forward to
in the future, whereby "we shall see God as He is." This is beyond
the nature of every created intellect, as was shown above (Question
12, Article 4).
So, then, it remains to be said, that, as regards this first beatitude,
which the angel could procure by his natural power, he was created
already blessed. Because the angel does not acquire such beatitude
by any progressive action, as man does, but, as was observed above
(Question 58, Articles 3,4), is straightway in possession thereof,
owing to his natural dignity. But the angels did not have from the
beginning of their creation that ultimate beatitude which is beyond
the power of nature; because such beatitude is no part of their
nature, but its end; and consequently they ought not to have it
immediately from the beginning.
Reply to Objection 1: Beatitude is there taken for that natural
perfection which the angel had in the state of innocence.
Reply to Objection 2: The corporeal creature instantly in the
beginning of its creation could not have the perfection to which it is
brought by its operation; consequently, according to Augustine
(Gen. ad. lit. v, 4,23; viii, 3), the growing of plants from the earth did
not take place at once among the first works, in which only the
germinating power of the plants was bestowed upon the earth. In the
same way, the angelic creature in the beginning of its existence had
the perfection of its nature; but it did not have the perfection to
which it had to come by its operation.
Reply to Objection 3: The angel has a twofold knowledge of the
Word; the one which is natural, and the other according to glory. He
has a natural knowledge whereby he knows the Word through a
similitude thereof shining in his nature; and he has a knowledge of
glory whereby he knows the Word through His essence. By both
kinds of knowledge the angel knows things in the Word; imperfectly
by his natural knowledge, and perfectly by his knowledge of glory.
Therefore the first knowledge of things in the Word was present to
the angel from the outset of his creation; while the second was not,
but only when the angels became blessed by turning to the good.
And this is properly termed their morning knowledge.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether an angel needs grace in order to turn to

God?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angel had no need of grace in
order to turn to God. For, we have no need of grace for what we can
accomplish naturally. But the angel naturally turns to God: because
he loves God naturally, as is clear from what has been said
(Question 60, Article 5). Therefore an angel did not need grace in
order to turn to God.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly we need help only for difficult tasks.
Now it was not a difficult task for the angel to turn to God; because
there was no obstacle in him to such turning. Therefore the angel
had no need of grace in order to turn to God.
Objection 3: Further, to turn oneself to God is to dispose oneself for
grace; hence it is said (Zach. 1:3): "Turn ye to Me, and I will turn to
you." But we do not stand in need of grace in order to prepare
ourselves for grace: for thus we should go on to infinity. Therefore
the angel did not need grace to turn to God.
On the contrary, It was by turning to God that the angel reached to
beatitude. If, then, he had needed no grace in order to turn to God, it
would follow that he did not require grace in order to possess
everlasting life. But this is contrary to the saying of the Apostle (Rm.
6:23): "The grace of God is life everlasting."
I answer that, The angels stood in need of grace in order to turn to
God, as the object of beatitude. For, as was observed above
(Question 60, Article 2) the natural movement of the will is the
principle of all things that we will. But the will's natural inclination is
directed towards what is in keeping with its nature. Therefore, if
there is anything which is above nature, the will cannot be inclined
towards it, unless helped by some other supernatural principle. Thus
it is clear that fire has a natural tendency to give forth heat, and to
generate fire; whereas to generate flesh is beyond the natural power
of fire; consequently, fire has no tendency thereto, except in so far
as it is moved instrumentally by the nutritive soul.
Now it was shown above (Question 12, Articles 4,5), when we were
treating of God's knowledge, that to see God in His essence, wherein