which regulates a living creature becomes weakened, being no longer able to
support all the limbs, it deprives them of their natural power of direction, and
then having become unstrung they tremble and turn giddy.
6. Paul also demonstrated this: for when he was reproaching the Corinthians
with a certain sin he said, "For this cause many are weak and sickly among you."
Therefore also Christ first removes the cause of the evil, and having said "Son!
Be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you," He uplifts the spirit and rouses the
downcast soul: for the speech became an efficient cause and having entered into
the conscience it laid hold of the soul itself and cast out of it all distress. For
nothing creates pleasure and affords confidence so much as freedom from selfreproach. For where remission of sins is there is sonship. Even so at least we are
not able to call God Father until we have washed away our sins in the pool of the
sacred water. It is when we have come up from thence, having put off that evil
load, that we say "Our Father which art in Heaven." But in the case of the man
who was infirm thirty and eight years why did He not act thus, but cured his
body first of all? Because by that long period of time his sins had been
exhausted: for the magnitude of a trial can lighten the load of sins; as indeed we
read was the case with Lazarus, that he received his evil things in full, and
thereupon was comforted: and again in another place we read, "Comfort ye my
people, say ye to the heart of Jerusalem, that she has received of the Lord's hand
double for her sins." [Isaiah 40:1-2] And again the prophet says "O Lord give us
peace, for you have requited all things to us," [Isaiah 26:12] indicating that
penalties and punishments work forgiveness of sins; and this we might prove
from many passages. It seems to me then that the reason why He said nothing to
that man about remission of sins, but only secured him against the future, was
because the penalty for his sins had been already worked out by the long
duration of his sickness: or if this was not the reason, it was because he had not
yet attained any high degree of belief concerning Christ that the Lord first
addressed Himself to the lesser need, and one which was manifest and obvious,
the health of the body; but in the case of the other man He did not act thus, but

inasmuch as this man had more faith, and a loftier soul, He spoke to him first of
all concerning the more dangerous disease: with the additional object of
exhibiting his equality of rank with the Father. For just as in the former case He
healed on the Sabbath day because He wished to lead men away from the Jewish
mode of observing it, and to take occasion from their reproaches to prove
Himself equal with the Father: even so in this instance also, knowing beforehand
what they were going to say, He uttered these words that He might use them as a
starting-point and a pretext for proving His equality of rank with the Father. For
it is one thing when no one brings an accusation or charge to enter spontaneously
upon a discourse about these things, and quite another when other persons give
occasion for it, to set about the same work in the order and shape of a defence.
For the nature of the former demonstration was a stumbling block to the hearers:
but the other was less offensive, and more acceptable, and everywhere we see
Him doing this, and manifesting His equality not so much by words as by deeds.
This at any rate is what the Evangelist implied when he said that the Jews
persecuted Jesus not only because He broke the Sabbath but also because He
said that God was His Father, making Himself equal with God, [John 5:16]
which is a far greater thing, for He effected this by the demonstration of His
deeds. How then do the envious and wicked act, and those who seek to find a
handle in every direction? "Why does this man blaspheme?" they say for "no
man can forgive sins save God alone." [Mark 2:7] As they persecuted Him there
because He broke the Sabbath, and took occasion from their reproaches to
declare His equality with the Father in the form of a defence, saying "my Father
works hitherto and I work," [John 5:17] so here also starting from the
accusations which they make He proves from these His exact likeness to the
Father. For what was it they said? "No man can forgive sins save God alone."
Inasmuch then as they themselves laid down this definition, they themselves
introduced the rule, they themselves declared the law, He proceeds to entangle
them by means of their own words. "You have confessed," He says, "that
forgiveness of sins is an attribute of God alone: my equality therefore is