due quantity; neither will death be any more, nor any waste affect the
parts of man. Therefore the acts of the generative and nutritive
powers would be void of purpose.
I answer that, The resurrection will not be necessary to man on
account of his primary perfection, which consists in the integrity of
those things that belong to his nature, since man can attain to this in
his present state of life by the action of natural causes; but the
necessity of the resurrection regards the attainment of his ultimate
perfection, which consists in his reaching his ultimate end.
Consequently those natural operations which are directed to cause
or preserve the primary perfection of human nature will not be in the
resurrection: such are the actions of the animal life in man, the
action of the elements on one another, and the movement of the
heavens; wherefore all these will cease at the resurrection. And
since to eat, drink, sleep, beget, pertain to the animal life, being
directed to the primary perfection of nature, it follows that they will
not be in the resurrection.
Reply to Objection 1: When Christ partook of that meal, His eating
was an act, not of necessity as though human nature needed food
after the resurrection, but of power, so as to prove that He had
resumed the true human nature which He had in that state wherein
He ate and drank with His disciples. There will be no need of such
proof at the general resurrection, since it will be evident to all. Hence
Christ is said to have ate by dispensation in the sense in which
lawyers say that a "dispensation is a relaxation of the general law":
because Christ made an exception to that which is common to those
who rise again (namely not to partake of food) for the aforesaid
motive. Hence the argument does not prove.
Reply to Objection 2: The distinction of sexes and the difference of
members will be for the restoration of the perfection of human nature
both in the species and in the individual. Hence it does not follow
that they are without purpose, although they lack their animal
operations.
Reply to Objection 3: The aforesaid operations do not belong to man
as man, as also the Philosopher states (Ethic. x, 7), wherefore the
happiness of the human body does not consist therein. But the
human body will be glorified by an overflow from the reason
whereby man is man, inasmuch as the body will be subject to
reason.

Reply to Objection 4: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 12, x, 5), the
pleasures of the body are medicinal, because they are applied to
man for the removal of weariness; or again, they are unhealthy, in so
far as man indulges in those pleasures inordinately, as though they
were real pleasures: just as a man whose taste is vitiated delights in
things which are not delightful to the healthy. Consequently it does
not follow that such pleasures as these belong to the perfection of
beatitude, as the Jews and Turks maintain, and certain heretics
known as the Chiliasts asserted; who, moreover, according to the
Philosopher's teaching, would seem to have an unhealthy appetite,
since according to him none but spiritual pleasures are pleasures
simply, and to be sought for their own sake: wherefore these alone
are requisite for beatitude.