the earth even now, even more desolate than that wilderness. Why was that
desert so terrible? Was it not because it had scorpions in it, and adders?
[Deuteronomy 8:15] "A land," it is said, "which none passed through." [Jeremiah
2:6]. Yet is not that wilderness, no, it is not so barren of fruits, as is this human
nature. At this instant, how many scorpions, how many asps are in this
wilderness, how many serpents, how many "offsprings of vipers" [Matthew 3:7]
are these through whom we at this instant pass! Yet let us not be afraid; for the
leader of this our Exodus is not Moses, but Jesus.
How then is it that we shall not suffer the same things? Let us not commit
the same acts, and then shall we not suffer the same punishment. They
murmured, they were ungrateful; let us therefore not cherish these passions.
How was it that they fell all of them? "They despised the pleasant land." [Psalm
106:24] "How 'despised' it? Surely they prized it highly." By becoming indolent
and cowardly, and not choosing to undergo any labors to obtain it. Let not us
then "despise" Heaven! This is what is meant by "despising." Again, among us
also has fruit been brought, fruit from Heaven, not the cluster of grapes borne
upon the staff [Numbers 13:23], but the "earnest of the Spirit" [2 Corinthians
1:22], "the citizenship which is in Heaven" [Philippians 3:20], which Paul and
the whole company of the Apostles, those marvelous husbandmen, have taught
us. It is not Caleb the son of Jephunneh, nor Jesus the son of Nun, that has
brought these fruits; but Jesus the Son of "the Father of mercies" [2 Corinthians
1:3], the Son of the Very God, has brought every virtue, has brought down from
Heaven all the fruits that are from thence, the songs of heaven has He brought.
For the words which the Cherubim above say, these has He charged us to say
also, "Holy, Holy, Holy." He has brought to us the virtue of the Angels. "The
Angels marry not, neither are given in marriage" [Matthew 22:30]; this fair
plant has He planted here also. They love not money, nor anything like it; and
this too has He sown among us. They never die; and this has He freely given us
also, for death is no longer death, but sleep. For hearken to what He says, "Our
friend Lazarus is fallen asleep." [John 11:11]

Do you see then the fruits of "Jerusalem that is above"? [Galatians 4:26]
And what is indeed more stupendous than all is this, that our warfare is not
decided, but all these things are given us before the attainment of the promise!
For they indeed toiled even after they had entered into the land of promise—
rather, they toiled not, for had they chosen to obey God, they might have taken
all the cities, without either arms or array. Jericho, we know, they overturned,
more after the fashion of dancers than of warriors. We however have no warfare
after we have entered into the land of promise, that is, into Heaven, but only so
long as we are in the wilderness, that is, in the present life. "For he that is
entered into his rest has himself also rested from his works as God did from His."
[Hebrews 4:10] "Let us not then be weary in well-doing, for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not." [Galatians 6:9] Do you see how that just as He led
them, so also He leads us? In their case, touching the manna and the wilderness,
it is said, "He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little
had no lack." [Exodus 16:18] And we have this charge given us, "not to lay up
treasure upon the earth." [Matthew 6:19] But if we do lay up treasure, it is no
longer the earthly worm that corrupts it, as was the case with the manna, but that
which dwells eternally with fire. Let us then "subdue all things," that we furnish
not food to this worm. For "he," it is said, "who gathered much had nothing
over." For this too happens with ourselves also every day. We all of us have but
the same capacity of hunger to satisfy. And that which is more than this, is but an
addition of cares. For what He intended in after-times to deliver, saying,
"Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof" [Matthew 6:34], this had He thus
been teaching even from the very beginning, and not even thus did they receive
it. But as to us, let us not be insatiable, let us not be discontented, let us not be
seeking out for splendid houses; for we are on our pilgrimage, not at home; so
that if there be any that knows that the present life is a sort of journey, and
expedition, and, as one might say, it is what they call an entrenched camp, he
will not be seeking for splendid buildings. For who, tell me, be he ever so rich,
would choose to build a splendid house in an encampment? No one; he would be