Reply to Objection 4: The universal, as understood with the intention
of universality, is, indeed, in a way, a principle of knowledge, in so
far as the intention of universality results from the mode of
understanding by way of abstraction. But what is a principle of
knowledge is not of necessity a principle of existence, as Plato
thought: since at times we know a cause through its effect, and
substance through accidents. Wherefore the universal thus
considered, according to the opinion of Aristotle, is neither a
principle of existence, nor a substance, as he makes clear (Metaph.
vii, Did. vi, 13). But if we consider the generic or specific nature itself
as existing in the singular, thus in a way it is in the nature of a formal
principle in regard to the singulars: for the singular is the result of
matter, while the idea of species is from the form. But the generic
nature is compared to the specific nature rather after the fashion of a
material principle, because the generic nature is taken from that
which is material in a thing, while the idea of species is taken from
that which is formal: thus the notion of animal is taken from the
sensitive part, whereas the notion of man is taken from the
intellectual part. Thus it is that the ultimate intention of nature is to
the species and not to the individual, or the genus: because the form
is the end of generation, while matter is for the sake of the form.
Neither is it necessary that, as regards us, knowledge of any cause
or principle should be secondary: since at times through sensible
causes we become acquainted with unknown effects, and sometimes
conversely.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether we can understand many things at the

same time?
Objection 1: It would seem that we can understand many things at
the same time. For intellect is above time, whereas the succession of
before and after belongs to time. Therefore the intellect does not
understand different things in succession, but at the same time.
Objection 2: Further, there is nothing to prevent different forms not
opposed to each other from actually being in the same subject, as,
for instance, color and smell are in the apple. But intelligible species
are not opposed to each other. Therefore there is nothing to prevent
the same intellect being in act as regards different intelligible
species, and thus it can understand many things at the same time.
Objection 3: Further, the intellect understands a whole at the same
time, such as a man or a house. But a whole contains many parts.
Therefore the intellect understands many things at the same time.
Objection 4: Further, we cannot know the difference between two
things unless we know both at the same time (De Anima iii, 2), and
the same is to be said of any other comparison. But our intellect
knows the difference and comparison between one thing and
another. Therefore it knows many things at the same time.
On the contrary, It is said (Topic. ii, 10) that "understanding is of one
thing only, knowledge is of many."
I answer that, The intellect can, indeed, understand many things as
one, but not as many: that is to say by "one" but not by "many"
intelligible species. For the mode of every action follows the form
which is the principle of that action. Therefore whatever things the
intellect can understand under one species, it can understand at the
same time: hence it is that God sees all things at the same time,
because He sees all in one, that is, in His Essence. But whatever
things the intellect understands under different species, it does not
understand at the same time. The reason of this is that it is
impossible for one and the same subject to be perfected at the same
time by many forms of one genus and diverse species, just as it is
impossible for one and the same body at the same time to have
different colors or different shapes. Now all intelligible species