THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.5.

what he does not wish, just as it is the free man's condition to apply
himself to what he wills.
Since, then, Christ's Passion was a sufficient and a superabundant
atonement for the sin and the debt of the human race, it was as a
price at the cost of which we were freed from both obligations. For
the atonement by which one satisfies for self or another is called the
price, by which he ransoms himself or someone else from sin and its
penalty, according to Dan. 4:24: "Redeem thou thy sins with alms."
Now Christ made satisfaction, not by giving money or anything of
the sort, but by bestowing what was of greatest price---Himself---for
us. And therefore Christ's Passion is called our redemption.
Reply to Objection 1: Man is said to belong to God in two ways. First
of all, in so far as he comes under God's power: in which way he
never ceased to belong to God; according to Dan. 4:22: "The Most
High ruleth over the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever
he will." Secondly, by being united to Him in charity, according to
Rm. 8:9: "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His."
In the first way, then, man never ceased to belong to God, but in the
second way he did cease because of sin. And therefore in so far as
he was delivered from sin by the satisfaction of Christ's Passion, he
is said to be redeemed by the Passion of Christ.
Reply to Objection 2: Man by sinning became the bondsman both of
God and of the devil. Through guilt he had offended God, and put
himself under the devil by consenting to him; consequently he did
not become God's servant on account of his guilt, but rather, by
withdrawing from God's service, he, by God's just permission, fell
under the devil's servitude on account of the offense perpetrated.
But as to the penalty, man was chiefly bound to God as his
sovereign judge, and to the devil as his torturer, according to Mt.
5:25: "Lest perhaps the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the
judge deliver thee to the officer"---that is, "to the relentless avenging
angel," as Chrysostom says (Hom. xi). Consequently, although, after
deceiving man, the devil, so far as in him lay, held him unjustly in
bondage as to both sin and penalty, still it was just that man should
suffer it. God so permitting it as to the sin and ordaining it as to the
penalty. And therefore justice required man's redemption with regard
to God, but not with regard to the devil.
Reply to Objection 3: Because, with regard to God, redemption was
necessary for man's deliverance, but not with regard to the devil, the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.48, C.5.

price had to be paid not to the devil, but to God. And therefore Christ
is said to have paid the price of our redemption---His own precious
blood---not to the devil, but to God.