THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.5.

Then follows the reception of the sacrament, the priest receiving
first, and afterwards giving it to others, because, as Dionysius says
(Eccl. Hier. iii), he who gives Divine things to others, ought first to
partake thereof himself.
Finally, the whole celebration of mass ends with the thanksgiving,
the people rejoicing for having received the mystery (and this is the
meaning of the singing after the Communion); and the priest
returning thanks by prayer, as Christ, at the close of the supper with
His disciples, "said a hymn" (Mt. 26:30).
Reply to Objection 1: The consecration is accomplished by Christ's
words only; but the other words must be added to dispose the
people for receiving it, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: As is stated in the last chapter of John (verse
25), our Lord said and did many things which are not written down
by the Evangelists; and among them is the uplifting of His eyes to
heaven at the supper; nevertheless the Roman Church had it by
tradition from the apostles. For it seems reasonable that He Who
lifted up His eyes to the Father in raising Lazarus to life, as related in
Jn. 11:41, and in the prayer which He made for the disciples (Jn.
17:1), had more reason to do so in instituting this sacrament, as
being of greater import.
The use of the word "manducate" instead of "comedite" makes no
difference in the meaning, nor does the expression signify,
especially since those words are no part of the form, as stated above
(Question 78, Article 1, ad 2,4).
The additional word "all" is understood in the Gospels, although not
expressed, because He had said (Jn. 6:54): "Except you eat the flesh
of the Son of Man . . . you shall not have life in you."
Reply to Objection 3: The Eucharist is the sacrament of the unity of
the whole Church: and therefore in this sacrament, more than in the
others, mention ought to be made of all that belongs to the salvation
of the entire Church.
Reply to Objection 4: There is a twofold instruction in the Faith: the
first is for those receiving it for the first time, that is to say, for
catechumens, and such instruction is given in connection with

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.5.

Baptism. The other is the instruction of the faithful who take part in
this sacrament; and such instruction is given in connection with this
sacrament. Nevertheless catechumens and unbelievers are not
excluded therefrom. Hence in De Consecr., dist. 1, it is laid down:
"Let the bishop hinder no one from entering the church, and hearing
the word of God, be they Gentiles, heretics, or Jews, until the mass
of the Catechumens begins," in which the instruction regarding the
Faith is contained.
Reply to Objection 5: Greater devotion is required in this sacrament
than in the others, for the reason that the entire Christ is contained
therein. Moreover, this sacrament requires a more general devotion, i.
e. on the part of the whole people, since for them it is offered; and
not merely on the part of the recipients, as in the other sacraments.
Hence Cyprian observes (De Orat. Domin. 31), "The priest, in saying
the Preface, disposes the souls of the brethren by saying, 'Lift up
your hearts,' and when the people answer---'We have lifted them up
to the Lord,' let them remember that they are to think of nothing else
but God."
Reply to Objection 6: As was said above (ad 3), those things are
mentioned in this sacrament which belong to the entire Church; and
consequently some things which refer to the people are sung by the
choir, and same of these words are all sung by the choir, as though
inspiring the entire people with them; and there are other words
which the priest begins and the people take up, the priest then acting
as in the person of God; to show that the things they denote have
come to the people through Divine revelation, such as faith and
heavenly glory; and therefore the priest intones the "Creed" and the
"Gloria in excelsis Deo." Other words are uttered by the ministers,
such as the doctrine of the Old and New Testament, as a sign that
this doctrine was announced to the peoples through ministers sent
by God. And there are other words which the priest alone recites,
namely, such as belong to his personal office, "that he may offer up
gifts and prayers for the people" (Heb. 5:1). Some of these, however,
he says aloud, namely, such as are common to priest and people
alike, such as the "common prayers"; other words, however, belong
to the priest alone, such as the oblation and the consecration;
consequently, the prayers that are said in connection with these
have to be said by the priest in secret. Nevertheless, in both he calls
the people to attention by saying: "The Lord be with you," and he
waits for them to assent by saying "Amen." And therefore before the
secret prayers he says aloud, "The Lord be with you," and he