also; that the flames of hell may likewise be scattered by the voice of Christ
saying, "You saw me an hungered, and fed me." [Matthew 25:35] For that voice
shall then be with us instead of a "moist wind whistling" through the midst of the
flame. Let us then go down with almsgiving, unto the furnace of poverty; let us
behold them that in self-restraint walk therein, and trample on the burning coals;
let us behold the marvel, strange and beyond thought, a man singing praise in a
furnace, a man giving thanks in fire, chained unto extreme poverty, yet offering
much praise to Christ. Since they, who bear poverty with thankfulness, really
become equal to those children. For no flame is so terrible as poverty, nor so apt
to set us on fire. But those children were not set on fire; rather, on their giving
thanks to the Lord, their bonds too were at once loosed. So likewise now, if
when you have fallen into poverty, you are thankful, both the bonds are
loosened, and the flame extinguished; or though it be not extinguished (what is
much more marvellous), it becomes a fountain instead of a flame: which then
likewise came to pass, and in the midst of a furnace they enjoyed a pure dew. For
the fire indeed it quenched not, but the burning of those cast in it altogether
hindered. This one may see in their case also who live by the rules of wisdom,
for they, even in poverty, feel more secure than the rich.
Let us not therefore sit down without the furnace, feeling no pity towards
the poor; lest the same befall us as then befell those executioners. For if you
should go down to them, and take your stand with the children, the fire will no
longer work you any harm; but if you should sit above and neglect them in the
flame of their poverty, the flame will burn you up. Go down therefore into the
fire, that you may not be burnt up by the fire; sit not down without the fire, lest
the flame catch hold of you. For if it should find you among the poor, it will
depart from you; but if alienated from them, it will run upon you quickly, and
catch you. Do not therefore stand off from them that are cast in, but when the
devil gives command to cast them that have not worshipped gold into the
furnace of poverty, be not thou of them that cast others in, but of them that are
cast in; that you may be of the number of the saved, and not of the burned. For

indeed it is a most effectual dew, to be held in no subjection by desire of wealth,
to be associate with poor persons. These are wealthier than all, who have
trampled under foot the desire of riches. Forasmuch as those children too, by
despising the king at that time, became more glorious than the king. And thou
therefore, if you despise the things of the world, shall become more honorable
than all the world; like those holy men, "of whom the world was not worthy."
[Hebrews 11:38]
In order then to become worthy of the things in Heaven, I bid you laugh to
scorn things present. For in this way you shall both be more glorious here, and
enjoy the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ; to whom be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.