body of our Lord. For even His enemies believe that that flesh died on the
cross of His passion, but they do not believe it to have risen again. Which
we believing most firmly, gaze upon it as from the solidity of a rock:
whence we wait with certain hope for the adoption, to wit, the
redemption of our body;19 because we hope for that in the members of
Christ, that is, in ourselves, which by a sound faith we acknowledge to be
perfect in Him as in our Head. Thence it is that He would not have His
back parts seen, unless as He passed by, that His resurrection may be
believed. For that which is Pascha in Hebrew, is translated Passover.
Whence John the Evangelist also says, "Before the feast of the Passover,
when Jesus knew that His hour was come, that He should pass out of this
world unto the Father."
30. But they who believe this, but believe it not in the Catholic Church,
but in some schism or in heresy, do not see the back parts of the Lord
from "the place that is by Him." For what does that mean which the Lord
says, "Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock?"
What earthly place is "by" the Lord, unless that is "by Him" which
touches Him spiritually? For what place is not "by" the Lord, who
"reacheth from one end to another mightily, and sweetly doth order all
things," and of whom it is said, "Heaven is His throne, and earth is His
footstool;" and who said, "Where is the house that ye build unto me, and
where is the place of my rest? For has not my hand made all those
things?" But manifestly the Catholic Church itself is understood to be
"the place by Him," wherein one stands upon a rock, where he healthfully
sees the "Pascha Domini," that is, the "Passing by" of the Lord, and His
back parts, that is, His body, who believes in His resurrection. "And thou
shalt stand," He says, "upon a rock while my glory passeth by." For in
reality, immediately after the majesty of the Lord had passed by in the
glorification of the Lord, in which He rose again and ascended to the
Father, we stood firm upon the rock. And Peter himself then stood firm,
so that he preached Him with confidence, whom, before he stood firm, he
had thrice from fear denied;4 although, indeed, already before placed in
predestination upon the watch-tower of the rock, but with the hand of the
Lord still held over him that he might not see. For he was to see His back
parts, and the Lord had not yet "passed by," namely, from death to life;
He had not yet been glorified by the resurrection.

31. For as to that, too, which follows in Exodus, "I will cover thee with
mine hand while I pass by, and I will take away my hand and thou shalt
see my back parts;" many Israelites, of whom Moses was then a figure,
believed in the Lord after His resurrection, as if His hand had been taken
off from their eyes, and they now saw His back parts. And hence the
evangelist also mentions that prophesy of Isaiah, "Make the heart of this
people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes." Lastly, in the
Psalm, that is not unreasonably understood to be said in their person,
"For day and night Thy hand was heavy upon me." "By day," perhaps,
when He performed manifest miracles, yet was not acknowledged by
them; but "by night," when He died in suffering, when they thought still
more certainly that, like any one among men, He was cut off and brought
to an end. But since, when He had already passed by, so that His back
parts were seen, upon the preaching to them by the Apostle Peter that it
behoved Christ to suffer and rise again, they were pricked in their hearts
with the grief of repentance,6 that that might come to pass among the
baptized which is said in the beginning of that Psalm, "Blessed are they
whose transgressions are forgiven, and whose sins are covered;"
therefore, after it had been said, "Thy hand is heavy upon me," the Lord,
as it were, passing by, so that now He removed His hand, and His back
parts were seen, there follows the voice of one who grieves and confesses
and receives remission of sins by faith in the resurrection of the Lord:
"My moisture," he says, "is turned into the drought of summer. I
acknowledged my sin unto Thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said,
I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and Thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin." For we ought not to be so wrapped up in the darkness
of the flesh, as to think the face indeed of God to be invisible, but His
back visible, since both appeared visibly in the form of a servant; but far
be it from us to think anything of the kind in the form of God; far be it
from us to think that the Word of God and the Wisdom of God has a face
on one side, and on the other a back, as a human body has, or is at all
changed either in place or time by any appearance or motion.
32. Wherefore, if in those words which were spoken in Exodus, and in all
those corporeal appearances, the Lord Jesus Christ was manifested; or if
in some cases Christ was manifested, as the consideration of this passage
persuades us, in others the Holy Spirit, as that which we have said above