THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.14.

union, according to which the mission of the Son took place, is prior
in the order of nature to habitual grace, according to which the
mission of the Holy Ghost takes place. Secondly, the reason of this
order may be taken from the relation of grace to its cause. For grace
is caused in man by the presence of the Godhead, as light in the air
by the presence of the sun. Hence it is written (Ezech. 43:2): "The
glory of the God of Israel came in by the way of the east . . . and the
earth shone with His majesty." But the presence of God in Christ is
by the union of human nature with the Divine Person. Hence the
habitual grace of Christ is understood to follow this union, as light
follows the sun. Thirdly, the reason of this union can be taken from
the end of grace, since it is ordained to acting rightly, and action
belongs to the suppositum and the individual. Hence action and, in
consequence, grace ordaining thereto, presuppose the hypostasis
which operates. Now the hypostasis did not exist in the human
nature before the union, as is clear from Question 4, Article 2.
Therefore the grace of union precedes, in thought, habitual grace.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine here means by grace the gratuitous
will of God, bestowing benefits gratis; and hence every man is said
to be made a Christian by the same grace whereby a Man became
Christ, since both take place by the gratuitous will of God without
merits.
Reply to Objection 2: As disposition in the order of generation
precedes the perfection to which it disposes, in such things as are
gradually perfected; so it naturally follows the perfection which one
has already obtained; as heat, which was a disposition to the form of
fire, is an effect flowing from the form of already existing fire. Now
the human nature in Christ is united to the Person of the Word from
the beginning without succession. Hence habitual grace is not
understood to have preceded the union, but to have followed it; as a
natural property. Hence, as Augustine says (Enchiridion xl): "Grace
is in a manner natural to the Man Christ."
Reply to Objection 3: The common precedes the proper, when both
are of the same genus; but when they are of divers genera, there is
nothing to prevent the proper being prior to the common. Now the
grace of union is not in the same genus as habitual grace; but is
above all genera even as the Divine Person Himself. Hence there is
nothing to prevent this proper from being before the common since
it does not result from something being added to the common, but is
rather the principle and source of that which is common.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.14.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.1.

## QUESTION 8 — OF THE GRACE OF CHRIST, AS HE IS THE HEAD OF