Father. But to affirm that what was mentally conceived and pre-created by the Father of all, just as
it has been actually formed, is the fruit of defect, and the production of ignorance, is to be guilty
of great blasphemy. For, according to them, the Father of all will thus be [regarded as] generating
in His breast, according to His own mental conception, the emanations of defect and the fruits of
ignorance, since the things which He had conceived in His mind have actually been produced.

### Chapter IV.—The absurdity of the supposed vacuum and defect of the heretics is demonstrated.

1. The cause, then, of such a dispensation on the part of God, is to be inquired after; but the
formation of the world is not to be ascribed to any other. And all things are to be spoken of as
having been so prepared by God beforehand, that they should be made as they have been made;
but shadow and vacuity are not to be conjured into existence. But whence, let me ask, came this
vacuity [of which they speak]? If it was indeed produced by Him who, according to them, is the
Father and Author of all things, then it is both equal in honour and related to the rest of the Æons,
perchance even more ancient than they are. Moreover, if it proceeded from the same source [as
they did], it must be similar in nature to Him who produced it, as well as to those along with whom
it was produced. There will therefore be an absolute necessity, both that the Bythus of whom they
speak, along with Sige, be similar in nature to a vacuum, that is, that He really is a vacuum; and
that the rest of the Æons, since they are the brothers of vacuity, should also be devoid of substance.
If, on the other hand, it has not been thus produced, it must have sprang from and been generated
by itself, and in that case it will be equal in point of age to that Bythus who is, according to them,
the Father of all; and thus vacuity will be of the same nature and of the same honour with Him who
is, according to them, the universal Father. For it must of necessity have been either produced by
some one, or generated by itself, and sprung from itself. But if, in truth, vacuity was produced, then
its producer Valentinus is also a vacuum, as are likewise his followers. If, again, it was not produced,
but was generated by itself, then that which is really a vacuum is similar to, and the brother of, and
of the same honour with, that Father who has been proclaimed by Valentinus; while it is more
ancient, and dating its existence from a period greatly anterior, and more exalted in honour than
the remaining Æons of Ptolemy himself, and Heracleon, and all the rest who hold the same
opinions.
2. But if, driven to despair in regard to these points, they confess that the Father of all contains
all things, and that there is nothing whatever outside of the Pleroma (for it is an absolute necessity
that, [if there be anything outside of it,] it should be bounded and circumscribed by something
greater than itself), and that they speak of what is without and what within in reference to knowledge