are unspeakable as regards us in our present condition), and that there shall they who have been
translated remain until the consummation [of all things], as a prelude to immortality.
2. If, however, any one imagine it impossible that men should survive for such a length of time,
and that Elias was not caught up in the flesh, but that his flesh was consumed in the fiery chariot,
let him consider that Jonah, when he had been cast into the deep, and swallowed down into the
whale's belly, was by the command of God again thrown out safe upon the land. And then, again,
when Ananias, Azarias, and Misa‘l were cast into the furnace of fire sevenfold heated, they sustained
no harm whatever, neither was the smell of fire perceived upon them. As, therefore, the hand of
God was present with them, working out marvellous things in their case—[things] impossible [to
be accomplished] by man's nature—what wonder was it, if also in the case of those who were
translated it performed something wonderful, working in obedience to the will of God, even the
Father? Now this is the Son of God, as the Scripture represents Nebuchadnezzar the king as having
said, "Did not we cast three men bound into the furnace? and, lo, I do see four walking in the midst
of the fire, and the fourth is like the Son of God." Neither the nature of any created thing, therefore,
nor the weakness of the flesh, can prevail against the will of God. For God is not subject to created
things, but created things to God; and all things yield obedience to His will. Wherefore also the
Lord declares, "The things which are impossible with men, are possible with God." As, therefore,
it might seem to the men of the present day, who are ignorant of God's appointment, to be a thing
incredible and impossible that any man could live for such a number of years, yet those who were
before us did live [to such an age], and those who were translated do live as an earnest of the future
length of days; and [as it might also appear impossible] that from the whale's belly and from the
fiery furnace men issued forth unhurt, yet they nevertheless did so, led forth as it were by the hand
of God, for the purpose of declaring His power: so also now, although some, not knowing the power
and promise of God, may oppose their own salvation, deeming it impossible for God, who raises
up the dead; to have power to confer upon them eternal duration, yet the scepticism of men of this
stamp shall not render the faithfulness of God of none effect.

### Chapter VI.—God will bestow salvation upon the whole nature of man, consisting of body
and soul in close union, since the Word took it upon Him, and adorned with the gifts of the
Holy Spirit, of whom our bodies are, and are termed, the temples.
1. Now God shall be glorified in His handiwork, fitting it so as to be conformable to, and
modelled after, His own Son. For by the hands of the Father, that is, by the Son and the Holy Spirit,