THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.5.

prepared by John's baptism for the baptism of Christ.
Reply to Objection 1: The baptism of John was instituted not only
that Christ might be baptized, but also for other reasons, as stated
above (Article 1). And yet, even if it were instituted merely in order
that Christ might be baptized therewith, it was still necessary for
others to receive this baptism, in order to avoid the objection
mentioned above.
Reply to Objection 2: Others who approached to be baptized by John
could not, indeed, confer anything on his baptism: yet neither did
they receive anything therefrom, save only the sign of penance.
Reply to Objection 3: This was the baptism of "penance," for which
children were not suited; wherefore they were not baptized
therewith. But to bring the nations into the way of salvation was
reserved to Christ alone, who is the "expectation of the nations," as
we read Gn. 49:10. Indeed, Christ forbade the apostles to preach the
Gospel to the Gentiles before His Passion and Resurrection. Much
less fitting, therefore, was it for the Gentiles to be baptized by John.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether John's baptism should have ceased after

Christ was baptized?
Objection 1: It would seem that John's baptism should have ceased
after Christ was baptized. For it is written (Jn. 1:31): "That He may be
made manifest in Israel, therefore am I come baptizing in water." But
when Christ had been baptized, He was made sufficiently manifest,
both by the testimony of John and by the dove coming down upon
Him, and again by the voice of the Father bearing witness to Him.
Therefore it seems that John's baptism should not have endured
thereafter.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. iv): "Christ
was baptized, and John's baptism ceased to avail." Therefore it
seems that, after Christ's baptism, John should not have continued
to baptize.
Objection 3: Further, John's baptism prepared the way for Christ's.
But Christ's baptism began as soon as He had been baptized;
because "by the touch of His most pure flesh He endowed the waters
with a regenerating virtue," as Bede asserts (Mag. Sent. iv, 3).
Therefore it seems that John's baptism ceased when Christ had been
baptized.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 3:22,23): "Jesus . . . came into the
land of Judea . . . and baptized: and John also was baptizing." But
Christ did not baptize before being baptized. Therefore it seems that
John continued to baptize after Christ had been baptized.
I answer that, It was not fitting for the baptism of John to cease when
Christ had been baptized. First, because, as Chrysostom says (Hom.
xxix in Joan.), "if John had ceased to baptize" when Christ had been
baptized, "men would think that he was moved by jealousy or
anger." Secondly, if he had ceased to baptize when Christ baptized,
"he would have given His disciples a motive for yet greater envy."
Thirdly, because, by continuing to baptize, "he sent his hearers to
Christ" (Hom. xxix in Joan.). Fourthly, because, as Bede [Scot. Erig.
Comment. in Joan.] says, "there still remained a shadow of the Old
Law: nor should the forerunner withdraw until the truth be made
manifest."