John 13:26
"He it is, to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it."
Even the manner (of the rebuke) was calculated to put him to shame. He
respected not the table, though he shared the bread; be it so; but the receiving the
sop from His own hand, whom would not that have won over? Yet him it won
not.

John 13:27
"Then Satan entered into him."
Laughing at him for his shamelessness. As long as he belonged to the band
of disciples he dared not spring upon him, but attacked him from without; but
when Christ made him manifest and separated him, then he sprang upon him
without fear. It was not fitting to keep within one of such a character, and who so
long had remained incorrigible. Wherefore He henceforth cast him out, and then
that other seized him when cut off, and he leaving them went forth by night.
"Jesus says unto him, Friend, that you do, do quickly."

John 13:28
"Now no man at the table knew with what intent He spoke this unto him."
3. Wonderful insensibility! How could it be that he was neither softened nor
shamed; but rendered yet more shameless, "went out." The "do quickly," is not
the expression of one commanding, nor advising, but of one reproaching, and
showing him that He desired to correct him, but that since he was incorrigible,
He let him go. And this, the Evangelist says, "no man of those that sat at the
table knew." Some one may perhaps find here a considerable difficulty, if, when
the disciples had asked, "Who is it?" and He had answered, "He to whom I shall
give a sop when I have dipped it," they did not even so understand; unless indeed
He spoke it secretly, so that no man should hear. For John on this very account,
leaning by His breast, asked Him almost close to His ear, so that the traitor might
not be made manifest; and Christ answered in like manner, so that not even then
did He discover him. And though He spoke emphatically, "Friend, that you do,
do quickly," even so they understood not. But he spoke thus to show that the
things were true which had been said by Him to the Jews concerning His death.
For He had said to them, "I have power to lay down My life, and I have power to
take it again": and, "No man takes it from Me." [John 10:18] As long then as He
would retain it, no man was able (to take it); but when He resigned it, then the
action became easy. All this He implied when He said, "That you do, do
quickly." Yet not even then did He expose him, for perhaps the others might have
torn him in pieces, or Peter might have killed him. On this account "no man at
the table knew." Not even John? Not even he: for he could not have expected that
a disciple would arrive at such a pitch of wickedness. For since they were far
from such iniquity themselves, they could not suspect such things concerning
others. As before He had told them, "I speak not of you all" [John 13:18], yet did
not reveal the person; so here, they thought that it was said concerning some
other matter.