Reply to Objection 1: It is not under the same but under quite
different aspects that an angel or a man loves self with natural and
with elective love, as was observed above.
Reply to Objection 2: As to be one is better than to be united, so
there is more oneness in love which is directed to self than in love
which unites one to others. Dionysius used the terms "uniting" and
"binding" in order to show the derivation of love from self to things
outside self; as uniting is derived from unity.
Reply to Objection 3: As love is an action which remains within the
agent, so also is it a movement which abides within the lover, but
does not of necessity tend towards something else; yet it can be
reflected back upon the lover so that he loves himself; just as
knowledge is reflected back upon the knower, in such a way that he
knows himself.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether an angel loves another with natural love

as he loves himself?
Objection 1: It would seem that an angel does not love another with
natural love as he loves himself. For love follows knowledge. But an
angel does not know another as he knows himself: because he
knows himself by his essence, while he knows another by his
similitude, as was said above (Question 56, Articles 1,2). Therefore it
seems that one angel does not love another with natural love as he
loves himself.
Objection 2: Further, the cause is more powerful than the effect; and
the principle than what is derived from it. But love for another comes
of love for self, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 8). Therefore one
angel does not love another as himself, but loves himself more.
Objection 3: Further, natural love is of something as an end, and is
unremovable. But no angel is the end of another; and again, such
love can be severed from him, as is the case with the demons, who
have no love for the good angels. Therefore an angel does not love
another with natural love as he loves himself.
On the contrary, That seems to be a natural property which is found
in all, even in such as devoid of reason. But, "every beast loves its
like," as is said, Ecclus. 13:19. Therefore an angel naturally loves
another as he loves himself.
I answer that, As was observed (Article 3), both angel and man
naturally love self. Now what is one with a thing, is that thing itself:
consequently every thing loves what is one with itself. So, if this be
one with it by natural union, it loves it with natural love; but if it be
one with it by non-natural union, then it loves it with non-natural
love. Thus a man loves his fellow townsman with a social love, while
he loves a blood relation with natural affection, in so far as he is one
with him in the principle of natural generation.
Now it is evident that what is generically or specifically one with
another, is the one according to nature. And so everything loves
another which is one with it in species, with a natural affection, in so
far as it loves its own species. This is manifest even in things devoid
of knowledge: for fire has a natural inclination to communicate its