that of the Law. These same difficulties are again felt in the Jews' case with an
opposite view. That Israel did not find, and though he took pains he did not find,
and did not find even the less. Having then thrust his hearer into perplexity, he
proceeds to give a concise answer, and tells him the cause of all that is said.
When then is the cause?
Ver. 32. "Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of
the Law."
This is the clearest answer in the passage, which if he had said immediately
upon starting he would not have gained so easy a hearing. But since it is after
many perplexities, and preparations, and demonstrations that he sets it down, and
after using countless preparatory steps, he has at last made it more intelligible,
and also more easily admitted. For this he says is the cause of their destruction:
"Because it was not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law," that they
wished to be justified. And he does not say, "by works," but, "as it were by the
works of the Law," to show that they had not even this righteousness.
"For they stumbled at that stumbling-stone;"
Ver. 33. "As it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a stumbling-stone, and rock of
offense: and whosoever believes in Him shall not be ashamed."
You see again how it is from faith that the boldness comes, and the gift is
universal; since it is not of the Jews only that this is said, but also of the whole
human race. For every one, he would say, whether Jew, or Grecian, or Scythian,
or Thracian, or whatsoever else he may be, will, if he believes, enjoy the
privilege of great boldness. But the wonder in the Prophet is that he foretells not
only that they should believe, but also that they should not believe. For to
stumble is to disbelieve. As in the former passage he points out them that perish
and them that are saved, where he says, "If the number of the children of Israel
be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall be saved. And, If the Lord of Sabaoth
had not left us a seed, we should have been as Sodoma." And, "He has called not
of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles;" so here too he implies that some will
believe, and some will stumble. But stumbling comes of not taking heed, of

gaping after other things. Since then they did give heed to the Law, they
stumbled on the stone, "And a stone of stumbling and rock of offense" he calls it
from the character and end of those that believe not.
Is then the language used made plain to you? Or does it still want much in
clearness? I think indeed that, to those who have been attending, it is easy to get
a clear view of it. But if it has slipped anybody's memory, you can meet in
private, and learn what it was. And this is why I have continued longer upon this
explanatory part of the discourse, that I might not be compelled to break off the
continuity of the context, and so spoil the clearness of the statements. And for
this cause too I will bring my discourse to a conclusion here, without saying
anything to you on the more immediately practical points, as I generally do, lest
I should make a fresh indistinctness in your memories by saying so much. It is
time now to come to the proper conclusion, by shutting up the discourse with the
doxology to the God of all. Let us then both pause, me that am speaking and you
that are hearing, and offer up glory to Him. For His is the kingdom, and the
power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.