THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.2.

sort that He had sin, but that He made Him a sacrifice for sin: even
as it is written (Osee 4:8): "They shall eat the sins of My people"--they, i.e. the priests, who by the law ate the sacrifices offered for sin.
And in that way it is written (Is. 53:6) that "the Lord hath laid on Him
the iniquity of us all" (i.e. He gave Him up to be a victim for the sins
of all men); or "He made Him sin" (i.e. made Him to have "the
likeness of sinful flesh"), as is written (Rm. 8:3), and this on account
of the passible and mortal body He assumed.
Reply to Objection 5: A penitent can give a praiseworthy example,
not by having sinned, but by freely bearing the punishment of sin.
And hence Christ set the highest example to penitents, since He
willingly bore the punishment, not of His own sin, but of the sins of
others.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.15, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there was the "fomes" of sin in Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that in Christ there was the "fomes" of
sin. For the "fomes" of sin, and the passibility and mortality of the
body spring from the same principle, to wit, from the withdrawal of
original justice, whereby the inferior powers of the soul were subject
to the reason, and the body to the soul. Now passibility and mortality
of body were in Christ. Therefore there was also the "fomes" of sin.
Objection 2: Further, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 19), "it
was by consent of the Divine will that the flesh of Christ was allowed
to suffer and do what belonged to it." But it is proper to the flesh to
lust after its pleasures. Now since the "fomes" of sin is nothing more
than concupiscence, as the gloss says on Rm. 7:8, it seems that in
Christ there was the "fomes" of sin.
Objection 3: Further, it is by reason of the "fomes" of sin that "the
flesh lusteth against the spirit," as is written (Gal. 5:17). But the spirit
is shown to be so much the stronger and worthier to be crowned
according as the more completely it overcomes its enemy---to wit,
the concupiscence of the flesh, according to 2 Tim. 2:5, he "is not
crowned except he strive lawfully." Now Christ had a most valiant
and conquering spirit, and one most worthy of a crown, according to
Apoc. 6:2: "There was a crown given Him, and He went forth
conquering that He might conquer." Therefore it would especially
seem that the "fomes" of sin ought to have been in Christ.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 1:20): "That which is conceived in
her is of the Holy Ghost." Now the Holy Ghost drives out sin and the
inclination to sin, which is implied in the word "fomes." Therefore in
Christ there ought not to have been the "fomes" of sin.
I answer that, As was said above (Question 7, Articles 2,9), Christ
had grace and all the virtues most perfectly. Now moral virtues,
which are in the irrational part of the soul, make it subject to reason,
and so much the more as the virtue is more perfect; thus,
temperance controls the concupiscible appetite, fortitude and
meekness the irascible appetite, as was said in the FS, Question 56,
Article 4. But there belongs to the very nature of the "fomes" of sin
an inclination of the sensual appetite to what is contrary to reason.
And hence it is plain that the more perfect the virtues are in any man,