is the advantage? That these very men who are perishing will be put to silence.
How? Because both if he had come, and if he had not come, they would not have
believed in Christ; He comes therefore to convict them. For that they may not
have occasion to say, that since Christ said that He was God—although He
nowhere said this openly—but since those who came after proclaimed it, we
have not believed. Because we have heard that there is One God from whom are
all things, therefore we have not believed. This their pretext then Antichrist will
take away. For when he comes, and comes commanding nothing good, but all
things unlawful, and is yet believed from false signs alone, he will stop their
mouths. For if you believe not in Christ, much more ought you not to believe in
Antichrist. For the former said that He was sent from the Father, but the latter the
contrary. For this reason Christ said, "I have come in My Father's name, and you
receive Me not: if another shall come in his own name. him you will receive."
[John 5:43] But we have seen signs, you say. But many and great signs were also
wrought in the case of Christ; much more therefore ought ye to have believed in
Him. And yet many things were predicted concerning this one, that he is the
lawless one, that he is the son of perdition, that his coming is after the working
of Satan. But the contrary concerning the other, that He is the Saviour, that He
brings with Him unnumbered blessings.
Ver. 10, 11, 12. "For because they received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved; for this cause God will send them a working of error, that
they should believe a lie: that they all might be judged who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness."
"That they might be judged." He does not say, that they might be punished;
for even before this they were about to be punished; but "that they might be
condemned," that is, at the dreadful Seat of Judgment, in order that they might be
without excuse. "Who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness." He calls Christ, "the Love of the Truth." "For because," says
he, "they received not the love of the truth." For He was both, and came for the
sake of both, both as loving men, and on behalf of things that were true.

"But had pleasure," he says, "in unrighteousness." For he came to the
destruction of men and to injure them. For what will he not then work? He will
change and confound all things, both by his commandments, and by the fear of
him. He will be terrible in every way, from his power, from his cruelty, from his
unlawful commandments.
But fear not. "In those that perish" he will have his strength. For Elijah too
will then come to give confidence to the faithful, and this Christ says; "Elijah
comes, and shall restore all things." [Matthew 17:11] Therefore it is said, "In the
spirit and power of Elijah." [Luke 1:17] For he neither wrought signs nor
wonders, as Elijah did. For "John," it is said, "did no miracle, but all things
which John spoke of this Man were true." How then was it "in the spirit and
power of Elijah"? That is, he will take upon him the same ministry. As the one
was the forerunner of His first Coming, so will the other be of His second and
glorious Coming, and for this he is reserved. Let us not therefore fear. He has
calmed the minds of the hearers. He causes them no longer to think present
things dreadful but worthy of thankfulness. Wherefore he has added,
Ver. 13. "But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, brethren
beloved of the Lord, for that God chose you from the beginning unto salvation, in
sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth."
How unto salvation? By sanctifying you through the Spirit. For these are
the things that are the efficient causes of our salvation. It is nowhere of works,
nowhere of righteous deeds, but through belief of the truth. Here again, "in" is
used for "through." "And through sanctification of the Spirit," he says,
Ver. 14. "Whereunto He called you through our Gospel to the obtaining of
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ."
This too is no little thing, if Christ considers our salvation His glory. For it
is the glory of the Friend of man that they that are saved should be many. Great
then is our Lord, if the Holy Spirit so desires our salvation. Why did he not say
faith first? Because even after sanctification we have yet need of much faith, that
we may not be shaken. Do you see how He shows that nothing is of themselves,