they who impose that necessity on others, are liable to the same accusation. And
not merely in houses, but also in the forum we may see that this takes place; and
especially in fights, when those who box with one another swear things that are
contrary. One swears that he will beat, the other that he will not be beaten. One
swears that he will carry off the cloak, the other that he will not suffer this. One
that he will exact the money, the other that he will not pay it. And many other
such contradictory things, those who are contentious take an oath to do. So also
in shops, and in schools, it may generally be observed that the same thing
occurs. Thus the workman has often sworn that he will not suffer his apprentice
to eat or drink, before he has finished all his assigned task. And so also the
pedagogue has often acted towards a youth; and a mistress towards her maidservant; and when the evening has overtaken them, and the work has remained
unfinished, it is necessary either that those who have not executed their task
should perish with hunger, or that those who have sworn should altogether
forswear themselves. For that malignant demon, who is always lying in wait
against our blessings, being present and hearing the obligation of the oaths,
impels those who are answerable to indifference; or works some other difficulty;
so that the task being unperformed, blows, insults, and perjuries, and a thousand
other evils, may take place. And just as when children drag with all their might a
long and rotten cord in directions opposite to each other; if the cord snaps in the
middle, they all fall flat upon their backs, and some strike their heads, and some
another part of the body; so also they who each engage with an oath to perform
things that are contrary, when the oath is broken by the necessity of the case,
both parties fall into the same gulf of perjury: these by actually perjuring
themselves, and those by affording the occasion of perjury to the others.
5. That this also may be rendered evident, not only from what happens
every day in private houses, and the places of public concourse, but from the
Scriptures themselves, I will relate to you a piece of ancient history, which bears
upon what has been said. Once, when the Jews had been invaded by their
enemies, and Jonathan (now he was the son of Saul) had slaughtered some, and

put the rest to flight; Saul, his father, being desirous to rouse the army more
effectually against the remainder; and in order that they might not desist until he
had subjugated them all, did that which was altogether opposite to what he
desired, by swearing that no one should eat any food until evening, and until
vengeance was taken of his enemies. What, I ask, could have been more
senseless than this? For when it was needful that he should have refreshed those
who were fatigued and exhausted, and have sent them forth with renewed vigour
against their enemies, he treated them far worse than he had done their enemies,
by the constraint of an oath, which delivered them over to excessive hunger.
Dangerous, indeed, it is for any one to swear in a matter pertaining to himself;
for we are forcibly impelled to do many things by the urgency of circumstances.
But much more dangerous is it by the obligation of one's own oath, to bind the
determination of others; and especially where any one swears, not concerning
one, or two, or three, but an unlimited multitude, which Saul then
inconsiderately did, without thinking that it was probable that, in so vast a
number, one at least might transgress the oath; or that soldiers, and soldiers too
on campaign, are very far removed from moral wisdom, and know nothing of
ruling the belly; more especially when their fatigue is great. He, however,
overlooking all these points, as if he were merely taking an oath about a single
servant, whom he was easily able to restrain, counted equally on his whole army.
In consequence of this he opened such a door for the devil, that in a short time he
framed, not two, three, or four, but many more perjuries out of this oath. For as
when we do not swear at all, we close the whole entrance against him, so if we
utter but a single oath, we afford him great liberty for constructing endless
perjuries. And just as those who twist skeins, if they have one to hold the end,
work the whole string with nicety, but if there is no one to do this, cannot even
undertake the commencement of it; in the same manner too the devil, when
about to twist the skein of our sins, if he could not get the beginning from our
tongues, would not be able to undertake the work; but should we only make a
commencement, while we hold the oath on our tongue, as it were a hand, then