forbearance, and in another, in some other virtue: And when we have got into the
habit of this virtue let us go to another, just as in the things we learn at school,
guarding what is already gained, and acquiring others.
After this let us proceed to contempt for riches. First let us restrain our
hands from grasping, and then let us give alms. Let us not simply confound
everything, with the same hands both slaying and showing mercy forsooth. After
this, let us go to some other virtue, and from that, to another. "Filthiness and
foolish talking and jesting, let it not be even named among you." [Ephesians 5:4]
Let us be thus far in the right way.
There is no need of spending money, there is no need of labor, none of
sweat, it is enough to have only the will, and all is done. There is no need to
travel a long way, nor to cross a boundless ocean, but to be in earnest and of
ready mind, and to put a bridle on the tongue. Unseasonable reproaches, anger,
disorderly lusts, luxuriousness, expensiveness, let us cast off; and the desire of
wealth also from our soul, perjury and habitual oaths.
If we thus cultivate ourselves, plucking out the former thorns, and casting in
the heavenly seed, we shall be able to attain the good things promised. For the
Husbandman will come and will lay us up in His Garner, and we shall attain to
all good things, which may we all attain, by the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, power, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 25 on Hebrews

Hebrews 11:17-19
" By faith [Abraham], when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and he that had
received the promises offered up his only-begotten son, of whom it was said,
That in Isaac shall your seed be called: accounting that God was able to raise
him up even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure."
1. Great indeed was the faith of Abraham. For while in the case of Abel,
and of Noah, and of Enoch, there was an opposition of reasonings only, and it
was necessary to go beyond human reasonings; in this case it was necessary not
only to go beyond human reasonings, but to manifest also something more. For
what was of God seemed to be opposed to what was of God; and faith opposed
faith, and command promise.
I mean this: He had said, "Get you out of your country, and from your
kindred, and I will give you this land." [Genesis 12:1-7] "He gave him none
inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on." [Acts 7:5] Do you see
how what was done was opposed to the promise? Again He said, "In Isaac shall
your seed be called" [Genesis 21:12], and he believed: and again He says,
Sacrifice to Me this one, who was to fill all the world from his seed. You see the
opposition between the commands and the promise? He enjoined things that
were in contradiction to the promises, and yet not even so did the righteous man
stagger, nor say he had been deceived.
For you indeed, he means, could not say this, that He promised ease and
gave tribulation. For in our case, the things which He promised, these also He
performs. How so? "In the world" (He says), "you shall have tribulation." [John
16:33] "He that takes not his cross and follows Me, is not worthy of Me."
[Matthew 10:38] "He that hates not his life shall not find it." [John 12:25] And,