manifestation of His miracles, of opening incidentally His discourses about His
kingdom, and of drawing all men towards it. For, those even whom He was
threatening to cast out, He threatened not in order to cast them out, but in order
that through such fear, He might draw them into it by His words. And if not even
hereby were they profited, theirs is the whole blame, as also of all who are in the
like distemper.
For not at all among Jews only may one see this taking place, but also
among them that have believed. For Judas too was a child of the kingdom, and it
was said to him with the disciples, "You shall sit on twelve thrones;"
[Matthew 19:28] yet he became a child of hell; whereas the Ethiopian, barbarian
as he was, and of them "from the east and west," shall enjoy the crowns with
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. This takes place among us also now. "For
many," says He, "that are first shall be last, and the last first." [Matthew 19:30]
And this He says, that neither the one may grow languid, as unable to return; nor
the others be confident, as standing fast. This John also declared before from the
beginning, when he said, "God is able of these stones to raise up children unto
Abraham." [Matthew 3:9] Thus, since it was so to come to pass, it is proclaimed
long before; that no one may be confounded at the strangeness of the event. But
he indeed speaks of it as a possible thing (for he was first); Christ on the other
hand as what will surely be, affording the proof of it from His works.
7. Let us not then be confident, who stand, but let us say to ourselves, "Let
him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall;" [1 Corinthians 10:12] neither let
us who are fallen despair, but let us say to ourselves, "He that falls, does he not
arise?" [Jeremiah 8:4] For many even who have mounted to the very summit of
Heaven, and have shown forth all austerity, and had made their abode in the
deserts, nor saw any woman so much as in a dream; having become a little
remiss, have been tripped up, and have come unto the very gulf of wickedness.
While others again from thence have gone up to Heaven, and from the stage and
orchestra have passed over unto the discipline of angels, and have displayed so
great virtue, as to drive away devils, and to work many other such miracles. And

of these examples both the Scriptures are full, and our life is also full. Even
whoremongers and effeminate persons stop the mouths of the Manichæans, who
say that wickedness is immoveable, enrolling themselves on the devil's side, and
weakening the hands of them that would wish to be in earnest, and overturning
all our life.
For they who inculcate these things, not only injure men as to the future,
but here also turn all things upside down, for their own part at least. Because
when will any regard virtue, from among those that are living in wickedness, so
long as he accounts his return that way, and his change for the better, a thing
impossible? For if now, when both laws exist, and penalties are threatened, and
there is common opinion to recall the ordinary sort, and hell is looked for, and a
kingdom promised, and wrong things reproached, and the good praised; hardly
do any choose the labors that are to be undergone for virtue's sake: should you
take away all these things, what is there to hinder ruin and corruption universal?
Knowing therefore the devil's craft, and that as well the lawgivers of the
Gentiles as the oracles of God, and the reasonings of nature, and the common
opinion of all men, yea barbarians, and Scythians, and Thracians, and generally
all, are directly opposed both to these, and to such as strive to enact the doctrines
of fate: let us be sober, beloved, and bidding farewell to all those, let us travel
along the narrow way, being both confident and in fear: in fear because of the
precipices on either side, confident because of Jesus our guide. Let us travel on,
sober and wakeful. For though but for a little while one slumber, he is swept
away quickly.
8. For we are not more perfect than David, who by a little carelessness was
hurled into the very gulf of sin. Yet he arose again quickly. Look not then to his
having sinned only, but also to his having washed away his sin. For to this end
He wrote that history, not that you should behold him fallen, but admire him
risen; to teach you, when you are fallen, how you should arise. Thus, as
physicians choose out the most grievous diseases, and write them in their books,
and teach their method of cure in similar cases; if so be men having practised on