Homily 31 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XIV. 14, 15
"Which when the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of, they rent their
clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out and saying, Sirs, why do ye
these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and preach unto you
that you should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven,
and earth, and the sea, and all things that are therein."
Mark the vehemence with which all this is done by the Apostles: "rent their
clothes, ran in, cried out," all from strong affection of the soul, revolted by the
things that were done. For it was a grief, indeed a grief inconsolable, that they
should needs be thought gods, and introduce idolatry, the very thing which they
came to destroy! This also was a contrivance of the devil— but he did not
prevail. But what say they? "We also are men of like passions with you." At the
very outset they overthrew the evil. They said not simply, "Men," but "As ye."
Then, that they may not seem to honor the gods, hear what they add: "Preaching
unto you, that you should turn from these vanities unto the living God, Who
made heaven, the sea, and all things that are therein." Observe how they
nowhere mention things invisible. (b) For they had learned that one should study
not so much to say somewhat worthy of God, as to say what is profitable for the
hearers. (a) What then? If He be Maker of all things, why does He not also
attend to these things by His Providence?— "Who in times past suffered all
nations to walk in their own ways" [Acts 14:16]— but wherefore He suffered
them, this he does not say, for at present he keeps to the matter of immediate
importance, nowhere bringing in the name of Christ. Observe, he does not wish
to swell the accusation against them, but rather that they themselves should refer
all to God. "Nevertheless, He left not Himself without witness, in that He did
good, giving you rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling your hearts with

food and gladness." [Acts 14:17] (c) See how covertly he puts the accusation "in
that He did good," etc. And yet if God did this, He could not have "let them
alone;" on the contrary, they ought to be punished, for that, enjoying so great
benefits, they had not acknowledged Him, not even as their feeder. "From
heaven," he says, "giving you rain." Thus also David said, "From the fruit of
their grain and wine and oil were they made to abound" [Psalm 4:7], and in
many places speaking of Creation, he brings forward these benefits: and
Jeremiah mentions first Creation, then Providence (shown) by the rains, so that
the Apostle here discourses as taught from those Scriptures. "Filling," he says,
"with food and gladness." [Jeremiah 5:24] With large liberality ([φιλοτιμίας]) the
food is given, not merely for a frugal sufficiency, nor stinted by the need. "And
saying these things, they scarcely stopped the multitudes" [Acts 14:18]— indeed
by this very thing they gained most admiration— "from sacrificing to them." Do
you observe that this was the point with them to put an end to that madness?
"But there came," it says, "certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium" [Acts
14:19].— Indeed children of the devil, that not in their own cities only, but also
beyond them, they did these things, and as much made it their study to make an
end of the preaching, as the Apostles were in earnest to establish it!— "and
having persuaded the multitude and stoned Paul, they dragged him out of the
city." (e) So then, the Gentiles regarded them as gods, but these "dragged" him,
"out of the city, supposing he had been dead. Having persuaded the multitude"—
for it is not likely that all thus reverenced them. In the very city in which they
received this reverence, in the same were they thus terribly ill treated. And this
also profited the beholders. "Lest any man," he says, "should think of me above
that which he sees me to be, or that he hears anything from me." (v. 20.)—
"Howbeit as the disciples stood round about him, he rose up and came into the
city." (d) Here is fulfilled that saying, "My grace is sufficient for you, for My
strength is made perfect in weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:9] Greater this than the
raising of the lame man! (f) "Came into the city." Do you mark the zeal, do you
mark how fervent he is, how set on fire! He came into the city itself again: for