For we indeed are Christ's, as his work: "Christ is God's," as a genuine
Offspring, not as a work: in which sense neither is the world ours. So that though
the saying is the same, yet the meaning is different. For "the world is ours," as
being a thing made for our sakes: but "Christ is God's," as having Him the
Author of his being, in that He is Father. And "we are Christ's," as having been
formed by Him. Now "if they are yours," says he, "why have you done what is
just contrary to this, in calling yourselves after their name, and not after Christ,
and God?"

1 Corinthians 4:1
5. "Let a man so account of us, as of ministers of Christ, and stewards of
the mysteries of God." After he had cast down their spirit, mark how again he
refreshes it, saying, "as ministers of Christ." Do not thou then, letting go the
Master, receive a name from the servants and ministers. "Stewards;" says he,
indicating that we ought not to give these things unto all, but unto whom it is
due, and to whom it is fitting we should minister.

1 Corinthians 4:2
"Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful:" that is,
that he do not appropriate to himself his master's goods, that he do not as a
master lay claim for himself but administer as a steward. For a steward's part is
to administer well the things committed to his charge: not to say that his master's
things are his own; but, on the contrary, that his own are his master's. Let every
one think on these things, both he that has power in speech and he that possesses
wealth, namely, that he has been entrusted with a master's goods and that they
are not his own; let him not keep them with himself, nor set them down to his
own account; but let him impute them unto God who gave them all. Would you
see faithful stewards? Hear what says Peter, "Why do you look so earnestly on
us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made this man to walk?"
[Acts 3:12] Unto Cornelius also he says, "We also are men of like passions with
you:" and unto Christ Himself, "Lo, we have left all, and followed You."
[Matthew 19:27] And Paul, no less, when he had said, "I labored more
abundantly than they all," [1 Corinthians 15:10] added, "yet not I, but the grace
of God which was with me." Elsewhere also, setting himself strongly against the
same persons, he said, "For what have you which thou did not receive?" [C. 1
Corinthians 4:7] "For you have nothing of your own, neither wealth, nor speech,
nor life itself; for this also is surely the Lord's. Wherefore, when necessity calls,
do thou lay down this also. But if you doatest on life, and being ordered to lay it
down refusest, you are no longer a faithful steward."
"And how is it possible, when God calls, to resist?" Well, that is just what I
say too: and on this account do I chiefly admire the loving-kindness of God, that
the things which He is able, even against your will, to take from you, these He
wills not to be paid in ([εἰσενεχθῆναι]) by you unwillingly, that you may have a
reward besides. For instance, He can take away life without your consent; but