and heat of the day. But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do you no
wrong; did you not agree with me for a penny? Take what is yours, and go your
way; I will give unto this last also, even as unto you. Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with my own? Is your eye evil, because I am good? Thus the last shall
be first, and the first last: for many are called, but few chosen."
3. What is to us the intent of this parable? For the beginning does not
harmonize with what is said at the end, but intimates altogether the contrary. For
in the first part He shows all enjoying the same, and not some cast out, and some
brought in; yet He Himself both before the parable and after the parable said the
opposite thing. "That the first shall be last, and the last first," that is, before the
very first, those not continuing first, but having become last. For in proof that
this is His meaning, He added, "Many are called, but few chosen," so as doubly
both to sting the one, and to soothe and urge on the other.
But the parable says not this, but that they shall be equal to them that are
approved, and have labored much. "For you have made them equal unto us," it is
said, "that have borne the burden and heat of the day."
What then is the meaning of the parable? For it is necessary to make this
first clear, and then we shall clear up that other point. By a vineyard He means
the injunctions of God and His commandments: by the time of laboring, the
present life: by laborers, them that in different ways are called to the fulfillment
of the injunctions: by early in the morning, and about the third and ninth and
eleventh hours, them who at different ages have drawn near to God, and
approved themselves.
But the question is this, whether the first having gloriously approved
themselves, and having pleased God, and having throughout the whole day
shone by their labors, are possessed by the basest feeling of vice, jealousy and
envy. For when they had seen them enjoying the same rewards, they say, "These
last have wrought but one hour, and you have made them equal unto us, that
have borne the burden and heat of the day." And in these words, when they are
to receive no hurt, neither to suffer diminution as to their own hire, they were

indignant, and much displeased at the good of others, which was proof of envy
and jealousy. And what is yet more, the good man of the house in justifying
himself with respect to them, and in making his defense to him that had said
these things, convicts him of wickedness and the basest jealousy, saying, "Did
you not agree with me for a penny? Take what is yours, and go your way; I will
give unto the last even as unto you. Is your eye evil, because I am good?"
What then is it which is to be established by these things? For in other
parables also this self-same thing may be seen. For the son who was approved is
brought in, as having felt this self-same thing, when he saw his prodigal brother
enjoying much honor, even more than himself. For like as these enjoyed more by
receiving first, so he in a greater degree was honored by the abundance of the
things given him; and to these things he that was approved bears witness.
What then may we say? There is no one who is thus justifying himself, or
blaming others in the kingdom of Heaven; away with the thought! For that place
is pure from envy and jealousy. For if when they are here the saints give their
very lives for sinners, much more when they see them there in the enjoyment of
these things, do they rejoice and account these to be blessings of their own.
Wherefore then did He so frame His discourse? The saying is a parable,
wherefore neither is it right to inquire curiously into all things in parables word
by word, but when we have learned the object for which it was composed, to
reap this, and not to busy one's self about anything further.
Wherefore then was this parable thus composed? What is its object to
effect? To render more earnest them that are converted and become better men in
extreme old age, and not to allow them to suppose they have a less portion. So it
is for this cause He introduces also others displeased at their blessings, not to
represent those men as pining or vexed, away with the thought! But to teach us
that these have enjoyed such honor, as could even have begotten envy in others.
Which we also often do, saying, "Such a one blamed me, because I counted you
worthy of much honor," neither having been blamed, nor wishing to slander that
other, but hereby to show the greatness of the gift which this one enjoyed.