even after the dust and ashes, are yet eager in those practices.
God therefore, to take away all our extravagances, and to teach us to stand
off from all earthly things, destroys the bodies before our eyes. For even he that
is enamored of bodies, and is greatly affected at the sight of a beautiful damsel,
if he will not learn by discourse the deformity of that substance, shall know it by
the very sight. Yea, many of the like age with her whom he loves, and oftentimes
also fairer, being dead, after the first or second day, have emitted an ill savor, and
foul matter, and decay with worms. Imagine then what sort of beauty you love,
and what sort of elegance has power so to disturb you. But if bodies did not
decay, this would not be well known: but as evil spirits run unto men's graves, so
also many of our lovers, continually sitting by the tombs, would have received
evil spirits in their soul, and would quickly have perished in this grievous
madness.
But as it is, together with all other things this also comforts the soul, that
the form is not seen: it brings men to forgetfulness of their affliction. Indeed, if
this were not so, there would be no tombs at all, but you would see our cities
having corpses instead of statues, each man desiring to look upon his own dead.
And much confusion would arise hence, and none of the ordinary sort would
attend to his soul, nor would give room to the doctrine of immortality to enter in:
and many other things too, more shocking than these, would have resulted,
which even to speak of were unseemly. Wherefore it decays presently, that you
might see unveiled the beauty of the soul. For if she be the procurer of all that
beauty and life, much more excellent must she herself be. And if she preserve
that which is so deformed and unsightly, much more herself.
5. For it is not the body wherein the beauty lies, but the expression, and the
bloom which is shed over its substance by the soul. Now then, I bid you love that
which makes the body also to appear such as it is. And why speak I of death?
Nay even in life itself, I would have you mark how all is hers that is beautiful.
For whether she be pleased, she showers roses over the cheeks; or whether she
be pained, she takes that beauty, and involves it all in a dark robe. And if she be

continually in mirth, the body improves in condition; if in grief, she renders the
same thinner and weaker than a spider's web; if in wrath, she has made it again
abominable and foul; if she show the eye calm, great is the beauty that she
bestows; if she express envy, very pale and livid is the hue she sheds over us; if
love, abundant the gracefulness she at once confers. Thus in fact many women,
not being beautiful in feature, have derived much grace from the soul; others
again of brilliant bloom, by having an ungracious soul, have marred their beauty.
Consider how a face that is pale grows red, and by the variation of color
produces great delight, when there is need of shame and blushing. As, on the
other hand, if it be shameless, it makes the countenance more unpleasing than
any monster.
For nothing is fairer, nothing sweeter than a beauteous soul. For while as to
bodies, the longing is with pain, in the case of souls the pleasure is pure and
calm. Why then let go the king, and be wild about the herald? Why leave the
philosopher, and gape after his interpreter? Have you seen a beautiful eye?
Acquaint yourself with that which is within; and if that be not beautiful, despise
this likewise. For surely, did you see an ill-favored woman wearing a beautiful
mask, she would make no impression on you: just as on the other hand, neither
would you suffer one fair and beautiful to be disguised by the mask, but
wouldest take it away, as choosing to see her beauty unveiled.
This then I bid you do in regard of the soul also, and acquaint yourself with
it first; for this is clad with the body instead of a mask; wherefore also that
abides such as it is; but the other, though it be mishapen, may quickly become
beautiful. Though it have an eye that is unsightly, and harsh, and fierce, it may
become beautiful, mild, calm, sweet-tempered, gentle.
This beauty therefore let us seek, this countenance let us adorn; that God
also may "have pleasure in our beauty," and impart to us of His everlasting
blessings, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
be glory and might forever and ever. Amen.