the more pleasing a thing is, the more displeasing is its contrary.
Now the last end is above all things pleasing: wherefore sin, which
turns us away from the last end, should be, above all things,
displeasing. The other sorrow is in the sensitive part, and is caused
by the former sorrow either from natural necessity, in so far as the
lower powers follow the movements of the higher, or from choice, in
so far as a penitent excites in himself this sorrow for his sins. In
neither of these ways is such sorrow, of necessity, the greatest,
because the lower powers are more deeply moved by their own
objects than through redundance from the higher powers. Wherefore
the nearer the operation of the higher powers approaches to the
objects of the lower powers, the more do the latter follow the
movement of the former. Consequently there is greater pain in the
sensitive part, on account of a sensible hurt, than that which
redounds into the sensitive part from the reason; and likewise, that
which redounds from the reason when it deliberates on corporeal
things, is greater than that which redounds from the reason in
considering spiritual things. Therefore the sorrow which results in
the sensitive part from the reason's displeasure at sin, is not greater
than the other sorrows of which that same part is the subject: and
likewise, neither is the sorrow which is assumed voluntarily greater
than other sorrows---both because the lower appetite does not obey
the higher appetite infallibly, as though in the lower appetite there
should arise a passion of such intensity and of such a kind as the
higher appetite might ordain---and because the passions are
employed by the reason, in acts of virtue, according to a certain
measure, which the sorrow that is without virtue sometimes does not
observe, but exceeds.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as sensible sorrow is on account of the
sensation of hurt, so interior sorrow is on account of the thought of
something hurtful. Therefore, although the hurt of sin is not
perceived by the external sense, yet it is perceived to be the most
grievous hurt by the interior sense or reason.
Reply to Objection 2: Affections of the body are the immediate result
of the sensitive passions and, through them, of the emotions of the
higher appetite. Hence it is that bodily tears flow more quickly from
sensible sorrow, or even from a thing that hurts the senses, than
from the spiritual sorrow of contrition.
Reply to Objection 3: The joy which a penitent has for his sorrow
does not lessen his displeasure (for it is not contrary to it), but

increases it, according as every operation is increased by the delight
which it causes, as stated in Ethic. x, 5. Thus he who delights in
learning a science, learns the better, and, in like manner, he who
rejoices in his displeasure, is the more intensely displeased. But it
may well happen that this joy tempers the sorrow that results from
the reason in the sensitive part.
Reply to Objection 4: The degree of displeasure at a thing should be
proportionate to the degree of its malice. Now the malice of mortal
sin is measured from Him against Whom it is committed, inasmuch
as it is offensive to Him; and from him who sins, inasmuch as it is
hurtful to him. And, since man should love God more than himself,
therefore he should hate sin, as an offense against God, more than
as being hurtful to himself. Now it is hurtful to him chiefly because it
separates him from God; and in this respect the separation from God
which is a punishment, should be more displeasing than the sin
itself, as causing this hurt (since what is hated on account of
something else, is less hated), but less than the sin, as an offense
against God. Again, among all the punishments of malice a certain
order is observed according to the degree of the hurt. Consequently,
since this is the greatest hurt, inasmuch as it consists in privation of
the greatest good, the greatest of all punishments will be separation
from God.
Again, with regard to this displeasure, it is necessary to observe that
there is also an accidental degree of malice, in respect of the present
and the past; since what is past, is no more, whence it has less of
the character of malice or goodness. Hence it is that a man shrinks
from suffering an evil at the present, or at some future time, more
than he shudders at the past evil: wherefore also, no passion of the
soul corresponds directly to the past, as sorrow corresponds to
present evil, and fear to future evil. Consequently, of two past evils,
the mind shrinks the more from that one which still produces a
greater effect at the present time, or which, it fears, will produce a
greater effect in the future, although in the past it was the lesser evil.
And, since the effect of the past sin is sometimes not so keenly felt
as the effect of the past punishment, both because sin is more
perfectly remedied than punishment, and because bodily defect is
more manifest than spiritual defect, therefore even a man, who is
well disposed, sometimes feels a greater abhorrence of his past
punishment than of his past sin, although he would be ready to
suffer the same punishment over again rather than commit the same
sin.