John 16:8
"He, when He has come, will reprove the world."
That is, "they shall not do these things unpunished if He come. For indeed,
the things that have been already done, are sufficient to stop their mouths; but
when these things are also done by Him, when doctrines are more perfect and
miracles greater, much more shall they be condemned when they see such things
done in My Name, which make the proof of the Resurrection more certain. For
now they are able to say, 'this is the carpenter's son, whose father and mother we
know'; but when they see the bands of death loosed, wickedness cast out, natural
lameness straightened, devils expelled, abundant supply of the Spirit, and all this
effected by My being called on, what will they say? The Father has borne
witness of Me, and the Spirit will bear witness also." Yet He bore witness at the
beginning. Yea, and shall also do it now. But the, "will convince,"

John 16:9
"Of sin."
This means, "will cut off all their excuses, and show that they have
transgressed unpardonably."

John 16:10
"Of righteousness, because I go to the Father, and you see Me no more."
That is, "I have exhibited a blameless life, and this is the proof, that, 'I go to
the Father.'" For since they continually urged this against Him, that He was not
from God, and therefore called Him a sinner and transgressor, He says, that the
Spirit shall take from them this excuse also. "For if My being deemed not to be
from God, shows Me to be a transgressor, when the Spirit shall have shown that I
have gone there, not merely for a season, but to abide there, (for the, 'You see Me
no more,' is the expression of one declaring this,) what will they say then?"
Observe how by these two things, their evil suspicion is removed; since neither
does working miracles belong to a sinner, (for a sinner cannot work them,) nor
does the being with God continually belong to a sinner. "So that you can no
longer say, that 'this man is a sinner,' that 'this man is not from God.'"

John 16:11
"Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged."
Here again He moots the argument concerning righteousness, that He had
overthrown His opponent. Now had He been a sinner, He could not have
overthrown him; a thing which not even any just man had been strong enough to
do. "But that he has been condemned through Me, they shall know who trample
on him hereafter, and who clearly know My Resurrection, which is the mark of
Him who condemns him. For he was not able to hold Me. And whereas they said
that I had a devil, and that I was a deceiver, these things also shall hereafter
appear to be false; for I could not have prevailed against him, had I been subject
to sin; but now he is condemned and cast out."

John 16:12
"I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now."
"Therefore it is expedient for you that I depart, if you then will bear them
when I departed." "And what has come to pass? Is the Spirit greater than You,
that now indeed we bear not, but It will fit us to bear? Is It working more
powerful and more perfect?" "Not so; for He too shall speak My words."
Wherefore He says,