says of himself. [1 Corinthians 11:27] Nor was this all; but he was cast into
prison at the command of Nero himself, and confined with robbers, with
impostors, with grave-breakers, with murderers, and he was, as he himself says,
scourged as a malefactor. Who then is the more illustrious? The name of the one
the greater part have never heard of. The other is daily celebrated by Greeks, and
Barbarians, and Scythians, and those who inhabit the extremities of the earth.
But let us not yet consider what is the case now, but even at that time who
was the more illustrious, who the more glorious, he that was in chains, and
dragged bound from prison, or he that was clothed in a purple robe, and walked
forth from a palace? The prisoner certainly. For the other, who had armies at his
command, and sat arrayed in purple, was not able to do what he would. But the
prisoner, that was like a malefactor, and in mean attire, could do everything with
more authority. How? The one said, "Do not disseminate the word of God." The
other said, "I cannot forbear; 'the word of God is not bound.'" Thus the Cilician,
the prisoner, the poor tent-maker, who lived in hunger, despised the Roman, rich
as he was, and emperor, and ruling over all, who enriched so many thousands;
and with all his armies he availed nothing. Who then was illustrious? Who
venerable? He that in chains was a conqueror, or he that in a purple robe was
conquered? He that standing below, smote, or he that sitting above, was smitten?
He that commanded and was despised, or he who was commanded and made no
account of the commands? He who being alone was victorious, or he who with
numerous armies was defeated? The king therefore so came off, that his prisoner
triumphed over him. Tell me then on whose side you would be? For do not look
to what comes afterwards, but to what was then their state. Would you be on the
side of Nero, or of Paul? I speak not according to the estimate of faith, for that is
manifest; but according to the estimate of glory, and reverence, and
preëminence. Any man of right understanding would say, on the side of Paul.
For if to conquer is more illustrious than to be conquered, he is more glorious.
And this is not yet much, that he conquered, but that being in so mean a state he
conquered one in so exalted a condition. For I say, and will not cease to repeat it,

though bound with a chain, yet he smote him that was invested with a diadem.
Such is the power of Christ. The chain surpassed the kingly crown, and this
apparel was shown more brilliant than that. Clothed in filthy rags, as the
inhabitant of a prison, he turned all eyes upon the chains that hung on him, rather
than on the purple robe. He stood on earth bound down and stooping low, and all
left the tyrant mounted on a golden chariot to gaze on him. And well they might.
For it was customary to see a king with white horses, but it was a strange and
unwonted sight to behold a prisoner conversing with a king with as much
confidence as a king would converse with a pitiful and wretched slave. The
surrounding multitude were all slaves of the king, yet they admired not their
lord, but him who was superior to their lord. And he before whom all feared and
trembled, was trampled upon by one solitary man. See then how great was the
brightness of these very chains!
And what need to mention what followed after these things? The tomb of
the one is nowhere to be seen; but the other lies in the royal city itself, in greater
splendor than any king, even there where he conquered, where he raised his
trophy. If mention is made of the one, it is with reproach, even among his
kindred, for he is said to have been profligate. But the memory of the other is
everywhere accompanied with a good report, not among us only, but among his
enemies. For when truth shines forth, it puts to shame even one's enemies, and if
they admire him not for his faith, yet they admire him for his boldness and his
manly freedom. The one is proclaimed by all mouths, as one that is crowned, the
other is loaded with reproaches and accusations. Which then is the real splendor?
And yet I am but praising the lion for his talons, when I ought to be
speaking of his real honors. And what are these? Those in the heavens. How will
he come in a shining vesture with the King of Heaven! How will Nero stand
then, mournful and dejected! And if what I say seems to you incredible and
ridiculous, you are ridiculous for deriding that which is no subject for laughter.
For if you disbelieve the future, be convinced from what is past. The season for
being crowned is not yet come, and yet how great honor has the combatant