121. Of course, all of us are called to mature in our work as evangelizers. We want to have better
training, a deepening love and a clearer witness to the Gospel. In this sense, we ought to let
others be constantly evangelizing us. But this does not mean that we should postpone the
evangelizing mission; rather, each of us should find ways to communicate Jesus wherever we are.
All of us are called to offer others an explicit witness to the saving love of the Lord, who despite
our imperfections offers us his closeness, his word and his strength, and gives meaning to our
lives. In your heart you know that it is not the same to live without him; what you have come to
realize, what has helped you to live and given you hope, is what you also need to communicate to
others. Our falling short of perfection should be no excuse; on the contrary, mission is a constant
stimulus not to remain mired in mediocrity but to continue growing. The witness of faith that each
Christian is called to offer leads us to say with Saint Paul: “Not that I have already obtained this, or
am already perfect; but I press on to make it my own, because Christ Jesus has made me his
own” (Phil 3:12-13).

The evangelizing power of popular piety

122. In the same way, we can see that the different peoples among whom the Gospel has been
inculturated are active collective subjects or agents of evangelization. This is because each people
is the creator of their own culture and the protagonist of their own history. Culture is a dynamic
reality which a people constantly recreates; each generation passes on a whole series of ways of
approaching different existential situations to the next generation, which must in turn reformulate it
as it confronts its own challenges. Being human means “being at the same time son and father of
the culture to which one belongs”. Once the Gospel has been inculturated in a people, in their
process of transmitting their culture they also transmit the faith in ever new forms; hence the
importance of understanding evangelization as inculturation. Each portion of the people of God, by
translating the gift of God into its own life and in accordance with its own genius, bears witness to
the faith it has received and enriches it with new and eloquent expressions. One can say that “a
people continuously evangelizes itself”. Herein lies the importance of popular piety, a true
expression of the spontaneous missionary activity of the people of God. This is an ongoing and
developing process, of which the Holy Spirit is the principal agent.

123. Popular piety enables us to see how the faith, once received, becomes embodied in a culture
and is constantly passed on. Once looked down upon, popular piety came to be appreciated once
more in the decades following the Council. In the Exhortation Evangelii Nuntiandi, Pope Paul VI
gave a decisive impulse in this area. There he stated that popular piety “manifests a thirst for God
which only the poor and the simple can know” and that “it makes people capable of
generosity and sacrifice even to the point of heroism, when it is a question of bearing witness to
belief”. Closer to our own time, Benedict XVI, speaking about Latin America, pointed out that
popular piety is “a precious treasure of the Catholic Church”, in which “we see the soul of the Latin
American peoples”.