FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.2.

man is also perfected for the purpose of doing good and fitting
actions. Now, when the soul cleaves to things by love, there is a kind
of contact in the soul: and when man sins, he cleaves to certain
things, against the light of reason and of the Divine law, as shown
above (Question 71, Article 6). Wherefore the loss of comeliness
occasioned by this contact, is metaphorically called a stain on the
soul.
Reply to Objection 1: The soul is not defiled by inferior things, by
their own power, as though they acted on the soul: on the contrary,
the soul, by its own action, defiles itself, through cleaving to them
inordinately, against the light of reason and of the Divine law.
Reply to Objection 2: The action of the intellect is accomplished by
the intelligible thing being in the intellect, according to the mode of
the intellect, so that the intellect is not defiled, but perfected, by
them. On the other hand, the act of the will consists in a movement
towards things themselves, so that love attaches the soul to the
thing loved. Thus it is that the soul is stained, when it cleaves
inordinately, according to Osee 9:10: "They . . . became abominable
as those things were which they loved."
Reply to Objection 3: The stain is neither something positive in the
soul, nor does it denote a pure privation: it denotes a privation of the
soul's brightness in relation to its cause, which is sin; wherefore
diverse sins occasion diverse stains. It is like a shadow, which is the
privation of light through the interposition of a body, and which
varies according to the diversity of the interposed bodies.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the stain remains in the soul after the act

of sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that the stain does not remain in the soul
after the act of sin. For after an action, nothing remains in the soul
except habit or disposition. But the stain is not a habit or
disposition, as stated above (Article 1, Objection 3). Therefore the
stain does not remain in the soul after the act of sin.
Objection 2: Further, the stain is to the sin what the shadow is to the
body, as stated above (Article 1, ad 3). But the shadow does not
remain when the body has passed by. Therefore the stain does not
remain in the soul when the act of sin is past.
Objection 3: Further, every effect depends on its cause. Now the
cause of the stain is the act of sin. Therefore when the act of sin is
no longer there, neither is the stain in the soul.
On the contrary, It is written (Jos. 22:17): "Is it a small thing to you
that you sinned with Beelphegor, and the stain of that crime
remaineth in you to this day?"
I answer that, The stain of sin remains in the soul even when the act
of sin is past. The reason for this is that the stain, as stated above
(Article 1), denotes a blemish in the brightness of the soul, on
account of its withdrawing from the light of reason or of the Divine
law. And therefore so long as man remains out of this light, the stain
of sin remains in him: but as soon as, moved by grace, he returns to
the Divine light and to the light of reason, the stain is removed. For
although the act of sin ceases, whereby man withdrew from the light
of reason and of the Divine law, man does not at once return to the
state in which he was before, and it is necessary that his will should
have a movement contrary to the previous movement. Thus if one
man be parted from another on account of some kind of movement,
he is not reunited to him as soon as the movement ceases, but he
needs to draw nigh to him and to return by a contrary movement.
Reply to Objection 1: Nothing positive remains in the soul after the
act of sin, except the disposition or habit; but there does remain
something private, viz. the privation of union with the Divine light.