wounding them, but he hints it in an obscure manner, without either making the
assertion thus, 'you are reprobate,' or proceeding by question and saying, 'But if
you are reprobate,' but leaving out even this way of putting it by question, he
indicates it obscurely by adding, "But I hope that you shall know that we are not
reprobate." Here also again, great is the threat, great the alarm. 'For since you
desire,' he says, 'in this way, by your own punishment to receive the proof, we
shall have no difficulty in giving you that demonstration.' But he does not indeed
so express himself, but with more weight and threatening. "But I hope that you
shall know that we are not reprobate." 'For you ought indeed,' he says, 'to have
known even without this what we are, and that we have Christ speaking and
working in us; but since you desire to receive the proof of it by deeds also, you
shall know that we are not reprobate.' Then when he has held the threat
suspended over their heads, and brought the punishment now up to their doors,
and has set them a trembling, and made them look for vengeance; see how again
he sweetens down his words and soothes their fear, and shows his unambitious
temper, his tender solicitude towards his disciples, his high-principledness of
purpose, his loftiness and freedom from vain-glory. For he exhibits all these
qualities in what he adds, saying,

2 Corinthians 13:7-9
"Now I pray to God that you do no evil, not that we may appear approved,
but that you may do that which is honorable, though we be as reprobate. For we
can do nothing against the truth but for the truth. For we rejoice when we are
weak, and you are strong. For this also we pray for even your perfecting."
5. What can be equal to this soul? He was despised, he was spit upon, he
was ridiculed, he was mocked, as mean, as contemptible, as a braggart, as
boastful in his words but in his deeds unable to make even a little show; and
although seeing so great a necessity for showing his own power, he not only puts
off, not only shrinks back, but even prays that he may not fall into such a
position. For he says, "I pray that you do no evil, not that we may appear
approved, but that you may do that which is honorable, though we be as
reprobate." What is it he says? 'I entreat God. I beseech Him,' he says, 'that I
may find no one unreformed, may find no one' that has not repented? Yea, rather,
not this alone, but that none may have sinned at all. For,' he says, 'that you have
done no [evil], but if you have perchance sinned, then that you may have
changed your conduct, and been beforehand with me in reforming, and arresting
all wrath. For this is not what I am eager about, that we should be approved in
this way, but clean the contrary, that we should not appear approved. For if you
should continue,' he says, 'sinning and not repenting, it will be necessary for us
to chastise, to punish, to maim your bodies; (as happened in the case of Sapphira
and of Magus;) and we have given proof of our power. But we pray not for this,
but the contrary, that we may not be shown to be approved in this way, that we
may not in this way exhibit the proof of the power which is in us, by chastising
you and punishing you as sinning and as incurably diseased, but what? "That ye
should do that which is honorable," we pray for this, that you should ever live in
virtue, ever in amendment; "and we should be as reprobate," not displaying our