saying, "Now I have told you before it came to pass, that when it has come to
pass ye may believe." [John 14:29] For greatly indeed, greatly does it tend to the
comfort of others, to have heard from their teachers what is to happen. For as he
that is sick, if he hear from his physician that this or that is taking place, is not
much troubled; but if anything happen unexpectedly, as if he too were at a loss,
and the disorder was beyond his art, he is afflicted and troubled; so also is it
here. Which Paul foreknowing, foretold to them, "we are about to be afflicted,"
"as it came to pass, and you know." He not only says that this came to pass, but
that he foretold many things, and they happened. "Hereunto we are appointed."
So that not only ye ought not to be troubled and disturbed about the past, but not
even about the future, if any such thing should happen, "for hereunto we are
appointed."
Moral . Let us hear, who have ears to hear. The Christian is appointed
hereunto. For concerning all the faithful is this said, "Hereunto we are
appointed." And we, as if we were appointed for ease, think it strange if we
suffer anything; and yet what reason have we for thinking anything strange? For
no season of affliction or temptation has overtaken us, but what is common to
man. It is a fit season for us to say to you, "You have not yet resisted unto blood,
striving against sin" [Hebrews 12:4]. Or rather, this is not seasonable for us to
say to you— but what? You have not yet despised riches. For to them indeed
these words were said with reason, when they had lost all their own possessions,
but this is said to those who retain theirs. Who has been robbed of his riches for
Christ's sake? Who has been beaten? Who has been insulted? Even in words, I
mean. What have you to boast of? What confidence have you to say anything?
So many things Christ suffered for us when we were enemies. What can we
show that we have suffered for Him? Nothing that we have suffered indeed, but
infinite good things that we have received from Him. Whence shall we have
confidence in that Day? Do you not know, that the soldier too, when he can
show numberless wounds and scars, will then be able to shine in the presence of
the king? But if he has no good action to show, though he may have done no

harm, he will take rank among the least.
But, you say, it is not the season of war. But if it was, tell me, who would
contend? Who would attack? Who would break through the phalanx? Perhaps no
one. For when I see that you do not despise riches for the sake of Christ, how
shall I believe that you will despise blows? Tell me, do you bear manfully those
who insult you, and do you bless them? You do not— but you disobey. What is
attended with no danger, you do not; and will you endure blows, in which there
is much pain and suffering? Do you not know that it is proper in peace to keep
up the exercises of war? Do you not see these soldiers, who though no war
disturbs them, but it is profound peace, brightening up their arms, and going
forth with the teachers who teach them tactics, into the broad and level plains, I
may say, every day, keep up with the greatest strictness the exercises of war? Of
our spiritual soldiers, who has done this? No one. For this reason we become in
war weak and ignoble, and easily led captive by any.
But what stupidity is this, not to think the present a season of war, when
Paul is crying out, "Yea, and all that would live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution" [2 Timothy 3:12]; and Christ says, "In the world you shall have
tribulation." [John 16:33] And again the blessed Paul with a loud voice cries out,
saying, "Our wrestling is not against flesh and blood," and again, "Stand
therefore, having girded your loins with truth." [Ephesians 6:12-14] Why do you
arm us, tell me, when it is not war? Why do you give us trouble to no purpose?
You put breastplates on the soldiers, when it is allowed them to rest and revive.
But he would have said, Certainly, however, though it were not war, it would be
right to attend to the concerns of war. For he who in peace considers the business
of battle, will be formidable in the season of battle; but he who is without
experience in the things of war, will be more troubled even in peace. Why so?
Because he will weep for the things which he possesses, and not being able to
fight for them, will be in anguish. For the possessions of the cowardly and
inexperienced and ignoble in war, are the property of all who are brave and
warlike. So that on this account first I arm you. But then also the whole time of