are covered with a shelter. But he continued always to pass his nights in the open
air, not having even the consolation of a bare roof. And, what is still greater, the
fact that these are conscious of many terrible evils within themselves, but he was
conscious of nothing against himself. For this is to be noticed in each of the
things which happened to him, a thing which caused him greater pain, and
produced more perplexity; the ignorance of the reason of what took place. These
persons then, as I said, would have many things with which to reproach
themselves. And this contributes no little to consolation in calamity; to be
conscious in oneself of being punished justly. But he was deprived of this
consolation, and while exhibiting a conversation full of virtue, endured the fate
of those who had dared to do extreme wickedness. And these folk who are with
us, are poor from the outset, and from the beginning are versed in calamity. But
he endured calamity in which he was unversed, experiencing the immense
change from wealth. As then the knowledge of the cause of what takes place, is
the greatest consolation; so it is not less than this, to have been versed in poverty
from the beginning, and so to continue in it. Of both these consolations that man
was deprived, and not even then, did he fall away. Do you see him indeed come
to extreme poverty, even in comparison with which it is impossible to find a
fellow? For what could be poorer than the naked who has not even a roof over
him? Yea rather not even was it in his power to enjoy the bare ground, but he sat
upon the dunghill. Therefore whenever you see yourself come to poverty,
consider the suffering of the just one, and straightway you shall rise up, and
shake off every thought of despondency. This one calamity therefore seems to
men to be the groundwork of all sufferings together. And the second after it, yea
rather before it, is the affliction of the body. Who then was even so disabled?
Who endured such disease? Who received or saw any one else receive so great
an affliction? No one. Little by little his body was wasted, and a stream of
worms on every side issued from his limbs, the running was constant, and the
evil smell which surrounded him was strong, and the body being destroyed little
by little, and decaying with such putrefaction, used to make food distasteful and

hunger was to him strange and unusual. For not even was he able to enjoy the
nourishment which was given to him. For says he "I see my food to be
loathsome." Whenever then you fall into weakness, O man, remember that body
and that saintly flesh. For it was saintly and pure, even when it had so many
wounds. And if any one belong to the army, and then unjustly and without any
reasonable pretext, be hanged upon the pillory, and has his sides rasped to
pieces, let him not think the matter to be a reproach, nor let him give way to the
pain when he thinks upon this saint. But this man, says one, has much comfort
and consolation in knowing that God was bringing these sufferings upon him.
This indeed especially troubled and disturbed him, to think that the just God who
had in every way been served by him, was at war with him. And he was not able
to find any reasonable pretext for what took place, since, when at least he
afterwards learned the cause, see what piety he showed, for when God said to
him "Do you think that I have had dealings with you in order that you might
appear righteous?" conscious-stricken he says "I will lay my hand upon my
mouth, once have I spoken but to a second word I will not proceed," and again
"as far as the hearing of the ear I have heard you before, but now mine eye has
seen you, wherefore I have held myself to be vile, and am wasted away, and I
consider myself to be earth and ashes."
6. But if you thinkest that this is sufficient for consolation, you will yourself
also be able to experience this comfort. And even if you dost not suffer any of
these misfortunes at the hands of God but owing to the insolence of men; and yet
givest thanks and dost not blaspheme him who is able to prevent them indeed,
but who permits them for the sake of testing you: just as they who suffer at the
hands of God are crowned, so also you shall obtain the same reward, because
you have borne nobly the calamities which were brought upon you from men,
and gave thanks to him who was able indeed to hinder them, but not willing.
Behold then! You have seen poverty and disease, and both in the extremest
degree brought upon this just man. Do you wish that I should show you the
warfare at nature's hands, in such excessive degree waged then against this noble