of the text. For he quotes it not as if it was on purpose to accuse them, but as if
intent upon showing some other things. And he leaves them without any excuse
even by what had before been done. For observe how strong the accusation is
even from the person speaking. For it is neither Paul, nor Peter, nor James, nor
John, but one whom they held in the greatest estimation, the chief of the
Prophets, the friend of God, a man who had been so very zealous in their behalf
as even to be given up to hunger for them, who even to this day has never died.
What then does this man say? "Lord, they have killed Your prophets, and dug
down Your altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life." What could be
more brutal cruelty than this? For when they should have besought pardon for
the offenses they had already committed, they were minded even to kill him.
And all these things put them quite beyond pardon. For it was not during the
prevalence of the famine, but when the season was favorable, and their shame
was done away, and the devils (i.e. false gods) had been put to shame, and the
power of God had been shown, and the king had bowed beneath it, that they
committed these audacities, passing from murder to murder, and making away
with their teachers, and such as would bring them to a better mind. What then
could they have to say to this? Were they too deceivers? Were they too
impostors? Did they not know whence they were either? But they distressed you.
Yes, but they also told you goodly things. But what of the altars? The altars too
did not surely distress you? Did they too exasperate you? See of what obstinacy,
of what insolence they were ever yielding proofs! This is why in another passage
too Paul says, when writing to the Thessalonians, You also have suffered like
things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews, who both killed
the Lord, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us, and please not God,
and are contrary to all men [1 Thessalonians 2:14-15]; which is what he says
here too, that they both dug down the altars, and killed the prophets. But what
says the answer of God unto him? "I have reserved to Myself seven thousand
men who have not bowed the knee to the image of Baal." [1 Kings 19:18] And
what has this to do with the present subject? Some may say. It has a great deal to

do with the present subject. For he shows here that it is the worthy that God uses
to save even if the promise be made to the whole nation. And this he pointed out
above when he said, "Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand
of the sea, a remnant shall be saved." And, "Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left
us a seed, we should have become as Sodoma." [Romans 9:27-29] And he points
it out from this passage also. Wherefore he proceeds to say, "Even so then at this
present time also, there is a remnant according to the election of grace."
Observe that each word maintains its own rank, showing at once God's grace,
and the obedient temper of them that receive salvation. For by saying election,
he showed the approval of them, but by saying grace, he showed the gift of God.
Ver. 6. "And if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no
more grace: but if it be of works, then is it no more grace, otherwise work is no
more work."
He again springs upon the disputatiousness of the Jews, in what has just
been quoted; and on this ground bereaves them of excuse. For you cannot, he
means, so much as say, that the Prophets called indeed, and God invited, and the
state of things cried aloud, and the provoking to jealousy was enough to draw us
to Him, but what was enjoined was grievous, and this is why we could not draw
near, since we had a display of works demanded of us, and laborious welldoings. For you cannot even say this. For how should God have demanded this
of you, when this would just throw His grace into the shade? And this he said
out of a wish to show that He was most desirous that they might be saved.
[Deuteronomy 5:29] For not only would their salvation be easily brought about,
but it was also God's greatest glory to display His love toward man. Why then
are you afraid of drawing near, since you have no works demanded of you? Why
are you bickering and quarrelsome, when grace is before you, and why keep
putting me the Law forward to no purpose whatsoever? For you will not be
saved by that, and will mar this gift also; since if you pertinaciously insist on
being saved by it, you do away with this grace of God. Then that they might not
think this strange, having first taken those seven thousand; he said that they were