THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.5.

each of these may happen in a twofold manner; artificially and
naturally. Now art fails in the operation of nature: because nature
gives the substantial form, which art cannot give; for whatever form
is given by art is accidental; except perchance when art applies a
proper agent to its proper matter, as fire to a combustible; in which
manner animals are produced from certain things by way of
putrefaction.
Whatever artificial change, then, takes place in the water, whether by
mixture or by alteration, the water's nature is not changed.
Consequently such water can be used for Baptism: unless perhaps
such a small quantity of water be mixed artificially with a body that
the compound is something other than water; thus mud is earth
rather than water, and diluted wine is wine rather than water.
But if the change be natural, sometimes it destroys the nature of the
water; and this is when by a natural process water enters into the
substance of a mixed body: thus water changed into the juice of the
grape is wine, wherefore it has not the nature of water. Sometimes,
however, there may be a natural change of the water, without
destruction of species: and this, both by alteration, as we may see in
the case of water heated by the sun; and by mixture, as when the
water of a river has become muddy by being mixed with particles of
earth.
We must therefore say that any water may be used for Baptism, no
matter how much it may be changed, as long as the species of water
is not destroyed; but if the species of water be destroyed, it cannot
be used for Baptism.
Reply to Objection 1: The change in sea-water and in other waters
which we have to hand, is not so great as to destroy the species of
water. And therefore such waters may be used for Baptism.
Reply to Objection 2: Chrism does not destroy the nature of the
water by being mixed with it: just as neither is water changed
wherein meat and the like are boiled: except the substance boiled be
so dissolved that the liquor be of a nature foreign to water; in this we
may be guided by the specific gravity [spissitudine]. If, however,
from the liquor thus thickened plain water be strained, it can be used
for Baptism: just as water strained from mud, although mud cannot
be used for baptizing.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.5.

Reply to Objection 3: The water which flowed from the side of Christ
hanging on the cross, was not the phlegmatic humor, as some have
supposed. For a liquid of this kind cannot be used for Baptism, as
neither can the blood of an animal, or wine, or any liquid extracted
from plants. It was pure water gushing forth miraculously like the
blood from a dead body, to prove the reality of our Lord's body, and
confute the error of the Manichees: water, which is one of the four
elements, showing Christ's body to be composed of the four
elements; blood, proving that it was composed of the four humors.
Reply to Objection 4: Baptism may be conferred with lye and the
waters of Sulphur Baths: because such like waters are not
incorporated, artificially or naturally, with certain mixed bodies, and
suffer only a certain alteration by passing through certain bodies.
Reply to Objection 5: Rose-water is a liquid distilled from roses:
consequently it cannot be used for Baptism. For the same reason
chemical waters cannot be used, as neither can wine. Nor does the
comparison hold with rain-water, which for the most part is formed
by the condensing of vapors, themselves formed from water, and
contains a minimum of the liquid matter from mixed bodies; which
liquid matter by the force of nature, which is stronger than art, is
transformed in this process of condensation into real water, a result
which cannot be produced artificially. Consequently rain-water
retains no properties of any mixed body; which cannot be said of
rose-water or chemical waters.