heavenly bodies can reach the intellect and will, forasmuch, namely,
as both intellect and will receive something from the inferior powers
which are affixed to corporeal organs. But in this the intellect and
will are differently situated. For the intellect, of necessity, receives
from the inferior apprehensive powers: wherefore if the imaginative,
cogitative, or memorative powers be disturbed, the action of the
intellect is, of necessity, disturbed also. The will, on the contrary,
does not, of necessity, follow the inclination of the inferior appetite;
for although the passions in the irascible and concupiscible have a
certain force in inclining the will; nevertheless the will retains the
power of following the passions or repressing them. Therefore the
impressions of the heavenly bodies, by virtue of which the inferior
powers can be changed, has less influence on the will, which is the
proximate cause of human actions, than on the intellect.
To maintain therefore that heavenly bodies are the cause of human
actions is proper to those who hold that intellect does not differ from
sense. Wherefore some of these said that "such is the will of men, as
is the day which the father of men and of gods brings on" (Odyssey
xviii 135). Since, therefore, it is manifest that intellect and will are not
acts of corporeal organs, it is impossible that heavenly bodies be the
cause of human actions.
Reply to Objection 1: The spiritual substances, that move the
heavenly bodies, do indeed act on corporeal things by means of the
heavenly bodies; but they act immediately on the human intellect by
enlightening it. On the other hand, they cannot compel the will, as
stated above (Question 111, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 2: Just as the multiformity of corporeal
movements is reducible to the uniformity of the heavenly movement
as to its cause: so the multiformity of actions proceeding from the
intellect and the will is reduced to a uniform principle which is the
Divine intellect and will.
Reply to Objection 3: The majority of men follow their passions,
which are movements of the sensitive appetite, in which movements
of the heavenly bodies can cooperate: but few are wise enough to
resist these passions. Consequently astrologers are able to foretell
the truth in the majority of cases, especially in a general way. But not
in particular cases; for nothing prevents man resisting his passions
by his free-will. Wherefore the astrologers themselves are wont to
say that "the wise man is stronger than the stars" [Ptolemy,

Centiloquium, prop. 5], forasmuch as, to wit, he conquers his
passions.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether heavenly bodies can act on the demons?

Objection 1: It would seem that heavenly bodies can act on the
demons. For the demons, according to certain phases of the moon,
can harass men, who on that account are called lunatics, as appears
from Mt. 4:24 and 17:14. But this would not be if they were not
subject to the heavenly bodies. Therefore the demons are subject to
them.
Objection 2: Further, necromancers observe certain constellations in
order to invoke the demons. But these would not be invoked through
the heavenly bodies unless they were subject to them. Therefore
they are subject to them.
Objection 3: Further, heavenly bodies are more powerful than
inferior bodies. But the demons are confined to certain inferior
bodies, namely, "herbs, stones, animals, and to certain sounds and
words, forms and figures," as Porphyry says, quoted by Augustine
(De Civ. Dei x, 11). Much more therefore are the demons subject to
the action of heavenly bodies.
On the contrary, The demons are superior in the order of nature, to
the heavenly bodies. But the "agent is superior to the patient," as
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 16). Therefore the demons are not
subject to the action of heavenly bodies.
I answer that, There have been three opinions about the demons. In
the first place the Peripatetics denied the existence of demons; and
held that what is ascribed to the demons, according to the
necromantic art, is effected by the power of the heavenly bodies.
This is what Augustine (De Civ. Dei x, 11) relates as having been held
by Porphyry, namely, that "on earth men fabricate certain powers
useful in producing certain effects of the stars." But this opinion is
manifestly false. For we know by experience that many things are
done by demons, for which the power of heavenly bodies would in
no way suffice: for instance, that a man in a state of delirium should
speak an unknown tongue, recite poetry and authors of whom he
has no previous knowledge; that necromancers make statues to
speak and move, and other like things.
For this reason the Platonists were led to hold that demons are