was not ascended, but even while they are conversing, would be present ere they
were aware. For if they said on a former occasion, "Where are You going?" [John
13:36] much more would they have said it now.
"Will You at this time," say they, "restore the kingdom to Israel?"
(Recapitulation). They so well knew his mildness, that after His Passion also
they ask Him, "Will you restore?" And yet He had before said to them, "You
shall hear of wars and rumors of wars, but the end is not yet," nor shall
Jerusalem be taken. But now they ask Him about the kingdom, not about the
end. And besides, He does not speak at great length with them after the
Resurrection. They address then this question, as thinking that they themselves
would be in high honor, if this should come to pass. But He (for as touching this
restoration, that it was not to be, He did not openly declare; for what needed they
to learn this? Hence they do not again ask, "What is the sign of Your coming, and
of the end of the world?" for they are afraid to say that: but, "Will You restore the
kingdom to Israel?" for they thought there was such a kingdom), but He, I say,
both in parables had shown that the time was not near, and here where they
asked, and He answered thereto, "You shall receive power," says He, "when the
Holy Ghost has come upon you. Is come upon you," not, "is sent," [to show the
Spirit's coequal Majesty. How then do you dare, O opponent of the Spirit, to call
Him a creature ?]. "And you shall be witnesses to Me." He hinted at the
Ascension. [And when he had spoken these things. ] Which they had heard
before, and He now reminds them of. ["He was taken up."] Already it has been
shown, that He went up into heaven. ["And a cloud, etc."] "Clouds and darkness
are under His feet," [Psalm 18:9; 97:2] says the Scripture: for this is declared by
the expression, "And a cloud received Him:" the Lord of heaven, it means. For as
a king is shown by the royal chariot, so was the royal chariot sent for Him.
[Behold, two men, etc.] That they may vent no sorrowful exclamations, and that
it might not be with them as it was with Elisha, [2 Kings 2:12] who, when his
master was taken up, rent his mantle. And what say they? "This Jesus, which is
taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come." And, "Behold, two men stood

by them." [Matthew 18:16] With good reason: for "in the mouth of two witnesses
shall every word be established" [Deuteronomy 17:6]: and these utter the same
things. And it is said, that they were "in white apparel." In the same manner as
they had already seen an Angel at the sepulchre, who had even told them their
own thoughts; so here also an Angel is the preacher of His Ascension; although
indeed the Prophets had frequently foretold it, as well as the Resurrection.
Everywhere it is Angels as at the Nativity, "for that which is conceived in
her," says one, "is by the Holy Ghost" [Matthew 1:20]: and again to Mary, "Fear
not, Mary." [Luke 1:30] And at the Resurrection: "He is not here; He is risen,
and goes before you." [Luke 24:6] "Come, and see!" [Matthew 28:6] And at the
Second Coming. For that they may not be utterly in amaze, therefore it is added,
"Shall thus come." [Matthew 25:31] They recover their breath a little; if indeed
He shall come again, if also thus come, and not be unapproachable! And that
expression also, that it is "from them" He is taken up, is not idly added. And of
the Resurrection indeed Christ Himself bears witness (because of all things this
is, next to the Nativity, nay even above the Nativity, the most wonderful: His
raising Himself to life again): for, "Destroy," He says, "this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up." [John 2:19] "Shall thus come," say they. If any therefore
desires to see Christ; if any grieves that he has not seen Him: having this heard,
let him show forth an admirable life, and certainly he shall see Him, and shall
not be disappointed. For Christ will come with greater glory, though "thus," in
this manner, with a body ; and much more wondrous will it be to see Him
descending from heaven. But for what He will come, they do not add.
["Shall thus come," etc.] This is a confirmation of the Resurrection; for if he
was taken up with a body, much rather must He have risen again with a body.
Where are those who disbelieve the Resurrection? Who are they, I pray? Are
they Gentiles, or Christians? For I am ignorant. But no, I know well: they are
Gentiles, who also disbelieve the work of Creation. For the two denials go
together: the denial that God creates any thing from nothing, and the denial that
He raises up what has been buried. But then, being ashamed to be thought such