did not see Christ, he saw no miracle: he beheld Jerusalem standing yet entire
([συνεστὥτα]): he believed Philip. How came he to behave thus? His soul was
earnest ([μεμεριμνημένη]). Yet the thief (on the cross) had seen miracles: the
wise men had seen a star; but this man, nothing of the kind. So great a thing is
the careful reading of the Scriptures! What of Paul then! Did he not study the
law? But he, it seems to me, was specially reserved, for the purpose which I have
already mentioned by anticipation, because Christ would fain draw to Himself
the Jews by inducements from every quarter. For had they been in their right
mind, nothing was so likely to do them good as this; for this, more than miracles
and all else, was calculated to attract them: as, on the other hand, nothing is so
apt to prove a stumbling block to men of duller minds. See then how, after the
Apostle, we have God also doing miracles. They accused the Apostles after these
[miracles of theirs]; they cast them into prison: see thereupon God doing the
miracles. For instance, the bringing them out of prison, was His miracle: the
bringing Philip, His miracle: the bringing Paul over, was His.— Observe in what
way Paul is honored, in what way the eunuch. There, Christ appears, probably
because of his hardness, and because Ananias would not (else) have been
persuaded. Conversant with these wonders, let us show ourselves worthy. But
many in these times, even when they come to church, do not know what is read;
whereas the eunuch, even in public ([ἐ] [π᾿ ἀγορἅς]) and riding in his chariot,
applied himself to the reading of the Scriptures. Not so you: none takes the Bible
in hand: nay, everything rather than the Bible.
Say, what are the Scriptures for? For as much as in you lies, it is all undone.
What is the Church for? Tie up the Bibles: perhaps the judgment would not be
such, not such the punishment: if one were to bury them in dung, that he might
not hear them, he would not so insult them as you do now. For say, what is the
insult there? That the man has buried them. And what here? That we do not hear
them. Say, when is a person most insulted— when he is silent, and one makes no
answer, or, when he does speak (and is unheeded)? So that the insult is greater in
the present case, when He does speak and you will not hear: greater the

contempt. "Speak not to us" [Isaiah 30:10], we read, they said of old to the
Prophets: but you do worse, saying, Speak: we will not do. For there they turned
them away that they should not even speak, as feeling that from the voice itself
they got some sort of awe and obligation; whereas you, in the excess of your
contempt, do not even this. Believe me, if you stopped our mouths by putting
your hands over them, the insult would not be so great as it is now. For say,
whether shows greater contempt, he that hears, even when hindering by this
action, or, he that will not even hear? Say— if we shall look at it as a case of an
insult offered— suppose one person to check the party insulting him, and to stop
his mouth, as being hurt by the insults, and another person to show no concern,
but pretend not even to hear them: whether will show most contempt? Would
you not say the latter? For the former shows that he feels himself hit: the latter
all but stops the mouth of God. Did ye shudder at what was said? Why, the
mouth by which God speaks, is the mouth of God. Just as our mouth is the
mouth of our soul, though the soul has no mouth, so the mouth of the Prophets is
the mouth of God. Hear, and shudder. There, common (to the whole
congregation) stands the deacon crying aloud, and saying, "Let us attend to the
reading." It is the common voice of the whole Church, the voice which he utters,
and yet none does attend. After him begins the Reader, "The Prophecy of
Esaias," and still none attends, although Prophecy has nothing of man in it. Then
after this, he says, "Thus says the Lord," and still none attends. Then after this
punishments and vengeances, and still even then none attends. But what is the
common excuse? "It is always the same things over again." This it is most of all,
that ruins you. Suppose you knew the things, even so you certainly ought not to
turn away: since in the theatres also, is it not always the same things acted over
again, and still you take no disgust? How dare you talk about "the same things,"
you who know not so much as the names of the Prophets? Are you not ashamed
to say, that this is why you do not listen, because it is "the same things over
again," while you do not know the names of those who are read, and this, though
always hearing the same things? You have yourself confessed that the same