regarded as the first principle, as is stated De Anima i, 2, it followed
that the soul was of the nature of God Himself. According to this
supposition, also, the Manichaeans, thinking that God was corporeal
light, held that the soul was part of that light bound up with the body.
Then a further step in advance was made, and some surmised the
existence of something incorporeal, not apart from the body, but the
form of a body; so that Varro said, "God is a soul governing the
world by movement and reason," as Augustine relates (De Civ. Dei
VII 6, IV 31). So some supposed man's soul to be part of that one
soul, as man is a part of the whole world; for they were unable to go
so far as to understand the different degrees of spiritual substance,
except according to the distinction of bodies.
But, all these theories are impossible, as proved above (Question 3,
Articles 1,8; and Question 75, Article 1), wherefore it is evidently
false that the soul is of the substance of God.
Reply to Objection 1: The term "breathe" is not to be taken in the
material sense; but as regards the act of God, to breathe [spirare], is
the same as to "make a spirit." Moreover, in the material sense, man
by breathing does not send forth anything of his own substance, but
an extraneous thing.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the soul is a simple form in its
essence, yet it is not its own existence, but is a being by
participation, as above explained (Question 75, Article 5, ad 4).
Therefore it is not a pure act like God.
Reply to Objection 3: That which differs, properly speaking, differs in
something; wherefore we seek for difference where we find also
resemblance. For this reason things which differ must in some way
be compound; since they differ in something, and in something
resemble each other. In this sense, although all that differ are
diverse, yet all things that are diverse do not differ. For simple things
are diverse; yet do not differ from one another by differences which
enter into their composition. For instance, a man and a horse differ
by the difference of rational and irrational; but we cannot say that
these again differ by some further difference.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the soul was produced by creation?

Objection 1: It would seem that the soul was not produced by
creation. For that which has in itself something material is produced
from matter. But the soul is in part material, since it is not a pure act.
Therefore the soul was made of matter; and hence it was not created.
Objection 2: Further, every actuality of matter is educed from the
potentiality of that matter; for since matter is in potentiality to act,
any act pre-exists in matter potentially. But the soul is the act of
corporeal matter, as is clear from its definition. Therefore the soul is
educed from the potentiality of matter.
Objection 3: Further, the soul is a form. Therefore, if the soul is
created, all other forms also are created. Thus no forms would come
into existence by generation; which is not true.
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 1:27): "God created man to His own
image." But man is like to God in his soul. Therefore the soul was
created.
I answer that, The rational soul can be made only by creation; which,
however, is not true of other forms. The reason is because, since to
be made is the way to existence, a thing must be made in such a way
as is suitable to its mode of existence. Now that properly exists
which itself has existence; as it were, subsisting in its own
existence. Wherefore only substances are properly and truly called
beings; whereas an accident has not existence, but something is
(modified) by it, and so far is it called a being; for instance,
whiteness is called a being, because by it something is white. Hence
it is said Metaph. vii, Did. vi, 1 that an accident should be described
as "of something rather than as something." The same is to be said
of all non-subsistent forms. Therefore, properly speaking, it does not
belong to any non-existing form to be made; but such are said to be
made through the composite substances being made. On the other
hand, the rational soul is a subsistent form, as above explained
(Question 75, Article 2). Wherefore it is competent to be and to be
made. And since it cannot be made of pre-existing matter---whether
corporeal, which would render it a corporeal being---or spiritual,
which would involve the transmutation of one spiritual substance
into another, we must conclude that it cannot exist except by