John 18:22
"And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by smote Him
with the palm of his hand."
What could be more audacious than this? Shudder, O heaven, be astounded,
O earth, at the long-suffering of the Lord, and the senselessness of the servants!
Yet what was it that He said? He said not, "Why do you ask Me," as if refusing to
speak, but wishing to remove every pretext for senseless behavior; and being
upon this buffeted, though He was able to shake, to annihilate, or to remove all
things, He does not any one of these, but speaks words able to relax any
brutality.

John 18:23
"And He says, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil."
That is, "If you can lay hold on My words, declare it; but if you can not,
why do you strike Me?" Do you see that the judgment-hall is full of tumult, and
trouble, and passion, and confusion? The high priest asked deceitfully and
treacherously, Christ answered in a straightforward manner, and as was meet.
What then was next to be done? Either to refute, or to accept what He said. This
however is not done, but a servant buffets Him. So far was this from being a
court of justice, and the proceedings those of a conspiracy, and a deed of tyranny.
Then not having even so made any farther discovery, they send Him bound to
Caiaphas.

John 18:25
"And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself."
Wonderful, by what a lethargy that hot and furious one was possessed,
when Jesus was being led away! After such things as had taken place, he does
not move, but still warms himself, that you may learn how great is the weakness
of our nature if God abandons. And, being questioned, he denies again.

John 18:26
Then says "the kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, (grieving at what had
taken place,) Did I not see you in the garden?"
But neither did the garden bring him to remember what had taken place, nor
the great affection which Jesus there had shown by those words, but all these
from pressure of anxiety he banished from his mind. But why have the
Evangelists with one accord written concerning him? Not as accusing the
disciple, but as desiring to teach us, how great an evil it is not to commit all to
God, but to trust to one's self. But do thou admire the tender care of his Master,
who, though a prisoner and bound, took great forethought for His disciple,
raising Peter up, when he was down, by His look, and launching him into a sea
of tears.
[john 18:28]"They lead Him therefore from Caiaphas to Pilate."
This was done, in order that the number of His judges might show, even
against their will, how fully tested was His truth. "And it was early." Before cock
crow He was brought to Caiaphas, early in the morning to Pilate; whence the
Evangelist shows, that being questioned by Caiaphas during an entire half of the
night, He was in nothing proved guilty; wherefore Caiaphas sent Him on to
Pilate. But leaving these things for the others to relate, John speaks of what
follows next. And observe the ridiculous conduct of the Jews. They who had
seized the innocent, and taken up arms, do not enter into the hall of judgment,
"lest they should be polluted." And tell me, what kind of pollution was it to set
foot in a judgment-hall, where wrong-doers suffer justice? They who paid tithes
of mint and anise, did not think they were polluted when bent on killing unjustly,
but thought that they polluted themselves by even treading in a court of justice.
"And why did they not kill Him, instead of bringing Him to Pilate?" In the first
place, the greater part of their rule and authority had been cut away, when their
affairs were placed under the power of the Romans; and besides, they feared lest