which is to be.
But if these men had been kept right, it may be said, and there had been no
one to bring in an offense, would not this saying have been convicted of
falsehood? By no means, for neither would it have been spoken. For if all were
to have been kept right, He would not have said, "it must needs be that they
come," but because He foreknew they would be of themselves incorrigible,
therefore He said, the offenses will surely come.
And wherefore did He not take them out of the way? It may be said. Why,
wherefore should they have been taken out of the way? For the sake of them that
are hurt? But not thence is the ruin of them that are hurt, but from their own
remissness. And the virtuous prove it, who, so far from being injured thereby,
are even in the greatest degree profited, such as was Job, such as was Joseph,
such as were all the righteous, and the apostles. But if many perish, it is from
their own slumbering. But if it were not so, but the ruin was the effect of the
offenses, all must have perished. And if there are those who escape, let him who
does not escape impute it to himself. For the offenses, as I have said, awaken,
and render more quick-sighted, and sharper, not only him that is preserved; but
even him that has fallen into them, if he rise up again quickly, for they render
him more safe, and make him more difficult to overcome; so that if we be
watchful, no small profit do we reap from hence, even to be continually awake.
For if when we have enemies, and when so many dangers are pressing upon us,
we sleep, what should we be if living in security. Nay, if you will, look at the
first man. For if having lived in paradise a short time, perchance not so much as
a whole day, and having enjoyed delights, he drove on to such a pitch of
wickedness, as even to imagine an equality with God, and to account the
deceiver a benefactor, and not to keep to one commandment; if he had lived the
rest of his life also without affliction, what would he not have done?
2. But when we say these things, they make other objections again, asking,
And why did God make him such? God did not make him such, far from it, since
then neither would He have punished him. For if we in those matters in which

we are the cause, do not find fault with our servant, much more will not the God
of all. "But whence did this come to pass?" one may say. Of himself and his own
remissness. "What means, of himself?" Ask yourself. For if it be not of
themselves the bad are bad, do not punish your servant nor reprove your wife for
what errors she may commit, neither beat your son, nor blame your friend, nor
hate your enemy that does despite to you: for all these deserve to be pitied, not to
be punished, unless they offend of themselves. "But I am not able to practise
self-restraint," one may say. And yet, when you perceive the cause not to be with
them, but of another necessity, you can practise self-restraint. When at least a
servant being taken with sickness does not the things enjoined him, so far from
blaming thou dost rather excuse him. Thus you are a witness, that the one thing
is of one's self, the other not of one's self. So that here too, if you knew that he
was wicked from being born such, so far from blaming, you would rather have
shown him indulgence. For surely, when you make him allowance for his illness,
it could not be that you would have refused to make allowance for God's act of
creation, if indeed he had been made such from the very first.
And in another way too it is easy to stop the mouths of such men, for great
is the abounding power of the truth. For wherefore do you never find fault with
your servant, because he is not of a beautiful countenance, that he is not of fine
stature in his body, that he is not able to fly? Because these things are natural. So
then from blame against his nature he is acquitted, and no man gainsays it. When
therefore you blame, you show that the fault is not of nature but of his choice.
For if in those things, which we do not blame, we bear witness that the whole is
of nature, it is evident that where we reprove, we declare that the offense is of
the choice.
Do not then bring forward, I beseech you, perverse reasonings, neither
sophistries and webs slighter than the spider's, but answer me this again: Did
God make all men? It is surely plain to every man. How then are not all equal in
respect of virtue and vice? Whence are the good, and gentle, and meek? Whence
are the worthless and evil? For if these things do not require any purpose, but are