heaven. Therefore the movement of the heaven will cease.
Further: "Thy sun shall go down no more, and thy moon shall not
decrease" (Is. 60:20). Now the setting of the sun and the phases of
the moon are caused by the movement of the heavens. Therefore the
heavenly movement will cease at length.
Further, it is shown in De Gener. ii that "the movement of the heaven
is for the sake of continual generation in this lower world." But
generation will cease when the number of the elect is complete.
Therefore the movement of the heaven will cease.
Further, all movement is for some end (Metaph. ii). But all movement
for an end ceases when the end is obtained. Therefore either the
movement of the heaven will never obtain its end, and thus it would
be useless, or it will cease at length.
Further, rest is more noble than movement, because things are more
likened to God, Who is supremely immovable, by being themselves
unmoved. Now the movement of lower bodies terminates naturally in
rest. Therefore since the heavenly bodies are far nobler, their
movement terminates naturally in rest.
I answer that, There are three opinions touching this question. The
first is of the philosophers who assert that the movement of the
heaven will last for ever. But this is not in keeping with our faith,
which holds that the elect are in a certain number preordained by
God, so that the begetting of men will not last for ever, and for the
same reason, neither will other things that are directed to the
begetting of men, such as the movement of the heaven and the
variations of the elements. Others say that the movement of the
heaven will cease naturally. But this again is false, since every body
that is moved naturally has a place wherein it rests naturally,
whereto it is moved naturally, and whence it is not moved except by
violence. Now no such place can be assigned to the heavenly body,
since it is not more natural to the sun to move towards a point in the
east than to move away from it, wherefore either its movement would
not be altogether natural, or its movement would not naturally
terminate in rest. Hence we must agree with others who say that the
movement of the heaven will cease at this renewal of the world, not
indeed by any natural cause, but as a result of the will of God. For
the body in question, like other bodies, was made to serve man in

the two ways above mentioned (Article 1): and hereafter in the state
of glory man will no longer need one of these services, that namely
in respect of which the heavenly bodies serve man for the
sustenance of his bodily life. Now in this way the heavenly bodies
serve man by their movement, in so far as by the heavenly
movement the human race is multiplied, plants and animals needful
for man's use generated, and the temperature of the atmosphere
rendered conducive to health. Therefore the movement of the
heavenly body will cease as soon as man is glorified.
Reply to Objection 1: These words refer to the earth in its present
state, when it is able to be the principle of the generation and
corruption of plants. This is evident from its being said there: "All
the days of the earth, seed time and harvest," etc. And it is simply to
be granted that as long as the earth is fit for seed time and harvest,
the movement of the heaven will not cease.
We reply in like manner to OBJ 2 that the Lord is speaking there of
the duration of the seed of Israel with regard to the present state.
This is evident from the words: "Then also the seed of Israel shall
fail, so as not to be a nation before Me for ever." For after this state
there will be no succession of days: wherefore the laws also which
He had mentioned will cease after this state.
Reply to Objection 3: The end which is there assigned to the
heavenly bodies is their proximate end, because it is their proper act.
But this act is directed further to another end, namely the service of
man, which is shown by the words of Dt. 4:19: "Lest perhaps lifting
up thy eyes to heaven, thou see the sun and the moon and all the
stars of heaven, and being deceived by error thou adore and serve
them, which the Lord thy God created for the service of all the
nations, that are under heaven." Therefore we should form our
judgment of the heavenly bodies from the service of man, rather than
from the end assigned to them in Genesis. Moreover the heavenly
bodies, as stated above, will serve glorified man in another way;
hence it does not follow that they will remain without a purpose.
Reply to Objection 4: Movement does not belong to the perfection of
a heavenly body, except in so far as thereby it is the cause of
generation and corruption in this lower world: and in that respect
also this movement makes the heavenly body participate in the
Divine goodness by way of a certain likeness of causality. But
movement does not belong to the perfection of the substance of the