that among men appear desirable.
For if the man who is proud of things really good is wretched and
miserable, and loses the reward of all those things, must not he who is exalted by
things that are nought, and puffs himself up because of a shadow or the flower of
the grass, (for such is this world's glory,) be more ridiculous than any, when he
does just as some poor needy man might do, pining all his time with hunger, yet
if ever he should chance one night to see a dream of good fortune, filled with
conceit because of it?
O wretched and miserable! When your soul is perishing by a most grievous
disease, when you are poor with utter poverty, are you high-minded because you
have such and such a number of talents of gold? Because you have a multitude
of slaves and cattle? Yet these are not yours; and if you dost not believe my
words, learn from the experience of those who have gone before you. And if you
are so drunken, that you can not be instructed even from what has befallen
others, wait a little, and you shall know by what befalls yourself that these things
avail you nothing, when gasping for life, and master not of a single hour, not
even of a little moment, you shall unwillingly leave them to those who are about
you, and these perhaps those whom you would not. For many have not been
permitted even to give directions concerning them, but have departed suddenly,
desiring to enjoy them, but not permitted, dragged from them, and forced to
yield them up to others, giving place by compulsion to those to whom they
would not. That this be not our case, let us, while we are yet in strength and
health, send forward our riches hence to our own city, for thus only and in no
other way shall we be able to enjoy them; so shall we lay them up in a place
inviolate and safe. For there is nothing, there is nothing there that can take them
from us; no death, no attested wills, no successors to inheritances, no false
informations, no plottings against us, but he who has departed hence bearing
away great wealth with him may enjoy it there for ever. Who then is so wretched
as not to desire to revel in riches which are his own throughout? Let us then
transfer our wealth, and remove it there. We shall not need for such a removal

asses, or camels, or carriages, or ships, (God has relieved even us from this
difficulty,) but we only want the poor, the lame, the crippled, the infirm. These
are entrusted with this transfer, these convey our riches to heaven, these
introduce the masters of such wealth as this to the inheritance of goods
everlasting. Which may it be that we all attain through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 17 on the Gospel of John
John 1:28-29
"These things were done in Bethany beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.
The next day he sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold the Lamb of God,
which takes away the sin of the world."
1. A great virtue is boldness and freedom of speech, and the making all
things second in importance to the confessing of Christ; so great and admirable,
that the Only-begotten Son of God proclaims such an one in the presence of the
Father. [Luke 12:8] Yet the recompense is more than just, for you confess upon
earth, He in heaven, thou in the presence of men, He before the Father and all
the angels.
Such an one was John, who regarded not the multitude, nor opinion, nor
anything else belonging to men, but trod all this beneath his feet, and proclaimed
to all with becoming freedom the things respecting Christ. And therefore the
Evangelist marks the very place, to show the boldness of the loud-voiced herald.
For it was not in a house, not in a corner, not in the wilderness, but in the midst
of the multitude, after that he had occupied Jordan, when all that were baptized
by him were present, (for the Jews came upon him as he was baptizing,) there it
was that he proclaimed aloud that wonderful confession concerning Christ, full
of those sublime and great and mysterious doctrines, and that he was not worthy
to unloose the latchet of His shoe. Wherefore he says, "These things were done
in Bethany," or, as all the more correct copies have it, "in Bethabara." For
Bethany was not "beyond Jordan," nor bordering on the wilderness, but
somewhere near to Jerusalem.
He marks the places also for another reason. Since he was not about to
relate matters of old date, but such as had come to pass but a little time before,
he makes those who were present and had beheld, witnesses of his words, and