SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.175, C.2.

that they might disperse throughout the whole world, and preach His
faith everywhere, according to Mt. 28:19, "Going . . . teach ye all
nations." Now it was not fitting that they who were being sent to
teach others should need to be taught by others, either as to how
they should speak to other people, or as to how they were to
understand those who spoke to them; and all the more seeing that
those who were being sent were of one nation, that of Judea,
according to Is. 27:6, "When they shall rush out from Jacob . . . they
shall fill the face of the world with seed." Moreover those who were
being sent were poor and powerless; nor at the outset could they
have easily found someone to interpret their words faithfully to
others, or to explain what others said to them, especially as they
were sent to unbelievers. Consequently it was necessary, in this
respect, that God should provide them with the gift of tongues; in
order that, as the diversity of tongues was brought upon the nations
when they fell away to idolatry, according to Gn. 11, so when the
nations were to be recalled to the worship of one God a remedy to
this diversity might be applied by the gift of tongues.
Reply to Objection 1: As it is written (1 Cor. 12:7), "the manifestation
of the Spirit is given to every man unto profit"; and consequently
both Paul and the other apostles were divinely instructed in the
languages of all nations sufficiently for the requirements of the
teaching of the faith. But as regards the grace and elegance of style
which human art adds to a language, the Apostle was instructed in
his own, but not in a foreign tongue. Even so they were sufficiently
instructed in wisdom and scientific knowledge, as required for
teaching the faith, but not as to all things known by acquired
science, for instance the conclusions of arithmetic and geometry.
Reply to Objection 2: Although either was possible, namely that,
while speaking in one tongue they should be understood by all, or
that they should speak in all tongues, it was more fitting that they
should speak in all tongues, because this pertained to the perfection
of their knowledge, whereby they were able not only to speak, but
also to understand what was said by others. Whereas if their one
language were intelligible to all, this would either have been due to
the knowledge of those who understood their speech, or it would
have amounted to an illusion, since a man's words would have had a
different sound in another's ears, from that with which they were
uttered. Hence a gloss says on Acts 2:6 that "it was a greater miracle
that they should speak all kinds of tongues"; and Paul says (1 Cor.
14:18): "I thank my God I speak with all your tongues."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.175, C.2.