spiritual bond, wherefore there is no need for it to be done in the
same way as material contracts, in order that it be binding, as in the
case of matrimony.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the like cannot plight themselves to
one another in words, they can do so by signs, and such signs count
for words.
Reply to Objection 3: According to Hugh of S. Victor (Tract. vii, Sum.
Sent.), persons who are being married should give their consent by
accepting one another freely. and this is judged to be the case if they
show no dissent when they are being wedded. Wherefore in such a
case the words of the parents are taken as being the maid's, for the
fact that she does not contradict them is a sign that they are her
words.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether consent given in words expressive of the

future makes a marriage?
Objection 1: It would seem that consent given in words expressive of
the future makes a marriage. For as present is to present, so is
future to future. But consent given in words expressive of the
present makes a marriage in the present. Therefore consent given in
words expressive of the future makes a marriage in the future.
Objection 2: Further, in other civil contracts, just as in matrimony, a
certain obligation results from the words expressing consent. Now in
other contracts it matters not whether the obligation is effected by
words of the present or of the future tense. Therefore neither does it
make any difference in matrimony.
Objection 3: Further, by the religious vow man contracts a spiritual
marriage with God. Now the religious vow is expressed in words of
the future tense, and is binding. Therefore carnal marriage also can
be effected by words of the future tense.
On the contrary, A man who consents in words of the future tense to
take a particular woman as his wife, and after, by words of the
present tense, consents to take another, according to law must take
the second for his wife (cap. Sicut ex Litteris, De spons. et matr.).
But this would not be the case if consent given in words of the future
tense made a marriage, since from the very fact that his marriage
with the one is valid, he cannot, as long as she lives, marry another.
Therefore consent given in words of the future tense does not make
a marriage.
Further, he who promises to do a certain thing does it not yet. Now
he who consents in words of the future tense, promises to marry a
certain woman. Therefore he does not marry her yet.
I answer that, The sacramental causes produce their effect by
signifying it; hence they effect what they signify. Since therefore
when a man expresses his consent by words of the future tense, he
does not signify that he is marrying, but promises that he will marry,
it follows that a consent expressed in this manner does not make a
marriage, but a promise [sponsionem] of marriage, and this promise
is known as a betrothal [sponsalia].