THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.5.

greater worth than the others, as stated above (Question 65, Article
3), the result is that there is in the words of the form of this
sacrament a created power which causes the change to be wrought
in it: instrumental, however, as in the other sacraments, as stated
above (Question 62, Articles 3,4). For since these words are uttered
in the person of Christ, it is from His command that they receive their
instrumental power from Him, just as His other deeds and sayings
derive their salutary power instrumentally, as was observed above
(Question 48, Article 6; Question 56, Article 1, ad 3).
Reply to Objection 1: When the bread is said to be changed into
Christ's body solely by the power of the Holy Ghost, the instrumental
power which lies in the form of this sacrament is not excluded: just
as when we say that the smith alone makes a knife we do not deny
the power of the hammer.
Reply to Objection 2: No creature can work miracles as the chief
agent. yet it can do so instrumentally, just as the touch of Christ's
hand healed the leper. And in this fashion Christ's words change the
bread into His body. But in Christ's conception, whereby His body
was fashioned, it was impossible for anything derived from His body
to have the instrumental power of forming that very body. Likewise
in creation there was no term wherein the instrumental action of a
creature could be received. Consequently there is no comparison.
Reply to Objection 3: The aforesaid words, which work the
consecration, operate sacramentally. Consequently, the converting
power latent under the forms of these sacraments follows the
meaning, which is terminated in the uttering of the last word. And
therefore the aforesaid words have this power in the last instant of
their being uttered, taken in conjunction with those uttered before.
And this power is simple by reason of the thing signified, although
there be composition in the words uttered outwardly.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the aforesaid expressions are true?

Objection 1: It seems that the aforesaid expressions are not true.
Because when we say: "This is My body," the word "this" designates
a substance. But according to what was said above (Articles 1,4, ad
3; Question 75, Articles 2,7), when the pronoun "this" is spoken, the
substance of the bread is still there, because the transubstantiation
takes place in the last instant of pronouncing the words. But it is
false to say: "Bread is Christ's body." Consequently this expression,
"This is My body," is false.
Objection 2: Further, the pronoun "this" appeals to the senses. But
the sensible species in this sacrament are neither Christ's body nor
even its accidents. Therefore this expression, "This is My body,"
cannot be true.
Objection 3: Further, as was observed above (Article 4, ad 3), these
words, by their signification, effect the change of the bread into the
body of Christ. But an effective cause is understood as preceding its
effect. Therefore the meaning of these words is understood as
preceding the change of the bread into the body of Christ. But
previous to the change this expression, "This is My body," is false.
Therefore the expression is to be judged as false simply; and the
same reason holds good of the other phrase: "This is the chalice of
My blood," etc.
On the contrary, These words are pronounced in the person of
Christ, Who says of Himself (Jn. 14:6): "I am the truth."
I answer that, There have been many opinions on this point. Some
have said that in this expression, "This is My body," the word "this"
implies demonstration as conceived, and not as exercised, because
the whole phrase is taken materially, since it is uttered by a way of
narration: for the priest relates that Christ said: "This is My body."
But such a view cannot hold good, because then these words would
not be applied to the corporeal matter present, and consequently the
sacrament would not be valid: for Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in
Joan.): "The word is added to the element, and this becomes a
sacrament." Moreover this solution ignores entirely the difficulty
which this question presents: for there is still the objection in regard