virginity to the hundredfold fruit, and to the aureole. Now the
sixtyfold fruit is not due to every widow, but only, as some say, to
one who vows to remain a widow. Therefore it would seem that
neither is the aureole due to any kind of virginity, but only to that
which is observed by vow.
Objection 7: Further, reward is not given to that which is done of
necessity, since all merit depends on the will. But some are virgins
of necessity, such as those who are naturally cold-blooded, and
eunuchs. Therefore an aureole is not always due to virginity.
On the contrary, A gloss on Ex. 25:25: "Thou shalt also make a little
golden crown [coronam aureolam]" says: "This crown denotes the
new hymn which the virgins sing in the presence of the Lamb, those,
to wit, who follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth." Therefore the
reward due to virginity is called an aureole.
Further, It is written (Is. 56:4): "Thus saith the Lord to the eunuchs":
and the text continues (Is. 56: 5): "I will give to them . . . a name
better than sons and daughters": and a gloss [St. Augustine, De
Virginit. xxv] says: "This refers to their peculiar and transcendent
glory." Now the eunuchs "who have made themselves eunuchs for
the kingdom of heaven" (Mt. 19:12) denote virgins. Therefore it would
seem that some special reward is due to virginity, and this is called
the aureole.
I answer that, Where there is a notable kind of victory, a special
crown is due. Wherefore since by virginity a person wins a signal
victory over the flesh, against which a continuous battle is waged:
"The flesh lusteth against the spirit," etc. (Gal. 5:17), a special crown
called the aureole is due to virginity. This indeed is the common
opinion of all; but all are not agreed as to the kind of virginity to
which it is due. For some say that the aureole is due to the act. So
that she who actually remains a virgin will have the aureole provided
she be of the number of the saved. But this would seem
unreasonable, because in this case those who have the will to marry
and nevertheless die before marrying would have the aureole. Hence
others hold that the aureole is due to the state and not to the act: so
that those virgins alone merit the aureole who by vow have placed
themselves in the state of observing perpetual virginity. But this also
seems unreasonable, because it is possible to have the same
intention of observing virginity without a vow as with a vow. Hence it
may be said otherwise that merit is due to every virtuous act

commanded by charity. Now virginity comes under the genus of
virtue in so far as perpetual incorruption of mind and body is an
object of choice, as appears from what has been said above (Sent.
iv, D, 33, Question 3, Articles 1,2) [TP, Question 152, Articles 1,3].
Consequently the aureole is due to those virgins alone, who had the
purpose of observing perpetual virginity, whether or no they have
confirmed this purpose by vow---and this I say with reference to the
aureole in its proper signification of a reward due to merit---although
this purpose may at some time have been interrupted, integrity of the
flesh remaining withal, provided it be found at the end of life,
because virginity of the mind may be restored, although virginity of
the flesh cannot. If, however, we take the aureole in its broad sense
for any joy added to the essential joy of heaven, the aureole will be
applicable even to those who are incorrupt in flesh, although they
had not the purpose of observing perpetual virginity. For without
doubt they will rejoice in the incorruption of their body, even as the
innocent will rejoice in having been free from sin, although they had
no opportunity of sinning, as in the case of baptized children. But
this is not the proper meaning of an aureole, although it is very
commonly taken in this sense.
Reply to Objection 1: In some respects virgins experience a greater
conflict in remaining continent; and in other respects, widows, other
things being equal. For virgins are inflamed by concupiscence, and
by the desire of experience, which arises from a certain curiosity as
it were, which makes man more willing to see what he has never
seen. Sometimes, moreover, this concupiscence is increased by
their esteeming the pleasure to be greater than it is in reality, and by
their failing to consider the grievances attaching to this pleasure. In
these respects widows experience the lesser conflict, yet theirs is
the greater conflict by reason of their recollection of the pleasure.
Moreover, in different subjects one motive is stronger than another,
according to the various conditions and dispositions of the subject,
because some are more susceptible to one, and others to another.
However, whatever we may say of the degree of conflict, this is
certain---that the virgin's victory is more perfect than the widow's, for
the most perfect and most brilliant kind of victory is never to have
yielded to the foe: and the crown is due, not to the battle but to the
victory gained by the battle.
Reply to Objection 2: There are two opinions about this. For some
say that the Blessed Virgin has not an aureole in reward of her
virginity, if we take aureole in the proper sense as referring to a