their wretched plight. I have found another resemblance yet. What then is it? As
in the sewers where there is accumulation of refuse, of dung, hay, stubble,
stones, clay, frequent stoppages occur; and then the stream of filth overflows at
top: so also it happens with the stomachs of those people. For these being
stopped up below, the greater part of these villainous streams spurts up above.
But not so with the poor, but like those fountains which well forth pure streams,
and water gardens and pleasure grounds , so also are their stomachs pure from
such-like superfluities. But not such are the stomachs of the rich, or rather of the
luxurious; but they are filled with humors, phlegm, bile, corrupted blood, putrid
rheums, and other suchlike matters. Wherefore no one, if he lives always in
luxury, can bear it even for a short time; but his life will be spent in continual
sicknesses. Wherefore I would gladly ask them, for what end are meats given?
That we may be destroyed, or be nourished? That we may be diseased, or be
strong? That we may be healthful, or be sickly? Very plainly, for nourishment,
creating unto the body disease and sickness? But not so the poor man; on the
contrary, by his plain diet he purchases to himself health, and vigor, and strength.
Weep not then on account of poverty, the mother of health, but even exult in it;
and if you would be rich, despise riches. For this, not the having money but the
not wanting to have it, is truly affluence. If we can achieve this, we shall both be
here more affluent than all that are rich, and there shall obtain the good things to
come, whereunto may all we attain, through the grace and love towards men of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory,
might, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 13 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 6:11-12
Our mouth is open unto you, O you Corinthians, our heart is enlarged, you
are not straitened in us, but you are straitened in your own affections.
Having detailed his own trials and afflictions, for "in patience," says he, "in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, (v. 4, 5.) in stripes, in imprisonments, in
tumult, in labors, in watchings;" and having shown that the thing was a great
good, for "as sorrowful," says he, "yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making
many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things;" [2 Corinthians
6:10] and having called those things "armor," for "as chastened," says he, "and
not killed:" and having hereby represented God's abundant care and power, for
he says, "that the exceeding greatness of the power may be of God, and not of
us;" [2 Corinthians 4:7] and having recounted his labors, for he says, "we always
bear about His dying;" and that this is a clear demonstration of the Resurrection,
for he says, "that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh;" [2
Corinthians 4:10] and of what things he was made partaker, and with what he
had been entrusted, for "we are ambassadors on behalf of Christ," [2 Corinthians
3:20] says he, "as though God were entreating by us;" and of what things he is a
minister, namely, "not of the letter, but of the Spirit;" [2 Corinthians 3:6] and that
he was entitled to reverence not only on this account, but also for his trials, for,
"Thanks be to God," says he, "which always causes us to triumph:" he purposes
now also to rebuke them as not being too well minded towards himself. But
though purposing he does not immediately come upon this, but having his
discussion of these things. For if even from his own good deeds he that rebukes
be entitled to reverence; yet still, when he also displays the love, which he bears
towards those who are censured, he makes his speech less offensive. Therefore