SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.44, C.7.

order," according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei xix, 13). Now it belongs
to wisdom to set things in order, as the Philosopher declares
(Metaph. i, 2), wherefore peaceableness is fittingly ascribed to
wisdom. The reward is expressed in the words, "they shall be called
the children of God." Now men are called the children of God in so
far as they participate in the likeness of the only-begotten and
natural Son of God, according to Rm. 8:29, "Whom He foreknew . . .
to be made conformable to the image of His Son," Who is Wisdom
Begotten. Hence by participating in the gift of wisdom, man attains to
the sonship of God.
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to charity to be at peace, but it
belongs to wisdom to make peace by setting things in order.
Likewise the Holy Ghost is called the "Spirit of adoption" in so far as
we receive from Him the likeness of the natural Son, Who is the
Begotten Wisdom.
Reply to Objection 2: These words refer to the Uncreated Wisdom,
which in the first place unites itself to us by the gift of charity, and
consequently reveals to us the mysteries the knowledge of which is
infused wisdom. Hence, the infused wisdom which is a gift, is not the
cause but the effect of charity.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Article 3) it belongs to
wisdom, as a gift, not only to contemplate Divine things, but also to
regulate human acts. Now the first thing, to be effected in this
direction of human acts is the removal of evils opposed to wisdom:
wherefore fear is said to be "the beginning of wisdom," because it
makes us shun evil, while the last thing is like an end, whereby all
things are reduced to their right order; and it is this that constitutes
peace. Hence James said with reason that "the wisdom that is from
above" (and this is the gift of the Holy Ghost) "first indeed is chaste,"
because it avoids the corruption of sin, and "then peaceable,"
wherein lies the ultimate effect of wisdom, for which reason peace is
numbered among the beatitudes. As to the things that follow, they
declare in becoming order the means whereby wisdom leads to
peace. For when a man, by chastity, avoids the corruption of sin, the
first thing he has to do is, as far as he can, to be moderate in all
things, and in this respect wisdom is said to be modest. Secondly, in
those matters in which he is not sufficient by himself, he should be
guided by the advice of others, and as to this we are told further that
wisdom is "easy to be persuaded." These two are conditions
required that man may be at peace with himself. But in order that

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.44, C.7.

man may be at peace with others it is furthermore required, first that
he should not be opposed to their good; this is what is meant by
"consenting to the good." Secondly, that he should bring to his
neighbor's deficiencies, sympathy in his heart, and succor in his
actions, and this is denoted by the words "full of mercy and good
fruits." Thirdly, he should strive in all charity to correct the sins of
others, and this is indicated by the words "judging without
dissimulation ," lest he should purpose to sate his hatred under
cover of correction.