together with their disciples. And the fear arising from their examples was
enough to control these, had they not been strongly persuaded that victory
without divine power was out of the question.
Yea, even if they did expect to prevail, with what sort of hopes undertook
they such great dangers, except they had an eye to the world to come? But let us
suppose that they hoped for no less than victory; what did they expect to gain
from the bringing all men unto Him, "who is not risen again," as you say? For if
now, men who believe concerning the kingdom of heaven and blessings
unnumbered with reluctance encounter dangers, how could they have undergone
so many for nothing, yea rather, for evil? For if the things which were done did
not take place, if Christ did not ascend into heaven; surely in their obstinate zeal
to invent these things, and convince all the world of them, they were offending
God, and must expect ten thousand thunderbolts from on high.
6. Or, in another point of view; if they had felt this great zeal while Christ
was living, yet on His death they would have let it go out. For He would have
seemed to them, had He not risen, as a sort of deceiver and pretender. Do you
not know that armies while the general and king is alive, even though they be
weak, keep together; but when those in such office have departed, however
strong they may be, they are broken up?
Tell me then, what were the enticing arguments whereupon they acted,
when about to take hold of the Gospel, and to go forth unto all the world? Was
there any kind of impediment wanting to restrain them? If they had been mad,
(for I will not cease repeating it,) they could not have succeeded at all; for no
one follows the advice of madmen. But if they succeeded as in truth they did
succeed, and the event proves, then none so wise as they. Now if none were so
wise as they, it is quite plain, they would not lightly have entered upon the
preaching. Had they not seen Him after He was risen, what was there sufficient
to draw them out unto this war? What which would not have turned them away
from it? He said unto them, "After three days I will rise again," and He made
promises concerning the kingdom of heaven. He said, they should master the

whole world, after they had received the Holy Spirit; and ten thousand other
things besides these, surpassing all nature. So that if none of these things had
come to pass, although they believed in Him while alive, after His death they
would not have believed in Him, unless they had seen Him after He was risen.
For they have said, "'After three days,' He said, 'I will rise again,' and He has not
arisen. He promised that He would give the Spirit, and He has not sent Him.
How then shall His sayings about the other world find credit with us, when His
sayings about this are tried and found wanting?"
And why, if He rose not again, did they preach that He was risen? "Because
they loved Him," you will say. But surely, it was likely that they would hate Him
afterwards, for deceiving and betraying them; and because, having lifted them up
with innumerable hopes, and divorced them from house, and parents, and all
things, and set in hostility against them the entire nation of Jews, He had
betrayed them after all. And if indeed the thing were of weakness, they might
have pardoned it; but now it would be deemed a result of exceeding malice. For
He ought to have spoken the truth, and not have promised heaven, being a mortal
man, as you say. So that the very opposite was the likely line for them to take; to
proclaim the deception, and declare Him a pretender and imposter. Thus again
would they have been rid of all their perils; thus have put an end to the war.
Moreover, seeing that the Jews gave money unto the soldiers to say that they
stole the body, if the disciples had come forward and said, "We stole Him, He is
not risen again," what honor would they not have enjoyed? Thus it was in their
power to be honored, nay, crowned. Why then did they for insults and dangers
barter away these things, if it was not some Divine power which influenced
them, and proved mightier than all these?
7. But if we do not yet convince, take this also into consideration; that had
this not been so, though they were ever so well disposed, they would not have
preached this Gospel in His name, but would have treated Him with abhorrence.
For you know that not even the names of those who deceive us in this sort are
we willing to hear. But for what reason preached they also His name? Expecting