destroy them, as He will, (for, "Bring hither," It says, "those which would not
that I should reign over them, and slay them,") wherefore says He that the deed
is not His, but His Father's? He addresses Himself to their weakness, and at the
same time honors Him that begot Him. Wherefore He said not, "I leave your
house desolate," but, it "is left"; He has put it impersonally. But by saying, "How
often would I have gathered your children together— and you would not," and
then adding, "is left," He shows that He wrought the desolation. "For since," He
tells them, "when you were benefited and healed of your infirmities, you would
not know Me, you shall know by being punished who I am."
"And the Father is with Me." That they may not deem the "who sent Me" to
be a mark of inferiority, He says, "is with Me"; the first belongs to the
Dispensation, the second to the Godhead.
"And He has not left Me alone," for I do always those things that please
Him.
Again He has brought down His discourse to a humbler strain, continually
setting Himself against that which they asserted, that He was not of God, and
that He kept not the Sabbath. To this He replies, "I do always those things that
are pleasing unto Him"; showing that it was pleasing unto Him even that the
Sabbath should be broken. So, for instance, just before the Crucifixion He said,
"Think ye that I cannot call upon My Father?" [Matthew 26:53] And yet by
merely saying, "Whom do you seek?" [c. xviii. 4, 6] He cast them down
backwards. Why then says He not, "Think ye that I cannot destroy you," when
He had proved this by deed? He condescends to their infirmity. For He took
great pains to show that He did nothing contrary to the Father. Thus He speaks
rather after the manner of a man; and as "He has not left Me alone," was spoken,
so also was the, "I do always those things that are pleasing unto Him."

John 8:30
"As He spoke these words, many believed on Him."
When He brought down His speech to a lowly strain, many believed on
Him. Do you still ask wherefore He speaks humbly? Yet the Evangelist clearly
alluded to this when he said, "As He spoke these things, many believed on Him."
By this all but proclaiming aloud to us, "Oh hearer, be not confounded if you
hear any lowly expression, for they who after such high teaching were not yet
persuaded that He was of the Father, were with good reason made to hear
humbler words, that they might believe." And this is an excuse for those things
which shall be spoken in a humble way. They believed then, yet not as they
ought, but carelessly and as it were by chance, being pleased and refreshed by
the humility of the words. For that they had not perfect faith the Evangelist
shows by their speeches after this, in which they insult Him again. And that
these are the very same persons he has declared by saying,