comes of works, and only using a parade of words and behaving in a barefaced
way. And this is why he uses so literal an expression, saying, "that every mouth
may be stopped," so pointing out the barefaced and almost uncontrollable
pomposity of their language, and that their tongue was now curbed in the
strictest sense. For as an unsupportable torrent, so had it been borne along. But
the prophet stopped it. And when Paul says, "that every mouth may be stopped,"
what he means is, not that the reason of their sinning was that their mouth might
be stopped, but that the reason of their being reproved was that they might not
commit this very sin in ignorance. "And all the world may become guilty before
God." He does not say the Jew, but the whole of mankind. For the phrase, "that
every mouth may be stopped," is the language of a person hinting at them,
although he has not stated it clearly, so as to prevent the language being too
harsh. But the words "that all the world may become guilty before God," are
spoken at once both of Jews and of Greeks. Now this is no slight thing with a
view to take down their unreasonableness. Since even here they have no
advantage over the Gentiles, but are alike given up as far as salvation is
concerned. For he would be in strict propriety called a guilty person, who cannot
help himself to any excuse, but needs the assistance of another: and such was the
plight of all of us, in that we had lost the things pertaining to salvation.
Ver. 20. "For by the Law is the knowledge of sin."
He springs upon the Law again, with forbearance however (for what he
says is not an accusation of it, but of the listlessness of the Jews). Yet
nevertheless he has been earnest here with a view (as he was going to introduce
his discourse about faith) to show its utter feebleness. For if you boast in the
Law, he means, it puts you to the greater shame: it solemnly parades forth your
sins before you. Only he does not word it in this harsh way, but again in a
subdued tone; "For by the Law is the knowledge of sin." And so the punishment
is greater, but that because of the Jew. For the Law accomplished the disclosure
of sin to you, but it was your duty then to flee it. Since then you have not fled
you have pulled the punishment more sorely on yourself, and the good deed of

the Law has been made to you a supply of greater vengeance. Now then having
added to their fear, he next brings in the things of grace, as having brought them
to a strong desire of the remission of their sins, and says,
Ver. 21. "But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested."
Here he utters a great thing, and such as needed much proof. For if they that
lived in the Law not only did not escape punishment, but were even the more
weighed down thereby, how without the Law is it possible not only to escape
vengeance, but even to be justified? For he has here set down two high points,
the being justified, and the obtaining these blessings, without the Law. And this
is why he does not say righteousness simply, but the righteousness of God, so by
the worthiness of the Person displaying the greater degree of the grace, and the
possibility of the promise. For to Him all things are possible. And he does not
say, "was given," but "is manifested," so cutting away the accusation of novelty.
For that which is manifested, is so as being old, but concealed. And it is not this
only, but the sequel that shows that this is no recent thing. For after saying, "is
manifested," he proceeds:
"Being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets."
Do not be troubled, he means, because it has but now been given, nor be
affrighted as though at a thing new and strange. For of old both the Law and the
Prophets foretold it. And some passages he has pointed out in the course of this
argument, and some he will shortly, having in what came before brought in
Habakkuk as saying, "the just shall live by faith" [Romans 1:17], but in what
comes after, Abraham and David, as themselves also conversing with us about
these things. Now the regard they had for these persons was great, for one was a
patriach and a prophet, and the other a king and a prophet: and further the
promises about these things had come to both of them. And this is why Matthew
in the first beginning of his Gospel mentions both of these first, and then brings
forward in order the forefathers. For after saying, "the Book of the Generation of
Jesus Christ" [Matthew 1:1], he does not wait after Abraham to name Isaac also
and Jacob, but mentions David along with (5 manuscripts "after") Abraham.