SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.4.

loves God above all things. Hence it is evident that patience, as a
virtue, is caused by charity, according to 1 Cor. 13:4, "Charity is
patient."
But it is manifest that it is impossible to have charity save through
grace, according to Rm. 5:5, "The charity of God is poured forth in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost Who is given to us." Therefore it is
clearly impossible to have patience without the help of grace.
Reply to Objection 1: The inclination of reason would prevail in
human nature in the state of integrity. But in corrupt nature the
inclination of concupiscence prevails, because it is dominant in man.
Hence man is more prone to bear evils for the sake of goods in
which the concupiscence delights here and now, than to endure
evils for the sake of goods to come, which are desired in accordance
with reason: and yet it is this that pertains to true patience.
Reply to Objection 2: The good of a social virtue [FS, Question 61,
Article 5] is commensurate with human nature; and consequently the
human will can tend thereto without the help of sanctifying grace, yet
not without the help of God's grace [FS, Question 109, Article 2]. On
the other hand, the good of grace is supernatural, wherefore man
cannot tend thereto by a natural virtue. Hence the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 3: Even the endurance of those evils which a man
bears for the sake of his body's health, proceeds from the love a man
naturally has for his own flesh. Hence there is no comparison
between this endurance and patience which proceeds from a
supernatural love.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether patience is a part of fortitude?

Objection 1: It seems that patience is not a part of fortitude. For a
thing is not part of itself. Now patience is apparently the same as
fortitude: because, as stated above (Question 123, Article 6), the
proper act of fortitude is to endure; and this belongs also to
patience. For it is stated in the Liber Sententiarum Prosperi [St.
Gregory, Hom. xxxv in Evang.] that "patience consists in enduring
evils inflicted by others." Therefore patience is not a part of fortitude.
Objection 2: Further, fortitude is about fear and daring, as stated
above (Question 123, Article 3), and thus it is in the irascible. But
patience seems to be about sorrow, and consequently would seem
to be in the concupiscible. Therefore patience is not a part of
fortitude but of temperance.
Objection 3: Further, the whole cannot be without its part. Therefore
if patience is a part of fortitude, there can be no fortitude without
patience. Yet sometimes a brave man does not endure evils
patiently, but even attacks the person who inflicts the evil. Therefore
patience is not a part of fortitude.
On the contrary, Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) reckons it a part of
fortitude.
I answer that, Patience is a quasi-potential part of fortitude, because
it is annexed thereto as secondary to principal virtue. For it belongs
to patience "to suffer with an equal mind the evils inflicted by
others," as Gregory says in a homily (xxxv in Evang.). Now of those
evils that are inflicted by others, foremost and most difficult to
endure are those that are connected with the danger of death, and
about these evils fortitude is concerned. Hence it is clear that in this
matter fortitude has the principal place, and that it lays claim to that
which is principal in this matter. Wherefore patience is annexed to
fortitude as secondary to principal virtue, for which reason Prosper
calls patience brave (Sent. 811).
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to fortitude to endure, not anything
indeed, but that which is most difficult to endure, namely dangers of
death: whereas it may pertain to patience to endure any kind of evil.