have no concern, but that "the temple also of the great goddess Diana is in
danger to be destroyed." Then, lest he should seem to say this for the sake of
lucre, see what he adds: "Whom the whole world worships." Observe how he
showed Paul's power to be the greater, proving all (their gods) to be wretched
and miserable creatures, since a mere man, who was driven about, a mere
tentmaker, had so much power. Observe the testimonies borne to the Apostles by
their enemies, that they overthrew their worship. There (at Lystra) they brought
"garlands and oxen." [Acts 14:13] Here he says, "This our craft is in danger to
be set at naught.— You have filled (all) everywhere with your doctrine." [Acts
5:28] So said the Jews also with regard to Christ: "You see how the world is
going after Him" [John 12:19]; and, "The Romans shall come and take away our
city." [John 11:48]. And again on another occasion, "These that have turned the
world upside down have come hither also." [Acts 17:6].— "And when they heard
these sayings, they were full of wrath." Upon what was that wrath called forth?
On hearing about Diana, and about their source of gain. "And cried out, saying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. And the whole city was filled with confusion:
and rushed with one accord into the theatre." [Acts 19:29]. Such is the way with
vulgar minds, any trivial occasion shall hurry them away and inflame their
passions. Therefore it behooves to do (things) with (strict) examination. But see
how contemptible they were, to be so exposed to all (excitements)! "Having
caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel,
they dragged them:" (here) again recklessly, just as did the Jews in the case of
Jason; and everywhere they set upon them. "And when Paul would have entered
in unto the people, the disciples suffered him not," [Acts 19:30] so far were they
from all display and love of glory. "And certain of the Asiarchs, which were his
friends, sent unto him, desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the
theatre" [Acts 19:31] to a disorderly populace and tumult. And Paul complies,
for he was not vainglorious, nor ambitious. "Some therefore cried one thing, and
some another: for the assembly was confused." Such is the nature of the
multitude: it recklessly follows, like fire when it has fallen upon fuel; and the

more part knew not wherefore they had come together. [Acts 19:32] "And they
drew Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward." It was the
Jews that thrust him forward; but as providence ordered it, this man did not
speak. "And Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made his
defence unto the people." [Acts 19:33] "But when they knew that he was a Jew,
all with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians." [Acts 19:34] A childish understanding indeed! As if they were
afraid, lest their worship should be extinguished, they shouted without
intermission. For two years had Paul abode there, and see how many heathen
there were still! "And when the town clerk had appeased the people, he said, You
men of Ephesus, what man is there that knows not how that the city of the
Ephesians is temple-keeper of the great goddess Diana, and of the image which
fell down from Jupiter?" [Acts 19:35] As if the thing were not palpable. With
this saying first he extinguished their wrath. "And of the Diopetes." There was
another sacred object ([ἱ] [ερὸν]) that was so called. Either he means the piece of
burnt earth or her image. This (is) a lie. "Seeing then that these things cannot be
spoken against, you ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly. For you have
brought hither these men, which are neither robbers of churches, nor yet
blasphemers of your goddess." (v. 36, 37.) All this however he says to the
people; but in order that those (workmen) also might become more reasonable,
he says: "Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsman which are with him, have a
matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies: let them
implead one another. But if you enquire anything concerning other matters, it
shall be determined in a lawful assembly. For we are in danger to be called in
question for this day's uproar, there being no cause, for which (matter) we shall
not be able to give an account for this concourse." [Acts 19:38-40] "A lawful
assembly," he says, for there were three assemblies according to law in each
month; but this one was contrary to law. Then he terrified them also by saying,
"We are in danger to be called to account" for sedition. But let us look again at
the things said.