too with the yieldingness of temper. For he who is altered so by tribulation, is
much more likely to be affected in this way by laxity. If he fails even when
splinted, (or tied) (this is what affliction is), much more will he when the
bandage is removed. If when braced up he is altered, much more when in a state
of tumor ([χαυνούμενος]). And how am I, one may ask, to keep from being so
altered by tribulation? Why, if you reflect that, wish it or not, you will have to
bear the thing inflicted: but if you dost it with a thankful spirit, you will gain
very greatly thereby; but if you are indignant at it, and ragest and blaspheme,
you will not make the calamity lighter, but you will render its wave more
troublous. By feeling then in this way, let us turn what is necessary into a matter
of our own choice. What I mean is this— suppose one has lost his own son,
another all his property: if you reflect that it is not in the nature of things for
what has taken place to be undone; while it is to gain fruit from the misfortune,
though irremediable, even that of bearing the circumstance nobly; and if instead
of using blasphemous words, thou were to offer up words of thanksgiving to the
Lord, so would evils brought upon you against your will become to you the good
deeds of a free choice. Have you seen a son taken prematurely away? Say, "the
Lord has given, the Lord has taken away." Do you see your fortune exhausted?
Say, "naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return there."
[Job 1:21] Do you see evil men faring well, and just men faring ill and
undergoing ills without number, and do you not know where to find the cause?
Say, "I became even as it were a beast before You. Yet I am ever with You."
[Psalm 73:22] But if you will search out the cause, reflect that He has fixed a
day in which He will judge the world, and so you will throw off perplexity, for
then every man will meet his deserts, even as Lazarus and the rich man. Call to
mind the Apostles, for they too rejoiced at being scourged, at being driven about
and undergoing numberless sufferings, because they were "counted worthy to
suffer shame for His Name's sake." [Acts 5:41] And do thou, then, if you are
sick, bear it nobly, and own yourself indebted to God for it, and you shall receive
the same reward with them. But how, when in feebleness and pain, are you to be

able to feel grateful to the Lord? You will if you love Him sincerely. For if the
Three Children who were thrown into the furnace, and others who were in
prisons, and in countless other evils, ceased not to give thanks, much more will
they who are in a state of disease, be able to do this. For there is not, assuredly
there is not, anything which vehement desire does not get the better of. But when
the desire is even that of God, it is higher than anything, and neither fire, nor the
sword, nor poverty, nor infirmity, nor death, nor anything else of the kind
appears dreadful to one who has gotten this love, but scorning them all, he will
fly to heaven, and will have affections no way inferior to those of its inhabitants,
seeing nothing else, neither heaven, nor earth, nor sea, but gazing only at the one
Beauty of that glory. And neither the vexations of this life present will depress
him, nor the things which are goodly and attended with pleasure elate him or
puff him up. Let us then love with this love (for there is not anything equal unto
it) both for the sake of things present and for the sake of things to come. Or
rather, more than for these, for the nature of the love itself. For we shall be set
free both from the punishments of this life and of that which is to come, and
shall enjoy the kingdom. Yet neither is the escape from hell, nor the fruition of
the kingdom, anything great in comparison of what is yet to be said. For greater
than all these things is it to have Christ our beloved at once and our lover. For if
when this happens with men it is above all pleasure; when both happen from
God, what language or what thought is able to set before one the blessedness of
this soul? There is none that can, save the experience of it only. That then we
may by experience come to know what is this spiritual joy, and life of
blessedness, and untold treasure of good things, let us leave everything to cling
to that love, with a view as well to our own joy as to the glory of God. For unto
Him is the glory and power, with His Only-begotten, and the Holy Ghost, now,
and ever, and unto all ages evermore. Amen.