Hebrews 5:4-5
Then also [there are] other [points]: He is made [Priest] (he says) by
Another and does not of Himself intrude into [the office]. This too is common
[Hebrews 5:4], "And no man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of
God as was Aaron."
Here again he conciliates them in another point, because He was sent from
God: which Christ was wont to say throughout to the Jews. "He that sent Me is
greater than I," and, "I came not of Myself." [John 12:49; 14:28; 8:42]
He appears to me in these words also to hint at the priests of the Jews, as
being no longer priests, [but] intruders and corrupters of the law of the
priesthood; [Hebrews 5:5] "So Christ also glorified not Himself to be made an
High Priest."
How then was He appointed (one says)? For Aaron was many times
appointed as by the Rod, and when the fire came down and destroyed those who
wished to intrude into the priesthood. But in this instance, on the contrary, they
[the Jewish Priests] not only suffered nothing, but even are in high esteem.
Whence then [His appointment]? He shows it from the prophecy. He has nothing
[to allege] perceptible by sense, nothing visible. For this cause he affirms it from
prophecy, from things future; "But He that said unto Him You are My Son, today
have I begotten You." What has this to do with the Son? Yea (he says) it is a
preparation for His being appointed by God.

Hebrews 5:6
"As He says also in another place, You are a Priest forever after the order
of Melchisedech." Unto whom now was this spoken?
Who is "after the order of Melchisedech"? No other [than He]. For they all
were under the Law, they all kept sabbaths, they all were circumcised; one could
not point out any other [than Him].

Hebrews 5:7-8
3. "Who in the days of His flesh, when He had offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears, to Him that was able to save Him
from death, and was heard in that He feared; though He were a Son, yet learned
He obedience by the things which He suffered." Do you see that he sets forth
nothing else than His care and the exceeding greatness of His love? For what
means the [expression] "with strong crying"? The Gospel nowhere says this, nor
that He wept when He prayed, nor yet that He uttered a cry. Do you see that it
was a condescension? For he could not [merely] say that He prayed, but also
"with strong crying."

Hebrews 5:9-10
"And was heard," (he says), "in that He feared; though He were a Son, yet
learned He obedience by the things which He suffered.", "And being made
perfect He became the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey Him:
called of God an High Priest after the order of Melchisedech."
Be it with "crying," why also "strong [crying] and tears"?
"Having offered," (he says), "and having been heard in that He feared."
What do you say? Let the Heretics be ashamed. The Son of God "was heard in
that He feared." And what more could any man say concerning the prophets?
And what sort of connection is there, in saying, "He was heard in that He feared,
though He were Son, yet learned He obedience by the things which He suffered"?
Would any man say these things concerning God? Why, who was ever so mad?
And who, even if he were beside himself, would have uttered these things?
"Having been heard," (he says), "in that He feared, He learned obedience by the
things which He suffered." What obedience? He that before this had been
obedient even unto death, as a Son to His Father, how did He afterwards learn?
Do you see that this is spoken concerning the Incarnation?
Tell me now, did He pray the Father that He might be saved from death?
And was it for this cause that He was "exceeding sorrowful, and said, If it be
possible, let this cup pass from Me"? [Matthew 26:38-39] Yet He nowhere
prayed the Father concerning His resurrection, but on the contrary He openly
declares, "Destroy this temple and within three days I will raise it up." [John
2:19] And, "I have power to lay down My life, and I have power to take it again.
No man takes it from Me, I lay it down of Myself." [John 10:18] What then is it;
why did He pray? (And again He said, "Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the
Son of Man shall be betrayed unto the chief priests and scribes, and they shall
condemn Him to death. And they shall deliver Him to the Gentiles, to mock, and