FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.112, C.3.

man's steps are guided by God.
Reply to Objection 1: A certain preparation of man for grace is
simultaneous with the infusion of grace; and this operation is
meritorious, not indeed of grace, which is already possessed---but of
glory which is not yet possessed. But there is another imperfect
preparation, which sometimes precedes the gift of sanctifying grace,
and yet it is from God's motion. But it does not suffice for merit,
since man is not yet justified by grace, and merit can only arise from
grace, as will be seen further on (Question 114, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 2: Since a man cannot prepare himself for grace
unless God prevent and move him to good, it is of no account
whether anyone arrive at perfect preparation instantaneously, or
step by step. For it is written (Ecclus. 11:23): "It is easy in the eyes of
God on a sudden to make the poor man rich." Now it sometimes
happens that God moves a man to good, but not perfect good, and
this preparation precedes grace. But He sometimes moves him
suddenly and perfectly to good, and man receives grace suddenly,
according to Jn. 6:45: "Every one that hath heard of the Father, and
hath learned, cometh to Me." And thus it happened to Paul, since,
suddenly when he was in the midst of sin, his heart was perfectly
moved by God to hear, to learn, to come; and hence he received
grace suddenly.
Reply to Objection 3: An agent of infinite power needs no matter or
disposition of matter, brought about by the action of something else;
and yet, looking to the condition of the thing caused, it must cause,
in the thing caused, both the matter and the due disposition for the
form. So likewise, when God infuses grace into a soul, no
preparation is required which He Himself does not bring about.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.112, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether grace is necessarily given to whoever

prepares himself for it, or to whoever does what he can?
Objection 1: It would seem that grace is necessarily given to
whoever prepares himself for grace, or to whoever does what he can,
because, on Rm. 5:1, "Being justified . . . by faith, let us have peace,"
etc. the gloss says: "God welcomes whoever flies to Him, otherwise
there would be injustice with Him." But it is impossible for injustice
to be with God. Therefore it is impossible for God not to welcome
whoever flies to Him. Hence he receives grace of necessity.
Objection 2: Further, Anselm says (De Casu Diaboli. iii) that the
reason why God does not bestow grace on the devil, is that he did
not wish, nor was he prepared, to receive it. But if the cause be
removed, the effect must needs be removed also. Therefore, if
anyone is willing to receive grace it is bestowed on them of
necessity.
Objection 3: Further, good is diffusive of itself, as appears from
Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv). Now the good of grace is better than the
good of nature. Hence, since natural forms necessarily come to
disposed matter, much more does it seem that grace is necessarily
bestowed on whoever prepares himself for grace.
On the contrary, Man is compared to God as clay to the potter,
according to Jer. 18:6: "As clay is in the hand of the potter, so are
you in My hand." But however much the clay is prepared, it does not
necessarily receive its shape from the potter. Hence, however much
a man prepares himself, he does not necessarily receive grace from
God.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), man's preparation for
grace is from God, as Mover, and from the free-will, as moved. Hence
the preparation may be looked at in two ways: first, as it is from freewill, and thus there is no necessity that it should obtain grace, since
the gift of grace exceeds every preparation of human power. But it
may be considered, secondly, as it is from God the Mover, and thus
it has a necessity---not indeed of coercion, but of infallibility---as
regards what it is ordained to by God, since God's intention cannot
fail, according to the saying of Augustine in his book on the
Predestination of the Saints (De Dono Persev. xiv) that "by God's