referred, for those spirits whom God has condemned eternally, since
this would be in opposition to our charity towards God whereby we
approve of His justice.
Secondly, we love a thing as being that which we desire to be
enduring as another's good. In this way we love irrational creatures
out of charity, in as much as we wish them to endure, to give glory to
God and be useful to man, as stated above (Article 3): and in this
way too we can love the nature of the demons even out of charity, in
as much as we desire those spirits to endure, as to their natural
gifts, unto God's glory.
Reply to Objection 1: The possession of everlasting happiness is not
impossible for the angelic mind as it is for the mind of a demon;
consequently the friendship of charity which is based on the
fellowship of everlasting life, rather than on the fellowship of nature,
is possible towards the angels, but not towards the demons.
Reply to Objection 2: In this life, men who are in sin retain the
possibility of obtaining everlasting happiness: not so those who are
lost in hell, who, in this respect, are in the same case as the demons.
Reply to Objection 3: That the demons are useful to us is due not to
their intention but to the ordering of Divine providence; hence this
leads us to be friends, not with them, but with God, Who turns their
perverse intention to our profit.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.13.

### ARTICLE 12. Whether four things are rightly reckoned as to be

loved out of charity, viz. God, our neighbor, our body and
ourselves?
Objection 1: It would seem that these four things are not rightly
reckoned as to be loved out of charity, to wit: God, our neighbor, our
body, and ourselves. For, as Augustine states (Tract. super Joan.
lxxxiii), "he that loveth not God, loveth not himself." Hence love of
oneself is included in the love of God. Therefore love of oneself is
not distinct from the love of God.
Objection 2: Further, a part ought not to be condivided with the
whole. But our body is part of ourselves. Therefore it ought not to be
condivided with ourselves as a distinct object of love.
Objection 3: Further, just as a man has a body, so has his neighbor.
Since then the love with which a man loves his neighbor, is distinct
from the love with which a man loves himself, so the love with which
a man loves his neighbor's body, ought to be distinct from the love
with which he loves his own body. Therefore these four things are
not rightly distinguished as objects to be loved out of charity.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 23): "There are
four things to be loved; one which is above us," namely God,
"another, which is ourselves, a third which is nigh to us," namely our
neighbor, "and a fourth which is beneath us," namely our own body.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 23, Articles 1,5), the
friendship of charity is based on the fellowship of happiness. Now, in
this fellowship, one thing is considered as the principle from which
happiness flows, namely God; a second is that which directly
partakes of happiness, namely men and angels; a third is a thing to
which happiness comes by a kind of overflow, namely the human
body.
Now the source from which happiness flows is lovable by reason of
its being the cause of happiness: that which is a partaker of
happiness, can be an object of love for two reasons, either through
being identified with ourselves, or through being associated with us
in partaking of happiness, and in this respect, there are two things to
be loved out of charity, in as much as man loves both himself and