attention bestowed upon revealed religion as embodied in the Scriptures,
and upon ethics and natural religion as contained in the classics, than has
ever been bestowed by any subsequent period in Christendom. One result
was that scripture was expounded by scripture; things spiritual by things
spiritual. This appears in the exegetical part of this treatise. Augustin
reasons out of the Scriptures; not out of metaphysics or physics.
The second, or speculative division of the work, is that which will be most
foreign to the thinking of some trinitarians. In it they will find what
seems to them to be a philosophy, rather than an interpretation of the
word of God. We shall, therefore, in this introductory essay, specify some
of the advantages, as it seems to us, of the general method of defending
and illustrating the doctrine of the Trinity employed by Augustin and the
patristic Trinitarians.
1. Fuller justice is done to Scripture by this method. Revelation
denominates the first trinitarian person the Father, the second the Son,
the third the Spirit. These terms are literal, not metaphorical; because the
relations denoted by them are eternally in the essence. Scripture clearly
teaches that the Father is such from eternity. Consequently, "paternity"
(implied in the name Father) can no more be ascribed to the first person
of the Godhead in a figurative sense, than eternity can be. For a person
that is a father must be so in relation to a son. No son, no father.
Consequently, an eternal Father implies an eternal Son. And the same
reasoning holds true of the relation of the Father and Son to the Spirit.
The terms Father, Son, and Spirit, in the baptismal formula and the
apostolic benediction, must designate primary and eternal distinctions.
The rite that initiates into the kingdom of God, certainly would not be
administered in three names that denote only assumed and temporal
relations of God; nor would blessings for time and eternity be invoked
from God under such secondary names.
Hence, these trinal names given to God in the baptismal formula and the
apostolic benediction, actually force upon the trinitarian theologian, the
ideas of paternity, generation, filiation, spiration, and procession. He
cannot reflect upon the implication of these names without forming these
ideas, and finding himself necessitated to concede their literal validity
and objective reality. He cannot say that the first person is the Father,

and then deny that he "begets." He cannot say that the second person is
the Son, and then deny that he is "begotten." He cannot say that the third
person is the Spirit, and then deny that he "proceeds" by "spiration"
(spiritus quia spiratus) from the Father and Son. When therefore
Augustin, like the primitive fathers generally, endeavors to illustrate this
eternal, necessary, and constitutional energizing and activity (opera ad
intra) in the Divine Essence, whereby the Son issues from the Father and
the Spirit from Father and Son, by the emanation of sunbeam from sun,
light from light, river from fountain, thought from mind, word from
thought—when the ternaries from nature and the human mind are
introduced to elucidate the Trinity—nothing more is done than when by
other well-known and commonly adopted analogies the Divine unity, or
omniscence, or omnipresence, is sought to be illustrated. There is no
analogy taken from the finite that will clear up the mystery of the infinite
—whether it be the mystery of the eternity of God, or that of his trinity.
But, at the same time, by the use of these analogies the mind is kept close
up to the Biblical term or statement, and is not allowed to content itself
with only a half-way understanding of it. Such a method brings
thoroughness and clearness into the interpretation of the Word of God.
2. A second advantage in this method is, that it shows the doctrine of the
Trinity to be inseparable from that of the Unity of God. The Deistical
conception of the Divine unity is wholly different from the Christian. The
former is that of natural religion, formed by the unassisted human mind
in its reflection upon the Supreme Being. The latter is that of revealed
religion, given to the human mind by inspiration. The Deistical unity is
mere singleness. The Christian unity is a trinality. The former is a unit.
The latter a true unity, and union. The former is meagre, having few
contents. The latter is a plenitude—what St. Paul denominates "the
fullness of the Godhead" (πλήρωμα τῆς θεότητος) Coloss. 1:9.
It follows, consequently, that the Divine unity cannot be discussed by
itself without reference to trinality, as the Deist and the Socinian
endeavor to do. Trinality belongs as necessarily and intrinsically to the
Divine unity as eternity does to the Divine essence. "If," says Athanasius
(Oration I. 17) "there was not a Blessed Trinity from eternity, but only a
unity existed first, which at length became a Trinity, it follows that the