When the Resurrection will be, he has not said, but that it will not be now,
he has said. "And our gathering together unto Him." This also is no little matter.
See how the exhortation also is again accompanied with commendation and
encouragement, in that He and all the Saints will certainly appear with us. Here
he is discoursing concerning the resurrection and our gathering together. For
these things will happen at the same time. He raises up their minds. "That ye be
not quickly shaken," he says, "nor yet be troubled, either by spirit, or by word, or
by epistle as from us, as that the day of the Lord is now present."
Here he seems to me to intimate that certain persons went about having
forged an Epistle, as if from Paul, and showing this, said that the Day of the Lord
is at hand, that thence they might lead many into error. Therefore that they might
not be deceived, Paul gives security by the things he writes, and says, "be not
troubled, either by spirit or by word": and this is the meaning of what he says:
Though any one having the spirit of prophecy should say this, believe it not. For
when I was with you I told you these things, so that you ought not to change
your persuasion from the things which you were taught. Or thus, "by spirit": so
he calls the false prophet, speaking what they spoke by an unclean spirit. For
these men, willing the more to be believed, not only endeavored to deceive by
persuasive words, (for this he shows, saying, "or by word,") but they also
showed a forged letter, as from Paul, declaring the same thing. Wherefore
pointing out this also, he has added, "or by letter as from us." Having therefore
secured them on every side, he thus sets forth his own doctrine, and says:
Ver. 3, 4. "Let no man beguile you in any wise: for it will not be, except the
falling away come first, and the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition, he
that opposes and exalts himself against all that is called God or that is
worshipped; so that he sits in the temple of God, setting himself forth as God."
Here he discourses concerning the Antichrist, and reveals great mysteries.
What is "the falling away?" He calls him Apostasy, as being about to destroy
many, and make them fall away. So that if it were possible, He says, the very
Elect should be offended. [From Matthew 24:24] And he calls him "the man of

sin." For he shall do numberless mischiefs, and shall cause others to do them.
But he calls him "the son of perdition," because he is also to be destroyed. But
who is he? Is it then Satan? By no means; but some man, that admits his fully
working in him. For he is a man. "And exalts himself against all that is called
God or is worshipped." For he will not introduce idolatry, but will be a kind of
opponent to God; he will abolish all the gods, and will order men to worship him
instead of God, and he will be seated in the temple of God, not that in Jerusalem
only, but also in every Church. "Setting himself forth," he says; he does not say,
saying it, but endeavoring to show it. For he will perform great works, and will
show wonderful signs.
Ver. 5. "Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these
things?"
Do you see that it is necessary continually to say the same things, and to
enlarge upon them in the same words? For behold, they heard him saying these
things when present, and again they had need to be reminded of them. For as
when they had heard concerning afflictions, "For verily," he says, "when we
were with you, we told you beforehand that we are to suffer affliction" [1
Thessalonians 3:4]; they nevertheless forgot it, and he confirms them again by
letters; so also having heard concerning the Coming of Christ, they again needed
letters to compose them. He therefore reminds them, showing that he speaks of
nothing strange, but what he had always said.
For as in the case of husbandmen, the seeds are indeed cast into the earth
once for all, yet do not constantly remain, but require much preparation withal,
and if they do not break up the earth, and cover over the seeds sown, they sow
for the birds that gather grain; so we also, unless by constant remembrance we
cover over what has been sown, have but cast it all into the air. For both the devil
carries it away, and our sloth destroys it, and the sun dries it up, and the rain
washes it away, and the thorns choke it: so that it is not sufficient after once
sowing it to depart, but there is need of much assiduity, driving off the birds,
rooting up the thorns, filling up the stony ground with much earth, checking, and