"Notwithstanding, that I be not further tedious unto you, I pray you that you
would hear us of your clemency a few words. For we have found this man a
pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the
world." (a) As a revolutionary and seditious person he wishes to deliver him up.
And yet, it might be answered, it is ye that have done this. (c) And see how he
would put up the judge to a desire of punishing, seeing he had here an
opportunity to coerce the man that turned the world upside down! As if they had
achieved a meritorious action, they make much of it: "Having found this fellow,"
etc., "a mover of sedition," say they, "among all the Jews throughout the world."
(Had he been such), they would have proclaimed him as a benefactor and
saviour of the nation! "And a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes." (v. 4, 5.)
They thought this likely to tell as a reproach— "of the Nazarenes:" and by this
also they seek to damage him— for Nazareth was a mean place. And, "we have
found him," say they: see how maliciously they calumniate him: (found him), as
if he had been always giving them the slip, and with difficulty they had
succeeded in getting him: though he had been seven days in the Temple! "Who
also has gone about to profane the temple; whom we took, [and would have
judged according to our law."] [Acts 24:6] See how they insult even the Law; it
was so like the Law, forsooth, to beat, to kill, to lie in wait! And then the
accusation against Lysias: though he had no right, say they, to interfere, in the
excess of his confidence he snatched him from us: ["But the tribune Lysias came
upon us, and with great violence took him away out of our hands, commanding
his accusers to come unto you]: by examining of whom yourself may take
knowledge of all these things, where of we accuse him. And the Jews also
assented, saying that these things were so." [Acts 24:7-9]. What then says Paul?
"Then Paul; after that the governor had beckoned unto him to speak, answered,
Forasmuch as I know that you have been of many years a just judge unto this
nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for myself." [Acts 24:10] This is not the
language of flattery, his testifying to the judge's justice: no, the adulation was
rather in that speech of the orator, "By you we enjoy great quietness." If so, then

why are you seditious? What Paul sought was justice. "Knowing you to be a just
judge, I cheerfully," says he, "answer for myself." Then also he enforces this by
the length of time: that (he had been judge) "of many years. Because that you
may understand, that there are yet but twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem
for to worship." [Acts 24:11] And what is this? (It means), "that I could not
immediately have raised a commotion." Because the accuser had nothing to
show (as done) in Jerusalem, observe what he said: "among all the Jews
throughout the world." Therefore it is that Paul here forcibly attracts him— "to
worship," he says, "I came up," so far am I from raising sedition— and lays a
stress upon this point of justices being the strong point. "And they neither found
me in the Temple disputing with any man, neither raising up the people, neither
in the synagogues, nor in the city" [Acts 24:12]; which in fact was the truth. And
the accusers indeed use the term "ringleader," as if it were a case of fighting and
insurrection; but see how mildly Paul here answers. "But this I confess unto you,
that after the way which they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers,
believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets: and have
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a
resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust." (v. 14, 15.) The accusers
were separating him (as an alien), but he identifies himself with the Law, as one
of themselves. "And in this," says he, "do I exercise myself, to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward men. Now after many years I
came to bring alms to my nation, and offerings. In which they found me purified
in the temple, not with multitude, neither with tumult." (v. 16, 17, 18.) Why then
did you come up? What brought you here? To worship, says he; to do alms. This
was not the act of a factious person. Then also he casts out their person: "but,"
says he, (they that found me, were) "certain Jews from Asia, who ought to have
been here before you, and object, if they had ought against me. Or else let these
same here say, if they have found any evil doing in me while I stood before the
council, except it be for this one voice, that I cried, standing among them,
Touching the resurrection of the dead I am called in question by you this day."