And if you are able to observe, come and stretch forth your hand to me, and
let us go unto this war, both of us, and let us see their battle array. For these too
fight every day, and slay their adversaries, and conquer all the lusts that are
plotting against us; and you will see these cast out on the ground, and not able so
much as to struggle, but proving by very deed that saying of the apostle, "They
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts."
[Galatians 5:24]
Do you see a multitude of dead lying there, slain by the sword of the Spirit?
Therefore in that place is no drunkenness nor gluttony. And their table proves it,
and the trophy that is set thereon. For drunkenness and gluttony lie dead, put to
the rout by the drinking of water, though this be multiform, and a many-headed
monster. For like as in the fabled Scylla and Hydra, so in drunkenness may one
see many heads, on one side fornication growing up, on another wrath; on one
hand sloth, on another lawless lusts; but all these things are taken away. And yet
all those other armies, though they get the better in ten thousand wars, are taken
captive by these; and neither arms, nor spears, nor whatever else there may be, is
able to stand against these phalanxes; but the very giants, the heroes, those that
do countless brave deeds, you will find without bonds bound by sleep and
drunkenness, without slaughter or wounds lying like the wounded, or rather in
more grievous case. For those at least struggle; but these do not even this, but
straightway give up.
Do you see that this host is greater and more to be admired? For the
enemies that got the better of the others it destroys by its mere will. For they do
so weaken the mother of all their evils, that she cannot even trouble them any
more; and the leader being overthrown, and the head removed, the rest of the
body also lies still.
And this victory one may see each of them, that abide there, achieving. For
it is not as in these wars of ours, where, if any enemy has received a blow from
one, he is no more grievous to another, having been once overthrown; but it is
necessary for all to smite this monster; and he that has not smitten and

overthrown her, is surely troubled by her.
Do you see a glorious victory? For such a trophy as the hosts in all parts of
the world having met together have not power to erect, this each one of those
men erects; and all things that from the army of drunkenness lie mingled
together wounded, delirious words of frenzy, insane thoughts, unpleasing
haughtiness. And they imitate their own Lord, at whom the Scripture marvelling
says, "He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall He lift up the head."
Would ye see also another multitude of dead? Let us see the lusts that arise
from luxurious living, those that are cherished by the makers of sauces, by the
cooks, the furnishers of feasts, the confectioners. For I am ashamed indeed to
speak of all; however, I will tell of the birds from Phasis, the soups that are
mixed from various things: the moist, the dry dishes, the laws made about these
things. For like as if ordering some city and marshalling hosts, even so these too
make laws, and ordain such a thing first, and such a thing second, and some
bring in first birds roasted on the embers, filled within with fish; and others
make of other material the beginnings of these unlawful feasts; and there is
much rivalry about these things, about quality, and about order, and about
quantity; and they take a pride in the things, for which they ought to bury
themselves for shame; some saying that they have spent the half of the day, some
all of it, some that they have added the night too. Behold, O wretched man, the
measure of your belly, and be ashamed of your unmeasured earnestness!
But there is nothing like this among those angels; but all these desires also
are dead. For their meals are not unto fullness, and unto luxurious living, but
unto necessity. No bird hunters are there, no fishermen, but bread and water. But
this confusion, and the disturbance, and the turmoils, are all removed from
thence, alike from the house and from the body, and great is the haven, but
among these great the tempest.
Burst open now in thought the belly of them who feed on such things, and
you will see the vast refuse, and the unclean channel, and the whited sepulchre.
But what come after these I am even ashamed to tell, the disagreeable