FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.2.

differ in species according to their objects, as was proved above
(Question 18, Article 2). Therefore it follows that sins are properly
distinguished in species by their objects.
Reply to Objection 1: The aspect of good is found chiefly in the end:
and therefore the end stands in the relation of object to the act of the
will which is at the root of every sin. Consequently it amounts to the
same whether sins differ by their objects or by their ends.
Reply to Objection 2: Sin is not a pure privation but an act deprived
of its due order: hence sins differ specifically according to their
objects of their acts rather than according to their opposites,
although, even if they were distinguished in reference to their
opposite virtues, it would come to the same: since virtues differ
specifically according to their objects, as stated above (Question 60,
Article 5).
Reply to Objection 3: In various things, differing in species or genus,
nothing hinders our finding one formal aspect of the object, from
which aspect sin receives its species. It is thus that pride seeks
excellence in reference to various things; and avarice seeks
abundance of things adapted to human use.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether spiritual sins are fittingly distinguished

from carnal sins?
Objection 1: It would seem that spiritual sins are unfittingly
distinguished from carnal sins. For the Apostle says (Gal. 5:19): "The
works of the flesh are manifest, which are fornication, uncleanness,
immodesty, luxury, idolatry, witchcrafts," etc. from which it seems
that all kinds of sins are works of the flesh. Now carnal sins are
called works of the flesh. Therefore carnal sins should not be
distinguished from spiritual sins.
Objection 2: Further, whosoever sins, walks according to the flesh,
as stated in Rm. 8:13: "If you live according to the flesh, you shall
die. But if by the spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you shall
live." Now to live or walk according to the flesh seems to pertain to
the nature of carnal sin. Therefore carnal sins should not be
distinguished from spiritual sins.
Objection 3: Further, the higher part of the soul, which is the mind or
reason, is called the spirit, according to Eph. 4:23: "Be renewed in
the spirit of your mind," where spirit stands for reason, according to
a gloss. Now every sin, which is committed in accordance with the
flesh, flows from the reason by its consent; since consent in a sinful
act belongs to the higher reason, as we shall state further on
(Question 74, Article 7). Therefore the same sins are both carnal and
spiritual, and consequently they should not be distinguished from
one another.
Objection 4: Further, if some sins are carnal specifically, this,
seemingly, should apply chiefly to those sins whereby man sins
against his own body. But, according to the Apostle (1 Cor. 6:18),
"every sin that a man doth, is without the body: but he that
committeth fornication, sinneth against his own body." Therefore
fornication would be the only carnal sin, whereas the Apostle (Eph.
5:3) reckons covetousness with the carnal sins.
On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 17) says that "of the seven
capital sins five are spiritual, and two carnal."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), sins take their species
from their objects. Now every sin consists in the desire for some