things consequent upon matrimony, for instance on the question of
its being a sacrament, or of its being lawful. Wherefore such error as
these is no impediment to marriage, as neither does an error about
baptism hinder a man from receiving the character, provided he
intend to receive what the Church gives, although he believe it to be
nothing.
Reply to Objection 3: It is not any ignorance of a circumstance that
causes the involuntariness which is an excuse from sin, as stated
above; wherefore the argument does not prove.
Reply to Objection 4: Difference of fortune or of quality does not
make a difference in the essentials to matrimony, as the condition of
slavery does. Hence the argument does not prove.
Reply to Objection 5: Error about a person's rank, as such, does not
void a marriage, for the same reason as neither does error about a
personal quality. If, however, the error about a person's rank or
position amounts to an error about the person, it is an impediment to
matrimony. Hence, if the woman consent directly to this particular
person, her error about his rank does not void the marriage; but if
she intend directly to consent to marry the king's son, whoever he
may be, then, if another man than the king's son be brought to her,
there is error about the person, and the marriage will be void.
Reply to Objection 6: Error is an impediment to matrimony, although
it be about other impediments to marriage if it concern those things
which render a person an unlawful subject of marriage. But (the
Master) does not mention error about such things, because they are
an impediment to marriage whether there be error about them or not;
so that if a woman contract with a subdeacon, whether she know this
or not, there is no marriage; whereas the condition of slavery is no
impediment if the slavery be known. Hence the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 7: In contracts money is regarded as the measure
of other things (Ethic. v, 5), and not as being sought for its own sake.
Hence if the coin paid is not what it is thought to be but another of
equal value, this does not void the contract. But if there be error
about a thing sought for its own sake, the contract is voided, for
instance if one were to sell a donkey for a horse; and thus it is in the
case in point.

Reply to Objection 8: No matter how long they have cohabited,
unless she be willing to consent again, there is no marriage.
Reply to Objection 9: If she did not consent previously to marry his
brother, she may hold to the one whom she took in error. Nor can
she return to his brother, especially if there has been carnal
intercourse between her and the man she took to husband. If,
however, she had previously consented to take the first one in words
of the present, she cannot have the second while the first lives. But
she may either leave the second or return to the first; and ignorance
of the fact excuses her from sin, just as she would be excused if
after the consummation of the marriage a kinsman of her husband
were to know her by fraud since she is not to be blamed for the
other's deceit.