40. After the events of the Resurrection and Ascension Mary entered the Upper Room
together with the Apostles to await Pentecost, and was present there as the Mother of the
glorified Lord. She was not only the one who "advanced in her pilgrimage of faith" and
loyally persevered in her union with her Son "unto the Cross," but she was also the
"handmaid of the Lord," left by her Son as Mother in the midst of the infant Church:
"Behold your mother." Thus there began to develop a special bond between this Mother
and the Church. For the infant Church was the fruit of the Cross and Resurrection of her
Son. Mary, who from the beginning had given herself without reserve to the person and
work of her Son, could not but pour out upon the Church, from the very beginning, her
maternal self-giving. After her Son's departure, her motherhood remains in the Church as
maternal mediation: interceding for all her children, the Mother cooperates in the saving
work of her Son, the Redeemer of the world. In fact the Council teaches that the
"motherhood of Mary in the order of grace...will last without interruption until the eternal
fulfillment of all the elect." With the redeeming death of her Son, the maternal
mediation of the handmaid of the Lord took on a universal dimension, for the work of
redemption embraces the whole of humanity. Thus there is manifested in a singular way
the efficacy of the one and universal mediation of Christ "between God and men" Mary's
cooperation shares, in its subordinate character, in the universality of the mediation of the
Redeemer, the one Mediator. This is clearly indicated by the Council in the words quoted
above.

"For," the text goes on, "taken up to heaven, she did not lay aside this saving role, but by
her manifold acts of intercession continues to win for us gifts of eternal salvation."
With this character of "intercession," first manifested at Cana in Galilee, Mary's
mediation continues in the history of the Church and the world. We read that Mary "by

her maternal charity, cares for the brethren of her Son who still journey on earth
surrounded by dangers and difficulties, until they are led to their happy homeland." In
this way Mary's motherhood continues unceasingly in the Church as the mediation which
intercedes, and the Church expresses her faith in this truth by invoking Mary "under the
titles of Advocate, Auxiliatrix, Adjutrix and Mediatrix."

41. Through her mediation, subordinate to that of the Redeemer, Mary contributes in a
special way to the union of the pilgrim Church on earth with the eschatological and
heavenly reality of the Communion of Saints, since she has already been "assumed into
heaven." The truth of the Assumption, defined by Pius XII, is reaffirmed by the
Second Vatican Council, which thus expresses the Church's faith: "Preserved free from
all guilt of original sin, the Immaculate Virgin was taken up body and soul into heavenly
glory upon the completion of her earthly sojourn. She was exalted by the Lord as Queen
of the Universe, in order that she might be the more thoroughly conformed to her Son, the
Lord of lords (cf. Rev. 19:16) and the conqueror of sin and death." In this teaching
Pius XII was in continuity with Tradition, which has found many different expressions in
the history of the Church, both in the East and in the West.