test of these, and you will not be perplexed with doubt. For as there is among
calculators the number of six thousand, to which all things can be reduced, and
everything can be divided and multiplied in the scale of six thousand, and this is
known to all who are acquainted with arithmetic; so he who knows those rules,
which I will briefly recapitulate, will never be offended. And what are these?
That virtue is a good, vice an evil; that diseases, poverty, ill-treatment, false
accusations, and the like, are things indifferent; that the righteous are afflicted
here, or if ever they are in prosperity, it is that virtue may not appear odious; that
the wicked enjoy pleasure now that hereafter they may be punished, or if they
are sometimes visited, it is that vice may not seem to be approved, nor their
actions to go unpunished; that all are not punished, lest there should be a
disbelief of the time of resurrection; that even of the good, some who have done
bad actions are quit of them here; and of the wicked, some have good ones, and
are rewarded for them here, that their wickedness may be punished hereafter
[Matthew 6:5]; that the works of God are for the most part incomprehensible,
and that the difference between us and Him is greater than can be expressed. If
we reason on these grounds, nothing will be able to trouble or perplex us. If we
listen to the Scriptures continually, we shall find many such examples.
"Which are able," he says, "to make you wise unto salvation."
For the Scriptures suggest to us what is to be done, and what is not to be
done. For hear this blessed one elsewhere saying, "You are confident that you
yourself art a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in darkness, an
instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes." [Romans 2:19-20] You see that the
Law is the light of them which are in darkness; and if that which shows the
letter, the letter which kills, is light, what then is the Spirit which quickens? If
the Old Covenant is light, what is the New, which contains so many, and so great
revelations? Where the difference is as great, as if any one should open heaven
to those who only know the earth, and make all things there visible. There we
learn concerning hell, heaven, and judgment. Let us not believe in things
irrational. They are nothing but imposture. "What," you say, "when what they

foretell comes to pass?" It is because you believe it, if it does come to pass. The
impostor has taken you captive. Your life is in his power, he manages you as he
will. If a captain of robbers should have under his power and disposal the son of
a king, who had fled to him, preferring the desert, and his lawless company,
would he be able to pronounce whether he would live or die? Assuredly he
would, not because he knows the future, but because he is the disposer of his life
or death, the youth having put himself in his power. For according to his own
pleasure, he may either kill him, or spare his life, as he has become subject to
him, and it is equally at his disposal to say whether you shall be rich or poor. The
greater part of the world have delivered themselves up into the hands of the
devil.
And furthermore, it contributes much to favor the pretenses of these
deceivers, that a man has accustomed himself to believe in them. For no one
takes notice of their failures, but their lucky conjectures are observed. But if
these men have any power of prognosticating, bring them to me, a believer. I say
not this, as magnifying myself, (for it is no great honor to be superior to these
things,) and indeed I am deep-laden with sins; but with respect to these matters, I
will not be humble-minded; by the grace of God I despise them all. Bring me
this pretender to magic; let him, if he has any power of prognosticating, tell me
what will happen to me tomorrow. But he will not tell me. For I am under the
power of the King, and he has no claim to my allegiance or submission. I am far
from his holes and caverns. I war under the king. "But some one committed
theft," you say, "and this man discovered it." This is not always true, certainly,
but for the most part absurdities and falsehoods. For they know nothing. If
indeed they know anything, they ought rather to speak of their own concerns,
how the numerous offerings to their idols have been stolen, how so much of their
gold has been melted. Why have they not informed their Priests? Even for the
sake of money, they have not been able to give information when their idoltemples have been burnt, and many have perished with them. Why do they not
provide for their own safety? But it is altogether a matter of chance, if they have