SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.149, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 11),
insensibility which is opposed to temperance "is not very common,"
so that like its species which are opposed to the species of
intemperance it has no name. Hence the vice opposed to
drunkenness is unnamed; and yet if a man were knowingly to
abstain from wine to the extent of molesting nature grievously, he
would not be free from sin.
Reply to Objection 2: This objection regards the resulting defect
which is involuntary: whereas immoderate use of wine is voluntary,
and it is in this that the sin consists.
Reply to Objection 3: Even as he that is drunk is excused if he knows
not the strength of the wine, so too is he that invites another to drink
excused from sin, if he be unaware that the drinker is the kind of
person to be made drunk by the drink offered. But if ignorance be
lacking neither is excused from sin.
Reply to Objection 4: Sometimes the correction of a sinner is to be
foregone, as stated above (Question 33, Article 6). Hence Augustine
says in a letter (Ad Aurel. Episc. Ep. xxii), "Meseems, such things are
cured not by bitterness, severity, harshness, but by teaching rather
than commanding, by advice rather than threats. Such is the course
to be followed with the majority of sinners: few are they whose sins
should be treated with severity."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.149, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether drunkenness is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that drunkenness is not a mortal sin. For
Augustine says in a sermon on Purgatory [Serm. civ in the Appendix
to St. Augustine's works] that "drunkenness if indulged in
assiduously, is a mortal sin." Now assiduity denotes a circumstance
which does not change the species of a sin; so that it cannot
aggravate a sin infinitely, and make a mortal sin of a venial sin, as
shown above (FS, Question 88, Article 5). Therefore if drunkenness /
is not a mortal sin for some other reason, neither is it for this.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says [Serm. civ in the Appendix to
St. Augustine's works]: "Whenever a man takes more meat and drink
than is necessary, he should know that this is one of the lesser
sins." Now the lesser sins are called venial. Therefore drunkenness,
which is caused by immoderate drink, is a venial sin.
Objection 3: Further, no mortal sin should be committed on the
score of medicine. Now some drink too much at the advice of the
physician, that they may be purged by vomiting; and from this
excessive drink drunkenness ensues. Therefore drunkenness is not
a mortal sin.
On the contrary, We read in the Canons of the apostles (Can. xli, xlii):
"A bishop, priest or deacon who is given to drunkenness or
gambling, or incites others thereto, must either cease or be deposed;
a subdeacon, reader or precentor who does these things must either
give them up or be excommunicated; the same applies to the laity."
Now such punishments are not inflicted save for mortal sins.
Therefore drunkenness is a mortal sin.
I answer that, The sin of drunkenness, as stated in the foregoing
Article, consists in the immoderate use and concupiscence of wine.
Now this may happen to a man in three ways. First, so that he knows
not the drink to be immoderate and intoxicating: and then
drunkenness may be without sin, as stated above (Article 1).
Secondly, so that he perceives the drink to be immoderate, but
without knowing it to be intoxicating, and then drunkenness may
involve a venial sin. Thirdly, it may happen that a man is well aware
that the drink is immoderate and intoxicating, and yet he would
rather be drunk than abstain from drink. Such a man is a drunkard