always to mock at Him, for had they desired to learn, the teaching which was by
His words, and by the Scriptures, and by His miracles would have been
sufficient. The woman, on the contrary, said what she said from an impartial
judgment and a simple mind, as is plain from what she did afterwards; for she
both heard and believed, and netted others also, and in every circumstance we
may observe the carefulness and faith of the woman.

John 4:27
"And upon this came His disciples," (very seasonably did they come when the
teaching was finished,) "and marveled that He talked with the woman, yet no
man said, What seekest Thou? Or, Why talkest Thou with her?"
3. At what did they marvel? At His want of pride and exceeding humility,
that looked upon as He was, He endured with such lowliness of heart to talk with
a woman poor, and a Samaritan. Still in their amazement they did not ask Him
the reason, so well were they taught to keep the station of disciples, so much did
they fear and reverence Him. For although they did not as yet hold the right
opinion concerning Him, still they gave heed unto Him as to some marvelous
one, and paid Him much respect. Yet they frequently are seen to act confidently;
as when John lay upon His bosom, when they came to Him and said, "Who is the
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?" [Matthew 18:1], when the sons of Zebedee
entreated Him to set one of them on His right hand, and the other on His left.
Why then did they not here question Him? Because since all those instances
related to themselves, they had need to enquire into them, while what here took
place was of no such great importance to them. And indeed John did that a long
time after towards the very end, when He enjoyed greater confidence, and was
bold in the love of Christ; for he it was, he says, "whom Jesus loved." What
could equal such blessedness?
But, beloved, let us not stop at this, the calling the Apostle blessed, but let
us do all things that we also may be of the blessed, let us imitate the Evangelist,
and see what it was that caused such great love. What then was it? He left his
father, his ship, and his net, and followed Jesus. Yet this he did in common with
his brother, and Peter, and Andrew, and the rest of the Apostles. What then was
the special thing which caused this great love? Shall we discover it? He says
nothing of this kind about himself, but only that he was beloved; as to the
righteous acts for which he was beloved he has modestly been silent. That Jesus

loved him with a special love was clear to every one; yet John does not appear
conversing with or questioning Jesus privately, as Peter often did, and Philip,
and Judas, and Thomas, except only when he desired to show kindness and
compliance to his fellow Apostle; for when the chief of the Apostles by
beckoning constrained him, then he asked. For these two had great love each for
the other. Thus, for instance, they are seen going up together into the Temple and
speaking in common to the people. Yet Peter in many places is moved, and
speaks more warmly than John. And at the end he hears Christ say, "Peter, do
you love Me more than these?" [John 21:15] Now it is clear that he who loved
"more than these" was also beloved. But this in his case was shown by loving
Jesus, in the case of the other by being beloved by Jesus.
What then was it which caused this special love? To my thinking, it was
that the man displayed great gentleness and meekness, for which reason he does
not appear in many places speaking openly. And how great a thing this is, is
plain also from the case of Moses. It was this which made him such and so great
as he was. There is nothing equal to lowliness of mind. For which cause Jesus
with this began the Beatitudes, and when about to lay as it were the foundation
and base of a mighty building, He placed first lowliness of mind. Without this a
man cannot possibly be saved; though he fast, though he pray, though he give
alms, if it be with a proud spirit, these things are abominable, if humility be not
there; while if it be, all these things are amiable and lovely, and are done with
safety. Let us then be modest, beloved, let us be modest; success is easy, if we be
sober-minded. For after all what is it, O man, that excites you to pride? Do you
see not the poverty of your nature? The unsteadiness of your will? Consider your
end, consider the multitude of your sins. But perhaps because you do many
righteous deeds you are proud. By that very pride you shall undo them all.
Wherefore it behooves not so much him that has sinned as him that does
righteousness to take pains to be humble. Why so? Because the sinner is
constrained by conscience, while the other, except he be very sober, soon caught
up as by a blast of wind is lifted on high, and made to vanish like the Pharisee.