But that you may not imagine that he was of the stock of Israel as coming of the
ten tribes, he says, "of the tribe of Benjamin." So that he was of the more
approved portion, for the place of the priests was in the lot of this tribe. "An
Hebrew of Hebrews." Because he was not a proselyte, but from of old, of
distinguished Jews; for he might have been of Israel, and yet not "an Hebrew of
Hebrews," for many were already corrupting the matter, and were strangers to
the language, being encircled by other nations; it is either this then, or the great
superiority of his birth, that he shows. "According to the law a Pharisee." He is
coming now to the circumstances dependent on his own will; for all those things
were apart from the will, for his being circumcised was not of himself, nor that
he was of the stock of Israel, nor that he was of the tribe of Benjamin. So that,
even among these he has a larger share, even though there were really many who
partook with him. Where then are we to place the "rather"? Particularly herein
that he was not a proselyte; for to be of the most distinguished tribe and sect, and
this from his ancestors of old, was a thing which belonged not to many. But he
comes to the things which are matters of choice, wherein we have the "rather."
"As touching the law, a Pharisee; as touching zeal, persecuting the Church." But
this is not sufficient; for it is possible to be a Pharisee even, and yet not very
zealous. But this also he adds; behold the "rather." "According to righteousness."
It is possible, however, to be adventurous, or to act thus from ambition, and not
out of zeal for the law, as the chief priests did. Yet neither was this the case, but,
"according to the righteousness which is in the law, found blameless." If then
both for purity of descent, and earnestness, and habits, and mode of life, I
surpassed all, why have I renounced all those dignities, he asks, but because I
found that the things of Christ are better, and better far? Wherefore he added;
"howbeit what things were gain to me, these have I counted loss for Christ."
[Philippians 3:7]
Such a course of life, so strictly regulated, and entered upon from earliest
childhood, such unblemished extraction, such dangers, plots, labors,
forwardness, did Paul renounce, "counting them but loss," which before were

"gain," that he might "win Christ." But we do not even contemn money, that we
may "win Christ," but prefer to fail of the life to come rather than of the good
things of the present life. And yet this is nothing else than loss; for tell me now,
let us examine in detail the conditions of riches, and see whether it be not loss
accompanied with trouble, and without any gain. For tell me, what is the
advantage of those stores of costly garments, what good do we gain when we are
arrayed in them? None, nay, we are only losers. How so? Because even the poor
man, in his cheap and threadbare clothing, does not bear the scorching in time of
heat any wise worse than yourself; nay, rather he bears it better, for clothes that
are threadbare and worn single allow more ease to the body, but not so with
those which are new made, though they be finer than the spider's web. Besides,
you, from your excessive self-importance, wear even two and often three inner
garments, and a cloak and girdle, and breeches too, but no one blames him if he
wears but a single inner garment; so that he is the man that endures most easily.
It is owing to this that we see rich men sweating, but the poor subject to nothing
of the sort. Since then his cheap clothing, which is sold for a trifle, answers the
same or even a better purpose to him, and those clothes, which oblige a man to
pay down much gold, do only the same thing, is not this great superabundance so
much loss? For it has added nothing in respect of its use and service, but your
purse is emptied of so much the more gold, and the same use and service. You
who have riches have purchased for a hundred pieces of gold, or even more, but
the poor man for a trifling sum of silver. Do you perceive the loss? No, for your
pride will not let you see it. Would you have us make out this account in the case
of the gold ornaments too, which men put alike about their horses and their
wives? For besides the other evils, the possession of money makes fools of men;
they account their wives and horses to be worthy of the same honor, and the
ornamentation of both is the same; and they would make themselves finer by the
same means as the very beasts that carry them, or as the very skins of the
awnings, wherein they are borne. What now is the use of decking out a mule or a
horse with gold? Or the lady, that has such a weight of gold and jewels about her