separation from you distresses you, yet you have this very great consolation
arising from your successful exploits; for I also who am banished to so great a
distance gain no small cheerfulness from this cause—I mean your courage.

To Olympias
Why do you lament? Why do you belabour yourself, and demand of
yourself a punishment which your enemies were not able to demand from you,
having thus abandoned your soul to the tyranny of dejection? For the letters
which you sent to me by the hands of Patricius have discovered to me the
wounds which have been inflicted on your mind. Wherefore also I am very
sorrowful and much distressed that when you ought to be using every exertion
and making it your business to expel dejection from your soul, you go about
collecting distressing thoughts, even inventing things (so you say) which do not
exist, and tearing yourself to pieces for no purpose, and to your very great injury.
For why are you grieved because you could not remove me from Cucusus? Yet
indeed, as far as you were concerned, you did remove me, having made every
exertion and endeavour for this purpose. And even if it has not been actually
accomplished you ought not to be vexed on that account. For perhaps it seemed
good to God that I should be set to run the longer double course, in order that the
garland of victory might be rendered more glorious. Why then are you vexed on
account of these things, in consequence of which my fame is spread abroad,
when you ought to leap and dance for joy and bind wreaths upon your brow,
because I have been deemed worthy of so great an honour which far exceeds my
merits? Is it the desolation of this place which grieves you? Yet what can be
pleasanter than my sojourn here? I have quietness, and tranquillity, plenty of
leisure and good bodily health. For although the town has neither market-place
nor market that is nothing to me. For all things are poured abundantly upon me
as out of a flowing spring. I find my lord the Bishop here and my lord Dioscorus
are constantly employed in providing for my refreshment. And the good
Patricius will tell you that as far as my sojourn here is concerned I pass my time
cheerfully and gladly, surrounded by attention. But if you lament the events

which occurred in Cæsarea, here again your conduct is unworthy of yourself. For
there also bright garlands of victory were woven for me, inasmuch as all were
proclaiming and publishing my praises, and expressing wonder and astonishment
at the ill-treatment to which I had been subjected followed by expulsion.
Meanwhile however do not let any one know these things, although they are the
theme of much gossip. For my lord Pœanius has disclosed to me that the
presbyters of Pharetrius himself have arrived on the spot, who declare that they
were in communion with me and had no communication or intercourse or
partnership with my adversaries. Therefore to avoid upsetting them do not let
any one know these things. For certainly the things which befell me were very
grievous: and if I had not suffered any other distress the events which happened
there would have sufficed to procure innumerable rewards for me: so extreme
was the danger which I encountered. Now I beseech you to keep these matters
secret, and so I will give you a short account of them, not in order to grieve you
but rather to make you glad. For herein consists the material of my gain, herein
consists my wealth, herein the means of getting rid of my sins— that my journey
is continually encompassed by trials of this kind, and that they are inflicted upon
me by persons from whom they were quite unexpected. For when I was about to
enter the region of Cappadocia, having escaped from that man of Galatia, who
nearly threatened me with death, many persons met me on the way saying "the
lord Pharetrius is awaiting you, and going about in all directions for fear of
missing the pleasure of meeting you, and making every possible endeavour to see
you, and embrace you, and show you all manner of affectionate regard; and he
has set the monasteries of men and women in motion for this purpose." Now
when I heard these things I did not expect that any of them would really take
place, but formed an impression in my own mind precisely the reverse: but of
this I said nothing to any of those who brought me this message.
2. Now when I arrived late one evening at Cæsarea, in an exhausted and
worn-out condition, being in the very height of a burning fever, faint and
suffering to the last degree, I lighted upon an inn situated just at the outskirts of