you leave him boundless wealth, you leave him no one to take care of it, and you
render him worse than those who are reduced to extreme poverty. For poverty is
better than riches for those children who are not well-disposed. For it retains
them in some degree of virtue even against their will. Whereas money does not
suffer those who would be sober to continue so, it leads them away, ruins them,
and plunges them into infinite dangers.
Mothers, be specially careful to regulate your daughters well; for the
management of them is easy. Be watchful over them, that they may be keepers at
home. Above all, instruct them to be pious, modest, despisers of wealth,
indifferent to ornament. In this way dispose of them in marriage. For if you form
them in this way, you will save not only them, but the husband who is destined
to marry them, and not the husband only, but the children, not the children only,
but the grandchildren. For the root being made good, good branches will shoot
forth, and still become better, and for all these you will receive a reward. Let us
do all things therefore, as benefiting not only one soul, but many through that
one. For they ought to go from their father's house to marriage, as combatants
from the school of exercise, furnished with all necessary knowledge, and to be as
leaven able to transform the whole lump to its own virtue. And let your sons be
so modest, as to be distinguished for their steadiness and sobriety, that they may
receive great praise both from God and men. Let them learn to govern their
appetites, to avoid extravagance, to be good economists, affectionate, and
submissive to rule. For so they will be able to secure a good reward to their
parents, so all things will be done to the glory of God, and to our salvation,
through Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom, etc.

## Homily 10 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 3:1-4
"If a man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. A Bishop
then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of good
behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach; not given to wine, no striker, not
greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous; one that rules
well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity."
As now proceeding to discourse of the Episcopal office, he sets out with
showing what sort of a person a Bishop ought to be. And here he does not do it
as in the course of his exhortation to Timothy, but addresses all, and instructs
others through him. And what says he? "If a man desire the office of a Bishop," I
do not blame him, for it is a work of protection. If any one has this desire, so that
he does not covet the dominion and authority, but wishes to protect the Church, I
blame him not. "For he desires a good work." Even Moses desired the office,
though not the power, and his desire exposed him to that taunt, "Who made you a
ruler and a judge over us?" [Acts 7:27; Exodus 2:14] If any one, then, desire it
in this way, let him desire it. For the Episcopate is so called from having the
oversight of all.
"A Bishop then," he says, "must be blameless, the husband of one wife."
This he does not lay down as a rule, as if he must not be without one, but as
prohibiting his having more than one. For even the Jews were allowed to
contract second marriages, and even to have two wives at one time. For
"marriage is honorable," [Hebrews 13:4] Some however say, that this is said
that he should be the husband of one wife. "Blameless." Every virtue is implied
in this word; so that if any one be conscious to himself of any sins, he does not
well to desire an office for which his own actions have disqualified him. For
such an one ought to be ruled, and not to rule others. For he who bears rule