FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.4.

Reply to Objection 2: Anger is said to grow into hatred, not as
though the same passion which at first was anger, afterwards
becomes hatred by becoming inveterate; but by a process of
causality. For anger when it lasts a long time engenders hatred.
Reply to Objection 3: Anger is said to be composed of sorrow and
desire, not as though they were its parts, but because they are its
causes: and it has been said above (Question 25, Article 2) that the
concupiscible passions are the causes of the irascible passions.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether anger requires an act of reason?

Objection 1: It would seem that anger does not require an act of
reason. For, since anger is a passion, it is in the sensitive appetite.
But the sensitive appetite follows an apprehension, not of reason,
but of the sensitive faculty. Therefore anger does not require an act
of reason.
Objection 2: Further, dumb animals are devoid of reason: and yet
they are seen to be angry. Therefore anger does not require an act of
reason.
Objection 3: Further, drunkenness fetters the reason; whereas it is
conducive to anger. Therefore anger does not require an act of
reason.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 6) that "anger
listens to reason somewhat."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), anger is a desire for
vengeance. Now vengeance implies a comparison between the
punishment to be inflicted and the hurt done; wherefore the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 6) that "anger, as if it had drawn the
inference that it ought to quarrel with such a person, is therefore
immediately exasperated." Now to compare and to draw an inference
is an act of reason. Therefore anger, in a fashion, requires an act of
reason.
Reply to Objection 1: The movement of the appetitive power may
follow an act of reason in two ways. In the first way, it follows the
reason in so far as the reason commands: and thus the will follows
reason, wherefore it is called the rational appetite. In another way, it
follows reason in so far as the reason denounces, and thus anger
follows reason. For the Philosopher says (De Problem. xxviii, 3) that
"anger follows reason, not in obedience to reason's command, but
as a result of reason's denouncing the injury." Because the sensitive
appetite is subject to the reason, not immediately but through the
will.
Reply to Objection 2: Dumb animals have a natural instinct imparted
to them by the Divine Reason, in virtue of which they are gifted with

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.5.

movements, both internal and external, like unto rational
movements, as stated above (Question 40, Article 3).
Reply to Objection 3: As stated in Ethic. vii, 6, "anger listens
somewhat to reason" in so far as reason denounces the injury
inflicted, "but listens not perfectly," because it does not observe the
rule of reason as to the measure of vengeance. Anger, therefore,
requires an act of reason; and yet proves a hindrance to reason.
Wherefore the Philosopher says (De Problem. iii, 2,27) that whose
who are very drunk, so as to be incapable of the use of reason, do
not get angry: but those who are slightly drunk, do get angry,
through being still able, though hampered, to form a judgment of
reason.