have not stolen the treasure: the vessel has been scourged, yet the treasure was
not betrayed; it has been drowned in the sea, yet the treasure was not
shipwrecked: it has died yet the treasure survives. He gave therefore the earnest
of the Spirit. Where are they who blaspheme the Spirit's majesty? Give ye heed.
"He that establishes us with you in Christ is God who also has given the earnest
of the Spirit." [2 Corinthians 1:21-22] You all know that the earnest is a small
part of the whole; let me tell you how. Some one goes to buy a house at a great
price; and he says give me an earnest that I may have confidence: or one goes to
take a wife for himself, he arranges about dowry and property, and he says "give
me an earnest." Observe: in the purchase of a slave and in all covenants there is
an earnest. Since then Christ made a covenant with us (for He was about to take
me as a bride) he also assigned a dowry to me not of money, but of blood. But
this dowry which He assigns is the bestowal of good things "such as eye has not
seen, and ear has not heard, neither has entered into the heart of man."
[1 Corinthians 2:9] He assigned them for the dowry:— immortality, praise with
the angels, release from death, freedom from sin, the inheritance of a kingdom
(so great are his riches), righteousness, sanctification, deliverance from present
evils, discovery of future blessings. Great was my dowry. Now attend carefully:
mark what He does. He came to take the harlot, for so I call her, unclean as she
was, that you might understand the love of the bridegroom. He came; He took
me: He assigns me a dowry: He says "I give you my wealth." How? "Have you
lost," He says, "paradise?" take it back. Have you lost your beauty? Take it
back; take all these things. But yet the dowry was not given to me here.
13. Observe, this is the reason why He speaks beforehand with reference to
this dowry; He warranted to me in the dowry the resurrection of the body—
immortality. For immortality does not always follow resurrection, but the two are
distinct. For many have risen, and been again laid low, like Lazarus and the
bodies of the saints. But in this case it is not so, but the promise is of
resurrection, immortality, a place in the joyful company of angels, the meeting of
the Son of Man in the clouds, and the fulfilment of the saying "so shall we ever

be with the Lord," [1 Thessalonians 4:17] the release from death, the freedom
from sin, the complete overthrow of destruction. Of what kind is that? "Eye has
not seen nor ear heard neither have entered into the heart of man the things
which God has prepared for them that love Him." Do you give me good things
which I know not? He says "yea; only be espoused to me here, love me in this
world." "Wherefore do you not give me the dowry here?" It will be given when
you have come to my Father, when you have entered the royal palace. Did you
come to me! nay I came to you. I came not that you should abide here but that I
might take you and return. Seek not the dowry here: all depends on hope, and
faith. "And do you give me nothing in this world?" He answers. "Receive an
earnest that you may trust me concerning that which is to come: receive pledges
and betrothal gifts." Therefore Paul says "I have espoused you."
[2 Corinthians 11:2] As gifts of betrothal God has given us present blessings:
they are an earnest of the future; but the full dowry abides in the other world.
How so? I will tell you. Here I grow old, there I grow not old; here I die, there I
die not, here I sorrow, there I sorrow not; here is poverty, and disease, and
intrigue, there nothing of that kind exists: here is darkness and light, there is light
alone: here is intrigue, there is liberty; here is disease, there is health; here is life
which has an end, there is life which has no end; here is sin, there is
righteousness, and sin is banished; here is envy, there nothing of the kind exists.
"Give me these things" one says; "Nay! Wait in order that your fellow-servants
also may be saved; wait I say. He who establishes us and has given us the
earnest"— what kind of earnest? The Holy Spirit, the supply of the Spirit. Let
me speak concerning the Spirit. He gave the signet ring to the Apostles, saying
"take this and give it to all." Is the ring then portioned out, and yet not divided?
It is so. Let me teach you the meaning of the supply of the Spirit: Peter received,
and Paul also received the Holy Spirit. He went about the world, he released
sinners from their sins, he restored the lame, he clothed the naked, he raised the
dead, he cleansed the lepers, he bridled the devil, he strangled the demons, he
held converse with God, he planted a Church, levelled temples to the earth,