2 Corinthians 8:6
4. "Insomuch that we exhorted Titus, that as he made a beginning before, so
he would also complete in you this grace also. "
And what connection is there here? Much; and closely bearing on what
went before. 'For because we saw them vehement,' he says, 'and fervent in all
things, in temptations, in almsgiving, in their love toward us, in the purity
otherwise of their life: in order that you too might be made their equals, we sent
Titus.' Howbeit he did not say this, though he implied it. Behold excessiveness
of love. 'For though intreated and desired by them,' he says, 'we were anxious
about your state, lest by any means ye should come short of them. Wherefore
also we sent Titus, that by this also being stirred up and put in mind, you might
emulate the Macedonians.' For Titus happened to be there when this Epistle was
writing. Yet he shows that he had made a beginning in this matter before Paul's
exhortation; "that as he had made a beginning before," he says. Wherefore also
he bestows great praise on him; for instance, in the beginning [of the Epistle];
"Because I found not Titus my brother, I had no relief for my spirit:" [2
Corinthians 2:13] and here all those things which he has said, and this too itself.
For this also is no light praise, the having begun before even: for this evinces a
warm and fervent spirit. Wherefore also he sent him, infusing among them in
this also a very great incentive unto giving, the presence of Titus. On this
account also he extols him with praises, wishing to endear him more exceedingly
to the Corinthians. For this too has a great weight unto persuading, when he who
counsels is upon intimate terms. And well does he both once and twice and
thrice, having made mention of almsgiving, call 'it grace,' now indeed saying,
"Moreover, brethren, I make known to you the grace of God bestowed on the
Churches of Macedonia;" and now, "they of their own accord, praying us with
much intreaty in regard of this grace and fellowship:" and again, "that as he had

begun, so he would also finish in you this grace also."
5. For this is a great good and a gift of God; and rightly done assimilates us,
so far as may be, unto God; for such an one is in the highest sense a man. A
certain one, at least, giving a model of a man has mentioned this, for "Man,"
says he, "is a great thing; and a merciful man is an honorable thing." [Proverbs
20:6. Septuagint] Greater is this gift than to raise the dead. For far greater is it to
feed Christ when an hungered than to raise the dead by the name of Jesus: for in
the former case you do good to Christ, in the latter He to you. And the reward
surely comes by doing good, not by receiving good. For here indeed, in the case
of miracles I mean, you are God's debtor; in that of almsgiving, you have God
for a debtor. Now it is almsgiving, when it is done with willingness, when with
bountifulness, when you deem yourself not to give but to receive, when done as
if you were benefitted, as if gaining and not losing; for so this were not a grace.
For he that shows mercy on another ought to feel joyful, not peevish. For how is
it not absurd, if while removing another's downheartedness, you are yourself
downhearted? For so thou no longer sufferest it to be alms. For if you are
downhearted because you have delivered another from downheartedness, you
furnish an example of extreme cruelty and inhumanity; for it were better not to
deliver him, than so to deliver him. And why are you also downhearted at all, O
man? For fear your gold should diminish? If such are your thoughts, do not give
at all: if you are not quite sure that it is multiplied for you in heaven, do not
bestow. But you seek the recompense here. Wherefore? Let your alms be alms,
and not traffic. Now many have indeed received a recompense even here; but
have not so received it, as if they should have an advantage over those who
received it not here; but some of them as being weaker than they ought, because
they were not so strongly attracted by the things which are there. And as those
who are greedy, and ill-mannered , and slaves of their bellies, being invited to a
royal banquet, and unable to wait till the proper time, just like little children mar
their own enjoyment, by taking food beforehand and stuffing themselves with
inferior dishes: even so in truth do these who seek for and receive [recompense]