THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.3.

was said above.
Reply to Objection 2: The body of an animal has no relation to a
rational soul, as the human body has. Hence there is no parity.
Reply to Objection 3: Although Christ drew the matter of His body
from other men, yet all draw from Him the immortal life of their body,
according to 1 Cor. 15:22: "And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ
all shall be made alive."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ is the Head of all men?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ is not the Head of all men. For
the head has no relation except to the members of its body. Now the
unbaptized are nowise members of the Church which is the body of
Christ, as it is written (Eph. 1:23). Therefore Christ is not the Head of
all men.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle writes to the Ephesians (5:25,27):
"Christ delivered Himself up for" the Church "that He might present
it to Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any
such thing." But there are many of the faithful in whom is found the
spot or the wrinkle of sin. Therefore Christ is not the Head of all the
faithful.
Objection 3: Further, the sacraments of the Old Law are compared to
Christ as the shadow to the body, as is written (Col. 2:17). But the
fathers of the Old Testament in their day served unto these
sacraments, according to Heb. 8:5: "Who serve unto the example
and shadow of heavenly things." Hence they did not pertain to
Christ's body, and therefore Christ is not the Head of all men.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Tim. 4:10): "Who is the Saviour of all
men, especially of the faithful," and (1 Jn. 2:2): "He is the propitiation
for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for those of the whole
world." Now to save men and to be a propitiation for their sins
belongs to Christ as Head. Therefore Christ is the Head of all men.
I answer that, This is the difference between the natural body of man
and the Church's mystical body, that the members of the natural
body are all together, and the members of the mystical are not all
together---neither as regards their natural being, since the body of
the Church is made up of the men who have been from the beginning
of the world until its end---nor as regards their supernatural being,
since, of those who are at any one time, some there are who are
without grace, yet will afterwards obtain it, and some have it already.
We must therefore consider the members of the mystical body not
only as they are in act, but as they are in potentiality. Nevertheless,
some are in potentiality who will never be reduced to act, and some
are reduced at some time to act; and this according to the triple
class, of which the first is by faith, the second by the charity of this

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.4.