deserves, should experience that which was spoken of by the blessed Paul and
"be swallowed up by overmuch sorrow." [2 Corinthians 2:7] The nicest accuracy,
therefore, is required in this matter also, lest what is intended to be profitable
should become to him an occasion of greater damage. For whatever sins he may
commit after such a method of treatment, the wrath caused by each of them must
be shared by the physician who so unskillfully applied his knife to the wound.
What severe punishment, then, must be expected by one who has not only to
render an account of the offenses which he himself has separately committed,
but also incurs extreme danger on account of the sins committed by others? For
if we shudder at undergoing judgment for our own misdeeds, believing that we
shall not be able to escape the fire of the other world, what must one expect to
suffer who has to answer for so many others? To prove the truth of this, listen to
the blessed Paul, or rather not to him, but to Christ speaking in him, when he
says: "Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit, for they watch for
your souls as they that shall give account." [Hebrews 13:17] Can the dread of
this threat be slight? It is impossible to say: but these considerations are
sufficient to convince even the most incredulous and obdurate that I did not
make this escape under the influence of pride or vainglory, but merely out of fear
for my own safety, and consideration of the gravity of the office.

## On the Priesthood — Book IV
Basil heard this, and after a little pause thus replied:
If you were yourself ambitious of obtaining this office, your fear would
have been reasonable; for in being ambitious of undertaking it, a man confesses
himself to be qualified for its administration, and if he fail therein, after it has
been entrusted to him, he cannot take refuge in the plea of inexperience, for he
has deprived himself of this excuse beforehand, by having hurriedly seized upon
the ministry, and whoever willingly and deliberately enters upon it, can no
longer say, "I have sinned in this matter against my will— and against my will I
have ruined such and such a soul;" for He who will one day judge him, will say
to him, "Since then thou were conscious of such inexperience, and had not
ability for undertaking this matter without incurring reproach, why were thou so
eager and presumptuous as to take in hand what was so far beyond your power?
Who compelled you to do so? Did you shrink or fly, and did any one drag you on
by force?" But you will hear nothing like this, for you can have nothing of this
kind to condemn yourself for; and it is evident to all that thou were in no degree
ambitious of this dignity, for the accomplishment of the matter was due to the
action of others. Hence, circumstances which leave those who are ambitious of
this office no chance of pardon when they err therein, afford you ample ground
for excuse.
Chrysostom: At this I shook my head and smiled a little, admiring the
simple-mindedness of the man, and thus addressed him: I could wish indeed that
matters were as you say, most excellent of men, but not in order that I might be
able to accept that office from which I lately fled. For if, indeed, no chastisement
were to await me for undertaking the care of the flock of Christ without
consideration and experience, yet to me it would be worse than all punishment,
after being entrusted with so great a charge, to have seemed so base towards Him