thousands of eyes [Hilary in Psalm 119] on every side, and not even to fancy that
ignorance will be an adequate excuse. For there is such a thing, there certainly is,
as being punished for ignorance, when the ignorance is inexcusable. Since the
Jews too were ignorant, yet not ignorant in an excusable way. And the Gentiles
were ignorant, but they are without excuse. [Romans 1:20] For when you are
ignorant of those things which it is not possible to know, you will not be subject
to any charge for it: but when of things easy and possible, you will be punished
with the utmost rigor. Else if we be not excessively supine, but contribute our
own share to its full amount, God will also reach forth His hand unto us in those
things which we are ignorant of. And this is what Paul said to the Philippians
likewise. "If in anything ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto
you." [Philippians 3:15] But when we are not willing to do even what we are
masters of, we shall not have the benefit of His assistance in this either. And this
was the case with the Jews too. "For this cause," He says, "speak I unto them in
parables, because seeing they see not." [Matthew 13:13] In what sense was it
that seeing they saw not? They saw devils cast out, and they said, He has a devil.
They saw the dead raised, and they worshipped not, but attempted to kill Him.
But not of this character was Cornelius. [Matthew 12:24] For this reason then,
when he was doing the whole of his duty with sincerity, God added unto him that
which was lacking also. Say not then, how came God to neglect such and such a
one who was no formalist ([ἄ] [πλαστος]) and a good man, though a Gentile?
For in the first place no man can possibly know for certain whether a person is
no formalist, but He only who "formed ([πλάσαντι]) the hearts severally."
[Psalm 33:15] And then there is this to be said too, that perchance ([πολλάκις])
such an one was neither thoughtful nor earnest. And how, it may be said, could
he, as being very uninformed? ([ἄ] [πλαστος].) Let me beg you to consider then
this simple and single-hearted man, and take notice of him in the affairs of life,
and you will see him a pattern of the utmost scrupulousness, such that if he
would have shown it in spiritual matters he would not have been overlooked: for
the facts of the truth are clearer than the sun. And wherever a man may go, he

might easily lay hold of his own salvation, if he were minded, that is, to be
heedful, and not to look on this as a by-work. For were the doings shut up into
Palestine, or in a little corner of the world? Have you not heard the prophet say,
"All shall know Me from the least even to the greatest?" [Jeremiah 31:34;
Hebrews 8:11] Do not you see the things themselves uttering the truth? How
then are these to be excused, seeing as they do the doctrine of the truth spread far
and wide, and not troubling themselves, or caring to learn it? And do you require
all this, it is asked, of a rude savage? Nay not of a rude savage only, but of any
who is more savage than men of the present day. For why is it, pray, that in
matters of this world he knows how to answer when he is wronged, and to resist
when he has violence done him, and do and devise everything to prevent his ever
having his will thwarted even in the slightest degree; but in spiritual concerns he
has not used this same judgment? And when a man worships a stone, and thinks
it a god, he both keeps feasts to it, and spends money on it, and shows much fear
towards it, and in no case becomes listless from his simpleness. But when he has
to seek to the very and true God, do you then mention singleness and simpleness
to me? These things are not so, assuredly they are not! For the complaints are
those of mere listlessness. For which do you think the most simple and rude,
those in Abraham's day or those now? [Joshua 24:2] Clearly the former. And
when that it was easiest to find religion out now or then? Clearly now. For now
the Name of God is proclaimed even by all men, and the Prophets have
preached, the things come to pass, the Gentiles been convinced. [Genesis 32:29;
Judges 13:18] But at that day the majority were still in an uninstructed state, and
sin was dominant. And there was no law to instruct, nor prophets, nor miracles,
nor doctrine, nor multitude of men acquainted with it, nor anything else of the
kind, but all things then lay as it were in a deep darkness, and a night moonless
and stormy. And yet even then that wondrous and noble man, though the
obstacles were so great, still knew God and practised virtue, and led many to the
same zeal; and this though he had not even the wisdom of those without. For
how should he, when there were no letters even yet invented? Yet still he