choice, and as, [also] agreeably to their own choice, the disobedient do not consent to His doctrine;
it is manifest that His Father has made all in a like condition, each person having a choice of his
own, and a free understanding; and that He has regard to all things, and exercises a providence over
all, "making His sun to rise upon the evil and on the good, and sending rain upon the just and
unjust."
2. And to as many as continue in their love towards God, does He grant communion with Him.
But communion with God is life and light, and the enjoyment of all the benefits which He has in
store. But on as many as, according to their own choice, depart from God, He inflicts that separation
from Himself which they have chosen of their own accord. But separation from God is death, and
separation from light is darkness; and separation from God consists in the loss of all the benefits
which He has in store. Those, therefore, who cast away by apostasy these forementioned things,
being in fact destitute of all good, do experience every kind of punishment. God, however, does
not punish them immediately of Himself, but that punishment falls upon them because they are
destitute of all that is good. Now, good things are eternal and without end with God, and therefore
the loss of these is also eternal and never-ending. It is in this matter just as occurs in the case of a
flood of light: those who have blinded themselves, or have been blinded by others, are for ever
deprived of the enjoyment of light. It is not, [however], that the light has inflicted upon them the
penalty of blindness, but it is that the blindness itself has brought calamity upon them: and therefore
the Lord declared, "He that believeth in Me is not condemned," that is, is not separated from
God, for he is united to God through faith. On the other hand, He says, "He that believeth not is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only-begotten Son of God;"
that is, he separated himself from God of his own accord. "For this is the condemnation, that light
is come into this world, and men have loved darkness rather than light. For every one who doeth
evil hateth the light, and cometh not to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that doeth
truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that he has wrought them in God."

### Chapter XXVIII.—The distinction to be made between the righteous and the wicked. The
future apostasy in the time of Antichrist, and the end of the world.
1. Inasmuch, then, as in this world (!"#$%) some persons betake themselves to the light, and by
faith unite themselves with God, but others shun the light, and separate themselves from God, the
Word of God comes preparing a fit habitation for both. For those indeed who are in the light, that
they may derive enjoyment from it, and from the good things contained in it; but for those in
darkness, that they may partake in its calamities. And on this account He says, that those upon the