specific accident, and chiefly in the shape; thus, we speak of a man's
image in copper. Whence Hilary says pointedly that "an image is of
the same species."
Now it is manifest that specific likeness follows the ultimate
difference. But some things are like to God first and most commonly
because they exist; secondly, because they live; and thirdly because
they know or understand; and these last, as Augustine says
(Questions. 83, qu. 51) "approach so near to God in likeness, that
among all creatures nothing comes nearer to Him." It is clear,
therefore, that intellectual creatures alone, properly speaking, are
made to God's image.
Reply to Objection 1: Everything imperfect is a participation of what
is perfect. Therefore even what falls short of the nature of an image,
so far as it possesses any sort of likeness to God, participates in
some degree the nature of an image. So Dionysius says that effects
are "contingent images of their causes"; that is, as much as they
happen [contingit] to be so, but not absolutely.
Reply to Objection 2: Dionysius compares the solar ray to Divine
goodness, as regards its causality; not as regards its natural dignity
which is involved in the idea of an image.
Reply to Objection 3: The universe is more perfect in goodness than
the intellectual creature as regards extension and diffusion; but
intensively and collectively the likeness to the Divine goodness is
found rather in the intellectual creature, which has a capacity for the
highest good. Or else we may say that a part is not rightly divided
against the whole, but only against another part. Wherefore, when
we say that the intellectual nature alone is to the image of God, we
do not mean that the universe in any part is not to God's image, but
that the other parts are excluded.
Reply to Objection 4: Boethius here uses the word "image" to
express the likeness which the product of an art bears to the artistic
species in the mind of the artist. Thus every creature is an image of
the exemplar type thereof in the Divine mind. We are not, however,
using the word "image" in this sense; but as it implies a likeness in
nature, that is, inasmuch as all things, as being, are like to the First
Being; as living, like to the First Life; and as intelligent, like to the
Supreme Wisdom.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the angels are more to the image of God

than man is?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angels are not more to the image
of God than man is. For Augustine says in a sermon de Imagine xliii
(de verbis Apost. xxvii) that God granted to no other creature
besides man to be to His image. Therefore it is not true to say that
the angels are more than man to the image of God.
Objection 2: Further, according to Augustine (Questions. 83, qu. 51),
"man is so much to God's image that God did not make any creature
to be between Him and man: and therefore nothing is more akin to
Him." But a creature is called God's image so far as it is akin to God.
Therefore the angels are not more to the image of God than man.
Objection 3: Further, a creature is said to be to God's image so far as
it is of an intellectual nature. But the intellectual nature does not
admit of intensity or remissness; for it is not an accidental thing,
since it is a substance. Therefore the angels are not more to the
image of God than man.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. in Evang. xxxiv): "The angel is
called a "seal of resemblance" [Ezech. 28:12] because in him the
resemblance of the Divine image is wrought with greater
expression."
I answer that, We may speak of God's image in two ways. First, we
may consider in it that in which the image chiefly consists, that is,
the intellectual nature. Thus the image of God is more perfect in the
angels than in man, because their intellectual nature is more perfect,
as is clear from what has been said (Question 58, Article 3; Question
79, Article 8). Secondly, we may consider the image of God in man as
regards its accidental qualities, so far as to observe in man a certain
imitation of God, consisting in the fact that man proceeds from man,
as God from God; and also in the fact that the whole human soul is
in the whole body, as God from God; and also in the fact that the
whole human soul is in the whole body, and again, in every part, as
God is in regard to the whole world. In these and the like things the
image of God is more perfect in man than it is in the angels. But
these do not of themselves belong to the nature of the Divine image
in man, unless we presuppose the first likeness, which is in the