to die before that time. But this seems too severe, because
affirmative precepts bind, not at once, but at a fixed time; and this,
not because it is most convenient to fulfill them then (for in that case
if a man were not to give alms of his superfluous goods, whenever
he met with a man in need, he would commit a mortal sin, which is
false), but because the time involves urgency. Consequently, if he
does not confess at the very first opportunity, it does not follow that
he commits a mortal sin, even though he does not await a better
opportunity. unless it becomes urgent for him to confess through
being in danger of death. Nor is it on account of the Church's
indulgence that he is not bound to confess at once, but on account
of the nature of an affirmative precept, so that before the
commandment was made, there was still less obligation.
Others again say that secular persons are not bound to confess
before Lent, which is the time of penance for them; but that religious
are bound to confess at once, because, for them, all time is a time for
penance. But this is not to the point; for religious have no
obligations besides those of other men, with the exception of such
as they are bound to by vow.
Reply to Objection 1: Hugh is speaking of those who die without this
sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not necessary for bodily health that the
physician be sent for at once, except when there is necessity for
being healed: and the same applies to spiritual disease.
Reply to Objection 3: The retaining of another's property against the
owner's will is contrary to a negative precept, which binds always
and for always, and therefore one is always bound to make
immediate restitution. It is not the same with the fulfillment of an
affirmative precept, which binds always, but not for always,
wherefore one is not bound to fulfill it at once.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether one can be dispensed from confession?

Objection 1: It would seem that one can be dispensed from
confessing his sins to a man. For precepts of positive law are
subject to dispensation by the prelates of the Church. Now such is
confession, as appears from what was said above (Article 3).
Therefore one may be dispensed from confession.
Objection 2: Further, a man can grant a dispensation in that which
was instituted by a man. But we read of confession being instituted,
not by God, but by a man (James 5:16): "Confess your sins, one to
another." Now the Pope has the power of dispensation in things
instituted by the apostles, as appears in the matter of bigamists.
Therefore he can also dispense a man from confessing.
On the contrary, Penance, whereof confession is a part, is a
necessary sacrament, even as Baptism is. Since therefore no one
can be dispensed from Baptism, neither can one be dispensed from
confession.
I answer that, The ministers of the Church are appointed in the
Church which is founded by God. Wherefore they need to be
appointed by the Church before exercising their ministry, just as the
work of creation is presupposed to the work of nature. And since the
Church is founded on faith and the sacraments, the ministers of the
Church have no power to publish new articles of faith, or to do away
with those which are already published, or to institute new
sacraments, or to abolish those that are instituted, for this belongs
to the power of excellence, which belongs to Christ alone, Who is the
foundation of the Church. Consequently, the Pope can neither
dispense a man so that he may be saved without Baptism, nor that
he be saved without confession, in so far as it is obligatory in virtue
of the sacrament. He can, however, dispense from confession, in so
far as it is obligatory in virtue of the commandment of the Church; so
that a man may delay confession longer than the limit prescribed by
the Church.
Reply to Objection 1: The precepts of the Divine law do not bind less
than those of the natural law: wherefore, just as no dispensation is
possible from the natural law, so neither can there be from positive
Divine law.