For if here the bride-chamber is so bright, the rooms so splendid, that none
is weary of observing them, much more there. Heaven is the chamber, and the
bride-chamber better than Heaven; then we shall enter. But if the Bride-chamber
is so beautiful, what will the Bridegroom be?
And why do I say, 'Let us put away our golden ornaments, and give to the
needy'? For if you ought even to sell yourselves, if you ought to become slaves
instead of free women, that so ye might be able to be with that Bridegroom, to
enjoy that Beauty, [nay] merely to look on that Countenance, ought you not with
ready mind to welcome all things? We look at and admire a king upon the earth,
but when [we see] a king and a bridegroom both, much more ought we to
welcome him with readiness. Truly these things are a shadow, while those are a
reality. And a King and a Bridegroom in Heaven! To be counted worthy also to
go before Him with torches, and to be near Him, and to be ever with Him, what
ought we not to do? What should we not perform? What should we not endure? I
entreat you, let us conceive some desire for those blessings, let us long for that
Bridegroom, let us be virgins as to the true Virginity. For the Lord seeks after the
virginity of the soul. With this let us enter into Heaven, "not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing" [Ephesians 5:27]; that we may attain also to the good
things promised, of which may we all be partakers through the grace and mercy
of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost,
be glory, power, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 29 on Hebrews

Hebrews 12:4-6
"You have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin. And you have
forgotten the exhortation which speaks unto you as unto children, My son,
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when you are rebuked of
Him. For whom the Lord loves, He chastens: and scourges every son whom He
receives."
1. There are two kinds of consolation, apparently opposed to one another,
but yet contributing great strength each to the other; both of which he has here
put forward. The one is when we say that persons have suffered much: for the
soul is refreshed, when it has many witnesses of its own sufferings, and this he
introduced above, saying, "Call to mind the former days, in which after ye had
been illuminated ye endured a great fight of afflictions." [Hebrews 10:32] The
other is when we say, "You have suffered no great thing." The former, when [the
soul] has been exhausted refreshes it, and makes it recover breath: the latter,
when it has become indolent and supine, turns it again and pulls down pride.
Thus that no pride may spring up in them from that testimony [to their
sufferings], see what he does. "You have not yet" (he says) "resisted unto blood,
[striving] against sin." And he did not at once go on with what follows, but after
having shown them all those who had stood "unto blood," and then brought in
the glory of Christ, His sufferings, he afterwards easily pursued his discourse.
This he says also in writing to the Corinthians, "There has no temptation taken
you, but such as is common to man" [1 Corinthians 10:13], that is, small. For this
is enough to arouse and set right the soul, when it considers that it has not risen
to the whole [trial], and encourages itself from what has already befallen it.
What he means is this: You have not yet submitted to death; your loss has