SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.8.

Jerome shows by the words of our Lord, Who equally forbade both,
that it comes to the same to have money and to possess other things
necessary for life. And though our Lord commanded those who were
sent to preach not to carry these things on the way, He did not forbid
them to be possessed in common. How these words of our Lord
should be understood has been shown above (Question 185, Article
6, ad 2; FS, Question 108, Article 2, ad 3).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the religious life of those who live in

community is more perfect than that of those who lead a
solitary life?
Objection 1: It would seem that the religious life of those who live in
community is more perfect than that of those who lead a solitary life.
For it is written (Eccles. 4:9): "It is better . . . that two should be
together, than one; for they have the advantage of their society."
Therefore the religious life of those who live in community would
seem to be more perfect.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Mt. 18:20): "Where there are two or
three gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of them."
But nothing can be better than the fellowship of Christ. Therefore it
would seem better to live in community than in solitude.
Objection 3: Further, the vow of obedience is more excellent than the
other religious vows; and humility is most acceptable to God. Now
obedience and humility are better observed in company than in
solitude; for Jerome says (Ep. cxxv ad Rustic. Monach.): "In solitude
pride quickly takes man unawares, he sleeps as much as he will, he
does what he likes"; whereas when instructing one who lives in
community, he says: "You may not do what you will, you must eat
what you are bidden to eat, you may possess so much as you
receive, you must obey one you prefer not to obey, you must be a
servant to your brethren, you must fear the superior of the
monastery as God, love him as a father." Therefore it would seem
that the religious life of those who live in community is more perfect
than that of those who lead a solitary life.
Objection 4: Further, our Lord said (Lk. 11:33): "No man lighteth a
candle and putteth it in a hidden place, nor under a bushel." Now
those who lead a solitary life are seemingly in a hidden place, and to
be doing no good to any man. Therefore it would seem that their
religious life is not more perfect.
Objection 5: Further, that which is in accord with man's nature is
apparently more pertinent to the perfection of virtue. But man is
naturally a social animal, as the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 1).
Therefore it would seem that to lead a solitary life is not more perfect
than to lead a community life.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.9.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xxiii) that "those
are holier who keep themselves aloof from the approach of all, and
give their whole mind to a life of prayer."
I answer that, Solitude, like poverty, is not the essence of perfection,
but a means thereto. Hence in the Conferences of the Fathers (Coll. i,
7) the Abbot Moses says that "solitude," even as fasting and other
like things, is "a sure means of acquiring purity of heart." Now it is
evident that solitude is a means adapted not to action but to
contemplation, according to Osee 2:14, "I . . . will lead her into
solitude; and I will speak to her heart." Wherefore it is not suitable to
those religious orders that are directed to the works whether
corporal or spiritual of the active life; except perhaps for a time, after
the example of Christ, Who as Luke relates (6:12), "went out into a
mountain to pray; and He passed the whole night in the prayer of
God." On the other hand, it is suitable to those religious orders that
are directed to contemplation.
It must, however, be observed that what is solitary should be selfsufficing by itself. Now such a thing is one "that lacks nothing," and
this belongs to the idea of a perfect thing [Aristotle, Phys. iii, 6].
Wherefore solitude befits the contemplative who has already
attained to perfection. This happens in two ways: in one way by the
gift only of God, as in the case of John the Baptist, who was "filled
with the Holy Ghost even from his mother's womb" (Lk. 1:11), so that
he was in the desert even as a boy; in another way by the practice of
virtuous action, according to Heb. 5:14: "Strong meat is for the
perfect; for them who by custom have their senses exercised to the
discerning of good and evil."
Now man is assisted in this practice by the fellowship of others in
two ways. First, as regards his intellect, to the effect of his being
instructed in that which he has to contemplate; wherefore Jerome
says (ad Rustic. Monach., Ep. cxxv): "It pleases me that you have the
fellowship of holy men, and teach not yourself. Secondly, as regards
the affections, seeing that man's noisome affections are restrained
by the example and reproof which he receives from others; for as
Gregory says (Moral. xxx, 23), commenting on the words, "To whom I
have given a house in the wilderness" (Job 39:6), "What profits
solitude of the body, if solitude of the heart be lacking?" Hence a
social life is necessary for the practice of perfection. Now solitude
befits those who are already perfect; wherefore Jerome says (ad