manuscripts died) and rose again. This then let us too be doing: let us keep
continually mortifying it in its works. I do not mean in its substance— far be it
from me— but in its inclinations towards evil doings. For this is a life too, or
rather this only is life, undergoing nothing that is common to man, nor being a
slave to pleasures. For he who has set himself under the rule of these, has no
power even to live through the low spirits, the fears, and the dangers, and the
countless throng of ills, that rise from them. For if death must be expected, he
has died, before death, of fear. And if it be disease he dreads, or affront, or
poverty, or any of the other ills one cannot anticipate, he is ruined and has
perished. What then can be more miserable than a life of this sort? But far
otherwise is he that lives to the Spirit, for he stands at once above fears and grief
and dangers and every kind of change: and that not by undergoing no such thing,
but, what is much greater, by thinking scorn of them when they assail him. And
how is this to be? It will be if the Spirit dwell in us continually. For he does not
speak of any short stay made thereby, but of a continual indwelling. Hence he
does not say "the Spirit which" dwelt, but "which dwells in us," so pointing to a
continual abiding. He then is most truly alive, who is dead to this life. Hence he
says, "The Spirit is life because of righteousness." And to make the thing clearer,
let me bring before you two men, one who is given up to extravagances and
pleasures, and the deceitfulness of this life; and the other made dead to all these;
and let us see which is more really the living one. For let one of these two be
very rich and much looked up to, keeping parasites and flatterers, and let us
suppose him to spend the whole day upon this, in revelling and drunkenness: and
let the other live in poverty, and fasting, and hard fare, and strict rules
([φιλοσοφί& 139necessary food only; or if you will let him even pass two or
three days without food. Which then of these two think we (3 manuscripts you)
is most really alive? Men in general will, I know, reckon the former so, the man
that takes his pleasure (Sav. σκιρτὥντα], manuscripts [τρυφὥντα]) and squanders
his goods. But we reckon the man that enjoys the moderate fare. Now then since
it is still a subject of contest and opposition let us go into the houses of them

both, and just at the very time too when in your judgment the rich man is living
in truest sense, in the very season of self-indulgence, and when we have got in,
let us look and see the real condition of each of these men. For it is from the
actions that it appears which is alive and which dead. Shall we not find the one
among his books, or in prayer and fasting, or some other necessary duty, awake
and sober, and conversing with God? But the other we shall see stupid in
drunkenness, and in no better condition than a dead man. And if we wait till the
evening, we shall see this death coming upon him more and more, and then sleep
again succeeding to that: but the other we shall see even in the night keeping
from wine and sleep. Which then shall we pronounce to be most alive, the man
that lies in a state of insensibility, and is an open laughing-stock to everybody?
Or the man that is active, and conversing with God? For if you go up to the one,
and tell him something he ought to know, you will not hear him say a word, any
more than a dead man. But the latter, whether you choose to be in his company
at night or by day, you will see to be an angel rather than a man, and will hear
him speak wisdom about things in Heaven. Do you see how one of them is alive
above all men living, and the other in a more pitiable plight even than the dead?
And even if he have a mind to stir he sees one thing instead of another, and is
like people that are mad, or rather is in a worse plight even than they. For if any
one were to do them any harm, we should at once feel pity for the sufferer, and
rebuke the doer of the wrong. But this man, if we were to see a person trample
on him, we should not only be disinclined to pity, but should even give judgment
against him, now that he was fallen. And will you tell me this is life, and not a
harder lot than deaths unnumbered? So you see the self-indulgent man is not
only dead, but worse than dead, and more miserable than a man possessed. For
the one is the object of pity, the other of hatred. And the one has allowance made
him, the other suffers punishment for his madness. But if externally he is so
ridiculous, as having his saliva tainted, and his breath stinking of wine, just
consider what case his wretched soul, inhumed as it were in a grave, in such a
body as this, is probably in. For one may look upon this as much the same as if