would cease to be itself. But herein the imagination plays us false;
for one is liable to think that, because a man seeks to occupy a
higher grade as to accidentals, which can increase without the
destruction of the subject, he can also seek a higher grade of nature,
to which he could not attain without ceasing to exist. Now it is quite
evident that God surpasses the angels, not merely in accidentals,
but also in degree of nature; and one angel, another. Consequently it
is impossible for one angel of lower degree to desire equality with a
higher; and still more to covet equality with God.
To desire to be as God according to likeness can happen in two
ways. In one way, as to that likeness whereby everything is made to
be likened unto God. And so, if anyone desire in this way to be
Godlike, he commits no sin; provided that he desires such likeness
in proper order, that is to say, that he may obtain it of God. But he
would sin were he to desire to be like unto God even in the right way,
as of his own, and not of God's power. In another way one may
desire to be like unto God in some respect which is not natural to
one; as if one were to desire to create heaven and earth, which is
proper to God; in which desire there would be sin. It was in this way
that the devil desired to be as God. Not that he desired to resemble
God by being subject to no one else absolutely; for so he would be
desiring his own 'not-being'; since no creature can exist except by
holding its existence under God. But he desired resemblance with
God in this respect---by desiring, as his last end of beatitude,
something which he could attain by the virtue of his own nature,
turning his appetite away from supernatural beatitude, which is
attained by God's grace. Or, if he desired as his last end that
likeness of God which is bestowed by grace, he sought to have it by
the power of his own nature; and not from Divine assistance
according to God's ordering. This harmonizes with Anselm's
opinion, who says [De casu diaboli, iv.] that "he sought that to which
he would have come had he stood fast." These two views in a
manner coincide; because according to both, he sought to have final
beatitude of his own power, whereas this is proper to God alone.
Since, then, what exists of itself is the cause of what exists of
another, it follows from this furthermore that he sought to have
dominion over others; wherein he also perversely wished to be like
unto God.
From this we have the answer to all the objections.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether any demons are naturally wicked?

Objection 1: It would seem that some demons are naturally wicked.
For Porphyry says, as quoted by Augustine (De Civ. Dei x, 11):
"There is a class of demons of crafty nature, pretending that they are
gods and the souls of the dead." But to be deceitful is to be evil.
Therefore some demons are naturally wicked.
Objection 2: Further, as the angels are created by God, so are men.
But some men are naturally wicked, of whom it is said (Ws. 12:10):
"Their malice is natural." Therefore some angels may be naturally
wicked.
Objection 3: Further, some irrational animals have wicked
dispositions by nature: thus the fox is naturally sly, and the wolf
naturally rapacious; yet they are God's creatures. Therefore,
although the demons are God's creatures, they may be naturally
wicked.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that "the demons are
not naturally wicked."
I answer that, Everything which exists, so far as it exists and has a
particular nature, tends naturally towards some good; since it comes
from a good principle; because the effect always reverts to its
principle. Now a particular good may happen to have some evil
connected with it; thus fire has this evil connected with it that it
consumes other things: but with the universal good no evil can be
connected. If, then, there be anything whose nature is inclined
towards some particular good, it can tend naturally to some evil; not
as evil, but accidentally, as connected with some good. But if
anything of its nature be inclined to good in general, then of its own
nature it cannot be inclined to evil. Now it is manifest that every
intellectual nature is inclined towards good in general, which it can
apprehend and which is the object of the will. Hence, since the
demons are intellectual substances, they can in no wise have a
natural inclination towards any evil whatsoever; consequently they
cannot be naturally evil.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine rebukes Porphyry for saying that the
demons are naturally deceitful; himself maintaining that they are not