addressing those from Ephesus, he says, "You know that these hands have
ministered to my necessities, and to those that were with me" [Acts 20:34-35];
and again, "It is more blessed to give than to receive."
Ver. 14. "Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil; the Lord reward him
according to his works."
Here he again makes mention of his trial, not wishing merely to censure and
accuse the man, but to prepare his disciple for the conflicts, that he might bear
them firmly. Though they be mean and contemptible persons, and without honor,
who cause these trials, they ought all, he says, to be borne with fortitude. For he
who suffers wrong from any great personage, receives no little distinction from
the superiority of him who does the wrong. But he who is injured by a vile and
abject person, suffers the greater annoyance. "He did me much evil," he says, that
is, he persecuted me in various ways. But these things will not go unpunished!
For the Lord will reward him according to his works. As he said above: "What
persecutions I endured, but out of them all the Lord delivered me." [2 Timothy
3:11] So also here he consoles his disciples by a double consideration, that he
himself had suffered wrong, and that the other would be rewarded for his evil
deeds. Not that the Saints rejoice in the punishment of their persecutors, but that
the cause of the Gospel required it, and the weaker would derive consolation
from it.
Ver. 15. "Of whom also beware; for he has greatly withstood our words."
That is, he is hostile to us, and opposes us. He has not said, Revenge,
punish, expel him, although by the grace given him he might have so done, but
he does no such thing; nor does he arm Timothy against him, but only
commands him to avoid him, leaving vengeance to God, and for the consolation
of the weaker he has said that He will reward him, which is a prophecy rather
than an imprecation. And that he says these things to prepare the mind of his
disciple, is manifest also from what follows. But see how he mentions other of
his trials.
Ver. 16. "At my first answer," he says, "no man stood with me, but all men

forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge."
Do you see how he spares his friends, notwithstanding it was a grievous
thing they had done? For it is not the same thing to be despised by aliens, as by
our own friends. Do you see his intense dejection? It cannot be said, that I was
assailed by those without, but had comfort in the attention and support of my
friends; for these also betrayed me. "All men," he says, "forsook me." And this
was no light offense. For if he that in war abandons one who is exposed to
danger, and shrinks from meeting the hands of his enemies, is justly smitten by
his friends, as having utterly betrayed their cause, much more in the case of the
Gospel. But what "first answer," does he speak of? He had stood before Nero,
and had escaped. But afterwards, because he had converted his cup-bearer, he
was beheaded. And here again is encouragement for his disciple in what follows.
Ver. 17. "Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me."
Though deserted by man, God does not permit him to suffer any harm. He
strengthened me, he says, that is, He gave me boldness in speaking. He suffered
me not to sink.
"That by me the preaching might be fully known."
That is, might be fulfilled. Observe his great humility. He does not say He
strengthened me as deserving of His gift, but that "the preaching," with which I
was entrusted, "might be fully known." As if any one should wear a purple robe
and a diadem, and to that circumstance should owe his safety.
"And that all the Gentiles might hear."
What is this? That the luster of the Gospel, and the care of His Providence
for me, might be known to all.
"And I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion."
Ver. 18. "And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work."
See how near he had been to death. He had fallen into the very jaws of the
lion. For he calls Nero a lion from his ferocity, and the violent and daring
character of his government. "The Lord delivered me," he says, "and will
deliver." But if he says, "He will deliver me," why does he say, "I am ready to be