A second area is that of “the baptized whose lives do not reflect the demands of Baptism”, who
lack a meaningful relationship to the Church and no longer experience the consolation born of
faith. The Church, in her maternal concern, tries to help them experience a conversion which will
restore the joy of faith to their hearts and inspire a commitment to the Gospel.

Lastly, we cannot forget that evangelization is first and foremost about preaching the Gospel to
those who do not know Jesus Christ or who have always rejected him. Many of them are quietly
seeking God, led by a yearning to see his face, even in countries of ancient Christian tradition. All
of them have a right to receive the Gospel. Christians have the duty to proclaim the Gospel without
excluding anyone. Instead of seeming to impose new obligations, they should appear as people
who wish to share their joy, who point to a horizon of beauty and who invite others to a delicious
banquet. It is not by proselytizing that the Church grows, but “by attraction”.

15. John Paul II asked us to recognize that “there must be no lessening of the impetus to preach
the Gospel” to those who are far from Christ, “because this is the first task of the Church”.
Indeed, “today missionary activity still represents the greatest challenge for the Church” and
“the missionary task must remain foremost”. What would happen if we were to take these
words seriously? We would realize that missionary outreach is paradigmatic for all the Church’s
activity. Along these lines the Latin American bishops stated that we “cannot passively and calmly
wait in our church buildings”; we need to move “from a pastoral ministry of mere conservation
to a decidedly missionary pastoral ministry”. This task continues to be a source of immense joy

for the Church: “Just so, I tell you, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents
than ninety-nine righteous persons who need no repentance” (Lk 15:7).

The scope and limits of this Exhortation

16. I was happy to take up the request of the Fathers of the Synod to write this Exhortation. In
so doing, I am reaping the rich fruits of the Synod’s labours. In addition, I have sought advice from
a number of people and I intend to express my own concerns about this particular chapter of the
Church’s work of evangelization. Countless issues involving evangelization today might be
discussed here, but I have chosen not to explore these many questions which call for further
reflection and study. Nor do I believe that the papal magisterium should be expected to offer a
definitive or complete word on every question which affects the Church and the world. It is not
advisable for the Pope to take the place of local Bishops in the discernment of every issue which
arises in their territory. In this sense, I am conscious of the need to promote a sound
“decentralization”.