it makes clothes, and coverlids, but does not imitate the spiders, and overwhelm
men with much absurdity, and unspeakable effeminacy, so long I call it an art.
And the sandal-makers' trade, so long as it makes sandals, I will not rob of
the appellation of art; but when it perverts men to the gestures of women, and
causes them by their sandals to grow wanton and delicate, we will set it amidst
the things hurtful and superfluous, and not so much as name it an art.
And I know well, that to many I seem over-minute in busying myself about
these things; I shall not however refrain for this. For the cause of all our evils is
this, such faults being at all counted trifling, and therefore disregarded.
And what sin, say you, can be of less account than this, of having an
ornamented and glittering sandal, which fits the foot; if indeed it seem right at all
to denominate it a sin?
Will ye then that I let loose my tongue upon it, and show its unseemliness,
how great it is? And will you not be angry? Or rather, though ye be angry, I care
not much. Nay, for yourselves are to blame for this folly, who do not so much as
think it is a sin, and hereby constrain us to enter upon the reproof of this
extravagance. Come then, let us examine it, and let us see what sort of an evil it
is. For when the silken threads, which it is not seemly should be even inwoven in
your garments, these are sewn by you into your shoes, what reproach, what
derision do these things deserve?
And if you despise our judgments, hear the voice of Paul, with great
earnestness forbidding these things, and then you will perceive the absurdity of
them. What then says he? "Not with braided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly
array." [1 Timothy 2:9] Of what favor then can you be worthy; when, in spite of
Paul's prohibiting the married woman to have costly clothing, you extend this
effeminacy even to your shoes, and hast no end of contrivances for the sake of
this ridicule and reproach? Yes: for first a ship is built, then rowers are mustered,
and a man for the prow, and a helmsman, and a sail is spread, and an ocean
traversed, and, leaving wife and children and country, the merchant commits his
very life to the waves, and comes to the land of the barbarians, and undergoes

innumerable dangers for these threads, that after it all you may take them, and
sew them into your shoes, and ornament the leather. And what can be done
worse than this folly?
But the old ways are not like these, but such as become men. Wherefore I
for my part expect that in process of time the young men among us will wear
even women's shoes, and not be ashamed. And what is more grievous, men's
fathers seeing these things are not much displeased, but do even account it an
indifferent matter.
Would ye that I should add what is still more grievous; that these things are
done even when there are many poor? Would ye that I bring before you Christ,
an hungered, naked, wandering everywhere, in chains? And how many
thunderbolts must ye not deserve, overlooking Him in want of necessary food,
and adorning these pieces of leather with so much diligence? And He indeed,
when He was giving law to His disciples, would not so much as suffer them to
have shoes at all, but we cannot bear to walk, I say not barefooted, but even with
feet shod as they ought to be.
7. What then can be worse than this unseemliness, this absurdity? For the
thing marks a soul, in the first place effeminate, then unfeeling and cruel, then
curious and idly busy. For when will he be able to attend to any necessary
matter, who is taken up with these superfluous things? When will such a youth
endure to take heed to his soul, or to consider so much as that he has a soul? Yes,
he surely will be a trifler who cannot help admiring such things; he cruel, who
for their sake neglects the poor; he void of virtue, who spends all his diligence
on them.
For he that is curious about the beauty of threads, and the bloom of colors,
and the tendrils made of such woven work, when will he be able to look upon
the heaven? When will he admire the beauty there, who is excited about a kind
of beauty that belongs to pieces of leather, and who is bending to the earth? And
whereas God has stretched out the Heaven, and lighted up the sun, drawing your
looks upwards; you constrain yourself to look downwards, and to the earth, like