there would be a hundred suns in the world?"
Therefore it must be said that as the wisdom of God is the cause of
the distinction of things, so the same wisdom is the cause of their
inequality. This may be explained as follows. A twofold distinction is
found in things; one is a formal distinction as regards things
differing specifically; the other is a material distinction as regards
things differing numerically only. And as the matter is on account of
the form, material distinction exists for the sake of the formal
distinction. Hence we see that in incorruptible things there is only
one individual of each species, forasmuch as the species is
sufficiently preserved in the one; whereas in things generated and
corruptible there are many individuals of one species for the
preservation of the species. Whence it appears that formal
distinction is of greater consequence than material. Now, formal
distinction always requires inequality, because as the Philosopher
says (Metaph. viii, 10), the forms of things are like numbers in which
species vary by addition or subtraction of unity. Hence in natural
things species seem to be arranged in degrees; as the mixed things
are more perfect than the elements, and plants than minerals, and
animals than plants, and men than other animals; and in each of
these one species is more perfect than others. Therefore, as the
divine wisdom is the cause of the distinction of things for the sake of
the perfection of the universe, so it is the cause of inequality. For the
universe would not be perfect if only one grade of goodness were
found in things.
Reply to Objection 1: It is part of the best agent to produce an effect
which is best in its entirety; but this does not mean that He makes
every part of the whole the best absolutely, but in proportion to the
whole; in the case of an animal, for instance, its goodness would be
taken away if every part of it had the dignity of an eye. Thus,
therefore, God also made the universe to be best as a whole,
according to the mode of a creature; whereas He did not make each
single creature best, but one better than another. And therefore we
find it said of each creature, "God saw the light that it was
good" (Gn. 1:4); and in like manner of each one of the rest. But of all
together it is said, "God saw all the things that He had made, and
they were very good" (Gn. 1:31).
Reply to Objection 2: The first effect of unity is equality; and then
comes multiplicity; and therefore from the Father, to Whom,
according to Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. i, 5), is appropriated unity,

the Son proceeds to Whom is appropriated equality, and then from
Him the creature proceeds, to which belongs inequality; but
nevertheless even creatures share in a certain equality---namely, of
proportion.
Reply to Objection 3: This is the argument that persuaded Origen:
but it holds only as regards the distribution of rewards, the
inequality of which is due to unequal merits. But in the constitution
of things there is no inequality of parts through any preceding
inequality, either of merits or of the disposition of the matter; but
inequality comes from the perfection of the whole. This appears also
in works done by art; for the roof of a house differs from the
foundation, not because it is made of other material; but in order that
the house may be made perfect of different parts, the artificer seeks
different material; indeed, he would make such material if he could.