become wise! If then we are not wise, but continue evil, will He not, tell me,
inflict the punishment? Will He not then recompense the good either with
rewards? Yes, you say, for that is becoming to Him, to do good even beyond
desert. So that those things indeed are true and will certainly be, while the
punishments will not be at all, but are only for the purpose of a threat, and of
terror! By what means I shall persuade you, I know not. If I say, that "the worm
will not die, and the fire will not be quenched" [Mark 9:44]; if I say, that "they
shall go away into everlasting fire" [Matthew 25:41-46]; if I set before you the
rich man already suffering punishment, you will say that it is all a matter of
threatening. Whence then shall I persuade you? For this is a Satanic reasoning,
indulging you with a favor that will not profit, and causing you to be slothful.
How then can we banish it? Whatever things we say from Scripture, you
will say, are for the purpose of threatening. But with respect to future things this
indeed might be said, but not so concerning things that have happened, and have
had an end. You have heard of the deluge. And were those things also said by
way of threat? Did they not actually happen? Those men too said many such
things, and for a hundred years while the ark was building, and the wood was
being wrought, and the righteous man was calling aloud, there was no one who
believed. But because they did not believe the threat in words, they suffered the
punishment in very deed. And this will be our fate too, if we shall not have
believed. On this account it is that He compares His coming with the days of
Noah, because as some disbelieved in that deluge, so will they in the deluge of
hell. Were these things a threat? Were they not a fact? Then will not He, who
then brought punishment upon them so suddenly, much more inflict it now also?
For the things that are committed now are not less than the offenses of that time.
How?— because then, it says, "the sons of God went in unto the daughters of
men" [Genesis 6:4], and those mixtures were the great offense. But now there is
no form of wickedness, which is unattempted. Do you then believe that the
deluge took place? Or does it seem to you a fable? And yet even the mountains
where the ark rested, bear witness; I speak of those in Armenia.

But, even superabundantly, I will turn my discourse to another thing more
evident than that. Has any one of you ever traveled in Palestine? For I will no
longer mention report, but facts, and yet the other were clearer than facts. For
whatever things the Scripture says, are more to be trusted than things we see.
Has any one of you then ever traveled in Palestine? I suppose so. What then?
Bear witness then for me, you who have seen the places, to those who have not
been there. For above Ascalon and Gaza up to the very end of the river Jordan
there is a country wide and fruitful— or rather there was— for it is not now. This
then is that which was as a garden. For it is said, "Lot beheld all the plain of
Jordan— and it was well watered everywhere, like the garden of the Lord."
[Genesis 13:10] This, therefore, that was so flourishing, and that rivaled all
countries, which for thrivingness exceeded the Paradise of God, is now more
desolate than any wilderness. And there stand trees, indeed, and they bear fruit.
But the fruit is a monument of the wrath of God. For there stand pomegranates, I
speak both of the tree and the fruit, having a very fine appearance, and to the
ignorant man holding out great hopes. But if they are taken into the hand, being
broken open they display no fruit indeed, but much dust and ashes stored up
within. Such also is the whole land. If you find a stone, you will find it full of
ashes. And why do I speak of stone and wood and earth, where the air and water
partake of the calamity? For as when a body is burnt and consumed, the shape
remains, and the outline in the appearance of the fire, and the bulk and the
proportion, but the power is no more, so truly there you may see earth, which yet
has nothing of earth about it, but all ashes; trees and fruit, but nothing of trees
and fruit about them; air and water, but nothing of water nor of air about them,
for even these are turned to ashes. And yet how could air ever have been burnt,
or water, while it remained water? For wood and stones indeed it is possible to
burn, but air and water it is altogether impossible. Impossible to us, but possible
to Him who did these things. Therefore the air is nothing else than a furnace, the
water is a furnace. All things are unfruitful, all unproductive, all for vengeance;
images of wrath that has gone before, and proofs of that which is to come.