each requires the assistance of his neighbour, and without this assistance, is lost
and destroyed. For as it regards the earth, if the fountains fail it, and the moisture
infused from the sea and the rivers, it quickly perishes by being parched. The
remaining elements too stand in need of one another, the air of the sun, as well as
the sun of the air. But not to protract this discourse; in what has been said,
having given a sufficient supply of reasons to start from for those who are
willing to receive them, we shall be content. For if the sun, which is the most
surprising part of the whole creation, has been proved to be so feeble and needy,
how much more the other parts of the universe? What then I have advanced
(offering these things for the consideration of the studious), I will myself again
show you in discourse from the Scriptures; and prove, that not only the sun, but
also the whole universe is thus corruptible. For since the elements are mutually
destructive, and when much cold intervenes, it chastens the force of the sun's
rays; and on the other hand, the heat prevailing, consumes the cold; and since the
elements are both the causes and subjects of contrary qualities, and dispositions,
in one another; it is very evident that these things offer a proof of great
corruptibility; and of the fact, that all these things which are visible, are a
corporeal substance.
10. But since this subject is too lofty for our simplicity, permit me now to
lead you to the sweet fountain of the Scriptures, that we may refresh your ears.
For we will not discourse to you of the heaven and the earth separately, but will
exhibit the Apostle declaring this very thing to us concerning the whole creation,
in these plain terms, that the whole creation is now in bondage to corruption; and
why it is thus in bondage, and at what time it shall be delivered from it, and unto
what condition it shall be translated. For after he had said, "The sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed
in us;" he goes on to add; "For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for
the manifestation of the sons of God. For the creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of Him who has subjected the same in hope."
[Romans 8:21] But what he intends is to this effect; "The creature," he says,

"was made corruptible;" for this is implied in the expression, "being made
subject to vanity." For it was made corruptible by the command of God. But God
so commanded it for the sake of our race; for since it was to nurture a corruptible
man, it was necessary itself should also be of the same character; for of course
corruptible bodies were not to dwell in an incorruptible creation. But,
nevertheless, he tells us, it will not remain so. "The creature also itself shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption;" and afterwards, for the purpose of
showing when this event shall take place, and through whom, he adds, "Into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God." For when we are raised, his meaning is, and
assume incorruptible bodies; then also this body of the heaven, the earth, and the
whole creation, shall be incorruptible, and imperishable. When, therefore, you
behold the sun arising, admire the Creator; when you behold him hiding himself
and disappearing, learn the weakness of his nature, that you may not adore him
as a Deity! For God has not only implanted in the nature of the elements this
proof of their weakness, but has also bidden His servants, that were but men,
command them; so that although you should not know their servitude from their
aspect, you may learn, from those who have commanded them, that they are all
your fellow-servants. Therefore it was, that Joshua, the son of Nave, said, "Let
the sun stand still in Gibeon, and the moon over against the valley of Ajalon."
And again the prophet Isaiah made the sun to retrace his steps, under the reign of
Hezekiah; and Moses gave orders to the air, and the sea, the earth, and the rocks.
Elisha changed the nature of the waters; the Three Children triumphed over the
fire. You see how God has provided for us on either hand; leading us by the
beauty of the elements to the knowledge of His divinity; and, by their feebleness,
not permitting us to lapse into the worship of them.
11. For the sake of all these things then, let us glorify Him, our Guardian;
not only by words, but also by deeds; and let us show forth an excellent
conversation, not only in general, but in particular with regard to abstinence
from oaths. For not every sin brings the same penalty; but those which are
easiest to be amended, bring upon us the greatest punishment: which indeed