SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.2.

Joan.; Questions. Evang. ii, qu. 39), that manifestation alone
excludes faith, which renders apparent or seen the principal object
of faith. Now the principal object of faith is the First Truth, the sight
of which gives the happiness of heaven and takes the place of faith.
Consequently, as the angels before their confirmation in grace, and
man before sin, did not possess the happiness whereby God is seen
in His Essence, it is evident that the knowledge they possessed was
not such as to exclude faith.
It follows then, that the absence of faith in them could only be
explained by their being altogether ignorant of the object of faith.
And if man and the angels were created in a purely natural state, as
some [St. Bonaventure, Sent. ii, D, 29] hold, perhaps one might hold
that there was no faith in the angels before their confirmation in
grace, or in man before sin, because the knowledge of faith
surpasses not only a man's but even an angel's natural knowledge
about God.
Since, however, we stated in the FP, Question 62, Article 3; FP,
Question 95, Article 1. that man and the angels were created with the
gift of grace, we must needs say that there was in them a certain
beginning of hoped-for happiness, by reason of grace received but
not yet consummated, which happiness was begun in their will by
hope and charity, and in the intellect by faith, as stated above
(Question 4, Article 7). Consequently we must hold that the angels
had faith before they were confirmed, and man, before he sinned.
Nevertheless we must observe that in the object of faith, there is
something formal, as it were, namely the First Truth surpassing all
the natural knowledge of a creature, and something material, namely,
the thing to which we assent while adhering to the First Truth. With
regard to the former, before obtaining the happiness to come, faith is
common to all who have knowledge of God, by adhering to the First
Truth: whereas with regard to the things which are proposed as the
material object of faith, some are believed by one, and known
manifestly by another, even in the present state, as we have shown
above (Question 1, Article 5; Question 2, Article 4, ad 2). In this
respect, too, it may be said that the angels before being confirmed,
and man, before sin, possessed manifest knowledge about certain
points in the Divine mysteries, which now we cannot know except by
believing them.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the words of Hugh of St. Victor are
those of a master, and have the force of an authority, yet it may be

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.2.

said that the contemplation which removes the need of faith is
heavenly contemplation, whereby the supernatural truth is seen in
its essence. Now the angels did not possess this contemplation
before they were confirmed, nor did man before he sinned: yet their
contemplation was of a higher order than ours, for by its means they
approached nearer to God, and had manifest knowledge of more of
the Divine effects and mysteries than we can have knowledge of.
Hence faith was not in them so that they sought an absent God as
we seek Him: since by the light of wisdom He was more present to
them than He is to us, although He was not so present to them as He
is to the Blessed by the light of glory.
Reply to Objection 2: There was no darkness of sin or punishment in
the original state of man and the angels, but there was a certain
natural obscurity in the human and angelic intellect, in so far as
every creature is darkness in comparison with the immensity of the
Divine light: and this obscurity suffices for faith.
Reply to Objection 3: In the original state there was no hearing
anything from man speaking outwardly, but there was from God
inspiring inwardly: thus the prophets heard, as expressed by the Ps.
84:9: "I will hear what the Lord God will speak in me."