SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.53, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: In every sin there must needs be a defect
affecting an act of reason, for instance a defect in counsel or the like.
Hence just as precipitation is a special sin on account of a special
act of reason which is omitted, namely counsel, although it may be
found in any kind of sin; so negligence is a special sin on account of
the lack of a special act of reason, namely solicitude, although it is
found more or less in all sins.
Reply to Objection 3: Properly speaking the matter of negligence is a
good that one ought to do, not that it is a good when it is done
negligently, but because on account of negligence it incurs a lack of
goodness, whether a due act be entirely omitted through lack of
solicitude, or some due circumstance be omitted.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.53, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether negligence is opposed to prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that negligence is not opposed to
prudence. For negligence seems to be the same as idleness or
laziness, which belongs to sloth, according to Gregory (Moral. xxxi,
45). Now sloth is not opposed to prudence, but to charity, as stated
above (Question 35, Article 3). Therefore negligence is not opposed
to prudence.
Objection 2: Further, every sin of omission seems to be due to
negligence. But sins of omission are not opposed to prudence, but
to the executive moral virtues. Therefore negligence is not opposed
to prudence.
Objection 3: Further, imprudence relates to some act of reason. But
negligence does not imply a defect of counsel, for that is
"precipitation," nor a defect of judgment, since that is
"thoughtlessness," nor a defect of command, because that is
"inconstancy." Therefore negligence does not pertain to
imprudence.
Objection 4: Further, it is written (Eccles. 7:19): "He that feareth God,
neglecteth nothing." But every sin is excluded by the opposite virtue.
Therefore negligence is opposed to fear rather than to prudence.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 20:7): "A babbler and a fool
[imprudens] will regard no time." Now this is due to negligence.
Therefore negligence is opposed to prudence.
I answer that, Negligence is directly opposed to solicitude. Now
solicitude pertains to the reason, and rectitude of solicitude to
prudence. Hence, on the other hand, negligence pertains to
imprudence. This appears from its very name, because, as Isidore
observes (Etym. x) "a negligent man is one who fails to choose [nec
eligens]": and the right choice of the means belongs to prudence.
Therefore negligence pertains to imprudence.
Reply to Objection 1: Negligence is a defect in the internal act, to
which choice also belongs: whereas idleness and laziness denote
slowness of execution, yet so that idleness denotes slowness in
setting about the execution, while laziness denotes remissness in