2 Corinthians 10:12
"For we are not bold to number, or compare in ourselves with some that
commend themselves."
Here he both shows that those false Apostles are boasters and say great
things of themselves: and ridicules them as commending themselves. 'But we do
no such thing: but even if we shall do any thing great, we refer all unto God, and
compare ourselves with one another.' Wherefore also he added,
"But they themselves measuring themselves by themselves and comparing
themselves among themselves are without understanding." Now what he says is
this: 'we do not compare ourselves with them, but with one another.' For further
on he says, "in nothing am I behind the very chiefest Apostles;" [2 Corinthians
12:11] and in the former Epistle, "I labored more abundantly than they all;" [1
Corinthians 15:10] and again, "Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought
among you in all patience." [2 Corinthians 12:12] 'So that we compare ourselves
with ourselves, not with those that have nothing: for such arrogance comes of
folly.' Either then he says this with reference to himself, or with reference to
them, that 'we dare not compare ourselves with those who contend with one
another and boast great things and do not understand:' that is, do not perceive
how ridiculous they are in being thus arrogant, and in exalting themselves
among one another.

2 Corinthians 10:13
"But we will not glory beyond our measure:" as they do.
For it is probable that in their boasting they said, 'we have converted the
world, we have reached unto the ends of the earth,' and vented many other such
like big words. 'But not so we,' he says,
"But according to the measure of the province which God apportioned to us
as a measure, to reach even unto you." So that his humility is evident on either
hand, both in that he boasted nothing more than he had wrought, and that he
refers even this itself to God. For, "according to the measure of the province,"
says he, "which God apportioned to us, a measure to reach even unto you." Just
as if portioning out a vine to husbandmen, even so He meted out unto us. As far
then as we have been counted worthy to attain to, so far we boast.

2 Corinthians 10:14
"For we stretch not ourselves overmuch, as though we reached not unto
you: for we came even as far as unto you in preaching the Gospel of Christ."
Not simply 'we came,' but, 'we announced, we preached, we persuaded, we
succeeded.' For it is probable that they having merely come to the disciples of
the Apostles, ascribed the whole to themselves, from their bare presence among
them. 'But not so we: nor can any one say that we were not able to come as far as
to you, and that we stretched our boasting as far as to you in words only; for we
also preached the word to you.'

2 Corinthians 10:15-16
3. "Not glorying beyond" our "measure," that is, "in other men's labors, but
having hope that as your faith grows, we shall be magnified in you according to
our province unto further abundance, so as to preach the Gospel even unto the
parts beyond you, and not to glory in another's province in regard of things
ready to our hand."
He sets forth a large accusation of them on these grounds, both that they
boasted of things without their measure, and of other men's labors; and that
while the whole of the toil was the Apostles', they plumed themselves upon their
labors. 'But we,' says he, 'showed these things in our deeds. We will not imitate
those men therefore, but will say such things where our deeds bear us witness.
And why,' says he, 'do I say, you?' "for I have hope that as your faith grows;" for
he does not assert absolutely, preserving his own character, but, 'I hope,' he says,
'if you make progress, that our province will be extended even farther, "to preach
the Gospel in the regions beyond." For we shall advance farther yet,' he says, 'so
as to preach and labor, not so as to boast in words of what other men have
labored.' And well did he call it "province and measure," as though he had come
into possession of the world, and a rich inheritance; and showing that the whole
was wholly God's. 'Having then such works,' he says, 'and expecting greater, we
do not boast as they do who have nothing, nor do we ascribe any part to
ourselves, but the whole to God. Wherefore also he adds,