John 7:32
"The Pharisees heard the people murmuring, and sent servants to take Him."
Do you see that the violation of the Sabbath was a mere pretense? And that
what most stung them was this murmuring? For here, though they had no fault to
find with Him for anything said or done, they desired to take Him because of the
multitude. They dared not do it themselves, suspecting danger, but sent their
hired servants. Alas! For their tyranny and their madness, or rather, I should say,
for their folly. After having often attempted themselves, and not prevailed, they
committed the matter to servants, simply satisfying their anger. Yet He had
spoken much at the pool [John 5], and they had done nothing of the kind; they
sought indeed occasion, but they attempted not, while here they can endure it no
longer, when the multitude is about to run to Him. What then says Christ?

John 7:33
"Yet a little while am I with you."
Having power to bow and terrify His hearers, He utters words full of
humility. As though He had said, "Why are you eager to persecute and kill Me?
Wait a little while, and even though you should be eager to keep Me back, I shall
not endure it." That no one should (as they did) suppose that the, "Yet a little
while am I with you," denoted a common death, that no one might suppose this,
or that He wrought nothing after death, He added,

John 7:34
"And where I am, there ye cannot come."
Now had He been about to continue in death, they might have gone to Him,
for to that place we all depart. His words therefore bent the simpler portion of
the multitude, terrified the bolder, made the more intelligent anxious to hear
Him, since but little time was now left, and since it was not in their power
always to enjoy this teaching. Nor did He merely say, "I am here," but, "I am
with you," that is, "Though you persecute, though ye drive Me away, yet for a
little while I shall not cease dispensing what is for your good, saying and
recommending the things that relate to your salvation."

John 7:33
"And I go unto Him that sent Me."
This was enough to terrify and throw them into an agony. For that they
should stand in need of Him, He declares also . . .

John 7:34
"You shall seek Me," He says, (not only "you shall not forget Me," but you shall
even "seek Me,") "and shall not find Me."
3. And when did the Jews "seek Him"? Luke says that the women mourned
over Him, and it is probable that many others, both at the time and when the city
was taken, remembered Christ and His miracles, and sought His presence. [Luke
23:49] Now all this He added, desiring to attract them. For the facts that the time
left was short, that He should after His departure be regretfully desired by them,
and that they should not then be able to find Him, were all together sufficient to
persuade them to come to Him. For had it not been that His presence should with
regret be desired by them, He would not have seemed to them to be saying any
great thing; if, again, it was about to be desired, and they able to find Him,
neither so would this have disturbed them. Again, had He been about to stay
with them a long time, so also they would have been remiss. But now He in
every way compels and terrifies them. And the, "I go to Him that sent Me," is the
expression of one declaring that no harm will happen to Him from their plotting,
and that His Passion was voluntary. Wherefore now He uttered two predictions,
that after a little while He should depart, and that they should not come to Him; a
thing which belonged not to human intelligence, the foretelling His own death.
Hear for instance, David saying, "Lord, make me to know mine end and the
number of my days, what it is, that I may know what time I have." [Psalm 39:4]
There is no man at all that knows this; and by one the other is confirmed. And I
think that He speaks this covertly to the servants, and directs His discourse to
them, thus specially attracting them, by showing them that He knew the cause of
their arrival. As though He had said, "Wait a little, and I shall depart."