enjoined them, that they do abstain from the vanities of idols, and from fornication, and from blood;
and whatsoever they wish not to be done to themselves, let them not do to others." And when
these things had been said, and all had given their consent, they wrote to them after this manner:
"The apostles, and the presbyters, [and] the brethren, unto those brethren from among the Gentiles
who are in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia, greeting: Forasmuch as we have heard that certain
persons going out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must
be circumcised, and keep the law; to whom we gave no such commandment: it seemed good unto
us, being assembled with one accord, to send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and
Paul; men who have delivered up their soul for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. We have sent
therefore Judas and Silas, that they may declare our opinion by word of mouth. For it seemed good
to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things; that
ye abstain from meats offered to idols, and from blood, and from fornication; and whatsoever ye
do not wish to be done to you, do not ye to others: from which preserving yourselves, ye shall do
well, walking in the Holy Spirit." From all these passages, then, it is evident that they did not
teach the existence of another Father, but gave the new covenant of liberty to those who had lately
believed in God by the Holy Spirit. But they clearly indicated, from the nature of the point debated
by them, as to whether or not it were still necessary to circumcise the disciples, that they had no
idea of another god.
15. Neither [in that case] would they have had such a tenor with regard to the first covenant,
as not even to have been willing to eat with the Gentiles. For even Peter, although he had been sent
to instruct them, and had been constrained by a vision to that effect, spake nevertheless with not a
little hesitation, saying to them: "Ye know how it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to
keep company with, or to come unto, one of another nation; but God hath shown me that I should
not call any man common or unclean. Therefore came I without gainsaying;" indicating by these
words, that he would not have come to them unless he had been commanded. Neither, for a like
reason, would he have given them baptism so readily, had he not heard them prophesying when
the Holy Ghost rested upon them. And therefore did he exclaim, "Can any man forbid water, that
these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?" He persuaded,
at the same time, those that were with him, and pointed out that, unless the Holy Ghost had rested
upon them, there might have been some one who would have raised objections to their baptism.
And the apostles who were with James allowed the Gentiles to act freely, yielding us up to the
Spirit of God. But they themselves, while knowing the same God, continued in the ancient
observances; so that even Peter, fearing also lest he might incur their reproof, although formerly