SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.2.

inferior to the superior to be perfected thereby; it moves the superior
to watch over the inferior:" and in this respect beneficence is an
effect of love. Hence it is not for us to benefit God, but to honor Him
by obeying Him, while it is for Him, out of His love, to bestow good
things on us.
Reply to Objection 2: Two things must be observed in the bestowal
of gifts. One is the thing given outwardly, while the other is the
inward passion that a man has in the delight of riches. It belongs to
liberality to moderate this inward passion so as to avoid excessive
desire and love for riches; for this makes a man more ready to part
with his wealth. Hence, if a man makes some great gift, while yet
desiring to keep it for himself, his is not a liberal giving. On the other
hand, as regards the outward gift, the act of beneficence belongs in
general to friendship or charity. Hence it does not detract from a
man's friendship, if, through love, he give his friend something he
would like to I keep for himself; rather does this prove the perfection
of his friendship.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as friendship or charity sees, in the
benefit bestowed, the general aspect of good, so does justice see
therein the aspect of debt, while pity considers the relieving of
distress or defect.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether we ought to do good to all?

Objection 1: It would seem that we are not bound to do good to all.
For Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 28) that we "are unable to do
good to everyone." Now virtue does not incline one to the
impossible. Therefore it is not necessary to do good to all.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 12:5) "Give to the good,
and receive not a sinner." But many men are sinners. Therefore we
need not do good to all.
Objection 3: Further, "Charity dealeth not perversely" (1 Cor. 13:4).
Now to do good to some is to deal perversely: for instance if one
were to do good to an enemy of the common weal, or if one were to
do good to an excommunicated person, since, by doing so, he would
be holding communion with him. Therefore, since beneficence is an
act of charity, we ought not to do good to all.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Gal. 6:10): "Whilst we have time,
let us work good to all men."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 1), beneficence is an
effect of love in so far as love moves the superior to watch over the
inferior. Now degrees among men are not unchangeable as among
angels, because men are subject to many failings, so that he who is
superior in one respect, is or may be inferior in another. Therefore,
since the love of charity extends to all, beneficence also should
extend to all, but according as time and place require: because all
acts of virtue must be modified with a view to their due
circumstances.
Reply to Objection 1: Absolutely speaking it is impossible to do
good to every single one: yet it is true of each individual that one
may be bound to do good to him in some particular case. Hence
charity binds us, though not actually doing good to someone, to be
prepared in mind to do good to anyone if we have time to spare.
There is however a good that we can do to all, if not to each
individual, at least to all in general, as when we pray for all, for
unbelievers as well as for the faithful.
Reply to Objection 2: In a sinner there are two things, his guilt and