children, or whether it be that having received it in sickness, and afterwards
recovered ([ἀ] [νενεγκόντες]), they had no hearty desire to live on (to the glory
of God), so it is, that neither do these make an earnest business of it: nay, even
such as received it in health, have little enough to show of any good impression,
and warmly affected for the time, these also presently let the fire go out. Why do
you flee? Why do you tremble? What is it you are afraid of? You do not mean to
say that you are not permitted to follow your business? I do not part you from
your wife! No, it is from fornication that I bar you. I do not debar you from the
enjoyment of your wealth? No, but from covetousness and rapacity. I do not
oblige you to empty out all your coffers? No, but to give some small matter
according to your means to them that lack, your superfluities to their need, and
not even this unrewarded. We do not urge you to fast? We do but forbid you to
besot yourselves with drunkenness and gormandizing. The things we would
retrench are but the very things which bring you disgrace; things which even
here, on this side of hell-fire, you yourselves confess to be things to be shunned
and hated. We do not forbid you to be glad and to rejoice? Nay, only rejoice not
with a disgraceful and unbecoming merriment. What is it you dread, why are
you afraid, why do you tremble? Where marriage is, where enjoyment of wealth,
where food in moderation, what matter of sin is there in these things? And yet,
they that are without enjoin the opposites to these, and are obeyed. For they
demand not according to your means, but they say, You must give thus much:
and if you allege poverty, they will make no account of that. Not so Christ: Give,
says He, of what you have, and I inscribe you in the first rank. Again those say,
If you will distinguish yourself, forsake father, mother, kindred, friends, and
keep close attendance on the Palace, laboring, toiling, slaving, distracted,
suffering miseries without number. Not so Christ; but keep thou, says He, at
home with your wife, with your children, and as for your daily occupations
reform and regulate them on the plan of leading a peaceable life, free from cares
and from perils. True, say you, but the other promises wealth. Aye, but Christ a
kingdom, and more, He promises wealth also with it. For, "Seek ye," says He,

"the kingdom of Heaven, and all these things shall be added unto you" [Matthew
6:33]: throwing in, by way of additional boon, what the other holds out as the
main thing: and the Psalmist says, he has "never seen the righteous forsaken, nor
his seed begging their bread." [Psalm 37:25] Let us set about practising virtue,
let us make a beginning; let us only lay hold on it, and you shall see what the
good will be. For surely in these (worldly) objects you do not succeed so without
labor, that you should be so faint-hearted for these (higher) objects— that you
should say, Those are to be had without labor, these only with toil. Nay,— what
need to tell you what is the true state of the case?— those are had only with
greater labor. Let us not recoil from the Divine Mysteries, I beseech you. Look
not at this, that one who was baptized before you, has turned out ill, and has
fallen from his hope: since among soldiers also we see some not doing their duty
by the service, while we see others distinguishing themselves, and we do not
look only at the idle ones, but we emulate these, the men who are successful. But
besides, consider how many, after their baptism, have of men become angels!
Fear the uncertainty of the future. "As a thief in the night," so death comes:
and not merely as a thief, but while we sleep it sets upon us, and carries us off
while we are idling. To this end has God made the future uncertain, that we may
spend our time in the practice of virtue, because of the uncertainty of
expectation. But He is merciful, say you. How long shall we hear this senseless,
ridiculous talk? I affirm not only that God is merciful, but that nothing can be
more merciful than He, and that He orders all things concerning us for our good.
How many all their life do you see afflicted with the worst form of leprosy! ([ἐ]
[ν ἐλέφαντι διάγοντας], "Elephantiasis,") how many blind from their earliest
youth even to old age! Others who have lost their eyesight, others in poverty,
others in bonds, others again in the mines, others entombed ([καταχωσθέντας])
together, others (slaughtered) in wars! These things say you, do not look like
mercy. Say, could He not have prevented these things had He wished, yet He
permits them? True, say you. Say, those who are blind from their infancy, why
are they so? I will not tell you, until you promise me to receive baptism, and,