powers. Wherefore also their captain is no one of men, nor of angels, but God
Himself. And the armor too of these warriors suits the nature of the warfare, for
it is not formed of hides and steel, but of truth and of righteousness, and faith,
and all true love of wisdom.
13. Since then the aforesaid republic is both the subject on which this book
was written, and it is now proposed for us to speak thereof, let us give careful
heed to Matthew, discoursing plainly concerning this: for what he says is not his
own, but all Christ's, who has made the laws of this city. Let us give heed, I say,
that we may be capable of enrolment therein, and of shining forth among those
that have already become citizens thereof, and are awaiting those incorruptible
crowns. To many, however, this discourse seems to be easy, while the prophetic
writings are difficult. But this again is the view of men who know not the depth
of the thoughts laid up therein. Wherefore I entreat you to follow us with much
diligence, so as to enter into the very ocean of the things written, with Christ for
our guide at this our entering in.
But in order that the word may be the more easy to learn, we pray and
entreat you, as we have done also with respect to the other Scriptures, to take up
beforehand that portion of the Scripture which we may be going to explain, that
your reading may prepare the way for your understanding (as also was the case
with the eunuch [Acts 8:28]), and so may greatly facilitate our task.
14. And this because the questions are many and frequent. See, for instance,
at once in the beginning of his Gospel, how many difficulties might be raised
one after the other. As first, wherefore the genealogy of Joseph is traced, who
was not father of Christ. Secondly, whence may it be made manifest that He
derives His origin from David, while the forefathers of Mary, who bare Him, are
not known, for the Virgin's genealogy is not traced? Thirdly, on what account
Joseph's genealogy is traced, when he had nothing to do with the birth; while
with regard to the Virgin, who was the very mother, it is not shown of what
fathers, or grandfathers, or ancestors, she is sprung.
And along with these things, this is also worth inquiry, wherefore it can be,

that, when tracing the genealogy through the men, he has mentioned women
also; and why since he determined upon doing this, he yet did not mention them
all, but passing over the more eminent, such as Sarah, Rebecca, and as many as
are like them, he has brought forward only them that are famed for some bad
thing; as, for instance, if any was a harlot, or an adulteress, or a mother by an
unlawful marriage, if any was a stranger or barbarian. For he has made mention
of the wife of Uriah, and of Thamar, and of Rahab, and of Ruth, of whom one
was of a strange race, another an harlot, another was defiled by her near
kinsman, and with him not in the form of marriage, but by a stolen intercourse,
when she had put on herself the mask of an harlot; and touching the wife of
Uriah no one is ignorant, by reason of the notoriety of the crime. And yet the
evangelist has passed by all the rest, and inserted in the genealogy these alone.
Whereas, if women were to be mentioned, all ought to be so; if not all but some,
then those famed in the way of virtue, not for evil deeds.
See you how much care is required of us straightway in the first beginning?
And yet the beginning seems to be plainer than the rest; to many perhaps even
superfluous, as being a mere numbering of names.
After this, another point again is worth inquiry; wherefore he has omitted
three kings. For if, because they were exceeding ungodly, he therefore passed by
their names in silence, neither should he have mentioned the others, that were
like them.
And this again is another question; why, after having spoken of fourteen
generations, he has not in the third division maintained the number.
And wherefore Luke has made mention of other names, and not only not all
of them the same, but also many more of them, while Matthew has both fewer
and different, though he too has ended with Joseph, with whom Luke likewise
concluded.
You see how much wakeful attention is needed on our part, not only for
explanation, but even that we may learn what things we have to explain. For
neither is this a little matter, to be able to find out the difficulties; there being