vain the fullness of the Church, in vain the number of the priests. Let us take
them away and destroy them. "God forbid!" you will say. You are doing these
things, and do ye say, "God forbid"? How say ye, "God forbid," when the very
things are taking place? I speak and testify, not looking to my own interest, but
to your salvation. But if any one be indifferent, he must see to it himself: if these
things are a care to no one else, yet are they a care to me. "I planted," says he,
"Apollos watered, but God gave the increase." [1 Corinthians 3:6] How shall we
bear the ridicule of the Greeks? For if they reproach us on account of our
heresies, what will they not say of these things? "If they have the same doctrines,
if the same mysteries, wherefore does a ruler in one Church invade another? See
ye," say they, "how all things among the Christians are full of vainglory? And
there is an ambition among them, and hypocrisy. Strip them," say they, "of their
numbers, and they are nothing. Cut out the disease, the corrupt multitude."
Would you have me tell what they say of our city, how they accuse us on the
score of our easy compliances? Any one, say they, that chooses may find
followers, and would never be at a loss for them. Oh, what a sneer is that, what a
disgrace are these things! And yet the sneer is one thing, the disgrace is another.
If any among us are convicted of deeds the most disgraceful, and are about to
meet with some penalty, great is the alarm, great is the fear on all sides, lest he
should start away, people say, and join the other side. Yea, let such an one start
away ten thousand times, and let him join them. And I speak not only of those
who have sinned, but if there be any one free from offense, and he has a mind to
depart, let him depart. I am grieved indeed at it, and bewail and lament it, and
am cut to the very heart, as though I were being deprived of one of my own
limbs; and yet I am not so grieved, as to be compelled to do anything wrong
through such fear as this. We have "not lordship over your faith" [2 Corinthians
1:24], beloved, nor command we these things as your lords and masters. We are
appointed for the teaching of the word, not for power, nor for absolute authority.
We hold the place of counselors to advise you. The counselor speaks his own
sentiments, not forcing the hearer, but leaving him full master of his choice upon

what is said; in this case alone is he blameable, if he fail to utter the things which
present themselves. For this cause do we also say these things, these things do
we assert, that it may not be in your power in that day to say, "No one told us, no
one gave us commandment, we were ignorant, we thought it was no sin at all."
Therefore I assert and protest, that to make a schism in the Church is no less an
evil than to fall into heresy. Tell me, suppose a subject of some king, though he
did not join himself to another king, nor give himself to any other, yet should
take and keep hold of his king's royal purple, and should tear it all from its clasp,
and rend it into many shreds; would he suffer less punishment than those who
join themselves to the service of another? And what, if withal he were to seize
the king himself by the throat and slay him, and tear his body limb from limb,
what punishment could he undergo, that should be equal to his deserts? Now if
in doing this toward a king, his fellow-servant, he would be committing an act
too great for any punishment to reach; of what hell shall not he be worthy who
slays Christ, and plucks Him limb from limb? Of that one which is threatened?
No, I think not, but of another far more dreadful.
Speak, you women, that are present—for this generally is a failing of
women, — relate to them that are absent this similitude which I have made;
startle them. If any think to grieve me and thus to have their revenge, let them be
well aware that they do these things in vain. For if you wish to revenge yourself
on me, I will give you a method by which you may take vengeance without
injury to yourself; or rather without injury it is not possible to revenge yourself,
but at all events with less injury. Buffet me, woman, spit upon me, when you
meet me in the public way, and aim blows at me. Do you shudder at hearing
this? When I bid you buffet me, do you shudder, and do you tear your Lord and
Master and not shudder? Do you pluck asunder the limbs of your Lord and
Master, and not tremble? The Church is our Father's house. "There is one body,
and one Spirit." But do you wish to revenge yourself on me? Yet stop at me.
Why do you revenge yourself on Christ in my stead? Nay, rather, why kick
against the nails? In no case indeed is revenge good and right, but to assault one