THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.5.

signs consist in sensible things: just as in the Divine Scriptures
spiritual things are set before us under the guise of things sensible.
And hence it is that sensible things are required for the sacraments;
as Dionysius also proves in his book on the heavenly hierarchy
(Coel. Hier. i).
Reply to Objection 1: The name and definition of a thing is taken
principally from that which belongs to a thing primarily and
essentially: and not from that which belongs to it through something
else. Now a sensible effect being the primary and direct object of
man's knowledge (since all our knowledge springs from the senses)
by its very nature leads to the knowledge of something else:
whereas intelligible effects are not such as to be able to lead us to
the knowledge of something else, except in so far as they are
manifested by some other thing, i.e. by certain sensibles. It is for this
reason that the name sign is given primarily and principally to things
which are offered to the senses; hence Augustine says (De Doctr.
Christ. ii) that a sign "is that which conveys something else to the
mind, besides the species which it impresses on the senses." But
intelligible effects do not partake of the nature of a sign except in so
far as they are pointed out by certain signs. And in this way, too,
certain things which are not sensible are termed sacraments as it
were, in so far as they are signified by certain sensible things, of
which we shall treat further on (Question 63, Article 1, ad 2; Article 3,
ad 2; Question 73, Article 6; Question 74, Article 1, ad 3).
Reply to Objection 2: Sensible things considered in their own nature
do not belong to the worship or kingdom of God: but considered
only as signs of spiritual things in which the kingdom of God
consists.
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine speaks there of sensible things,
considered in their nature; but not as employed to signify spiritual
things, which are the highest goods.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether determinate things are required for a

sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that determinate things are not required for a
sacrament. For sensible things are required in sacraments for the
purpose of signification, as stated above (Article 4). But nothing
hinders the same thing being signified by divers sensible things:
thus in Holy Scripture God is signified metaphorically, sometimes by
a stone (2 Kgs. 22:2; Zach. 3:9; 1 Cor. 10:4; Apoc. 4:3); sometimes by
a lion (Is. 31:4; Apoc. 5:5); sometimes by the sun (Is. 60:19,20; Mal.
4:2), or by something similar. Therefore it seems that divers things
can be suitable to the same sacrament. Therefore determinate things
are not required for the sacraments.
Objection 2: Further, the health of the soul is more necessary than
that of the body. But in bodily medicines, which are ordained to the
health of the body, one thing can be substituted for another which
happens to be wanting. Therefore much more in the sacraments,
which are spiritual remedies ordained to the health of the soul, can
one thing be substituted for another when this happens to be
lacking.
Objection 3: Further, it is not fitting that the salvation of men be
restricted by the Divine Law: still less by the Law of Christ, Who
came to save all. But in the state of the Law of nature determinate
things were not required in the sacraments, but were put to that use
through a vow, as appears from Gn. 28, where Jacob vowed that he
would offer to God tithes and peace-offerings. Therefore it seems
that man should not have been restricted, especially under the New
Law, to the use of any determinate thing in the sacraments.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Jn. 3:5): "Unless a man be born again
of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God."
I answer that, In the use of the sacraments two things may be
considered, namely, the worship of God, and the sanctification of
man: the former of which pertains to man as referred to God, and the
latter pertains to God in reference to man. Now it is not for anyone to
determine that which is in the power of another, but only that which
is in his own power. Since, therefore, the sanctification of man is in