flight the Barbarians [Genesis 14] he does not add show to victory, nor erect a
trophy. For he wished to save only, not to exhibit himself. Again, he entertained
strangers, yet did he not here act vain-gloriously, but himself both ran to them
and bowed down to them, not as though he were giving, but receiving a benefit,
and he calls them lords, without knowing who they are who have come to him,
and presents his wife in the place of a handmaiden. [Genesis 18] And in Egypt
too before this, when he had appeared so extraordinary a person, and had
received back this very woman, his wife, and had enjoyed so great honor
[Genesis 12] he shows it to no man. And though the inhabitants of the place
called him prince, he himself even laid down the price of the sepulchre. [Genesis
23:6] And when he sent to betroth a wife for his son, he gave no command to
speak in high and dignified terms of him, [Genesis 24] but merely to bring the
bride.
11. Will you examine also the conduct of those under grace, when from
every side great was the glory of the teaching flowing round them, and will you
see then also this passion cast out? Consider, I pray, this same Apostle who
speaks these things, how he ever ascribes the whole to God, how of his sins he
makes mention continually, but of his good deeds never, unless perchance it
should be needful to correct the disciples; and even if he be compelled to do this,
he calls the matter folly, and yields the first place to Peter, and is not ashamed to
labor with Priscilla and Aquila, and every where he is eager to show himself
lowly, not swaggering in the market place, nor carrying crowds with him, but
setting himself down among the obscure. Wherefore also he said, "but his bodily
presence is weak." [2 Corinthians 10:10] i.e., easy to be despised, and not at all
accompanied with display. And again, "I pray that you do no evil, not that we
may appear approved." And what marvel if he despise this glory? Seeing that he
despises the glory of heaven, and the kingdom, and hell, for that which was
pleasing unto Christ: for he wishes himself to be accursed from Christ for the
glory of Christ. For if he says that he is willing to suffer this for the Jews' sake,
he says it on this account that none of those without understanding might think

to take to himself the promises made to them. If therefore he were ready to pass
by those things, what marvel is it if he despise human things?
12. But the men of our time are overwhelmed by all things, not by desire of
glory only, but also, on the other hand, by insult and fear of dishonor. Thus,
should any one praise, it would puff you up, and if he blame, it would cast you
down. And as weak bodies are by common accidents injured, so also souls
which grovel on earth. For such not poverty alone, but even wealth destroys, not
grief only, but likewise joy, and prosperity more than adversity. For poverty
compels to be wise, but wealth leads on oftentimes into some great evil. And as
men in a fever are hard to be pleased in any thing, so also they that are depraved
in mind on every side receive hurt.
Knowing therefore these things, let us not shun poverty, let us not admire
riches: but prepare our soul to be sufficient for all estates. For so any one
building an house does not consider how neither rain may descend, nor sunbeam
light on it, (for this were impossible,) but how it may be made capable of
enduring all. And he again that builds a ship does not fashion and design any
thing to keep waves from breaking against it, or any tempest from rising in the
sea: (for this too were impossible:) but that the sides of the ship may be ready to
meet all. And again, he that cares for the body does not look to this that there
may be no inequality in the temperature, but that the body may easily endure all
these things. So accordingly let us act in respect of the soul, and neither be
anxious to fly poverty nor to become rich, but to regulate each of them for our
own safety.
Wherefore, letting alone these things, let us render our soul meet both for
wealth and poverty. For although no calamity, such as man is subject to, befall,
which is for the most part impossible, even thus, better is he that seeks not
wealth, but knows how to bear all things easily than he that is always rich. And
why? First, such an one has his safety from within, but the other from without.
And as he is a better soldier who trusts to his bodily powers and skill in fighting,
than he that has his strength in his armor only; so he that relies on his wealth,