instead of another? I have killed and buried your former transgressions, like
worms— how is it that you have bred others?— for sins are worse than worms,
since these do harm to the body, those to the soul; and those make the more
offensive stench. Yet we perceive it not, and so we are at no pains to purge them
out. Thus the drunkard knows not how disgustful the stale wine is, but he that is
not drunken has a distinct perception of it. So with sins also, he that lives soberly
knows thoroughly that other mire, and the stain. But he that gives himself up to
wickedness, like a man made drowsy with drunkenness, does not even know the
very fact that he is ill. And this is the most grievous part of vice, that it does not
allow those who fall into it even to see the greatness of their own bane, but as
they lie in the mire, they think they are enjoying perfumes. And so they have not
even the power of getting free, but when full of worms, like men that pride
themselves in precious stones, so do they exult in these. And for this reason they
have not so much as the will to kill them, but they even nourish these up, and
multiply them in themselves, until they send them on to the worms of the world
to come. For these are providers for those, and are not only providers, but even
the fathers of those that never die; as it says, "their worm shall not die." [Mark
9:44] These kindle the hell which never extinguishes. To prevent this from
happening then, let us do away with this fountain of evil, and extinguish the
furnace, and let us draw up the root of wickedness from beneath, since you will
do no good by cutting the tree off from above, if the root remains below, and
sends up fresh shoots of the same kind again. What then is the root of the evils?
Learn from the good husbandman [i.e. St. Paul, 1 Corinthians 3:6-9], who has an
accurate knowledge of such things, and tends the spiritual vine and cultivates the
whole world. Now what does he say is the cause of all the evils? The love of
money. For the "love of money is the root of all evils." [1 Timothy 6:10]. Hence
come fightings, and enmities and wars; hence emulations, and railings, and
suspicions, and insults; hence murders, and thefts, and violations of sepulchres.
Through this, not cities and countries only, but roads and habitable and
inhabitable parts, and mountains, and groves, and hills, and, in a word, all places

are filled with blood and murder. And not even from the sea has this evil
withdrawn, but even there also with great fury has it revelled, since pirates beset
it on all sides, thus devising a new mode of robbery. Through this have the laws
of nature been subverted, and the claims of relationship set aside, and the laws of
piety itself broken through. For the thraldom of money has armed, not against
the living only, but even against the departed too, the right hands of such men.
And at death even, they make no truce with them, but bursting open the
sepulchres, they put forth their impious hands even against dead bodies, and not
even him that has let go of life will they suffer to be let go from their plotting.
And all the evils that you may find, whether in the house or in the market-place,
or in the courts of law, or in the senate, or in the king's palace, or in any other
place whatsoever, it is from this that you will find they all spring. For this evil it
is, this assuredly, which fills all places with blood and murder, this lights up the
flame of hell, this makes cities as wretchedly off as a wilderness, yea, even much
worse. For those that beset the high roads, one can easily be on one's guard
against, as not being always upon attack. But they who in the midst of cities
imitate them are so much the worse than them, in that these are harder to guard
against, and dare to do openly what the others do with secrecy. For those laws,
which have been made with a view to stopping their iniquity, they draw even
into alliance and fill the cities with this kind of murders and pollutions. Is it not
murder, pray, and worse than murder, to hand the poor man over to famine, and
to cast him into prison, and to expose him not to famine only, but to tortures too,
and to countless acts of insolence? For even if you do not do these things
yourself to him, yet you are the occasion of their being done, you do them more
than the ministers who execute them. The murderer plunges his sword into a
man at once, and after giving him pain for a short time, he does not carry the
torture any farther. But do you who by your calumnies, by your harassings, by
your plottings, make light darkess to him, and set him upon desiring death ten
thousand times over, consider how many deaths you perpetrate instead of one
only? And what is worse than all, you plunder and are grasping, not impelled to