and they were introducing somewhat more than they. For it is probable that with
much idle talk, they were bringing in senseless rubbish so as to overlay these
doctrines. And therefore he made mention of the serpent and of Eve who was
thus deceived by the expectation of acquiring more. And alluding to this in the
former Epistle also, he said, "Now you have become rich, you have reigned as
kings without us;" and again, "we are fools for Christ's sake, but you are wise in
Christ." [1 Corinthians 4:8] Since then it was probable that using the wisdom
which is without, they talked much idly, what he says is this: that 'if these
persons said any thing more, and preached a different Christ who ought to have
been preached, but we omitted it, "ye do well to bear" with them.' For on this
account he added, "whom we did not preach." 'But if the chief points of the faith
are the same, what have ye the more of them? For whatsoever things they may
say, they will say nothing more than what we have said.' And observe with what
precision he states the case. For he did not say, 'if he that comes says any thing
more;' for they did say something more, haranguing with more authority and
with much beauty of language; wherefore he did not say this, but what? [If] "he
that comes preaches another Jesus," a thing which had no need of that array of
words: "or ye receive a different Spirit," (for neither was there need of words in
this case;) that is to say, 'makes you richer in grace;' or "a different Gospel which
you did not accept," (nor did this again stand in need of words,) "ye do well to
bear" with him. But consider, I pray you, how he every where uses such a
definition as shows that nothing very great, nor indeed any thing more, had been
introduced by them. For when he had said, "If he that comes preaches another
Jesus," he added, "whom we did not preach;" and "ye receive a different Spirit,"
he subjoined, "which you did not receive; or a different Gospel," he added,
"which you did not accept," by all these showing that it is meet to attend to them,
not simply if they say something more, but if they said any thing more which
ought to have been said and was by us omitted. But if it ought not to have been
said, and was therefore not said by us; or if they say only the same things as we,
why gape ye so admiringly upon them? 'And yet if they say the same things,'

says one, 'wherefore do you hinder them?' Because that using hypocrisy, they
introduce strange doctrines. This however for the present he does not say, but
afterwards asserts it, when he says, "They fashion themselves into Apostles of
Christ;" [2 Corinthians 11:13] for the present he withdraws the disciples from
their authority by less offensive considerations; and this not out of envy to them,
but to secure these. Else why does he not hinder Apollos, who was, however, a
"learned man, and mighty in the Scriptures;" [Acts 18:24; 1 Corinthians 16:12]
but even beseeches him, and promises he will send him? Because together with
his learning he preserved also the integrity of the doctrines; but with these it was
the reverse. And therefore he wars with them and blames the disciples for gaping
admiringly upon them, saying, 'if anything that should have been said we
omitted and they supplied, we do not hinder you from giving heed to them: but if
all has been fully completed by us and nothing left deficient, whence is it that
they caught you?' Wherefore also he adds,