THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: The Man assumed is reckoned with the Divine
Trinity in the knowledge of Itself, not indeed as regards
comprehension, but by reason of a certain most excellent knowledge
above the rest of creatures.
Reply to Objection 2: Not even in the union by personal being does
the human nature comprehend the Word of God or the Divine Nature,
for although it was wholly united to the human nature in the one
Person of the Son, yet the whole power of the Godhead was not
circumscribed by the human nature. Hence Augustine says (Ep. ad
Volusian. cxxxvii): "I would have you know that it is not the Christian
doctrine that God was united to flesh in such a manner as to quit or
lose the care of the world's government, neither did Ne narrow or
reduce it when He transferred it to that little body." So likewise the
soul of Christ sees the whole Essence of God, yet does not
comprehend It; since it does not see It totally, i.e. not as perfectly as
It is knowable, as was said in the FP, Question 12, Article 7.
Reply to Objection 3: This saying of Augustine is to be understood of
the grace of union, by reason of which all that is said of the Son of
God in His Divine Nature is also said of the Son of Man on account of
the identity of suppositum. And in this way it may be said that the
Son of Man is a comprehensor of the Divine Essence, not indeed by
His soul, but in His Divine Nature; even as we may also say that the
Son of Man is the Creator.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the Son of God knew all things in the

Word?
Objection 2: It would seem that the soul of Christ does not know all
things in the Word. For it is written (Mk. 13:32): "But of that day or
hour no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven nor the Son, but
the Father." Therefore He does not know all things in the Word.
Objection 2: Further, the more perfectly anyone knows a principle
the more he knows in the principle. But God sees His Essence more
perfectly than the soul of Christ does. Therefore He knows more than
the soul of Christ knows in the Word. Therefore the soul of Christ
does not know all things in the Word.
Objection 3: Further, the extent depends on the number of things
known. If, therefore, the soul of Christ knew in the Word all that the
Word knows, it would follow that the knowledge of the soul of Christ
would equal the Divine knowledge, i.e. the created would equal the
uncreated, which is impossible.
On the contrary, on Apoc. 5:12, "The Lamb that was slain is worthy
to receive . . . divinity and wisdom," a gloss says, i.e. "the knowledge
of all things."
I answer that, When it is inquired whether Christ knows all things in
the Word, "all things" may be taken in two ways: First, properly, to
stand for all that in any way whatsoever is, will be, or was done, said,
or thought, by whomsoever and at any time. And in this way it must
be said that the soul of Christ knows all things in the Word. For
every created intellect knows in the Word, not all simply, but so
many more things the more perfectly it sees the Word. Yet no
beatified intellect fails to know in the Word whatever pertains to
itself. Now to Christ and to His dignity all things to some extent
belong, inasmuch as all things are subject to Him. Moreover, He has
been appointed Judge of all by God, "because He is the Son of Man,"
as is said Jn. 5:27; and therefore the soul of Christ knows in the
Word all things existing in whatever time, and the thoughts of men,
of which He is the Judge, so that what is said of Him (Jn. 2:25), "For
He knew what was in man," can be understood not merely of the
Divine knowledge, but also of His soul's knowledge, which it had in
the Word. Secondly, "all things" may be taken widely, as extending