SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.178, C.2.

Accordingly since certain men are especially intent on the
contemplation of truth, while others are especially intent on external
actions, it follows that man's life is fittingly divided into active and
contemplative.
Reply to Objection 1: Each thing's proper form that makes it actually
"to be" is properly that thing's principle of operation. Hence "to live"
is, in living things, "to be," because living things through having
"being" from their form, act in such and such a way.
Reply to Objection 2: Life in general is not divided into active and
contemplative, but the life of man, who derives his species from
having an intellect, wherefore the same division applies to intellect
and human life.
Reply to Objection 3: It is true that contemplation enjoys rest from
external movements. Nevertheless to contemplate is itself a
movement of the intellect, in so far as every operation is described
as a movement; in which sense the Philosopher says (De Anima iii,
7) that sensation and understanding are movements of a kind, in so
far as movement is defined "the act of a perfect thing." In this way
Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv) ascribes three movements to the soul in
contemplation, namely, "straight," "circular," and
"oblique" [Question 180, Article 6].

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.178, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether life is adequately divided into active and

contemplative?
Objection 1: It would seem that life is not adequately divided into
active and contemplative. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 5) that
there are three most prominent kinds of life, the life of "pleasure,"
the "civil" which would seem to be the same as the active, and the
"contemplative" life. Therefore the division of life into active and
contemplative would seem to be inadequate.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine (De Civ. Dei xix, 1,2,3,19) mentions
three kinds of life, namely the life of "leisure" which pertains to the
contemplative, the "busy" life which pertains to the active, and a
third "composed of both." Therefore it would seem that life is
inadequately divided into active and contemplative.
Objection 3: Further, man's life is diversified according to the divers
actions in which men are occupied. Now there are more than two
occupations of human actions. Therefore it would seem that life
should be divided into more kinds than the active and the
contemplative.
On the contrary, These two lives are signified by the two wives of
Jacob; the active by Lia, and the contemplative by Rachel: and by
the two hostesses of our Lord; the contemplative life by Mary, and
the active life by Martha, as Gregory declares (Moral. vi, 37 [Hom. xiv
in Ezech.]). Now this signification would not be fitting if there were
more than two lives. Therefore life is adequately divided into active
and contemplative.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 2), this division applies
to the human life as derived from the intellect. Now the intellect is
divided into active and contemplative, since the end of intellective
knowledge is either the knowledge itself of truth, which pertains to
the contemplative intellect, or some external action, which pertains
to the practical or active intellect. Therefore life too is adequately
divided into active and contemplative.
Reply to Objection 1: The life of pleasure places its end in pleasures
of the body, which are common to us and dumb animals; wherefore
as the Philosopher says (Ethic. Ethic. i, 5), it is the life "of a beast."