FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether consent to delectation is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that consent to delectation is not a mortal
sin, for consent to delectation belongs to the lower reason, which
does not consider the eternal types, i.e. the eternal law, and
consequently does not turn away from them. Now every mortal sin
consists in turning away from Augustine's definition of mortal sin,
which was quoted above (Question 71, Article 6). Therefore consent
to delectation is not a mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, consent to a thing is not evil, unless the thing
to which consent is given be evil. Now "the cause of anything being
such is yet more so," or at any rate not less. Consequently the thing
to which a man consents cannot be a lesser evil than his consent.
But delectation without deed is not a mortal sin, but only a venial sin.
Therefore neither is the consent to the delectation a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, delectations differ in goodness and malice,
according to the difference of the deeds, as the Philosopher states
(Ethic. x, 3,5). Now the inward thought is one thing, and the outward
deed, e.g. fornication, is another. Therefore the delectation
consequent to the act of inward thought, differs in goodness and
malice from the pleasure of fornication, as much as the inward
thought differs from the outward deed; and consequently there is a
like difference of consent on either hand. But the inward thought is
not a mortal sin, nor is the consent to that thought: and therefore
neither is the consent to the delectation.
Objection 4: Further, the external act of fornication or adultery is a
mortal sin, not by reason of the delectation, since this is found also
in the marriage act, but by reason of an inordinateness in the act
itself. Now he that consents to the delectation does not, for this
reason, consent to the inordinateness of the act. Therefore he seems
not to sin mortally.
Objection 5: Further, the sin of murder is more grievous than simple
fornication. Now it is not a mortal sin to consent to the delectation
resulting from the thought of murder. Much less therefore is it a
mortal sin to consent to the delectation resulting from the thought of
fornication.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.9.

Objection 6: Further, the Lord's prayer is recited every day for the
remission of venial sins, as Augustine asserts (Enchiridion lxxviii).
Now Augustine teaches that consent to delectation may be driven
away by means of the Lord's Prayer: for he says (De Trin. xii, 12) that
"this sin is much less grievous than if it be decided to fulfil it by
deed: wherefore we ought to ask pardon for such thoughts also, and
we should strike our breasts and say: 'Forgive us our trespasses.'"
Therefore consent to delectation is a venial sin.
On the contrary, Augustine adds after a few words: "Man will be
altogether lost unless, through the grace of the Mediator, he be
forgiven those things which are deemed mere sins of thought, since
without the will to do them, he desires nevertheless to enjoy them."
But no man is lost except through mortal sin. Therefore consent to
delectation is a mortal sin.
I answer that, There have been various opinions on this point, for
some have held that consent to delectation is not a mortal sin, but
only a venial sin, while others have held it to be a mortal sin, and this
opinion is more common and more probable. For we must take note
that since every delectation results from some action, as stated in
Ethic. x, 4, and again, that since every delectation may be compared
to two things, viz. to the operation from which it results, and to the
object in which a person takes delight. Now it happens that an
action, just as a thing, is an object of delectation, because the action
itself can be considered as a good and an end, in which the person
who delights in it, rests. Sometimes the action itself, which results in
delectation, is the object of delectation, in so far as the appetitive
power, to which it belongs to take delight in anything, is brought to
bear on the action itself as a good: for instance, when a man thinks
and delights in his thought, in so far as his thought pleases him;
while at other times the delight consequent to an action, e.g. a
thought, has for its object another action, as being the object of his
thought; and then his thought proceeds from the inclination of the
appetite, not indeed to the thought, but to the action thought of.
Accordingly a man who is thinking of fornication, may delight in
either of two things: first, in the thought itself, secondly, in the
fornication thought of. Now the delectation in the thought itself
results from the inclination of the appetite to the thought; and the
thought itself is not in itself a mortal sin; sometimes indeed it is only
a venial sin, as when a man thinks of such a thing for no purpose;
and sometimes it is no sin at all, as when a man has a purpose in
thinking of it; for instance, he may wish to preach or dispute about it.