THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.24, C.3.

as man which belongs to him by reason of human nature.
Consequently, we must say that "Christ, as Man, was predestinated
the Son of God."
Reply to Objection 1: When we say, "Christ, as Man, was
predestinated the Son of God," this qualification, "as Man," can be
referred in two ways to the action signified by the participle. First, as
regards what comes under predestination materially, and thus it is
false. For the sense would be that it was predestinated that Christ, as
Man, should be the Son of God. And in this sense the objection takes
it.
Secondly, it may be referred to the very nature of the action itself:
that is, forasmuch as predestination implies antecedence and
gratuitous effect. And thus predestination belongs to Christ by
reason of His human nature, as stated above. And in this sense He is
said to be predestinated as Man.
Reply to Objection 2: Something may be befitting to a man by reason
of human nature, in two ways. First, so that human nature be the
cause thereof: thus risibility is befitting to Socrates by reason of
human nature, being caused by its principles. In this manner
predestination is not befitting either to Christ or to any other man, by
reason of human nature. This is the sense of the objection.
Secondly, a thing may be befitting to someone by reason of human
nature, because human nature is susceptible of it. And in this sense
we say that Christ was predestinated by reason of human nature;
because predestination refers to the exaltation of human nature in
Him, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Praedest. Sanct. xv): "The
Word of God assumed Man to Himself in such a singular and
ineffable manner that at the same time He may be truly and correctly
called the Son of Man, because He assumed Men to Himself; and the
Son of God, because it was the Only-begotten of God Who assumed
human nature." Consequently, since this assumption comes under
predestination by reason of its being gratuitous, we can say both
that the Son of God was predestinated to be man, and that the Son of
Man was predestinated to be the Son of God. But because grace was
not bestowed on the Son of God that He might be man, but rather on
human nature, that it might be united to the Son of God; it is more
proper to say that "Christ, as Man, was predestinated to be the Son
of God," than that, "Christ, as Son of God, was predestinated to be

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.24, C.3.

Man."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.24, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ's predestination is the exemplar of

ours?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's predestination is not the
exemplar of ours. For the exemplar exists before the exemplate. But
nothing exists before the eternal. Since, therefore, our predestination
is eternal, it seems that Christ's predestination is not the exemplar of
ours.
Objection 2: Further, the exemplar leads us to knowledge of the
exemplate. But there was no need for God to be led from something
else to knowledge of our predestination; since it is written (Rm.
8:29): "Whom He foreknew, He also predestinated." Therefore
Christ's predestination is not the exemplar of ours.
Objection 3: Further, the exemplar is conformed to the exemplate.
But Christ's predestination seems to be of a different nature from
ours: because we are predestinated to the sonship of adoption,
whereas Christ was predestinated "Son of God in power," as is
written (Rm. 1:4). Therefore His predestination is not the exemplar of
ours.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Praedest. Sanct. xv): "The
Saviour Himself, the Mediator of God and men, the Man Christ Jesus
is the most splendid light of predestination and grace." Now He is
called the light of predestination and grace, inasmuch as our
predestination is made manifest by His predestination and grace;
and this seems to pertain to the nature of an exemplar. Therefore
Christ's predestination is the exemplar of ours.
I answer that, Predestination may be considered in two ways. First,
on the part of the act of predestination: and thus Christ's
predestination cannot be said to be the exemplar of ours: for in the
same way and by the same eternal act God predestinated us and
Christ.
Secondly, predestination may be considered on the part of that to
which anyone is predestinated, and this is the term and effect of
predestination. In this sense Christ's predestination is the exemplar
of ours, and this in two ways. First, in respect of the good to which
we are predestinated: for He was predestinated to be the natural Son