"Because they knew Him not," he says: so that the sin was one of ignorance. See
how he gently makes an apology even on behalf of those (crucifiers). And not
only this: but he adds also, that thus it must needs be. And how so? "By
condemning Him, they fulfilled the voices of the prophets." Then again from the
Scriptures. "And when they had fulfilled all that was written of Him, they took
Him down from the tree, and laid Him in a sepulchre. But God raised Him from
the dead. And He was seen many days of them which came up with Him from
Galilee to Jerusalem, who are His witnesses unto the people— " [Acts 13:29-31]
that He rose again. "And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise
which was made unto the fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their
children, in that He has raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second
Psalm, You are My Son, this day have I begotten You. And as concerning that He
raised Him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, He said on
this wise, I will give you the sure mercies of David. Wherefore he says also in
another Psalm, You shall not allow Your Holy One to see corruption. For David,
after he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was
laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption: but He, Whom God raised again, saw
no corruption. Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through
this Man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: and by Him all that
believe are justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the
law of Moses." [Acts 13:32-39] Observe how Paul here is more vehement in his
discourse: we nowhere find Peter saying this. Then too he adds the terrifying
words: "Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the
prophets; Behold, you despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in
your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it
unto you." (v. 40, 41.)
(a) Observe how he twines (the thread of) his discourse (alternately) from
things present, from the prophets. Thus, "from (this man's) seed according to the
promise"— [Acts 13:23]: (c) the name of David was dear to them; well then, is it
not (a thing to be desired) that a son of his, he says, should be their king?— (b)

then he adduces John: then again the prophets, where he says, "By condemning
they fulfilled," and again, "All that was written:" then the Apostles as witnesses
of the Resurrection: then David bearing witness. For neither the Old Testament
proofs seemed so cogent when taken by themselves as they are in this way, nor
yet the latter testimonies apart from the former: wherefore he makes them
mutually confirm each other. "Men and brethren," etc. [Acts 13:26] For since
they were possessed by fear, as having slain Him, and conscience made them
aliens (the Apostles), discourse not with them as unto Christicides, neither as
putting into their hands a good which was not theirs, but one peculiarly their
own. (d) "For they that dwell at Jerusalem, and their rulers:" as much as to say,
not you, but they: and again, apologizing even for those, "Because they knew
Him not, and the voices of the Prophets which are read every sabbath day, in
condemning Him, they fulfilled them." A great charge it is against them that they
continually hearing heeded not. But no marvel: for what was said above
concerning Egypt and the wilderness, was enough to show their ingratitude. And
observe how this Apostle also, as one moved by the Spirit Himself, continually
preaches the Passion, the Burial. (g) "Having taken Him down from the tree."
Observe, what a great point they make of this. He speaks of the manner of His
death. Moreover they bring Pilate (conspicuously) forward, that (the fact of) the
Passion may be proved by the mention of the tribunal (by which he was
condemned), but at the same time, for the greater impeachment of those (His
crucifiers), seeing they delivered Him up to an alien. And he does not say, They
made a complaint (against Him), ([ἐ] [νέτυχον], al. [ἐ] [ντυγχάνει]) but, "They
desired, though having found no cause of death" (in Him), "that He should be
slain. (e) Who appeared," he says, "for many days to them that came up with
Him from Galilee to Jerusalem." [Romans 11:2] Instead of ** he says, "Who are
His witnesses unto the people," to wit, "The men which came up with Him from
Galilee to Jerusalem." Then he produces David and Esaias bearing witness. "The
faithful (mercies)," the abiding (mercies), those which never perish. (h) Paul
loved them exceedingly. And observe, he does not enlarge on the ingratitude of