others in their room, and those too he had safe for the Resurrection. Had they
been restored, the number would have been diminished, but now having given
others in their stead, He will present them also at the Resurrection. All these
things happened to him, because of his openhandedness in almsgiving. Let us
then do likewise, that we may obtain the same rewards by the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

## Homily 8 on Second Timothy

[2 Timothy 3:1-4]
"This know also, that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God."
If any now takes offense at the existence of heretics, let him remember that
it was so from the beginning, the devil always setting up error by the side of
truth. God from the beginning promised good, the devil came too with a
promise. God planted Paradise, the devil deceived, saying, "You shall be as
gods." [Genesis 3:5] For as he could show nothing in actions, he made the more
promises in words. Such is the character of deceivers. After this were Cain and
Abel, then the sons of Seth and the daughters of men; afterwards Ham and
Japhet, Abraham and Pharaoh, Jacob and Esau; and so it is even to the end,
Moses and the magicians, the Prophets and the false prophets, the Apostles and
the false apostles, Christ and Antichrist. Thus it was then, both before and at that
time. Then there was Theudas, then Simon, then were the Apostles, then too this
party of Hermogenes and Philetus. In short, there was no time when falsehood
was not set up in opposition to truth. Let us not therefore be distressed. That it
would be so, was foretold from the beginning. Therefore he says, "Know that in
the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their own
selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection." The unthankful then is unholy,
and this is natural, for what will he be to others, who is not grateful to his
benefactor? The unthankful man is a truce-breaker, he is without natural
affection.

"False accusers," that is, slanderers. For those who are conscious that they
have no good in themselves, while they commit many sins and offenses, find
consolation in defaming the characters of others.
"Incontinent," with respect both to their tongue and their appetite, and
everything else.
"Fierce," hence their inhumanity and cruelty, when any one is covetous,
selfish, ungrateful, licentious.
"Despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady." "Traitors," betrayers of
friendship; "heady," having no steadiness; "high-minded," filled with arrogance.
"Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God."
Ver. 5. "Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof."
In the Epistle to the Romans, he says somewhat on this wise, "Having the
form of knowledge and of the truth in the law" [Romans 2:20], where he speaks
in commendation of it: but here he speaks of this sin as an evil beyond all other
defects. And why is this? Because he does not use the words in the same
signification. For an image is often taken to signify a likeness; but sometimes a
thing without life, and worthless. Thus he says himself in his Epistle to the
Corinthians, "A man ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image
and glory of God." [1 Corinthians 11:7] But the Prophet says, "Man walks in an
image." [Psalm 39:9, Septuagint] And the Scripture sometimes takes a lion to
represent royalty, as, "He couched as a lion, and as a lion's cub, who shall raise
him up?" [Genesis 49:9, Septuagint] And sometimes to signify rapacity, as, "a
ravening and a roaring lion." [Psalm 22:13] And we ourselves do the same. For
as things are compounded and varied in themselves, they are fitly adduced for
various images and examples. As when we would express our admiration of a
beautiful woman, we say, she is like a picture; and when we admire a painting,
we say that it speaks, that it breathes. But we do not mean to express the same
thing, but in one case to mark likeness, in the other beauty. So here with respect
to form, in the one passage, it means a model, or representation, a doctrine, or
pattern of godliness; in the other, something that is lifeless, a mere appearance,