receive active power, but work all of myself."
Wherefore at the centurion He both marvels, and prefers him to all the
people, and honors him with the gift of the kingdom, and provokes the rest to the
same zeal. And to show you that for this end He so spoke, viz. for the instructing
of the rest to believe in like manner, listen to the exactness of the evangelist, how
he has intimated it. For,
"Jesus," says he, "turned Him about, and said to them that followed Him, I
have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel."
It follows, that to have high imaginations concerning Him, this especially is
of faith, and tends to procure the kingdom and His other blessings. For neither
did His praise reach to words only, but He both restored the sick man whole, in
recompence of his faith, and weaves for him a glorious crown, and promises
great gifts, saying on this wise,
"Many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down in the bosoms
of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; but the children of the kingdom shall be cast
out."
Thus, since He had shown many miracles, He proceeds to talk with them
more unreservedly.
Then, that no one might suppose His words to come of flattery, but that all
might be aware that such was the mind of the centurion, He says,
"Go your way; as you have believed, so be it done unto you."
[Matthew 8:13]
And straightway the work followed, bearing witness to his character.
nothing; for the question is, whether each of them has set before us the
zealousness of the man, and his having had the right opinion concerning Christ.
But it is likely, that after sending his friends, he himself also came and said these
things. And if Luke did not speak of the one, no more did Matthew of the other;
and this is not the part of men disagreeing among themselves, but rather of those
that are filling up the things omitted by one another. But see by another thing
also how Luke has proclaimed his faith, saying that his servant "was ready to

die." [Luke 7:2] Nevertheless, not even this cast him into despondency, neither
did it cause him to give up: but even so he trusted that he should prevail. And if
Matthew affirm Christ to have said, "I have not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel," and hereby to show clearly that he was not an Israelite; while Luke says,
"He built our synagogue;" neither is this a contradiction. For it was possible for
one, even though not a Jew, both to build the synagogue, and to love the nation.
4. But do not thou, I pray you, merely inquire what was said by him, but
add thereto his rank also, and then you will see the man's excellency. Because in
truth great is the pride of them that are in places of command, and not even in
afflictions do they take lower ground. He, for example, who is set down in John,
is for dragging Him unto his house, and says, "Come down, for my child is ready
to die." [John 4:49] But not so this man; rather he is far superior both to him, and
to those who let down the bed through the roof. For he seeks not for His bodily
presence, neither did He bring the sick man near the physician; a thing which
implied no mean imaginations concerning Him, but rather a suspicion of His
divine dignity. And he says, "speak the word only." And at the beginning he says
not even, "speak the word," but only describe his affliction: for neither did he, of
great humility, expect that Christ would straightway consent, and inquire for his
house. Therefore, when he heard Him say, "I will come and heal him," then, not
before he says, "speak the word." Nor yet did the suffering confound him, but
still under calamity he reasons coolly, not looking so much to the health of the
servant, as to the avoiding all appearance of doing anything irreverent.
And yet it was not he that pressed it, but Christ that offered it: nevertheless
even so he feared, lest perchance he should be thought to be going beyond his
own deservings, and to be drawing upon himself a thing above his strength. Do
you see his wisdom? Mark the folly of the Jews, in saying, "He was worthy for
whom He should do the favor." [Luke 7:4] For when they should have taken
refuge in the love of Jesus towards man, they rather allege this man's worthiness;
and know not so much as on what ground to allege it. But not so he, but he
affirmed himself even in the utmost degree unworthy, not only of the benefit, but