the passionate, the envious, the covetous, the deceitful, and every one that lives
in sin, may be called dissolute, disorderly, and licentious.
Ver. 3. "For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour."
What is said to be "acceptable"? The praying for all men. This God accepts,
this He wills.
Ver. 4. "Who wills that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth."
Imitate God! If He wills that all men should be saved, there is reason why
one should pray for all, if He has willed that all should be saved, be thou willing
also; and if you wish it, pray for it, for wishes lead to prayers. Observe how from
every quarter He urges this upon the soul, to pray for the Heathen, showing how
great advantage springs from it; "that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life";
and what is much more than this, that it is pleasing to God, and thus men become
like Him, in that they will the same that He does. This is enough to shame a very
brute. Fear not therefore to pray for the Gentiles, for God Himself wills it; but
fear only to pray against any, for that He wills not. And if you pray for the
Heathens, you ought of course to pray for Heretics also, for we are to pray for all
men, and not to persecute. And this is good also for another reason, as we are
partakers of the same nature, and God commands and accepts benevolence and
affection towards one another.
But if the Lord Himself wills to give, you say, what need of my prayer? It is
of great benefit both to them and to yourself. It draws them to love, and it
inclines you to humanity. It has the power of attracting others to the faith; (for
many men have fallen away from God, from contentiousness towards one
another;) and this is what he now calls the salvation of God, "who will have all
men to be saved"; without this all other is nothing great, a mere nominal
salvation, and only in words. "And to come to the knowledge of the truth." The
truth: what truth? Faith in Him. And indeed he had previously said, "Charge
some that they teach no other doctrine." But that no one may consider such as
enemies, and on that account raise troubles against them; he says that "He wills

that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth"; and
having said this, he adds,
Ver. 5. "For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men."
He had before said, "to come to the knowledge of the truth," implying that
the world is not in the truth. Now he says, "that there is one God," that is, not as
some say, many, and that He has sent His Son as Mediator, thus giving proof that
He will have all men to be saved. But is not the Son God? Most truly He is; why
then does he say, "One God"? In contradistinction to the idols; not to the Son.
For he is discoursing about truth and error. Now a mediator ought to have
communion with both parties, between whom he is to mediate. For this is the
property of a mediator, to be in close communion with each of those whose
mediator he is. For he would be no longer a mediator, if he were connected with
one but separated from the other. If therefore He partakes not of the nature of the
Father, He is not a Mediator, but is separated. For as He is partaker of the nature
of men, because He came to men, so is He partaker of the nature of God,
because He came from God. Because He was to mediate between two natures,
He must approximate to the two natures; for as the place situated between two
others is joined to each place, so must that between natures be joined to either
nature. As therefore He became Man, so was He also God. A man could not have
become a mediator, because he must also plead with God. God could not have
been mediator, since those could not receive Him, toward whom He should have
mediated. And as elsewhere he says, "There is one God the Father,...and one
Lord Jesus Christ" [1 Corinthians 8:6]; so also here "One" God, and "One"
Mediator; he does not say two; for he would not have that number wrested to
Polytheism, of which he was speaking. So he wrote "One" and "One." You see
how accurate are the expressions of Scripture! For though one and one are two,
we are not to say this, though reason suggests it. And here you say not one and
one are two, and yet you say what reason does not suggest. "If He begot He also
suffered." "For there is one God," he says, "and one Mediator between God and
men, the Man Christ Jesus."