FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.2.

those virtues which are called principal or cardinal are fittingly
placed among the moral virtues.
Reply to Objection 1: When a univocal genus is divided into its
species, the members of the division are on a par in the point of the
generic idea; although considered in their nature as things, one
species may surpass another in rank and perfection, as man in
respect of other animals. But when we divide an analogous term,
which is applied to several things, but to one before it is applied to
another, nothing hinders one from ranking before another, even in
the point of the generic idea; as the notion of being is applied to
substance principally in relation to accident. Such is the division of
virtue into various kinds of virtue: since the good defined by reason
is not found in the same way in all things.
Reply to Objection 2: The theological virtues are above man, as
stated above (Question 58, Article 3, ad 3). Hence they should
properly be called not human, but "super-human" or godlike virtues.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the intellectual virtues, except in
prudence, rank before the moral virtues, in the point of their subject,
they do not rank before them as virtues; for a virtue, as such,
regards good, which is the object of the appetite.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there are four cardinal virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are not four cardinal virtues.
For prudence is the directing principle of the other moral virtues, as
is clear from what has been said above (Question 58, Article 4). But
that which directs other things ranks before them. Therefore
prudence alone is a principal virtue.
Objection 2: Further, the principal virtues are, in a way, moral
virtues. Now we are directed to moral works both by the practical
reason, and by a right appetite, as stated in Ethic. vi, 2. Therefore
there are only two cardinal virtues.
Objection 3: Further, even among the other virtues one ranks higher
than another. But in order that a virtue be principal, it needs not to
rank above all the others, but above some. Therefore it seems that
there are many more principal virtues.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. ii): "The entire structure of
good works is built on four virtues."
I answer that, Things may be numbered either in respect of their
formal principles, or according to the subjects in which they are: and
either way we find that there are four cardinal virtues.
For the formal principle of the virtue of which we speak now is good
as defined by reason; which good is considered in two ways. First,
as existing in the very act of reason: and thus we have one principal
virtue, called "Prudence." Secondly, according as the reason puts its
order into something else; either into operations, and then we have
"Justice"; or into passions, and then we need two virtues. For the
need of putting the order of reason into the passions is due to their
thwarting reason: and this occurs in two ways. First, by the passions
inciting to something against reason, and then the passions need a
curb, which we call "Temperance." Secondly, by the passions
withdrawing us from following the dictate of reason, e.g. through fear
of danger or toil: and then man needs to be strengthened for that
which reason dictates, lest he turn back; and to this end there is
"Fortitude."
In like manner, we find the same number if we consider the subjects