SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.2.

the subjection and honor due to Him, like those who make certain
offerings to their lord in recognition of his authority. Now this is what
we mean by a sacrifice, and consequently the offering of sacrifice is
of the natural law.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (FS, Question 95, Article 2),
certain things belong generically to the natural law, while their
determination belongs to the positive law; thus the natural law
requires that evildoers should be punished; but that this or that
punishment should be inflicted on them is a matter determined by
God or by man. In like manner the offering of sacrifice belongs
generically to the natural law, and consequently all are agreed on
this point, but the determination of sacrifices is established by God
or by man, and this is the reason for their difference.
Reply to Objection 2: Adam, Isaac and other just men offered
sacrifice to God in a manner befitting the times in which they lived,
according to Gregory, who says (Moral. iv, 3) that in olden times
original sin was remitted through the offering of sacrifices. Nor does
Scripture mention all the sacrifices of the just, but only those that
have something special connected with them. Perhaps the reason
why we read of no sacrifice being offered by Adam may be that, as
the origin of sin is ascribed to him, the origin of sanctification ought
not to be represented as typified in him. Isaac was a type of Christ,
being himself offered in sacrifice; and so there was no need that he
should be represented as offering a sacrifice.
Reply to Objection 3: It is natural to man to express his ideas by
signs, but the determination of those signs depends on man's
pleasure.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sacrifice should be offered to God alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that sacrifice should not be offered to the
most high God alone. Since sacrifice ought to be offered to God, it
would seem that it ought to be offered to all such as are partakers of
the Godhead. Now holy men are made "partakers of the Divine
nature," according to 2 Pt. 1:4; wherefore of them is it written (Ps.
81:6): "I have said, You are gods": and angels too are called "sons of
God," according to Job 1:6. Thus sacrifice should be offered to all
these.
Objection 2: Further, the greater a person is the greater the honor
due to him from man. Now the angels and saints are far greater than
any earthly princes: and yet the subjects of the latter pay them much
greater honor, by prostrating before them, and offering them gifts,
than is implied by offering an animal or any other thing in sacrifice.
Much more therefore may one offer sacrifice to the angels and
saints.
Objection 3: Further, temples and altars are raised for the offering of
sacrifices. Yet temples and altars are raised to angels and saints.
Therefore sacrifices also may be offered to them.
On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 22:20): "He that sacrificeth to gods
shall be put to death, save only to the Lord."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), a sacrifice is offered in
order that something may be represented. Now the sacrifice that is
offered outwardly represents the inward spiritual sacrifice, whereby
the soul offers itself to God according to Ps. 50:19, "A sacrifice to
God is an afflicted spirit," since, as stated above (Question 81,
Article 7; Question 84, Article 2), the outward acts of religion are
directed to the inward acts. Again the soul offers itself in sacrifice to
God as its beginning by creation, and its end by beatification: and
according to the true faith God alone is the creator of our souls, as
stated in the FP, Question 90, Article 3; FS, Question 118, Article 2,
while in Him alone the beatitude of our soul consists, as stated
above (FS, Question 1, Article 8; FS, Question 2, Article 8; FS,
Question 3, Articles 1,7,8). Wherefore just as to God alone ought we
to offer spiritual sacrifice, so too ought we to offer outward
sacrifices to Him alone: even so "in our prayers and praises we