and it is the people ([αὐτοί]) that draw them, not the Apostles that lead them.
Observe how he avoids all that is superfluous: he does not tell in what way it
was done, but that they were ordained ([ἐ] [χειροτονήθησαν]) with prayer: for
this is the meaning of [χειροτονία], (i.e. "putting forth the hand,") or ordination:
the hand of the man is laid upon (the person,) but the whole work is of God, and
it is His hand which touches the head of the one ordained, if he be duly ordained.
"And the word of God," it says, "increased: and the number of the disciples
multiplied." [Acts 6:7] It is not for nothing that he says this: it shows how great
is the virtue of alms and good order. And as he is about in the sequel to enlarge
([αὔξειν]) upon the affair of Stephen, he puts first the causes which led to it.
"And many," he says, "of the priests were obedient to the faith." For since they
perceived such to be the mind of their ruler and teacher, they put the matter to
the test of facts.— It is also a subject for wonder, how it was that the multitude
was not divided in its choice of the men, and how it was that the Apostles were
not rejected by them. But what sort of rank these bore, and what sort of office
they received, this is what we need to learn. Was it that of Deacons? And yet this
is not the case in the Churches. But is it to the Presbyters that the management
belongs? And yet at present there was no Bishop, but the Apostles only. Whence
I think it clearly and manifestily follows, that neither Deacons nor Presbyters is
their designation: but it was for this particular purpose that they were ordained.
And this business was not simply handed over to them without further ceremony,
but the Apostles prayed over them, that power might be given to them. But
observe, I pray you, if there were need of seven men for this, great in proportion
must have been the sums of money that flowed in, great in proportion also the
number of widows. So then the prayers were not made in an off-hand way, but
with much deliberate attention: and this office, as well as preaching, was thus
brought to good effect; for what they did, they effected mostly by the means of
these (their prayers.) Thus they were enabled to give their attention to things
spiritual; thus were these also free to undertake long journeys; thus were these
put in trust with the word. But the writer does not say this, nor extol them, but

that it was "not reason" that they should leave the work given to them. Thus they
had been taught by Moses's example not to undertake the management of
everything by themselves. [Numbers 11:14] "Only," it is said, "that we should
remember the poor." [Galatians 2:10] And how did they bring these forward?
They fasted. "Look you out seven men," etc. [Acts 6:3] It is not simply, spiritual
men, but, "full of the Spirit and of wisdom," for it needed very great superiority
of mind ([φιλοσοφίας]) to bear the complainings of widows. For what profits it,
that the dispenser of alms steal not, if nevertheless he waste all, or be harsh and
easily provoked? "And they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy
Ghost." [Acts 6:5] And in this regard Philip also was admirable: for it is of him
that the writer says: "And we entered into the house of Philip the Evangelist,
which was one of the seven; and abode with him."— [Acts 21:8] Do you mark
how matters are ordered quite otherwise than after the matter of men? "And the
number of disciples was multiplied in Jerusalem." [Acts 6:7] In Jerusalem the
multitude increased. Wonderful, where Christ was slain, there the preaching
increased! And not only was it not the case that some were offended then in the
manner of Ananias, but the awe became even greater: while these are scourged,
those threatening, those tempting the Spirit, those murmuring. But I would have
you remark under what circumstances the multitude increased: after these trials,
then it was that the multitude increased, and not before. Mark also how great the
mercy of God. Of those chief-priests, of the very men who had indignation and
sore displeasure and so cried out and said, "He saved others, Himself He cannot
save;" of these same, "Many," it says, "were obedient unto the faith." [Matthew
27:42]
Him therefore let us also imitate. He received them, and did not cast them
out. So let us requite those our enemies, who have wrought us even numberless
ills. Whatever good thing we may have, let us impart to them: let us not pass
them by, in our acts of beneficence. For if we ought, by suffering ill, to sate their
rage, much more, by doing them good: for this is a less thing than the other. For
it is not all alike, to do good to an enemy, and to be willing to suffer greater