SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.4.

Gregory says (Hom. ix, Super Ezech.): "Those who are so placed that
their life should be an example to others, ought, if possible, to
silence their detractors, lest their preaching be not heard by those
who could have heard it, and they continue their evil conduct
through contempt of a good life."
Reply to Objection 1: The daring of the railing reviler should be
checked with moderation, i.e. as a duty of charity, and not through
lust for one's own honor. Hence it is written (Prov. 26:4): "Answer
not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like him."
Reply to Objection 2: When one man prevents another from being
reviled there is not the danger of lust for one's own honor as there is
when a man defends himself from being reviled: indeed rather would
it seem to proceed from a sense of charity.
Reply to Objection 3: It would be an act of revenge to keep silence
with the intention of provoking the reviler to anger, but it would be
praiseworthy to be silent, in order to give place to anger. Hence it is
written (Ecclus. 8:4): "Strive not with a man that is full of tongue, and
heap not wood upon his fire."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether reviling arises from anger?

Objection 1: It would seem that reviling does not arise from anger.
For it is written (Prov. 11:2): "Where pride is, there shall also be
reviling." But anger is a vice distinct from pride. Therefore reviling
does not arise from anger.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 20:3): "All fools are meddling
with revilings." Now folly is a vice opposed to wisdom, as stated
above (Question 46, Article 1); whereas anger is opposed to
meekness. Therefore reviling does not arise from anger.
Objection 3: Further, no sin is diminished by its cause. But the sin of
reviling is diminished if one gives vent to it through anger: for it is a
more grievous sin to revile out of hatred than out of anger. Therefore
reviling does not arise from anger.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that "anger gives rise
to revilings."
I answer that, While one sin may arise from various causes, it is
nevertheless said to have its source chiefly in that one from which it
is wont to arise most frequently, through being closely connected
with its end. Now reviling is closely connected with anger's end,
which is revenge: since the easiest way for the angry man to take
revenge on another is to revile him. Therefore reviling arises chiefly
from anger.
Reply to Objection 1: Reviling is not directed to the end of pride
which is excellency. Hence reviling does not arise directly from
pride. Nevertheless pride disposes a man to revile, in so far as those
who think themselves to excel, are more prone to despise others and
inflict injuries on them, because they are more easily angered,
through deeming it an affront to themselves whenever anything is
done against their will.
Reply to Objection 2: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 6)
"anger listens imperfectly to reason": wherefore an angry man
suffers a defect of reason, and in this he is like the foolish man.
Hence reviling arises from folly on account of the latter's kinship
with anger.