the truth of human nature more perfectly: which same order the
second opinion applied to those things that are produced afterwards
from food, in which point also these two opinions agree.
Reply to Objection 1: A natural thing is what it is, not from its matter
but from its form; wherefore, although that part of matter which at
one time was under the form of bovine flesh rises again in man
under the form of human flesh, it does not follow that the flesh of an
ox rises again, but the flesh of a man: else one might conclude that
the clay from which Adam's body was fashioned shall rise again. The
second opinion, however, grants this argument.
Reply to Objection 2: That rib did not belong to the perfection of the
individual in Adam, but was directed to the multiplication of the
species. Hence it will rise again not in Adam but in Eve, just as the
seed will rise again, not in the begetter, but in the begotten.
Reply to Objection 3: According to the first opinion it is easy to reply
to this argument, because the flesh that is eaten never belonged to
the truth of human nature in the eater, but it did belong to the truth of
human nature in him whose flesh was eaten: and thus it will rise
again in the latter but not in the former. according to the second and
third opinions, each one will rise again in that wherein he
approached nearest to the perfect participation of the virtue of the
species, and if he approached equally in both, he will rise again in
that wherein he was first, because in that he first was directed to the
resurrection by union with the rational soul of that man. Hence if
there were any surplus in the flesh eaten, not belonging to the truth
of human nature in the first man, it will be possible for it to rise again
in the second: otherwise what belonged to the resurrection in the
first will rise again in him and not in the second; but in the second its
place is taken either by something of that which was the product
from other food, or if he never partook of any other food than human
flesh, the substitution is made by Divine power so far as the
perfection of quantity requires, as it does in those who die before the
perfect age. Nor does this derogate from numerical identity, as
neither does the ebb and flow of parts.
Reply to Objection 4: According to the first opinion this argument is
easily answered. For that opinion asserts that the seed is not from
the surplus food: so that the flesh eaten is not changed into the seed
whereof the child is begotten. But according to the other two
opinions we must reply that it is impossible for the whole of the flesh

eaten to be changed into seed, because it is after much separation
that the seed is distilled from the food, since seed is the ultimate
surplus of food. That part of the eaten flesh which is changed into
seed belongs to the truth of human nature in the one born of the
seed more than in the one of whose flesh the seed was the product.
Hence according to the rule already laid down (ad 3), whatever was
changed into the seed will rise again in the person born of the seed;
while the remaining matter will rise again in him of whose flesh the
seed was the product.
Reply to Objection 5: The embryo is not concerned with the
resurrection before it is animated by a rational soul, in which state
much has been added to the seminal substance from the substance
of food, since the child is nourished in the mother's womb.
Consequently on the supposition that a man partook of such food,
and that some one were begotten of the surplus thereof, that which
was in the seminal substance will indeed rise again in the one
begotten of that seed; unless it contain something that would have
belonged to the seminal substance in those from whose flesh being
eaten the seed was produced, for this would rise again in the first
but not in the second. The remainder of the eaten flesh, not being
changed into seed, will clearly rise again in the first the Divine power
supplying deficiencies in both. The first opinion is not troubled by
this objection, since it does not hold the seed to be from the surplus
food: but there are many other reasons against it as may be seen in
the Second Book (Sent. ii, D, 30; FP, Question 119, Article 2).