of pitiable distress, and the bare sight of him was sufficient to soften even a heart
of stone: and yet even this did not induce that unmerciful man to assist this case
of poverty: but he had his luxurious table spread, and goblets wreathed with
flowers, and pure wine plentifully poured forth, and grand armies of cooks, and
parasites, and flatterers from early dawn, and troops of singers, cupbearers, and
jesters; and he spent all his time in devising every species of dissipation, and
drunkenness, and surfeiting, and in revelling in dress and feasting and many
other things. But although he saw that poor man every day distressed by
grievous hunger and the bitterest infirmity, and the oppression of his many sores,
and by destitution, and the ills which result from these things, he never even
gave him a thought: yet the parasites and the flatterers were pampered even
beyond their need; but the poor man, and he so very poor, and encompassed with
so many miseries, was not even vouchsafed the crumbs which fell from that
table, although he greatly desired them: and yet none of these things injured him,
he did not give vent to a bitter word, he did not utter a profane speech; but like a
piece of gold which shines all the more brilliantly when it is purified by
excessive heat, even so he, although oppressed by these sufferings, was superior
to all of them, and to the agitation which in many cases is produced by them. For
if generally speaking poor men, when they see rich men, are consumed with
envy and racked by malicious ill-will, and deem life not worth living, and this
even when they are well supplied with necessary food, and have persons to
minister to their wants; what would the condition of this poor man have been had
he not been very wise and noble hearted, seeing that he was poor beyond all
other poor men, and not only poor, but also infirm, and without any one to
protect or cheer him, and lay in the midst of the city as if in a remote desert, and
wasted away with bitter hunger, and saw all good things being poured upon the
rich man as out of a fountain, and had not the benefit of any human consolation,
but lay exposed as a perpetual meal for the tongues of the dogs, for he was so
enfeebled and broken down in body that he could not scare them away? Do you
perceive that he who does not injure himself suffers no evil? For I will again take

up the same argument.
11. For what harm was done to this hero by his bodily infirmity? Or by the
absence of protectors? Or by the coming of the dogs? Or the evil proximity of
the rich man? Or by the great luxury, haughtiness and arrogance of the latter?
Did it enervate him for the contest on behalf of virtue? Did it ruin his fortitude?
Nowhere was he harmed at all, but that multitude of sufferings, and the cruelty
of the rich man, rather increased his strength, and became the pledge for him of
infinite crowns of victory, a means of adding to his rewards, an augmentation of
his recompense, and a promise of an increased requital. For he was crowned not
merely on account of his poverty, or of his hunger or of his sores, or of the dogs
licking them: but because, having such a neighbour as the rich man, and being
seen by him every day, and perpetually overlooked he endured this trial bravely
and with much fortitude, a trial which added no small flame but in fact a very
strong one to the fire of poverty, and infirmity and loneliness.
And, tell me, what was the case of the blessed Paul? For there is nothing to
prevent my making mention of him again. Did he not experience innumerable
storms of trial? And in what respect was he injured by them? Was he not
crowned with victory all the more in consequence—because he suffered hunger,
because he was consumed with cold and nakedness, because he was often
tortured with the scourge, because he was stoned, because he was cast into the
sea? But then some one says he was Paul, and called by Christ. Yet Judas also
was one of the twelve, and he too was called of Christ; but neither his being of
the twelve nor his call profited him, because he had not a mind disposed to
virtue. But Paul although struggling with hunger, and at a loss to procure
necessary food, and daily undergoing such great sufferings, pursued with great
zeal the road which leads to heaven: whereas Judas although he had been called
before him, and enjoyed the same advantages as he did, and was initiated in the
highest form of Christian life, and partook of the holy table and that most awful
of sacred feasts, and received such grace as to be able to raise the dead, and
cleanse the lepers, and cast out devils, and often heard discourses concerning