made distinct from the imagination.
Objection 6: Further, Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii, 6,7,24) describes
three kinds of vision; namely, corporeal, which is the action of the
sense; spiritual, which is an action of the imagination or phantasy;
and intellectual, which is an action of the intellect. Therefore there is
no interior power between the sense and intellect, besides the
imagination.
On the contrary, Avicenna (De Anima iv, 1) assigns five interior
sensitive powers; namely, "common sense, phantasy, imagination,
and the estimative and memorative powers."
I answer that, As nature does not fail in necessary things, there must
needs be as many actions of the sensitive soul as may suffice for the
life of a perfect animal. If any of these actions cannot be reduced to
the same one principle, they must be assigned to diverse powers;
since a power of the soul is nothing else than the proximate principle
of the soul's operation.
Now we must observe that for the life of a perfect animal, the animal
should apprehend a thing not only at the actual time of sensation,
but also when it is absent. Otherwise, since animal motion and
action follow apprehension, an animal would not be moved to seek
something absent: the contrary of which we may observe specially
in perfect animals, which are moved by progression, for they are
moved towards something apprehended and absent. Therefore an
animal through the sensitive soul must not only receive the species
of sensible things, when it is actually affected by them, but it must
also retain and preserve them. Now to receive and retain are, in
corporeal things, reduced to diverse principles; for moist things are
apt to receive, but retain with difficulty, while it is the reverse with
dry things. Wherefore, since the sensitive power is the act of a
corporeal organ, it follows that the power which receives the species
of sensible things must be distinct from the power which preserves
them.
Again we must observe that if an animal were moved by pleasing
and disagreeable things only as affecting the sense, there would be
no need to suppose that an animal has a power besides the
apprehension of those forms which the senses perceive, and in
which the animal takes pleasure, or from which it shrinks with

horror. But the animal needs to seek or to avoid certain things, not
only because they are pleasing or otherwise to the senses, but also
on account of other advantages and uses, or disadvantages: just as
the sheep runs away when it sees a wolf, not on account of its color
or shape, but as a natural enemy: and again a bird gathers together
straws, not because they are pleasant to the sense, but because they
are useful for building its nest. Animals, therefore, need to perceive
such intentions, which the exterior sense does not perceive. And
some distinct principle is necessary for this; since the perception of
sensible forms comes by an immutation caused by the sensible,
which is not the case with the perception of those intentions.
Thus, therefore, for the reception of sensible forms, the "proper
sense" and the "common sense" are appointed, and of their
distinction we shall speak farther on (ad 1,2). But for the retention
and preservation of these forms, the "phantasy" or "imagination" is
appointed; which are the same, for phantasy or imagination is as it
were a storehouse of forms received through the senses.
Furthermore, for the apprehension of intentions which are not
received through the senses, the "estimative" power is appointed:
and for the preservation thereof, the "memorative" power, which is a
storehouse of such-like intentions. A sign of which we have in the
fact that the principle of memory in animals is found in some such
intention, for instance, that something is harmful or otherwise. And
the very formality of the past, which memory observes, is to be
reckoned among these intentions.
Now, we must observe that as to sensible forms there is no
difference between man and other animals; for they are similarly
immuted by the extrinsic sensible. But there is a difference as to the
above intentions: for other animals perceive these intentions only by
some natural instinct, while man perceives them by means of
coalition of ideas. Therefore the power by which in other animals is
called the natural estimative, in man is called the "cogitative," which
by some sort of collation discovers these intentions. Wherefore it is
also called the "particular reason," to which medical men assign a
certain particular organ, namely, the middle part of the head: for it
compares individual intentions, just as the intellectual reason
compares universal intentions. As to the memorative power, man
has not only memory, as other animals have in the sudden
recollection of the past; but also "reminiscence" by syllogistically,
as it were, seeking for a recollection of the past by the application of
individual intentions. Avicenna, however, assigns between the