FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: Dionysius is speaking of love and dilection, in
so far as they are in the intellectual appetite; for thus love is the
same as dilection.
Reply to Objection 2: The object of love is more general than the
object of dilection: because love extends to more than dilection
does, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Love and dilection differ, not in respect of good
and evil, but as stated. Yet in the intellectual faculty love is the same
as dilection. And it is in this sense that Augustine speaks of love in
the passage quoted: hence a little further on he adds that "a right will
is well-directed love, and a wrong will is ill-directed love." However,
the fact that love, which is concupiscible passion, inclines many to
evil, is the reason why some assigned the difference spoken of.
Reply to Objection 4: The reason why some held that, even when
applied to the will itself, the word "love" signifies something more
Godlike than "dilection," was because love denotes a passion,
especially in so far as it is in the sensitive appetite; whereas
dilection presupposes the judgment of reason. But it is possible for
man to tend to God by love, being as it were passively drawn by Him,
more than he can possibly be drawn thereto by his reason, which
pertains to the nature of dilection, as stated above. And
consequently love is more Godlike than dilection.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether love is properly divided into love of

friendship and love of concupiscence?
Objection 1: It would seem that love is not properly divided into love
of friendship and love of concupiscence. For "love is a passion,
while friendship is a habit," according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii,
5). But habit cannot be the member of a division of passions.
Therefore love is not properly divided into love of concupiscence
and love of friendship.
Objection 2: Further, a thing cannot be divided by another member
of the same division; for man is not a member of the same division
as "animal." But concupiscence is a member of the same division as
love, as a passion distinct from love. Therefore concupiscence is not
a division of love.
Objection 3: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 3)
friendship is threefold, that which is founded on "usefulness," that
which is founded on "pleasure," and that which is founded on
"goodness." But useful and pleasant friendship are not without
concupiscence. Therefore concupiscence should not be contrasted
with friendship.
On the contrary, We are said to love certain things, because we
desire them: thus "a man is said to love wine, on account of its
sweetness which he desires"; as stated in Topic. ii, 3. But we have
no friendship for wine and suchlike things, as stated in Ethic. viii, 2.
Therefore love of concupiscence is distinct from love of friendship.
I answer that, As the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 4), "to love is to wish
good to someone." Hence the movement of love has a twofold
tendency: towards the good which a man wishes to someone (to
himself or to another) and towards that to which he wishes some
good. Accordingly, man has love of concupiscence towards the
good that he wishes to another, and love of friendship towards him
to whom he wishes good.
Now the members of this division are related as primary and
secondary: since that which is loved with the love of friendship is
loved simply and for itself; whereas that which is loved with the love
of concupiscence, is loved, not simply and for itself, but for