THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.5.

by the Saints, or by Himself of Himself, and believes that some are to
be applied to the Man, and apportions some to the Word alone---let
him be anathema." And the reason of this is that, since there is one
hypostasis of both natures, the same hypostasis is signified by the
name of either nature. Thus whether we say "man" or "God," the
hypostasis of Divine and human nature is signified. And hence, of
the Man may be said what belongs to the Divine Nature, as of a
hypostasis of the Divine Nature; and of God may be said what
belongs to the human nature, as of a hypostasis of human nature.
Nevertheless, it must be borne in mind that in a proposition in which
something is predicated of another, we must not merely consider
what the predicate is predicated of, but also the reason of its being
predicated. Thus, although we do not distinguish things predicated
of Christ, yet we distinguish that by reason of which they are
predicated, since those things that belong to the Divine Nature are
predicated of Christ in His Divine Nature, and those that belong to
the human nature are predicated of Christ in His human nature.
Hence Augustine says (De Trin. i, 11): "We must distinguish what is
said by Scripture in reference to the form of God, wherein He is
equal to the Father, and what in reference to the form of a servant,
wherein He is less than the Father": and further on he says (De Trin.
i, 13): "The prudent, careful, and devout reader will discern the
reason and point of view of what is said."
Reply to Objection 1: It is impossible for contraries to be predicated
of the same in the same respects, but nothing prevents their being
predicated of the same in different aspects. And thus contraries are
predicated of Christ, not in the same, but in different natures.
Reply to Objection 2: If the things pertaining to defect were attributed
to God in His Divine Nature, it would be a blasphemy, since it would
be derogatory to His honor. But there is no kind of wrong done to
God if they are attributed to Him in His assumed nature. Hence in a
discourse of the Council of Ephesus [Part III, ch. 10] it is said: "God
accounts nothing a wrong which is the occasion of man's salvation.
For no lowliness that He assumed for us injures that Nature which
can be subject to no injury, yet makes lower things Its own, to save
our nature. Therefore, since these lowly and worthless things do no
harm to the Divine Nature, but bring about our salvation, how dost
thou maintain that what was the cause of our salvation was the
occasion of harm to God?"

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.5.

Reply to Objection 3: To be assumed pertains to human nature, not
in its suppositum, but in itself; and thus it does not belong to God.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.6.