The third part is about the separation of creatures through Christ. This is divided into two parts:
For first, there is set forth the faith which Christ taught by which we are justified, in that book
entitled De fide Christiana, which begins: "The Christian faith." In the second part, an
explanation is given of what must be held about Christ: namely, how two natures are united in
one person. This discussion of the two natures and the one person in Christ is also in a book
written to the same John, which begins: "You, indeed, solicitously."

Now the mode employed in treating of the Trinity is twofold, as St. Augustine says in I De
Trinitate, namely, through truths known on the basis of authority, and through those known by
reason, both of which modes Augustine combined, as he himself says.

Some of the holy Fathers, as Ambrose and Hilary, employed but one mode of explanation:
namely, by setting forth those truths founded upon authority. But Boethius chose to proceed
according to the other mode; namely, according to reasoned arguments, presupposing what had
been concluded by others on the grounds of authority. Hence also the method of his work is
indicated in what he says: "I shall investigate", in which an inquiry of reason is signified. In
Sirach 39:1 we read: "Wisdom," namely, knowledge of the Trinity; "of all the ancients," that is,
which the ancients affirmed solely on the grounds of authority; "the wise man will seek out," that
is, he will investigate by reason.

Wherefore, in the preface he speaks of "An investigation carried on for a very long time."

The purpose of this work is: that hidden things may be made manifest, so far as that is possible
in this life.

"They that explain me shall have life everlasting" (Sirach 24:31); and therefore, he says: "I will
bring the knowledge of her to light" (Wis. 6:24). "The depths also of rivers he searched, and
hidden things he brought forth to light" (Job 2 8: 11).

## BOETHIUS' PREFACE

The problem which has been for so long a time the subject of my investigationÑto the extent that
the divine light has deigned to enkindle the feeble spark of my mindÑnow arranged according to
a reasoned plan and consigned to writing, I have taken pains to offer and share with you,
prompted as much by desire for your judgment as by zeal for my task.

In this matter it is possible to understand what my intention is whenever I entrust my thought to
pen, both because of the difficulty of the matter and because it is only to you men that I am
addressing it.

Indeed, I am not prompted by any desire for fame or for empty popular applause; but if there is
any exterior reward, it can be no other than to hope for a judgment in keeping with the matter.

For, wherever I have directed my gaze, apart from you, I have encountered, on the one side,
stolid indifference or, on the other, sly envy, so that I would appear to offer insult to matters
pertaining to divine things by putting them before such monsters of men to be trampled under
foot by them rather than to be acknowledged. On this account I restrain my pen by brevity, and
truths gleaned from the deepest teachings of philosophy I veil over by the signification of new
words, so that they may speak only to me and to you; if you, indeed, will direct your attention to
them. But, as for others, I so disregard them that those who are unable to grasp the meaning of