stone, he met all events with a noble and constant spirit.
Taking these things to heart, let us do everything "without murmuring and
disputing." Is it some good work that you have before you, and do you murmur?
Wherefore? Are you then forced? For that there are many about you who force
you to murmur, I know well, says he. This he intimated by saying, "in the midst
of a crooked and perverse generation"; but it is this that deserves admiration,
that we admit no such feeling when under galling provocation. For the stars too
give light in the night, they shine in the dark, and receive no blemish to their
own beauty, yea they even shine the brighter; but when light returns, they no
longer shine so. Thus thou too dost appear with the greater lustre, while you hold
straight in the midst of the crooked. This it is which deserves our admiration, the
being "blameless"; for that they might not urge this plea, he himself set it down
by anticipation. What means "holding fast the word of life"? I.e. "being destined
to live, being of those that are gaining salvation." Observe how immediately he
subjoins the rewards, which are in reserve. Lights [i.e. luminaries], he says,
retain the principle of light; so do ye the principle of life. What means "the word
of life"? Having the seed of life, i.e. having pledges of life, holding life itself, i.e.
"having in yourselves the seed of life," this is what he calls "the word of life."
Consequently the rest are all dead, for by these words he signified as much; for
otherwise those others likewise would have held "the word of life." "That I may
have whereof to glory," he says; what is this? I too participate in your good
deeds, he says. So great is your virtue, as not only to save yourselves, but to
render me illustrious. Strange kind of "boasting," thou blessed Paul! You are
scourged, driven about, reviled for our sakes: therefore he adds, "in the day of
Christ, that I did not run," he says, "in vain, nor labored in vain," but I always
have a right to glory, he means, that I did not run in vain.
"Yea, and if I am offered." He said not, "and if I die even," nor did he when
writing to Timothy, for there, too, he has made use of the same expression, "For
I am already being offered." [2 Timothy 4:6] He is both consoling them about his
own death, and instructing them to bear gladly the death that is for Christ's sake.

I have become, he says, as it were a libation and a sacrifice. O blessed soul! His
bringing them to God he calls a sacrifice. It is much better to present a soul than
to present oxen. "If, then, over and above this offering," he says, "I add myself,
my death as a libation, I rejoice." For this he implies, when he says, "Yea, and if
I am offered upon the sacrifice and service, I joy and rejoice with you all; and in
the same manner do ye also joy and rejoice with me." Why do you rejoice with
them? Do you see that he shows that it is their duty to rejoice? On the one hand
then, I rejoice in being made a libation; on the other, I rejoice with you, in
having presented a sacrifice; "and in the same manner do ye also joy and rejoice
with me," that I am offered up; "rejoice with me," "who rejoice in myself." So
that the death of the just is no subject for tears, but for joy. If they rejoice, we
should rejoice with them. For it is misplaced for us to weep, while they rejoice.
"But," it is urged, "we long for our wonted intercourse." This is a mere pretext
and excuse; and that it is so, mark what he enjoins: "Rejoice with me, and joy."
Do you miss your wonted intercourse? If you were yourself destined to remain
here, there would be reason in what you say, but if after a brief space you will
overtake him who has departed, what is that intercourse which thou dost seek?
For it is only when he is forever severed from him that a man misses the society
of another, but if he will go the same way that you will go, what is the
intercourse which you long for? Why do we not bewail all that are upon foreign
travel? Do we not just a little, and cease after the first or the second day? If you
long for your wonted intercourse with him, weep so far only. "It is no evil that I
suffer," says he, "but I even rejoice in going to Christ, and do ye not rejoice."
"Rejoice with me." Let us too rejoice when we see a righteous man dying, and
yet more even when any of the desperately wicked; for the first is going to
receive the reward of his labors, but the other has abated somewhat from the
score of his sins. But it is said, perhaps he might have altered, had he lived. Yet
God would never have taken him away, if there had been really a prospect of an
alteration. For why should not He who orders all events for our salvation, allow
him the opportunity, who gave promise of pleasing Him? If He leaves those,