SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.3.

Secondly, it happens through real union, for instance when another's
evil comes near to us, so as to pass to us from him. Hence the
Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that men pity such as are akin to them,
and the like, because it makes them realize that the same may
happen to themselves. This also explains why the old and the wise
who consider that they may fall upon evil times, as also feeble and
timorous persons, are more inclined to pity: whereas those who
deem themselves happy, and so far powerful as to think themselves
in no danger of suffering any hurt, are not so inclined to pity.
Accordingly a defect is always the reason for taking pity, either
because one looks upon another's defect as one's own, through
being united to him by love, or on account of the possibility of
suffering in the same way.
Reply to Objection 1: God takes pity on us through love alone, in as
much as He loves us as belonging to Him.
Reply to Objection 2: Those who are already in infinite distress, do
not fear to suffer more, wherefore they are without pity. In like
manner this applies to those also who are in great fear, for they are
so intent on their own passion, that they pay no attention to the
suffering of others.
Reply to Objection 3: Those who are disposed to contumely, whether
through having been contemned, or because they wish to contemn
others, are incited to anger and daring, which are manly passions
and arouse the human spirit to attempt difficult things. Hence they
make a man think that he is going to suffer something in the future,
so that while they are disposed in that way they are pitiless,
according to Prov. 27:4: "Anger hath no mercy, nor fury when it
breaketh forth." For the same reason the proud are without pity,
because they despise others, and think them wicked, so that they
account them as suffering deservedly whatever they suffer. Hence
Gregory says (Hom. in Evang. xxxiv) that "false godliness," i.e. of the
proud, "is not compassionate but disdainful."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether mercy is a virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that mercy is not a virtue. For the chief
part of virtue is choice as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 5). Now
choice is "the desire of what has been already counselled" (Ethic. iii,
2). Therefore whatever hinders counsel cannot be called a virtue. But
mercy hinders counsel, according to the saying of Sallust (Catilin.):
"All those that take counsel about matters of doubt, should be free
from . . . anger . . . and mercy, because the mind does not easily see
aright, when these things stand in the way." Therefore mercy is not a
virtue.
Objection 2: Further, nothing contrary to virtue is praiseworthy. But
nemesis is contrary to mercy, as the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii, 9),
and yet it is a praiseworthy passion (Rhet. ii, 9). Therefore mercy is
not a virtue.
Objection 3: Further, joy and peace are not special virtues, because
they result from charity, as stated above (Question 28, Article 4;
Question 29, Article 4). Now mercy, also, results from charity; for it is
out of charity that we weep with them that weep, as we rejoice with
them that rejoice. Therefore mercy is not a special virtue.
Objection 4: Further, since mercy belongs to the appetitive power, it
is not an intellectual virtue, and, since it has not God for its object,
neither is it a theological virtue. Moreover it is not a moral virtue,
because neither is it about operations, for this belongs to justice;
nor is it about passions, since it is not reduced to one of the twelve
means mentioned by the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 7). Therefore mercy is
not a virtue.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix, 5): "Cicero in
praising Caesar expresses himself much better and in a fashion at
once more humane and more in accordance with religious feeling,
when he says: 'Of all thy virtues none is more marvelous or more
graceful than thy mercy.'" Therefore mercy is a virtue.
I answer that, Mercy signifies grief for another's distress. Now this
grief may denote, in one way, a movement of the sensitive appetite,
in which case mercy is not a virtue but a passion; whereas, in
another way, it may denote a movement of the intellective appetite,