But what are these? To seek the things spiritual, all of them; to forgive them that
have trespassed, and so to draw near asking forgiveness; "to lift up holy hands
without wrath and doubting." If we thus ask, we shall receive. As it is, surely our
asking is a mockery, and the act of drunken rather than of sober men.
"What then," says one, "if I ask even spiritual things, and do not receive?"
You did not surely knock with earnestness; or you made yourself unworthy to
receive; or quickly left off.
"And wherefore," it may be inquired, "did He not say, what things we ought
to ask"? Nay verily, He has mentioned them all in what precedes, and has
signified for what things we ought to draw near. Say not then, "I drew near, and
did not receive." For in no case is it owing to God that we receive not, God who
loves us so much as to surpass even fathers, to surpass them as far as goodness
does this evil nature.
"For if you, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how
much more your heavenly Father."
Now this He said, not to bring an evil name on man's nature, nor to
condemn our race as bad; but in contrast to His own goodness He calls paternal
tenderness evil, so great is the excess of His love to man.
Do you see an argument unspeakable, of power to arouse to good hopes
even him that has become utterly desperate?
Now here indeed He signifies His goodness by means of our fathers, but in
what precedes by the chief among His gifts, by the "soul," by the body. And
nowhere does He set down the chief of all good things, nor bring forward His
own coming:— for He who thus made speed to give up His Son to the slaughter,
"how shall He not freely give us all things?"— because it had not yet come to
pass. But Paul indeed sets it forth, thus saying, "He that spared not His own Son,
how shall He not also with Him freely give us all things." [Romans 8:32] But His
discourse with them is still from the things of men.
6. After this, to indicate that we ought neither to feel confidence in prayer,
while neglecting our own doings; nor, when taking pains, trust only to our own

endeavors; but both to seek after the help from above, and contribute withal our
own part; He sets forth the one in connection with the other. For so after much
exhortation, He taught also how to pray, and when He had taught how to pray,
He proceeded again to His exhortation concerning what we are to do; then from
that again to the necessity of praying continually, saying, "Ask," and "seek," and
"knock." And thence again, to the necessity of being also diligent ourselves.
"For all things," says He, "whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye also to them."
Summing up all in brief, and signifying, that virtue is compendious, and
easy, and readily known of all men.
And He did not merely say, "All things whatsoever ye would," but,
"Therefore all things whatsoever ye would." For this word, "therefore," He did
not add without purpose, but with a concealed meaning: "if you desire," says He,
"to be heard, together with what I have said, do these things also." What then
are these? "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you." Do you see how
He has hereby also signified that together with prayer we need exact
conversation? And He did not say, "whatsoever things you would to be done
unto you of God, those do unto your neighbor;" lest you should say, "But how is
it possible? He is God and I am man:" but, "whatsoever you would to be done
unto you of your fellow servant, these things do thou also yourself show forth
towards your neighbor." What is less burdensome than this? What fairer?
Then the praise also, before the rewards, is exceeding great.
"For this is the law and the prophets." Whence it is evident, that virtue is
according to our nature; that we all, of ourselves, know our duties; and that it is
not possible for us ever to find refuge in ignorance.
7. "Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: and strait is the
gate and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it."
And yet after this He said, "My yoke is easy, and my burden is light."
[Matthew 11:30] And in what He has lately said also, He intimated the same: