different duties to perform in battle and in triumph.
Reply to Objection 1: The principalities and powers will come to an
end in that final consummation as regards their office of leading
others to their end; because when the end is attained, it is no longer
necessary to tend towards the end. This is clear from the words of
the Apostle, "When He shall have delivered up the kingdom of God
and the Father," i.e. when He shall have led the faithful to the
enjoyment of God Himself.
Reply to Objection 2: The actions of angels over the other angels are
to be considered according to a likeness to our own intellectual
actions. In ourselves we find many intellectual actions which are
ordered according to the order of cause and effect; as when we
gradually arrive at one conclusion by many middle terms. Now it is
manifest that the knowledge of a conclusion depends on all the
preceding middle terms not only in the new acquisition of
knowledge, but also as regards the keeping of the knowledge
acquired. A proof of this is that when anyone forgets any of the
preceding middle terms he can have opinion or belief about the
conclusion, but not knowledge; as he is ignorant of the order of the
causes. So, since the inferior angels know the types of the Divine
works by the light of the superior angels, their knowledge depends
on the light of the superior angels not only as regards the
acquisition of knowledge, but also as regards the preserving of the
knowledge possessed. So, although after the Judgment the inferior
angels will not progress in the knowledge of some things, still this
will not prevent their being enlightened by the superior angels.
Reply to Objection 3: Although after the Day of Judgment men will
not be led any more to salvation by the ministry of the angels, still
those who are already saved will be enlightened through the angelic
ministry.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether men are taken up into the angelic

orders?
Objection 1: It would seem that men are not taken up into the orders
of the angels. For the human hierarchy is stationed beneath the
lowest heavenly hierarchy, as the lowest under the middle hierarchy
and the middle beneath the first. But the angels of the lowest
hierarchy are never transferred into the middle, or the first. Therefore
neither are men transferred to the angelic orders.
Objection 2: Further, certain offices belong to the orders of the
angels, as to guard, to work miracles, to coerce the demons, and the
like; which do not appear to belong to the souls of the saints.
Therefore they are not transferred to the angelic orders.
Objection 3: Further, as the good angels lead on to good, so do the
demons to what is evil. But it is erroneous to say that the souls of
bad men are changed into demons; for Chrysostom rejects this
(Hom. xxviii in Matt.). Therefore it does not seem that the souls of the
saints will be transferred to the orders of angels.
On the contrary, The Lord says of the saints that, "they will be as the
angels of God" (Mt. 22:30). I answer that, As above explained
(Articles 4,7), the orders of the angels are distinguished according to
the conditions of nature and according to the gifts of grace.
Considered only as regards the grade of nature, men can in no way
be assumed into the angelic orders; for the natural distinction will
always remain. In view of this distinction, some asserted that men
can in no way be transferred to an equality with the angels; but this
is erroneous, contradicting as it does the promise of Christ saying
that the children of the resurrection will be equal to the angels in
heaven (Lk. 20:36). For whatever belongs to nature is the material
part of an order; whilst that which perfects is from grace which
depends on the liberality of God, and not on the order of nature.
Therefore by the gift of grace men can merit glory in such a degree
as to be equal to the angels, in each of the angelic grades; and this
implies that men are taken up into the orders of the angels. Some,
however, say that not all who are saved are assumed into the angelic
orders, but only virgins or the perfect; and that the other will
constitute their own order, as it were, corresponding to the whole
society of the angels. But this is against what Augustine says (De