by his speech, that they too apologized for those of their own nation: "And they
said unto him, We neither received letters out of Judea concerning you, neither
any of the brethren that came showed or spoke any harm of you." [Acts 28:21]
Neither through letters, nor through men, have they made known any harm of
you. Nevertheless, we wish to hear from yourself: "But we desire to hear of you
what you think." [Acts 28:22]: and then forestalled him by showing their own
sentiments. "For as concerning this sect, it is known to us, that everywhere it is
spoken against. And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to
him into his lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God,
persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses and out of the
Prophets, from morning till evening. And some believed the things which were
spoken, and some believed not." (v. 23, 24.) They said not, we speak against it,
but "it is spoken against." Then he did not immediately answer, but gave them a
day, and they came to him, and he discoursed, it says, "both out of the Law of
Moses, and out of the Prophets. And some believed, and some believed not. And
when they agreed not among themselves, they departed, after that Paul had
spoken one word, Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our
fathers, saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing you shall hear, and shall
not understand; and seeing you shall see, and not perceive: for the heart of this
people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have
they closed; lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them."
[Acts 28:25-27] But when they departed, as they were opposed to each other,
then he reproaches them, not because he wished to reproach those (that believed
not), but to confirm these (that believed). "Well said Esaias," says he to them. So
that to the Gentiles it is given to know this mystery. No wonder then, if they did
gainsay: this was foretold from the first. Then again he moves their jealousy (on
the score) of them of the Gentiles. "Be it known therefore unto you, that the
salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they will hear it. And when
he had said these words, the Jews departed, and had great reasoning among

themselves. And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and
received all that came in unto him, preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence, no man
forbidding him. Amen." [Acts 28:28-31] It shows the freedom he had now:
without hindrance in Rome, he who had been hindered in Judea; and he
remained teaching there for two years. What of the (years) after these?
(Recapitulation.) (d) "Who having examined me," says he, "found nothing in
me" [Acts 28:18]. When those ought to have rescued, they "delivered (him) into
the hands of the Romans." And such the superabundance, * * because those had
not power to condemn but delivered him prisoner. "Not as having anything to
accuse my nation of," [Acts 28:19] am I come. See what friendliness of
expression "my nation:" he does not hold them as aliens. He does not say, I do
not accuse, but, "I have not (whereof) to accuse:" although he had suffered so
many evils at their hands. But nothing of all this does he say, nor make his
speech offensive: neither does he seem to be sparing them as matter of favor. For
this was the main point, to show that they delivered him prisoner to the Romans,
when those ought to have condemned him. (a) "For this cause," he says, "I
wished to see you" [Acts 28:20]: that it might not be in any man's power to
accuse me, and to say what (naturally) might suggest itself ([τὰ παριστάμενα]),
that having escaped their hands I have come for this: not to bring evils upon
others, but myself fleeing from evils. "I was compelled to appeal unto Cæsar."
Observe them also speaking more mildly to him. "We beg," say they: and wish to
speak in exculpation of those (at Jerusalem). (e) Whereas they ought to accuse
them, they plead for them: by the very fact of their exonerating them, they do in
fact accuse them. (b) For this very thing was a proof that they knew themselves
exceedingly in the wrong. Had they been confident, they would at any rate have
done this, so that he should not have it in his power to make out his story in his
own way, and besides they shrank from coming. And by their many times
attempting they showed * * (f) "As for this sect, it is known to us," say they, "that
it is everywhere spoken against." (v. 21, 21.) True, but (people) are also