SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.3.

I answer that, Fraternal correction is a matter of precept. We must
observe, however, that while the negative precepts of the Law forbid
sinful acts, the positive precepts inculcate acts of virtue. Now sinful
acts are evil in themselves, and cannot become good, no matter
how, or when, or where, they are done, because of their very nature
they are connected with an evil end, as stated in Ethic. ii, 6:
wherefore negative precepts bind always and for all times. On the
other hand, acts of virtue must not be done anyhow, but by
observing the due circumstances, which are requisite in order that
an act be virtuous; namely, that it be done where, when, and how it
ought to be done. And since the disposition of whatever is directed
to the end depends on the formal aspect of the end, the chief of
these circumstances of a virtuous act is this aspect of the end,
which in this case is the good of virtue. If therefore such a
circumstance be omitted from a virtuous act, as entirely takes away
the good of virtue, such an act is contrary to a precept. If, however,
the circumstance omitted from a virtuous act be such as not to
destroy the virtue altogether, though it does not perfectly attain the
good of virtue, it is not against a precept. Hence the Philosopher
(Ethic. ii, 9) says that if we depart but little from the mean, it is not
contrary to the virtue, whereas if we depart much from the mean
virtue is destroyed in its act. Now fraternal correction is directed to a
brother's amendment: so that it is a matter of precept, in so far as it
is necessary for that end, but not so as we have to correct our erring
brother at all places and times.
Reply to Objection 1: In all good deeds man's action is not
efficacious without the Divine assistance: and yet man must do what
is in his power. Hence Augustine says (De Correp. et Gratia xv):
"Since we ignore who is predestined and who is not, charity should
so guide our feelings, that we wish all to be saved." Consequently
we ought to do our brethren the kindness of correcting them, with
the hope of God's help.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 32, Article 5, ad 4),
all the precepts about rendering service to our neighbor are reduced
to the precept about the honor due to parents.
Reply to Objection 3: Fraternal correction may be omitted in three
ways.
First, meritoriously, when out of charity one omits to correct

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.3.

someone. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 9): "If a man refrains
from chiding and reproving wrongdoers, because he awaits a
suitable time for so doing, or because he fears lest, if he does so,
they may become worse, or hinder, oppress, or turn away from the
faith, others who are weak and need to be instructed in a life of
goodness and virtue, this does not seem to result from
covetousness, but to be counselled by charity."
Secondly, fraternal correction may be omitted in such a way that one
commits a mortal sin, namely, "when" (as he says in the same
passage) "one fears what people may think, or lest one may suffer
grievous pain or death; provided, however, that the mind is so
dominated by such things, that it gives them the preference to
fraternal charity." This would seem to be the case when a man
reckons that he might probably withdraw some wrongdoer from sin,
and yet omits to do so, through fear or covetousness.
Thirdly, such an omission is a venial sin, when through fear or
covetousness, a man is loth to correct his brother's faults, and yet
not to such a degree, that if he saw clearly that he could withdraw
him from sin, he would still forbear from so doing, through fear or
covetousness, because in his own mind he prefers fraternal charity
to these things. It is in this way that holy men sometimes omit to
correct wrongdoers.
Reply to Objection 4: We are bound to pay that which is due to some
fixed and certain person, whether it be a material or a spiritual good,
without waiting for him to come to us, but by taking proper steps to
find him. Wherefore just as he that owes money to a creditor should
seek him, when the time comes, so as to pay him what he owes, so
he that has spiritual charge of some person is bound to seek him
out, in order to reprove him for a sin. On the other hand, we are not
bound to seek someone on whom to bestow such favors as are due,
not to any certain person, but to all our neighbors in general,
whether those favors be material or spiritual goods, but it suffices
that we bestow them when the opportunity occurs; because, as
Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 28), we must look upon this as a
matter of chance. For this reason he says (De Verb. Dom. xvi, 1) that
"Our Lord warns us not to be listless in regard of one another's sins:
not indeed by being on the lookout for something to denounce, but
by correcting what we see": else we should become spies on the
lives of others, which is against the saying of Prov. 24:19: "Lie not in
wait, nor seek after wickedness in the house of the just, nor spoil his