Now mark how unassuming he is. He does not say, The former Gospel
which I preached, but, "The former treatise have I made;" accounting the title of
Gospel to be too great for him; although it is on the score of this that the Apostle
dignifies him: "Whose praise," he says, "is in the Gospel." But he himself
modestly says, "The former treatise have I made— O Theophilus, of all that
Jesus began both to do and to teach:" not simply "of all," but from the beginning
to the end; "until the day," he says, "in which He was taken up." And yet John
says, that it was not possible to write all: for "were they written, I suppose," says
he, "that even the world itself could not contain the books written." [John 21:25]
How then does the Evangelist here say, "Of all?" He does not say "all," but "of
all," as much as to say, "in a summary way, and in the gross;" and "of all that is
mainly and pressingly important." Then he tells us in what sense he says all,
when he adds, "Which Jesus began both to do and to teach;" meaning His
miracles and teaching; and not only so, but implying that His doing was also a
teaching.
But now consider the benevolent and Apostolic feelings of the writer: that
for the sake of a single individual he took such pains as to write for him an entire
Gospel. "That you might have," he says, "the certainty of those things, wherein
you have been instructed." [Luke 1:4] In truth, he had heard Christ say, "It is not
the will of My Father that one of these little ones should perish." [Matthew
18:14] And why did he not make one book of it, to send to one man Theophilus,
but has divided it into two subjects? For clearness, and to give the brother a
pause for rest. Besides, the two treatises are distinct in their subject-matter.
But consider how Christ accredited his words by His deeds. Thus He says,
"Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart." [Matthew 11:29] He taught
men to be poor, and exhibited this by His actions: "For the Son of Man," He
says, "has not where to lay His head." [Matthew 8:20] Again, He charged men to
love their enemies; and He taught the same lesson on the Cross, when He prayed
for those who were crucifying Him. He said, "If any man will sue you at the law,
and take away your coat, let him have your cloak also" [Matthew 5:40]: now He

not only gave His garments, but even His blood. In this way He bade others
teach. Wherefore Paul also said, "So as you have us for an example."
[Philippians 3:17] For nothing is more frigid than a teacher who shows his
philosophy only in words: this is to act the part not of a teacher, but of a
hypocrite. Therefore the Apostles first taught by their conduct, and then by their
words; nay rather they had no need of words, when their deeds spoke so loud.
Nor is it wrong to speak of Christ's Passion as action, for in suffering all He
performed that great and wonderful act, by which He destroyed death, and
effected all else that He did for us.
"Until the day in which He was taken up, after that He, through the Holy
Spirit, had given commandments unto the Apostles whom He had chosen. After
He had given commandments through the Spirit" [Acts 1:2]; i.e. they were
spiritual words that He spoke unto them, nothing human; either this is the
meaning, or, that it was by the Spirit that He gave them commandments. Do you
observe in what low terms he still speaks of Christ, as in fact Christ had spoken
of Himself? "But if I by the Spirit of God cast out devils" [Matthew 12:28]; for
indeed the Holy Ghost wrought in that Temple. Well, what did He command?
"Go ye therefore," He says, "make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them
into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you." (Ib. 28:19-20.) A
high encomium this for the Apostles; to have such a charge entrusted to them, I
mean, the salvation of the world! Words full of the Spirit! And this the writer
hints at in the expression, "through the Holy Ghost" (and, "the words which I
spoke unto you," says the Lord, "are Spirit") [John 6:63]; thus leading the hearer
on to a desire of learning what the commands were, and establishing the
authority of the Apostles, seeing it is the words of the Spirit they are about to
speak, and the commandments of Christ. "After He had given commandments,"
he says, "He was taken up." He does not say, 'ascended;' he still speaks as
concerning a man. It appears then that He also taught the Disciples after His
resurrection, but of this space of time no one has related to us the whole in detail.