SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.80, C.2.

I answer that, as Isidore says (Etym. x), "according to Cicero, a man
is said to be religious from 'religio,' because he often ponders over,
and, as it were, reads again [relegit], the things which pertain to the
worship of God," so that religion would seem to take its name from
reading over those things which belong to Divine worship because
we ought frequently to ponder over such things in our hearts,
according to Prov. 3:6, "In all thy ways think on Him." According to
Augustine (De Civ. Dei x, 3) it may also take its name from the fact
that "we ought to seek God again, whom we had lost by our neglect".
Or again, religion may be derived from "religare" [to bind together],
wherefore Augustine says (De Vera Relig. 55): "May religion bind us
to the one Almighty God." However, whether religion take its name
from frequent reading, or from a repeated choice of what has been
lost through negligence, or from being a bond, it denotes properly a
relation to God. For it is He to Whom we ought to be bound as to our
unfailing principle; to Whom also our choice should be resolutely
directed as to our last end; and Whom we lose when we neglect Him
by sin, and should recover by believing in Him and confessing our
faith.
Reply to Objection 1: Religion has two kinds of acts. Some are its
proper and immediate acts, which it elicits, and by which man is
directed to God alone, for instance, sacrifice, adoration and the like.
But it has other acts, which it produces through the medium of the
virtues which it commands, directing them to the honor of God,
because the virtue which is concerned with the end, commands the
virtues which are concerned with the means. Accordingly "to visit
the fatherless and widows in their tribulation" is an act of religion as
commanding, and an act of mercy as eliciting; and "to keep oneself
unspotted from this world" is an act of religion as commanding, but
of temperance or of some similar virtue as eliciting.
Reply to Objection 2: Religion is referred to those things one
exhibits to one's human kindred, if we take the term religion in a
broad sense, but not if we take it in its proper sense. Hence, shortly
before the passage quoted, Augustine says: "In a stricter sense
religion seems to denote, not any kind of worship, but the worship of
God."
Reply to Objection 3: Since servant implies relation to a lord,
wherever there is a special kind of lordship there must needs be a
special kind of service. Now it is evident that lordship belongs to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.80, C.2.

God in a special and singular way, because He made all things, and
has supreme dominion over all. Consequently a special kind of
service is due to Him, which is known as "latria" in Greek; and
therefore it belongs to religion.
Reply to Objection 4: We are said to worship those whom we honor,
and to cultivate [colere]: a man's memory or presence: we even
speak of cultivating things that are beneath us, thus a farmer
[agricola] is one who cultivates the land, and an inhabitant [incola] is
one who cultivates the place where he dwells. Since, however,
special honor is due to God as the first principle of all things, to Him
also is due a special kind of worship, which in Greek is Eusebeia or
Theosebeia, as Augustine states (De Civ. Dei x, 1).
Reply to Objection 5: Although the name "religious" may be given to
all in general who worship God, yet in a special way religious are
those who consecrate their whole life to the Divine worship, by
withdrawing from human affairs. Thus also the term "contemplative"
is applied, not to those who contemplate, but to those who give up
their whole lives to contemplation. Such men subject themselves to
man, not for man's sake but for God's sake, according to the word of
the Apostle (Gal. 4:14), "You . . . received me as an angel of God,
even as Christ Jesus."