1 Corinthians 15:38
"But God gives it a body even as it pleased Him."
"Yes," says one, "but in that case it is the work of nature." Of what nature,
tell me? For in that case likewise God surely does the whole; not nature, nor the
earth, nor the rain. Wherefore also he making these things manifest, leaves out
both earth and rain, atmosphere, sun, and hands of husbandmen, and subjoins,
"God gives it a body as it pleased Him." Do not thou therefore curiously inquire,
nor busy yourself with the how and in what manner, when you hear of the power
and will of God.
"And to each seed a body of its own." Where then is the alien matter which
they speak of? For He gives to each "his own." So that when he says, "You sow
not that which shall be," he says not this, that one substance is raised up instead
of another, but that it is improved, that it is more glorious. For "to each of the
seeds," says he, "a body of its own."
4. From hence in what follows, he introducing also the difference of the
resurrection which shall then be. For do not suppose, because grain is sown and
all come up ears of grain, that therefore there is also in the resurrection an
equality of honor. For in the first place, neither in seeds is there only one rank,
but some are more valuable, and some inferior. Wherefore also he added, "to
each seed a body of its own."
However, he is not content with this, but seeks another difference greater
and more manifest. For that you may not, when hearing, as I said, that all rise
again, suppose that all enjoy the same reward; he laid before even in the
preceding verses the seeds of this thought, saying, "But each in his own order."
But he brings it out here also more clearly, saying,

1 Corinthians 15:39
"All flesh is not the same flesh." For why speak I, says he, in respect of
seeds? In respect of bodies let us agitate this point, concerning which we are
discoursing now. Wherefore also he adds, and says,
"But there is one flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of birds, and
another of fishes."

1 Corinthians 15:40
"There are also celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory of the
celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another."

1 Corinthians 15:41
"There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another
glory of the stars: for one star differs from another star in glory."
And what means he by these expressions? Wherefore from the resurrection
of the body did he throw himself into the discourse of the stars and the sun? He
did not throw himself out, neither did he break off from his purpose; far from it:
but he still keeps to it. For whereas he had established the doctrine concerning
the resurrection, he intimates in what follows that great will be then the
difference of glory, though there be but one resurrection. And for the present he
divides the whole into two: into "bodies celestial," and "bodies terrestrial." For
that the bodies are raised again, he signified by the grain: but that they are not all
in the same glory, he signifies by this. For as the disbelief of the resurrection
makes men supine, so again it makes them indolent to think that all are
vouchsafed the same reward. Wherefore he corrects both. And the one in the
preceeding verses he had completed; but this he begins now. And having made
two ranks, of the righteous and of sinners, these same two he subdivides again
into many parts, signifying that neither righteous nor sinners shall obtain the
same; neither righteous men, all of them, alike with other righteous, nor sinners
with other sinners.
Now he makes, you see, first, one separation between righteous and sinners,
where he says, "bodies celestial, and bodies terrestrial:" by the "terrestrial"
intimating the latter, and by the "celestial," the former. Then farther he
introduces a difference of sinners from sinners, saying, "All flesh is not the same
flesh, but there is one flesh of fishes, another of birds, and another of beasts."
And yet all are bodies; but some are in more, and some in lesser vileness. And
that in their manner of living too, and in their very constitution.
And having said this, he ascends again to the heaven, saying, "There is one