SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.16, C.2.

human act to be good and to attain its due rule.
Reply to Objection 1: In the passions, the mean of virtue depends on
right reason being attained, wherein also consists the essence of
virtue. Wherefore in hope too, the good of virtue depends on a man's
attaining, by hoping, the due rule, viz. God. Consequently man
cannot make ill use of hope which attains God, as neither can he
make ill use of moral virtue which attains the reason, because to
attain thus is to make good use of virtue. Nevertheless, the hope of
which we speak now, is not a passion but a habit of the mind, as we
shall show further on (Article 5; Question 18, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 2: Hope is said to arise from merits, as regards
the thing hoped for, in so far as we hope to obtain happiness by
means of grace and merits; or as regards the act of living hope. The
habit itself of hope, whereby we hope to obtain happiness, does not
flow from our merits, but from grace alone.
Reply to Objection 3: He who hopes is indeed imperfect in relation to
that which he hopes to obtain, but has not as yet; yet he is perfect, in
so far as he already attains his proper rule, viz. God, on Whose help
he leans.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.16, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether eternal happiness is the proper object of

hope?
Objection 1: It would seem that eternal happiness is not the proper
object of hope. For a man does not hope for that which surpasses
every movement of the soul, since hope itself is a movement of the
soul. Now eternal happiness surpasses every movement of the
human soul, for the Apostle says (1 Cor. 2:9) that it hath not "entered
into the heart of man." Therefore happiness is not the proper object
of hope.
Objection 2: Further, prayer is an expression of hope, for it is written
(Ps. 36:5): "Commit thy way to the Lord, and trust in Him, and He will
do it." Now it is lawful for man to pray God not only for eternal
happiness, but also for the goods, both temporal and spiritual, of the
present life, and, as evidenced by the Lord's Prayer, to be delivered
from evils which will no longer be in eternal happiness. Therefore
eternal happiness is not the proper object of hope.
Objection 3: Further, the object of hope is something difficult. Now
many things besides eternal happiness are difficult to man.
Therefore eternal happiness is not the proper object of hope.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 6:19) that we have hope
"which entereth in," i.e. maketh us to enter . . . "within the veil," i.e.
into the happiness of heaven, according to the interpretation of a
gloss on these words. Therefore the object of hope is eternal
happiness.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the hope of which we
speak now, attains God by leaning on His help in order to obtain the
hoped for good. Now an effect must be proportionate to its cause.
Wherefore the good which we ought to hope for from God properly
and chiefly is the infinite good, which is proportionate to the power
of our divine helper, since it belongs to an infinite power to lead
anyone to an infinite good. Such a good is eternal life, which
consists in the enjoyment of God Himself. For we should hope from
Him for nothing less than Himself, since His goodness, whereby He
imparts good things to His creature, is no less than His Essence.
Therefore the proper and principal object of hope is eternal
happiness.