THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.2.

time comes for perfecting the sacrament, the priest uses no longer
his own words, but the words of Christ. Therefore, it is Christ's
words that perfect this sacrament."
I answer that, This sacrament differs from the other sacraments in
two respects. First of all, in this, that this sacrament is accomplished
by the consecration of the matter, while the rest are perfected in the
use of the consecrated matter. Secondly, because in the other
sacraments the consecration of the matter consists only in a
blessing, from which the matter consecrated derives instrumentally
a spiritual power, which through the priest who is an animated
instrument, can pass on to inanimate instruments. But in this
sacrament the consecration of the matter consists in the miraculous
change of the substance, which can only be done by God; hence the
minister in performing this sacrament has no other act save the
pronouncing of the words. And because the form should suit the
thing, therefore the form of this sacrament differs from the forms of
the other sacraments in two respects. First, because the form of the
other sacraments implies the use of the matter, as for instance,
baptizing, or signing; but the form of this sacrament implies merely
the consecration of the matter, which consists in transubstantiation,
as when it is said, "This is My body," or, "This is the chalice of My
blood." Secondly, because the forms of the other sacraments are
pronounced in the person of the minister, whether by way of
exercising an act, as when it is said, "I baptize thee," or "I confirm
thee," etc.; or by way of command, as when it is said in the
sacrament of order, "Take the power," etc.; or by way of entreaty, as
when in the sacrament of Extreme Unction it is said, "By this
anointing and our intercession," etc. But the form of this sacrament
is pronounced as if Christ were speaking in person, so that it is
given to be understood that the minister does nothing in perfecting
this sacrament, except to pronounce the words of Christ.
Reply to Objection 1: There are many opinions on this matter. Some
have said that Christ, Who had power of excellence in the
sacraments, performed this sacrament without using any form of
words, and that afterwards He pronounced the words under which
others were to consecrate thereafter. And the words of Pope
Innocent III seem to convey the same sense (De Sacr. Alt. Myst. iv),
where he says: "In good sooth it can be said that Christ
accomplished this sacrament by His Divine power, and subsequently
expressed the form under which those who came after were to
consecrate." But in opposition to this view are the words of the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.2.

Gospel in which it is said that Christ "blessed," and this blessing
was effected by certain words. Accordingly those words of Innocent
are to be considered as expressing an opinion, rather than
determining the point.
Others, again, have said that the blessing was effected by other
words not known to us. But this statement cannot stand, because
the blessing of the consecration is now performed by reciting the
things which were then accomplished; hence, if the consecration
was not performed then by these words, neither would it be now.
Accordingly, others have maintained that this blessing was effected
by the same words as are used now; but that Christ spoke them
twice, at first secretly, in order to consecrate, and afterwards openly,
to instruct others. But even this will not hold good, because the
priest in consecrating uses these words, not as spoken in secret, but
as openly pronounced. Accordingly, since these words have no
power except from Christ pronouncing them, it seems that Christ
also consecrated by pronouncing them openly.
And therefore others said that the Evangelists did not always follow
the precise order in their narrative as that in which things actually
happened, as is seen from Augustine (De Consens. Evang. ii). Hence
it is to be understood that the order of what took place can be
expressed thus: "Taking the bread He blessed it, saying: This is My
body, and then He broke it, and gave it to His disciples." But the
same sense can be had even without changing the words of the
Gospel; because the participle "saying" implies sequence of the
words uttered with what goes before. And it is not necessary for the
sequence to be understood only with respect to the last word
spoken, as if Christ had just then pronounced those words, when He
gave it to His disciples; but the sequence can be understood with
regard to all that had gone before; so that the sense is: "While He
was blessing, and breaking, and giving it to His disciples, He spoke
the words, 'Take ye,'" etc.
Reply to Objection 2: In these words, "Take ye and eat," the use of
the consecrated, matter is indicated, which is not of the necessity of
this sacrament, as stated above (Question 74, Article 7). And
therefore not even these words belong to the substance of the form.
Nevertheless, because the use of the consecrated matter belongs to
a certain perfection of the sacrament, in the same way as operation
is not the first but the second perfection of a thing, consequently, the