What deep understanding existed between Jesus and his mother? How can we probe the
mystery of their intimate spiritual union? But the fact speaks for itself. It is certain that
that event already quite clearly outlines the new dimension, the new meaning of Mary's
motherhood. Her motherhood has a significance which is not exclusively contained in the
words of Jesus and in the various episodes reported by the Synoptics (Lk. 11:27-28 and
Lk. 8:19-21; Mt. 12:46-50; Mk. 3:31-35). In these texts Jesus means above all to contrast
the motherhood resulting from the fact of birth with what this "motherhood" (and also
"brotherhood") is to be in the dimension of the Kingdom of God, in the salvific radius of
God's fatherhood. In John's text on the other hand, the description of the Cana event
outlines what is actually manifested as a new kind of motherhood according to the spirit
and not just according to the flesh, that is to say Mary's solicitude for human beings, her
coming to them in the wide variety of their wants and needs. At Cana in Galilee there is
shown only one concrete aspect of human need, apparently a small one of little
importance ("They have no wine"). But it has a symbolic value: this coming to the aid of
human needs means, at the same time, bringing those needs within the radius of Christ's
messianic mission and salvific power. Thus there is a mediation: Mary places herself
between her Son and mankind in the reality of their wants, needs and sufferings. She puts
herself "in the middle," that is to say she acts as a mediatrix not as an outsider, but in her
position as mother. She knows that as such she can point out to her Son the needs of
mankind, and in fact, she "has the right" to do so. Her mediation is thus in the nature of
intercession: Mary "intercedes" for mankind. And that is not all. As a mother she also
wishes the messianic power of her Son to be manifested, that salvific power of his which

is meant to help man in his misfortunes, to free him from the evil which in various forms
and degrees weighs heavily upon his life. Precisely as the Prophet Isaiah had foretold
about the Messiah in the famous passage which Jesus quoted before his fellow townsfolk
in Nazareth: "To preach good news to the poor...to proclaim release to the captives and
recovering of sight to the blind..." (cf. Lk. 4:18).

Another essential element of Mary's maternal task is found in her words to the servants:
"Do whatever he tells you." The Mother of Christ presents herself as the spokeswoman of
her Son's will, pointing out those things which must be done so that the salvific power of
the Messiah may be manifested. At Cana, thanks to the intercession of Mary and the
obedience of the servants, Jesus begins "his hour." At Cana Mary appears as believing in
Jesus. Her faith evokes his first "sign" and helps to kindle the faith of the disciples.