If therefore all have a share in the Resurrection, and not in the Resurrection only,
but also in incorruption, how said he, "If by any means I may attain," as if about
to share in some special thing? "For this cause," says he, "I endure these things,
if by any means I may attain unto the resurrection from the dead." For if you had
not died, you would not arise. What is it then? Some great thing seems here to be
hinted at. So great was it, that he dared not openly assert it, but says, "If by any
means." I have believed in Him and His resurrection, nay, moreover, I suffer for
Him, yet I am unable to be confident concerning the Resurrection. What
resurrection does he here mention? That which leads to Christ Himself. I said,
that I believed in "Him, and in the power of His resurrection," and that I "have
fellowship with His sufferings," and that I "become conformed to His death." Yet
after all these things I am by no means confident; as he said elsewhere, "Let him
that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall." [1 Corinthians 10:12] And again, "I
fear lest by any means, after that I have preached to others, I myself should be
rejected." [1 Corinthians 9:27]
Ver. 12. "Not that I have already obtained, or am already made perfect: but
I press on, if so be that I may apprehend that for which also I was apprehended
by Christ Jesus."
"Not that I have already obtained." What means "already obtained"? He
speaks of the prize, but if he who had endured such sufferings, he who was
persecuted, he "who had in him the dying of the Lord Jesus," was not yet
confident about that resurrection, what can we say? What means, "if I may
apprehend"? What he before said, "If I may attain to the resurrection of the
dead." [2 Corinthians 4:10] If I may apprehend, he says, His resurrection; i.e. if I
may be able to endure so great things, if I may be able to imitate Him, if I may
be able to become conformed to Him. For example, Christ suffered many things,
He was spit upon, He was stricken, was scourged, at last He suffered what things
he suffered. This is the entire course. Through all these things it is needful that
men should endure the whole contest, and so come to His resurrection. Or he
means this, if I am thought worthy to attain the glorious resurrection, which is a

matter of confidence, in order to His resurrection. For if I am able to endure all
the contests, I shall be able also to have His resurrection, and to rise with glory.
For not as yet, says he, am I worthy, but "I press on, if so be that I may
apprehend." My life is still one of contest, I am still far from the end, I am still
distant from the prize, still I run, still I pursue. And He said not, I run, but "I
pursue." For you know with what eagerness a man pursues. He sees no one, he
thrusts aside with great violence all who would interrupt his pursuit. He collects
together his mind, and sight, and strength, and soul, and body, looking to nothing
else than the prize. But if Paul, who so pursued, who had suffered so many
things, yet says, "if I may attain," what should we say, who have relaxed our
efforts? Then to show that the thing is of debt, he says, "For which also I was
apprehended by Christ Jesus." I was, he says, of the number of the lost, I gasped
for breath, I was near dead, God apprehended me. For He pursued us, when we
fled from Him, with all speed. So that he points out all those things; for the
words, "I was apprehended," show the earnestness of Him who wishes to
apprehend us, and our great aversion to Him, our wandering, our flight from
Him.
So that we are liable for a vast debt, and no one grieves, no one weeps, no
one groans, all having returned to their former state. For as before the
appearance of Christ we fled from God, so now also. For we can flee from God,
not in place, for He is everywhere; and hear the Prophet, when he says, "Whither
shall I go from Your Spirit, or whither shall I flee from Your presence"? [Psalm
139:7] How then can we flee from God? Even as we can become distant from
God, even as we can be removed afar off. "They that are far from You," it says,
"shall perish." [Psalm 73:27] And again, "Have not your iniquities separated
between Me and you?" [Isaiah 59:2] How then comes this removal, how comes
this separation? In purpose and soul: for it cannot be in place. For how could one
fly from Him who is everywhere present? The sinner then flies. This is what the
Scripture says, "The wicked flees when no man pursues him." [Proverbs 28:1]
We eagerly fly from God, although He always pursues us. The Apostle hasted,