THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.12.

thee, and Christ rises again every day in thee, for when Christ riseth
it is today."
Reply to Objection 2: The Paschal Lamb was the figure of this
sacrament chiefly as to Christ's Passion represented therein; and
therefore it was partaken of once a year only, since Christ died but
once. And on this account the Church celebrates once a year the
remembrance of Christ's Passion. But in this sacrament the
memorial of His Passion is given by way of food which is partaken of
daily; and therefore in this respect it is represented by the manna
which was given daily to the people in the desert.
Reply to Objection 3: Reverence for this sacrament consists in fear
associated with love; consequently reverential fear of God is called
filial fear, as was said in the FS, Question 67, Article 4, ad 2; SS,
Question 19, Articles 9,11,12; because the desire of receiving arises
from love, while the humility of reverence springs from fear.
Consequently, each of these belongs to the reverence due to this
sacrament; both as to receiving it daily, and as to refraining from it
sometimes. Hence Augustine says (Ep. liv): "If one says that the
Eucharist should not be received daily, while another maintains the
contrary, let each one do as according to his devotion he thinketh
right; for Zaccheus and the Centurion did not contradict one another
while the one received the Lord with joy, whereas the other said:
'Lord I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under my roof'; since
both honored our Saviour, though not in the same way." But love
and hope, whereunto the Scriptures constantly urge us, are
preferable to fear. Hence, too, when Peter had said, "Depart from me,
for I am a sinful man, O Lord," Jesus answered: "Fear not."
Reply to Objection 4: Because our Lord said (Lk. 11:3), "Give us this
day our daily bread," we are not on that account to communicate
several times daily, for, by one daily communion the unity of Christ's
Passion is set forth.
Reply to Objection 5: Various statutes have emanated according to
the various ages of the Church. In the primitive Church, when the
devotion of the Christian faith was more flourishing, it was enacted
that the faithful should communicate daily: hence Pope Anaclete
says (Ep. i): "When the consecration is finished, let all communicate
who do not wish to cut themselves off from the Church; for so the
apostles have ordained, and the holy Roman Church holds." Later
on, when the fervor of faith relaxed, Pope Fabian (Third Council of

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.12.

Tours, Canon 1) gave permission "that all should communicate, if
not more frequently, at least three times in the year, namely, at
Easter, Pentecost, and Christmas." Pope Soter likewise (Second
Council of Chalon, Canon xlvii) declares that Communion should be
received "on Holy Thursday," as is set forth in the Decretals (De
Consecratione, dist. 2). Later on, when "iniquity abounded and
charity grew cold" (Mt. 24:12), Pope Innocent III commanded that the
faithful should communicate "at least once a year," namely, "at
Easter." However, in De Eccles. Dogmat. xxiii, the faithful are
counseled "to communicate on all Sundays."