and this is by way of a kind of affinity; wherefore it would seem on
the same grounds to pass to a woman of whom he has carnal
knowledge, though she be not his wife. Hence the verse: "I may not
marry my own child's godmother, nor the mother of my godchild: but
I may marry the godmother of my wife's child."
Reply to Objection 1: From the fact that corporal and spiritual union
differ generically we may conclude that the one is not the other, but
not that the one cannot cause the other, since things of different
genera sometimes cause one another either directly or indirectly.
Reply to Objection 2: The godfather and godmother of the same
person are not united in that person's spiritual birth save
accidentally, since one of them would be self-sufficient for the
purpose. Hence it does not follow from this that any spiritual
relationship results between them whereby they are hindered from
marrying one another. Hence the verse:
"Of two co-parents one is always spiritual, the other carnal: this rule
is infallible."
On the other hand, marriage by itself makes husband and wife one
flesh: wherefore the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 3: If the wife be not baptized, the spiritual
relationship will not reach her, because she is not a fit subject, and
not because spiritual relationship cannot pass from husband to wife
through marriage.
Reply to Objection 4: Since no spiritual relationship results between
godfather and godmother, nothing prevents husband and wife from
raising together someone from the sacred font. Nor is it absurd that
the wife become twice godmother of the same person from different
causes, just as it is possible for her to be connected in carnal
relationship both by affinity and consanguinity to the same person.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether spiritual relationship passes to the

godfather's carnal children?
Objection 1: It would seem that spiritual relationship does not pass
to the godfather's carnal children. For no degrees are assigned to
spiritual relationship. Yet there would be degrees if it passed from
father to son, since the person begotten involves a change of
degree, as stated above (Question 55, Article 5). Therefore it does
not pass to the godfather's carnal sons.
Objection 2: Further, father and son are related in the same degree
as brother and brother. If therefore spiritual relationship passes from
father to son, it will equally pass from brother to brother: and this is
false.
On the contrary, This is proved by authority quoted in the text (Sent.
iv, D, 42).
I answer that, A son is something of his father and not conversely
(Ethic. viii, 12): wherefore spiritual relationship passes from father to
his carnal son and not conversely. Thus it is clear that there are
three spiritual relationships: one called spiritual fatherhood between
godfather and godchild; another called co-paternity between the
godparent and carnal parent of the same person; and the third is
called spiritual brotherhood, between godchild and the carnal
children of the same parent. Each of these hinders the contracting of
marriage and voids the contract.
Reply to Objection 1: The addition of a person by carnal generation
entails a degree with regard to a person connected by the same kind
of relationship, but not with regard to one connected by another kind
of relationship. Thus a son is connected with his father's wife in the
same degree as his father, but by another kind of relationship. Now
spiritual relationship differs in kind from carnal. Wherefore a godson
is not related to his godfather's carnal son in the same degree as the
latter's father is related to him, through whom the spiritual
relationship is contracted. Consequently it does not follow that
spiritual relationship admits of degrees.
Reply to Objection 2: A man is not part of his brother as a son is of
his father. But a wife is part of her husband, since she is made one