"the fear of the Lord," it is said, "surpasses all things." [Sirach 25:11] This let us
procure; let us do all things for its sake. If need be that we lay down our lives, if
our body must be mangled, let us not spare them; let us do all, to obtain this fear.
For thus shall we abound above all men; and shall obtain those good things to
come in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom, etc.

## Homily 4 on Philippians

[Philippians 1:22-26]
"Then what I shall choose I know not. But I am in a strait between the two,
having the desire to depart and be with Christ; which is very far better: yet to
abide in the flesh is more needful for your sake. And having this confidence, I
know that I shall abide, yea and abide with you all, for your progress and joy in
the faith; that your glorying may abound in Jesus Christ in me, through my
presence with you again."
Nothing can be more blessed than the spirit of Paul, for the reason that
nothing is more noble. We all shudder at death, I am wont to say, some by reason
of our many sins, of whom I too am one, others from love of life, and cowardice,
of whom may I never be one; for they who are subject to this fear are mere
animals. This then, which we all shudder at, he prayed for, and hasted toward
Him; saying, "To depart is very far better." What do you say? When you are
about to change from earth to heaven, and to be with Christ, do you not know
what to choose? Nay, far is this from the spirit of Paul; for if such an offer were
made to any one on sure grounds, would he not straightway seize it? Yes, for as
it is not ours "to depart and be with Christ," neither, if we were able to attain to
this, were it ours to remain here. Both are of Paul, and of his spirit. He was
confidently persuaded. What? Are you about to be with Christ? And do you say,
"What I shall choose I know not"? And not this only, but do you choose that
which is here, "to abide in the flesh"? What in the world? Did you not live an
exceeding bitter life, in "watchings," in shipwrecks, in "hunger and thirst," and
"nakedness," in cares and anxiety? "with the weak" thou were "weak," and for
those who "were made to stumble" you "burn." [2 Corinthians 11:23-29] "In
much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
imprisonments, in tumults, in fastings, in pureness." [2 Corinthians 6:5-6] "Five

times" did you "receive forty stripes save one," "thrice" were you "beaten with
rods, once" were you "stoned" "a night and a day" you have "been in the deep,
in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils in the city, in perils in the
wilderness, in perils among false brethren." [2 Corinthians 11:24-26] Did you
not, when the whole nation of the Galatians returned to the observance of the
law, did you not cry aloud, and say, "Whosoever of you would be justified by the
law, you are fallen away from grace"? [Galatians 5:4] How great was then your
grief, and still do you desire this perishing life? Had none of these things
befallen you, but had your success, wherever success attended you, been without
fear, and full of delight, yet should not thou hasten to some harbor, from fear of
the uncertain future? For tell me, what trader, whose vessel is full of untold
wealth, when he may run into port, and be at rest, would prefer to be still at sea?
What wrestler, when he might be crowned, would prefer to contend? What
boxer, when he might put on his crown, would choose to enter afresh into the
contest, and offer his head to wounds? What general is there, who when he
might be quit of war with good report, and trophies, and might with the king
refresh himself in the palace, would choose still to toil, and to stand in battle
array? How then do you, who livest a life so exceeding bitter, wish to remain
still here? Did you not say, I am in dread, "lest by any means, after that I have
preached to others, I myself should be rejected?" [1 Corinthians 9:27] If for no
other cause, yet surely for this, you ought to desire your release; were the present
full of innumerable goods, yet for the sake of Christ your Desire.
Oh that spirit of Paul! nothing was ever like it, nor ever will be! Thou
fearest the future, you are compassed by innumerable dreadful things, and will
you not be with Christ? No, he answers, and this for Christ's sake, that I may
render more loving unto Him those whom I have made his servants, that I may
make the plot which I have planted bear much fruit. [1 Corinthians 3:9]. Did you
not hear me, when I declared that I sought not "that which profited myself" [1
Corinthians 10:33], but my neighbor? Heardest thou not these words, "I could
wish that I myself were anathema from Christ" [Romans 9:3], that many might