FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.2.

speak of "feeling and understanding as being a kind of passion" (De
Anima i, 5). But passion, accompanied by the loss of something, is
only in respect of a bodily transmutation; wherefore passion
properly so called cannot be in the soul, save accidentally, in so far,
to wit, as the "composite" is passive. But here again we find a
difference; because when this transmutation is for the worse, it has
more of the nature of a passion, than when it is for the better: hence
sorrow is more properly a passion than joy.
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to matter to be passive in such a
way as to lose something and to be transmuted: hence this happens
only in those things that are composed of matter and form. But
passivity, as implying mere reception, need not be in matter, but can
be in anything that is in potentiality. Now, though the soul is not
composed of matter and form, yet it has something of potentiality, in
respect of which it is competent to receive or to be passive,
according as the act of understanding is a kind of passion, as stated
in De Anima iii, 4.
Reply to Objection 2: Although it does not belong to the soul in itself
to be passive and to be moved, yet it belongs accidentally as stated
in De Anima i, 3.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument is true of passion accompanied
by transmutation to something worse. And passion, in this sense, is
not found in the soul, except accidentally: but the composite, which
is corruptible, admits of it by reason of its own nature.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether passion is in the appetitive rather than in

the apprehensive part?
Objection 1: It would seem that passion is in the apprehensive part
of the soul rather than in the appetitive. Because that which is first in
any genus, seems to rank first among all things that are in that
genus, and to be their cause, as is stated in Metaph. ii, 1. Now
passion is found to be in the apprehensive, before being in the
appetitive part: for the appetitive part is not affected unless there be
a previous passion in the apprehensive part. Therefore passion is in
the apprehensive part more than in the appetitive.
Objection 2: Further, what is more active is less passive; for action is
contrary to passion. Now the appetitive part is more active than the
apprehensive part. Therefore it seems that passion is more in the
apprehensive part.
Objection 3: Further, just as the sensitive appetite is the power of a
corporeal organ, so is the power of sensitive apprehension. But
passion in the soul occurs, properly speaking, in respect of a bodily
transmutation. Therefore passion is not more in the sensitive
appetitive than in the sensitive apprehensive part.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix, 4) that "the
movement of the soul, which the Greeks called pathe, are styled by
some of our writers, Cicero [Tusc. iv. 5] for instance, disturbances;
by some, affections or emotions; while others rendering the Greek
more accurately, call them passions." From this it is evident that the
passions of the soul are the same as affections. But affections
manifestly belong to the appetitive, and not to the apprehensive part.
Therefore the passions are in the appetitive rather than in the
apprehensive part.
I answer that, As we have already stated (Article 1) the word
"passion" implies that the patient is drawn to that which belongs to
the agent. Now the soul is drawn to a thing by the appetitive power
rather than by the apprehensive power: because the soul has,
through its appetitive power, an order to things as they are in
themselves: hence the Philosopher says (Metaph. vi, 4) that "good
and evil," i.e. the objects of the appetitive power, "are in things
themselves." On the other hand the apprehensive power is not