intellect, which neither is its own act of understanding, nor is its own
essence the first object of its act of understanding, for this object is
the nature of a material thing. And therefore that which is first known
by the human intellect is an object of this kind, and that which is
known secondarily is the act by which that object is known; and
through the act the intellect itself is known, the perfection of which is
this act of understanding. For this reason did the Philosopher assert
that objects are known before acts, and acts before powers (De
Anima ii, 4).
Reply to Objection 1: The object of the intellect is something
universal, namely, "being" and "the true," in which the act also of
understanding is comprised. Wherefore the intellect can understand
its own act. But not primarily, since the first object of our intellect, in
this state of life, is not every being and everything true, but "being"
and "true," as considered in material things, as we have said above
(Question 84, Article 7), from which it acquires knowledge of all other
things.
Reply to Objection 2: The intelligent act of the human intellect is not
the act and perfection of the material nature understood, as if the
nature of the material thing and intelligent act could be understood
by one act; just as a thing and its perfection are understood by one
act. Hence the act whereby the intellect understands a stone is
distinct from the act whereby it understands that it understands a
stone; and so on. Nor is there any difficulty in the intellect being thus
potentially infinite, as explained above (Question 86, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 3: The proper sense feels by reason of the
immutation in the material organ caused by the external sensible. A
material object, however, cannot immute itself; but one is immuted
by another, and therefore the act of the proper sense is perceived by
the common sense. The intellect, on the contrary, does not perform
the act of understanding by the material immutation of an organ; and
so there is no comparison.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the intellect understands the act of the

will?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intellect does not understand the
act of the will. For nothing is known by the intellect, unless it be in
some way present in the intellect. But the act of the will is not in the
intellect; since the will and the intellect are distinct. Therefore the act
of the will is not known by the intellect.
Objection 2: Further, the act is specified by the object. But the object
of the will is not the same as the object of the intellect. Therefore the
act of the will is specifically distinct from the object of the intellect,
and therefore the act of the will is not known by the intellect.
Objection 3: Augustine (Confess. x, 17) says of the soul's affections
that "they are known neither by images as bodies are known; nor by
their presence, like the arts; but by certain notions." Now it does not
seem that there can be in the soul any other notions of things but
either the essences of things known or the likenesses thereof.
Therefore it seems impossible for the intellect to known such
affections of the soul as the acts of the will.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. x, 11), "I understand that I
will."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 59, Article 1), the act of the
will is nothing but an inclination consequent on the form
understood; just as the natural appetite is an inclination consequent
on the natural form. Now the inclination of a thing resides in it
according to its mode of existence; and hence the natural inclination
resides in a natural thing naturally, and the inclination called the
sensible appetite is in the sensible thing sensibly; and likewise the
intelligible inclination, which is the act of the will, is in the intelligent
subject intelligibly as in its principle and proper subject. Hence the
Philosopher expresses himself thus (De Anima iii, 9)---that "the will
is in the reason." Now whatever is intelligibly in an intelligent
subject, is understood by that subject. Therefore the act of the will is
understood by the intellect, both inasmuch as one knows that one
wills; and inasmuch as one knows the nature of this act, and
consequently, the nature of its principle which is the habit or power.