Surely then, one may say, the benefit of the prediction is taken away. For if
they knew not what they were hearing, neither could they look for the event, and
not looking for it, neither could they be exercised by their expectations.
But I say another thing also more perplexing than this: If they did not know,
how were they sorry. For another says, they were sorry. If therefore they knew it
not, how were they sorry? How did Peter say, "Be it far from You. This shall not
be unto You?" [Matthew 16:22]
What then may we say? That He should die indeed they knew, albeit they
knew not clearly the mystery of the Incarnation. Neither did they know clearly
about the resurrection, neither what He was to achieve; and this was hid from
them.
For this cause also they felt pain. For some they had known to have been
raised again by other persons, but for any one to have raised up himself again,
and in such wise to have raised himself as not to die any more, they had never
known.
This then they understood not, though often said; nay nor of this self-same
death did they clearly know what it was, and how it should come on Him.
Wherefore also they were amazed as they followed Him, but not for this cause
only; but to me at least He seems even to amaze them by discoursing of His
passion.
2. Yet none of these things made them take courage, and this when they
were continually hearing about His resurrection. For together with His death this
also especially troubled them, to hear that men should "mock and scourge Him,"
and the like. For when they considered His miracles, the possessed persons
whom He had delivered, the dead whom He had raised, all the other marvellous
works which He was doing, and then heard these things, they were amazed, if
He who does these works is thus to suffer. Therefore they fell even into
perplexity, and now believed, now disbelieved, and could not understand His
sayings. So far at least were they from understanding clearly what He said, that
the sons of Zebedee at the same time came to Him, and spoke to Him of

precedence. "We desire," it is said, "that one should sit on Your right hand, and
one on Your left." How then does this evangelist say, that their mother came to
Him? It is probable both things were done. I mean, that they took their mother
with them, with the purpose of making their entreaty stronger, and in this way to
prevail with Christ.
For in proof that this is true, as I say, and the request was rather theirs, and
that being ashamed they put forward their mother, mark how Christ directs His
words to them.
But rather let us learn, first, what do they ask, and with what disposition,
and whence they were moved to this? Whence then were they moved to this?
They saw themselves honored above the rest, and expected from that they should
obtain this request also. But what can it be they ask? Hear another evangelist
plainly declaring this. For, "Because He was near," it is said, "to Jerusalem, and
because they thought the kingdom of God should immediately appear,"
[Luke 19:11] they asked these things. For they supposed that this was at the
doors, and visible, and that having obtained what they asked, they would
undergo none of the painful things. For neither for its own sake only did they
seek it, but as though they would also escape the hardships.
Wherefore also Christ in the first place leads them off from these thoughts,
commanding them to await slaughter and dangers, and the utmost terrors. For,
"Are ye able," says He, "to drink of the cup that I drink of?" [Matthew 20:22]
But let no man be troubled at the apostles being in such an imperfect state.
For not yet was the cross accomplished, not yet the grace of the Spirit given. But
if you would learn their virtue, notice them after these things, and you will see
them superior to every passion. For with this object He reveals their deficiencies,
that after these things you might know what manner of men they became by
grace.
That then they were asking, in fact, for nothing spiritual, neither had a
thought of the kingdom above, is manifest from hence. But let us see also, how
they come unto Him, and what they say. "We would," it is said, "that whatsoever