diffused so far distress me, but those only do I save that yield themselves worthy
of it. And he does not mention the "sand of the sea" without a reason, but to
remind them of the ancient promise whereof they had made themselves
unworthy. Why then are you troubled, as though the promise had failed, when all
the Prophets show that it is not all that are to be saved? Then he mentions the
mode of the salvation also. Observe the accuracy of the Prophet, and the
judgment of the Apostle, what a testimony he has cited, how exceedingly
apposite! For it not only shows us that those to be saved are some and not all, but
also adds the way they are to be saved. How then are they to be saved, and how
will God count them worthy of the benefit?
Ver. 28. "He will finish the work, and cut it short in righteousness," he says,
"because a short work will the Lord make upon the earth." [Isaiah 10:23,
Septuagint]
What he means then is somewhat of this sort. There is no need of fetching a
circuit, and of trouble, and the vexation of the works of the Law, for the
salvation is by a very short way. For such is faith, it holds salvation in a few
short words. "For if you shall confess with your mouth the Lord Jesus, and
believe in your heart that God has raised Him from the dead, you shall be
saved." [Romans 10:9] Now you see what this, "the Lord shall make a short
word (LXX. lit.) upon earth," is. And what is indeed wonderful is, that this short
word carries with it not salvation only, but also righteousness.
Ver 29. "And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a
seed, we had been as Sodoma, and had been made like Gomorrha." [Isaiah 1:9]
Here again he shows another thing, that not even those few were saved
from their own resources. For they too would have perished, and met with
Sodom's fate, that is, they would have had to undergo utter destruction (for they
(of Sodom) were also destroyed root and branch, and left not even the slightest
remnant of themselves,) and they too, he means, would have been like these,
unless God had used much kindness to them, and had saved them by faith. And
this happened also in the case of the visible captivity, the majority having been

taken away captive and perished, and some few only being saved.
Ver. 30, 31. "What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not
after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness
which is by faith. But Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, has
not attained to the law of righteousness."
Here at last is the clearest answer. For since he had used a proof as well
from facts ("for they are not all Israel that are of Israel") as from the case of the
forefathers Jacob and Esau, and from the prophets Hosea and Isaiah, he further
gives the most decisive answer, after first adding to the perplexity. The points
discussed, then, are two; one that the Gentiles attained, and the other that they
attained it without following after it, that is, without taking pains about it. And
again in the Jews' case also there are two difficulties of the same kind; one that
Israel attained not, the other that, though they took pains, they attained not.
Whence also his use of words is more emphatical. For he does not say that they
had, but that they "attained to righteousness." For what is especially new and
unusual is, that they who followed after it attained not, but they which followed
not after it attained. And he seems to be indulging them by saying, "followed
after." But afterwards he strikes the blow home. For since he had a strong answer
to give them, he had no fear of making the objection a little harsher. Hence he
does not speak of faith either, and the righteousness ensuing thereon, but shows
that before the faith even, on their own ground they were worsted and
condemned. For thou, O Jew, he says, hast not found even the righteousness
which was by the Law. For you have transgressed it, and become liable to the
curse. But these that came not through the Law, but by another road, have found
a greater righteousness than this, that, namely, which is of faith. And this he had
also said before. "For if Abraham was justified by works, he has whereof to
glory, but not before God" [Romans 4]: so showing that the other righteousness
was greater than this. Before, then, I said that there were two difficulties, but
now they have even become three questions: that the Gentiles found
righteousness, and found it without following after it, and found a greater than