FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.4.

accordingly, even as to those things which we are bound to believe,
the New Law is contained in the Old.
Reply to Objection 2: The precepts of the New Law are said to be
greater than those of the Old Law, in the point of their being set forth
explicitly. But as to the substance itself of the precepts of the New
Testament, they are all contained in the Old. Hence Augustine says
(Contra Faust. xix, 23,28) that "nearly all Our Lord's admonitions or
precepts, where He expressed Himself by saying: 'But I say unto
you,' are to be found also in those ancient books. Yet, since they
thought that murder was only the slaying of the human body, Our
Lord declared to them that every wicked impulse to hurt our brother
is to be looked on as a kind of murder." And it is in the point of
declarations of this kind that the precepts of the New Law are said to
be greater than those of the Old. Nothing, however, prevents the
greater from being contained in the lesser virtually; just as a tree is
contained in the seed.
Reply to Objection 3: What is set forth implicitly needs to be
declared explicitly. Hence after the publishing of the Old Law, a New
Law also had to be given.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the New Law is more burdensome than

the Old?
Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law is more burdensome
than the Old. For Chrysostom (Opus Imp. in Matth., Hom. x) say:
"The commandments given to Moses are easy to obey: Thou shalt
not kill; Thou shalt not commit adultery: but the commandments of
Christ are difficult to accomplish, for instance: Thou shalt not give
way to anger, or to lust." Therefore the New Law is more
burdensome than the Old.
Objection 2: Further, it is easier to make use of earthly prosperity
than to suffer tribulations. But in the Old Testament observance of
the Law was followed by temporal prosperity, as may be gathered
from Dt. 28:1-14; whereas many kinds of trouble ensue to those who
observe the New Law, as stated in 2 Cor. 6:4-10: "Let us exhibit
ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in tribulation, in
necessities, in distresses," etc. Therefore the New Law is more
burdensome than the Old.
Objection 3: The more one has to do, the more difficult it is. But the
New Law is something added to the Old. For the Old Law forbade
perjury, while the New Law proscribed even swearing: the Old Law
forbade a man to cast off his wife without a bill of divorce, while the
New Law forbade divorce altogether; as is clearly stated in Mt. 5:31,
seqq., according to Augustine's expounding. Therefore the New Law
is more burdensome than the Old.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 11:28): "Come to Me, all you that
labor and are burdened": which words are expounded by Hilary thus:
"He calls to Himself all those that labor under the difficulty of
observing the Law, and are burdened with the sins of this world."
And further on He says of the yoke of the Gospel: "For My yoke is
sweet and My burden light." Therefore the New Law is a lighter
burden than the Old.
I answer that, A twofold difficult may attach to works of virtue with
which the precepts of the Law are concerned. One is on the part of
the outward works, which of themselves are, in a way, difficult and
burdensome. And in this respect the Old Law is a much heavier
burden than the New: since the Old Law by its numerous ceremonies