SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.11.

that we fulfil that which it would be wrong or useless to vow, or
which would be an obstacle to the greater good whereunto the
dispensation from that vow would conduce. Hence the dispensation
from a vow is not contrary to the fidelity due to God.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether it is possible to be dispensed from a

solemn vow of continency?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is possible to be dispensed from a
solemn vow of continency. As stated above, one reason for granting
a dispensation from a vow is if it be an obstacle to a greater good.
But a vow of continency, even though it be solemn, may be an
obstacle to a greater good, since the common good is more God-like
than the good of an individual. Now one man's continency may be an
obstacle to the good of the whole community, for instance, in the
case where, if certain persons who have vowed continency were to
marry, the peace of their country might be procured. Therefore it
seems that it is possible to be dispensed even from a solemn vow of
continency.
Objection 2: Further, religion is a more excellent virtue than chastity.
Now if a man vows an act of religion, e.g. to offer sacrifice to God he
can be dispensed from that vow. Much more, therefore, can he be
dispensed from the vow of continency which is about an act of
chastity.
Objection 3: Further, just as the observance of a vow of abstinence
may be a source of danger to the person, so too may be the
observance of a vow of continency. Now one who takes a vow of
abstinence can be dispensed from that vow if it prove a source of
danger to his body. Therefore for the same reason one may be
dispensed from a vow of continency.
Objection 4: Further, just as the vow of continency is part of the
religious profession, whereby the vow is solemnized, so also are the
vows of poverty and obedience. But it is possible to be dispensed
from the vows of poverty and obedience, as in the case of those who
are appointed bishops after making profession. Therefore it seems
that it is possible to be dispensed from a solemn vow of continency.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 26:20): "No price is worthy of a
continent soul."
Further, (Extra, De Statu Monach.) at the end of the Decretal, Cum ad
Monasterium it is stated that the "renouncing of property, like the
keeping of chastity, is so bound up with the monastic rule, that not

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.12.

even the Sovereign Pontiff can disperse from its observance."
I answer that, Three things may be considered in a solemn vow of
continency: first, the matter of the vow, namely, continency;
secondly, the perpetuity of the vow, namely, when a person binds
himself by vow to the perpetual observance of chastity: thirdly, the
solemnity of the vow. Accordingly, some [William of Auxerre, Sum.
Aur. III. vii. 1, qu. 5] say that the solemn vow cannot be a matter of
dispensation, on account of the continency itself for which no
worthy price can be found, as is stated by the authority quoted
above. The reason for this is assigned by some to the fact that by
continency man overcomes a foe within himself, or to the fact that by
continency man is perfectly conformed to Christ in respect of purity
of both body and soul. But this reason does not seem to be cogent
since the goods of the soul, such as contemplation and prayer, far
surpass the goods of the body and still more conform us to God, and
yet one may be dispensed from a vow of prayer or contemplation.
Therefore, continency itself absolutely considered seems no reason
why the solemn vow thereof cannot be a matter of dispensation;
especially seeing that the Apostle (1 Cor. 7:34) exhorts us to be
continent on account of contemplation, when he says that the
unmarried woman . . . "thinketh on the things of God," and since the
end is of more account than the means.
Consequently others [Albertus Magnus, Sent. iv, D, 38] find the
reason for this in the perpetuity and universality of this vow. For they
assert that the vow of continency cannot be canceled, save by
something altogether contrary thereto, which is never lawful in any
vow. But this is evidently false, because just as the practice of carnal
intercourse is contrary to continency, so is eating flesh or drinking
wine contrary to abstinence from such things, and yet these latter
vows may be a matter for dispensation.
For this reason others [Innocent IV, on the above decretal] maintain
that one may be dispensed even from a solemn vow of continency,
for the sake of some common good or common need, as in the case
of the example given above (Objection 1), of a country being
restored to peace through a certain marriage to be contracted. Yet
since the Decretal quoted says explicitly that "not even the
Sovereign Pontiff can dispense a monk from keeping chastity," it
follows seemingly, that we must maintain that, as stated above
(Article 10, ad 1; cf. Lev. 27:9,10,28), whatsoever has once been
sanctified to the Lord cannot be put to any other use. For no