SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.138, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the fourth beatitude: "Blessed are they

that hunger and thirst after justice," corresponds to the gift of
fortitude?
Objection 1: It seems that the fourth beatitude, "Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after justice," does not correspond to the gift of
fortitude. For the gift of piety and not the gift of fortitude
corresponds to the virtue of justice. Now hungering and thirsting
after justice pertain to the act of justice. Therefore this beatitude
corresponds to the gift of piety rather than to the gift of fortitude.
Objection 2: Further, hunger and thirst after justice imply a desire for
good. Now this belongs properly to charity, to which the gift of
wisdom, and not the gift of fortitude, corresponds, as stated above
(Question 45). Therefore this beatitude corresponds, not to the gift of
fortitude, but to the gift of wisdom.
Objection 3: Further, the fruits are consequent upon the beatitudes,
since delight is essential to beatitude, according to Ethic. i, 8. Now
the fruits, apparently, include none pertaining to fortitude. Therefore
neither does any beatitude correspond to it.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i):
"Fortitude becomes the hungry and thirsty: since those who desire
to enjoy true goods, and wish to avoid loving earthly and material
things, must toil."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 121, Article 2), Augustine
makes the beatitudes correspond to the gifts according to the order
in which they are set forth, observing at the same time a certain
fittingness between them. Wherefore he ascribes the fourth
beatitude, concerning the hunger and thirst for justice, to the fourth
gift, namely fortitude.
Yet there is a certain congruity between them, because, as stated
(Article 1), fortitude is about difficult things. Now it is very difficult,
not merely to do virtuous deeds, which receive the common
designation of works of justice, but furthermore to do them with an
unsatiable desire, which may be signified by hunger and thirst for
justice.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.138, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: As Chrysostom says (Hom. xv in Matth.), we
may understand here not only particular, but also universal justice,
which is related to all virtuous deeds according to Ethic. v, 1,
wherein whatever is hard is the object of that fortitude which is a gift.
Reply to Objection 2: Charity is the root of all the virtues and gifts, as
stated above (Question 23, Article 8, ad 3; FS, Question 68, Article 4,
ad 3). Hence whatever pertains to fortitude may also be referred to
charity.
Reply to Objection 3: There are two of the fruits which correspond
sufficiently to the gift of fortitude: namely, patience, which regards
the enduring of evils: and longanimity, which may regard the long
delay and accomplishment of goods.