he ever stands with his own battle array, watching for our indolence, and
laboring more zealously for our destruction, than we for our salvation.
And that he is not seen by us, and suddenly assails us, which things are a
source of countless evils to those who are not always on the watch, proves this
kind of war to be harder than the other. Couldest thou wish us, then, in such a
case to command the soldiers of Christ? Yea, this were to command them for the
devil's service, for whenever he who ought to marshal and order others is the
most inexperienced and feeble of all men, by betraying through this inexperience
those who have been entrusted to his charge, he commands them in the devil's
interests rather than in Christ's.
But why do you sigh? Why weep? For my ease does not now call for
wailing, but for joy and gladness.
Basil: But not my case, yea this calls for countless lamentations. For I am
hardly able yet to understand to what degree of evil you have brought me. For I
came to you wanting to learn what excuse I should make on your behalf to those
who find fault with you; but you send me back after putting another case in the
place of that I had. For I am no longer concerned about the excuses I shall give
them on your behalf, but what excuse I shall make to God for myself and my
own faults. But I beseech you, and implore you, if my welfare is at all regarded
by you, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
bowels, and mercies, [Philippians 2:1] for you know that yourself above all hast
brought me into this danger, stretch forth your hand, both saying and doing what
is able to restore me, do not have the heart to leave me for the briefest moment,
but now rather than before let me pass my life with you.
Chrysostom: But I smiled, and said, how shall I be able to help, how to
profit you under so great a burden of office? But since this is pleasant to you,
take courage, dear soul, for at any time at which it is possible for you to have
leisure amid your own cares, I will come and will comfort you, and nothing shall
be wanting of what is in my power.
On this, he weeping yet more, rose up. But I, having embraced him and

kissed his head, led him forth, exhorting him to bear his lot bravely. For I
believe, said I, that through Christ who has called you, and set you over his own
sheep, you will obtain such assurance from this ministry as to receive me also, if
I am in danger at the last day, into your everlasting tabernacle.