John 11:43
"Let him go."
Do you see His freedom from boastfulness? He does not lead him on, nor
bid him go about with Him, lest He should seem to any to be showing him; so
well knew He how to observe moderation.
When the sign had been wrought, some wondered, others went and told it to
the Pharisees. What then did they? When they ought to have been astonished and
to have admired Him, they took counsel to kill Him who had raised the dead.
What folly! They thought to give up to death Him who had overcome death in
the bodies of others.

John 11:47
"And they said, What do we? For this man does many miracles."
They still call Him "man," these who had received such proof of His
divinity. "What do we?" They ought to have believed, and served, and bowed
down to Him, and no longer to have deemed Him a man.

John 11:48
"If we let him thus alone, the Romans will come, and will take away both our
nation and city."
What is it which they counsel to do? They wish to stir up the people, as
though they themselves would be in danger on suspicion of establishing a
kingdom. "For if," says one of them, "the Romans learn that this Man is leading
the multitudes, they will suspect us, and will come and destroy our city."
Wherefore, tell me? Did He teach revolt? Did He not permit you to give tribute
to Cæsar? Did not ye wish to make Him a king, and He fly from you? Did He
not follow a mean and unpretending life, having neither house nor anything else
of the kind? They therefore said this, not from any such expectation, but from
malice. Yet it so fell out contrary to their expectation, and the Romans took their
nation and city when they had slain Christ. For the things done by Him were
beyond all suspicion. For He who healed the sick, and taught the most excellent
way of life, and commanded men to obey their rulers, was not establishing but
undoing a tyranny. "But," says some one, "we conjecture from former
(impostors)." But they taught revolt, He the contrary. Do you see that the words
were but a pretense? For what action of the kind did He exhibit? Did He lead
about with Him pompous guards? Had He a train of chariots? Did He not seek
the deserts? But they, that they may not seem to be speaking from their own ill
feeling, say that all the city is in danger, that the common good is being plotted
against, and that they have to fear the worst. These were not the causes of your
captivity, but things contrary to them; both of this last, and of the Babylonish,
and of that under Antiochus which followed: it was not that there were
worshipers among you, but that there were among you those who did unjustly,
and excited God to wrath, this caused you to be given up into bondage. But such
a thing is envy, allowing men to see nothing which they ought to see, when it has
once for all blinded the soul. Did He not teach men to be meek? Did He not bid