This promise is made in two ways, namely absolutely, or
conditionally. Absolutely, in four ways: firstly, a mere promise, by
saying: "I will take thee for my wife," and conversely; secondly, by
giving betrothal pledges, such as money and the like; thirdly, by
giving an engagement ring; fourthly, by the addition of an oath. If,
however, this promise be made conditionally, we must draw a
distinction; for it is either an honorable condition, for instance if we
say: "I will take thee, if thy parents consent," and then the promise
holds if the condition is fulfilled, and does not hold if the condition is
not fulfilled; or else the condition is dishonorable, and this in two
ways: for either it is contrary to the marriage blessings, as if we were
to say: "I will take thee if thou promise means of sterility," and then
no betrothal is contracted; or else it is not contrary to the marriage
blessings, as were one to say: "I will take thee if thou consent to my
thefts," and then the promise holds, but the condition should be
removed.
Reply to Objection 1: The betrothal itself and giving of sureties are a
ratification of the promise, wherefore it is denominated from these as
from that which is more perfect.
Reply to Objection 2: By this promise one party is bound to the other
in respect of contracting marriage; and he who fulfills not his
promise sins mortally, unless a lawful impediment arise; and the
Church uses compulsion in the sense that she enjoins a penance for
the sin. But he is not compelled by sentence of the court, because
compulsory marriages are wont to have evil results; unless the
parties be bound by oath, for then he ought to be compelled, in the
opinion of some, although others think differently on account of the
reason given above, especially if there be fear of one taking the
other's life.
Reply to Objection 3: Such things are added only in confirmation of
the promise, and consequently they are not distinct from it.
Reply to Objection 4: The condition that is appended does not
destroy the liberty of marriage; for if it be unlawful, it should be
renounced; and if it be lawful, it is either about things that are good
simply, as were one to say, "I will take thee, if thy parents consent,"
and such a condition does not destroy the liberty of the betrothal,
but gives it an increase of rectitude. or else it is about things that are
useful, as were one to say: "I will marry thee if thou pay me a
hundred pounds," and then this condition is appended, not as

asking a price for the consent of marriage, but as referring to the
promise of a dowry; so that the marriage does not lose its liberty.
Sometimes, however, the condition appended is the payment of a
sum of money by way of penalty, and then, since marriage should be
free, such a condition does not hold, nor can such a penalty be
exacted from a person who is unwilling to fulfill the promise of
marriage.
Reply to Objection 5: James does not intend to forbid altogether the
making of promises about the future, but the making of promises as
though one were certain of one's life; hence he teaches that we
ought to add the condition. "If the Lord will," which, though it be not
expressed in words, ought nevertheless to be impressed on the
heart.
Reply to Objection 6: In marriage we may consider both the marriage
union and the marriage act; and on account of his promise of the
first as future a man is called a "spouse" from his having contracted
his espousals by words expressive of the future; but from the
promise of the second a man is called a "spouse," even when the
marriage has been contracted by words expressive of the present,
because by this very fact he promises [spondet] the marriage act.
However, properly speaking, espousals are so called from the
promise [sponsione] in the first sense, because espousals are a kind
of sacramental annexed to matrimony, as exorcism to baptism.