FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.4.

other things. Wherefore it was likely enough that on account of this
affection they would fear death all the more, and be so much the less
brave in battle. Secondly, because, as the Philosopher says (Phys. ii,
5), "it is a misfortune for a man if he is prevented from obtaining
something good when it is within his grasp." And so lest the
surviving relations should be the more grieved at the death of these
men who had not entered into the possession of the good things
prepared for them; and also lest the people should be horrorstricken at the sight of their misfortune: these men were taken away
from the danger of death by being removed from the battle.
Reply to Objection 6: The timid were sent back home, not that they
might be the gainers thereby; but lest the people might be the losers
by their presence, since their timidity and flight might cause others
to be afraid and run away.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Old Law set forth suitable precepts

about the members of the household?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law set forth unsuitable
precepts about the members of the household. For a slave "is in
every respect his master's property," as the Philosopher states
(Polit. i, 2). But that which is a man's property should be his always.
Therefore it was unfitting for the Law to command (Ex. 21:2) that
slaves should "go out free" in the seventh year.
Objection 2: Further, a slave is his master's property, just as an
animal, e.g. an ass or an ox. But it is commanded (Dt. 22:1-3) with
regard to animals, that they should be brought back to the owner if
they be found going astray. Therefore it was unsuitably commanded
(Dt. 23:15): "Thou shalt not deliver to his master the servant that is
fled to thee."
Objection 3: Further, the Divine Law should encourage mercy more
even than the human law. But according to human laws those who illtreat their servants and maidservants are severely punished: and the
worse treatment of all seems to be that which results in death.
Therefore it is unfittingly commanded (Ex. 21:20,21) that "he that
striketh his bondman or bondwoman with a rod, and they die under
his hands . . . if the party remain alive a day . . . he shall not be
subject to the punishment, because it is his money."
Objection 4: Further, the dominion of a master over his slave differs
from that of the father over his son (Polit. i, 3). But the dominion of
master over slave gives the former the right to sell his servant or
maidservant. Therefore it was unfitting for the Law to allow a man to
sell his daughter to be a servant or handmaid (Ex. 21:7).
Objection 5: Further, a father has power over his son. But he who
has power over the sinner has the right to punish him for his
offenses. Therefore it is unfittingly commanded (Dt. 21:18, seqq.)
that a father should bring his son to the ancients of the city for
punishment.
Objection 6: Further, the Lord forbade them (Dt. 7:3, seqq.) to make
marriages with strange nations; and commanded the dissolution of
such as had been contracted (1 Esdras 10). Therefore it was unfitting