is not in any way in potentiality: therefore if the world was made a fact from being
previously no fact at all, the power of the Maker must be infinite.
This argument avails to prove the infinity of the divine power even to the mind of those
who assume the eternity of the world. For they acknowledge God to be the cause of the
substantial being of the world, although they think that substance to have been from
eternity, saying that the eternal God is the cause of an ever-existing world in the same
way that a foot would be the cause of an everlasting foot-print, if it had been from
eternity stamped on the dust. Still, even accepting the position thus defined, it follows
that the power of God is infinite. For whether He produced things in time, according to
us, or from eternity, according to them, there can be nothing in the world of reality that
He has not produced, seeing that He is the universal principle of being; and thus He has
brought things to be, without presupposition of any matter or potentiality. Now the
measure of active power must be taken according to the measure of potentiality or
passivity; for the greater the pre-existing or preconceived passivity, the greater the
active power required to reduce it to complete actuality. The conclusion remains that, as
finite power in producing an effect is conditioned on the potentiality of matter, the power
of God, not being conditioned on any potentiality, is not finite, but infinite, and so is His
essence infinite.
To this truth Holy Scripture bears witness: Great is the Lord and exceedingly to he
praised, and of his greatness there is no end (Ps. cxliv, 3).

exclusiveness to be called personality? Personality, a distinguishing perfection of the
highest of creatures, cannot well be denied to the most perfect of beings, their Creator.

## CHAPTER XLIV--That God has Understanding
IN no order of causes is it found that an intelligent cause is the instrument of an
unintelligent one. But all causes in the world stand to the prime mover, which is God, as
instruments to the principal agent. Since then in the world there are found many
intelligent causes, the prime mover cannot possibly cause unintelligently.
5. No perfection is wanting in God that is found in any kind of beings (Chap.XXVIII):
nor does any manner of composition result in Him for all that (Chap.XVIII). But
among the perfections of creatures the highest is the possession of understanding: for
by understanding a thing is in a manner all things, having in itself the perfections of all
things.
6. Everything that tends definitely to an end, either fixes its own end, or has its end fixed
for it by another: otherwise it would not tend rather to this end than to that. But the
operations of nature tend to definite ends: the gains of nature are not made by chance:
for if they were, they would not be the rule, but the exception, for chance is of
exceptional cases. Since then physical agents do not fix their own end, because they
have no idea of an end, they must have an end fixed for them by another, who is the
author of nature. But He could not fix an end for nature, had He not Himself
understanding.
7. Everything imperfect is derived from something perfect: for perfection is naturally
prior to imperfection, as actuality to potentiality. But the forms that exist in particular
things are imperfect, for the very reason that they do exist in particular, and not in the
universality of their idea, or the fulness of their ideal being. They must therefore be
derived from some perfect forms, which are not under particular limitations. Such forms
cannot be other than objects of understanding, seeing that no form is found in its
universality or ideal fulness, except in the understanding. Consequently such forms
must be endowed with understanding, if they are to subsist by themselves: for only by
that endowment can they be operative. God therefore, who is the first actuality existing
by itself, whence all others are derived, must be endowed with understanding.
This truth also is in the confession of Catholic faith: for it is said: He is wise of heart and
mighty of power (Job ix, 4): With him is strength and wisdom (Ibid. xii, 16): Thy wisdom
is made wonderful to me (Ps. cxxxviii, 6): O depth of riches, of wisdom and of
knowledge of God (Rom. vi, 33).