## Homily 31 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 12:21
And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of you: or again the
head to the feet, I have no need of you.
Having checked the envy of those in lower rank, and having taken off the
dejection which it was likely that they would feel from greater gifts having been
vouchsafed to others, he humbles also the pride of these latter who had received
the greater gifts. He had done the same indeed in his discourse also with the
former. For the statement that it was a gift and not an achievement was intended
to declare this. But now he does it again even more vehemently, dwelling on the
same image. For from the body in what follows, and from the unity thence
arising, he proceeds to the actual comparison of the members, a thing on which
they were especially seeking to be instructed. Since there was not so much
power to console them in the circumstance of their being all one body, as in the
conviction that in the very things wherewith they were endowed, they were not
left greatly behind. And he says, "The eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need
of you: or again the head to the feet, I have no need of you."
For though the gift be less, yet is it necessary: and as when the one is
absent, many functions are impeded, so also without the other there is a maim in
the fullness of the Church. And he said not, "will not say," but "cannot say." So
that even though it wish it, though it should actually say so, it is out of the
question nor is the thing consistent with nature. For this cause having taken the
two extremes, he makes trial of his argument in them, first in respect of the hand
and the eye, and secondly, in respect of the head and feet, adding force to the
example.
For what is meaner than the foot? Or what more honorable and more

necessary than the head? For this, the head, more than any thing, is the man.
Nevertheless, it is not of itself sufficient nor could it alone perform all things;
since if this were so, our feet would be a superfluous addition.
2. And neither did he stop here, but seeks also another amplification, a kind
of thing which he is always doing, contending not only to be on equal terms but
even advancing beyond. Wherefore also he adds, saying,

1 Corinthians 12:22
Nay, much rather those members of the body, which seem to be more feeble
are necessary:

1 Corinthians 12:23
"And those parts of the body which we think to be less honorable, upon
these we bestow more abundant honor; and our uncomely parts have more
abundant comeliness."
In every clause adding the term "body," and thereby both consoling the one
and checking the other. "For I affirm not this only, " says he, "that the greater
have need of the less, but that they have also much need. Since if there be any
thing weak in us, if any thing dishonorable, this is both necessary and enjoys
greater honor." And he well said, "which seem," and, "which we think;" pointing
out that the judgment arises not from the nature of the things, but from the
opinion of the many. For nothing in us is dishonorable, seeing it is God's work.
Thus what in us is esteemed less honorable than our genital members?
Nevertheless, they enjoy greater honor. And the very poor, even if they have the
rest of the body naked, cannot endure to exhibit those members naked. Yet
surely this is not the condition of things dishonorable; but it was natural for them
to be despised rather than the rest. For so in a house the servant who is
dishonored, so far from enjoying greater attention, has not even an equal share
vouchsafed him. By the same rule likewise, if this member were dishonorable,
instead of having greater privileges it ought not even to enjoy the same: whereas
now it has more honor for its portion: and this too the wisdom of God has
effected. For to some parts by their nature He has given not to need it: but to
others, not having granted it by their nature, He has compelled us to yield it. Yet
are they not therefore dishonorable. Since the animals too by their nature have a
sufficiency, and need neither clothing nor shoes nor a roof, the greater part of
them: yet not on this account is our body less honorable than they, because it
needs all these things.
Yea rather, were one to consider accurately, these parts in question are even