2 Corinthians 2:9
5. "For to this end also did I write to you , that I might know the proof of
you, whether you are obedient in all things;" not only in cutting off but also in
reuniting. Do you see how here again he brings the danger to their doors. For as
when he sinned, he alarmed their minds, except they should cut him off, saying,
"A little leaven leavens the whole lump," [1 Corinthians 5:6] and several other
things; so here too again he confronts them with the fear of disobedience, as
good as saying, 'As then ye had to consult not for him, but for yourselves too, so
now must ye not less for yourselves than for him; lest ye seem to be of such as
love contention and have not human sensibilities, and not to be in all things
obedient. And hence he says, "For to this end also did I write to you, that I might
know the proof of you, whether you are obedient in all things."
For the former instance might have seemed to proceed even of envy and
malice, but this shows very especially the obedience to be pure, and whether you
are apt unto loving kindness. For this is the test of right minded disciples; if they
obey not only when ordered to do certain things, but when the contrary also.
Therefore he said, "in all things," showing that if they disobey, they disgrace not
him so much as themselves, earning the character of lovers of contention; and he
does this that hence also he may drive them to obey. Whence also he says, "For
to this end did I write to you;" and yet he wrote not for this end, but he says so in
order to win them. For the leading object was the salvation of that person. But
where it does no harm, he also gratifies them. And by saying, "In all things," he
again praises them, recalling to memory and bringing forth to view their former
obedience.

2 Corinthians 2:10
"To whom you forgive any thing, I forgive also."
Do you see how again he assigns the second part to himself, showing them
as beginning, himself following. This is the way to soften an exasperated, to
compose a contentious spirit. Then lest he should make them careless, as though
they were arbiters, and they should refuse forgiveness; he again constrains them
unto this, saying, that himself also had forgiven him.
"For what I also have forgiven, if I have forgiven any thing, for your sakes
have I forgiven it." For, this very thing I have done for your sakes, he says. And
as when he commanded them to cut him off, he left not with them the power to
forgive, saying, "I have judged already to deliver such an one unto Satan," [1
Corinthians 5:3-5] and again made them partners in his decision saying, "ye
being gathered together to deliver him," (ib. 4, 5.) (thereby securing two most
important things, viz., that the sentence should be passed; yet not without their
consent, lest herein he might seem to hurt them;) and neither himself alone
pronounces it, lest they should consider him self-willed, and themselves to be
overlooked, nor yet leaves all to them, lest when possessed of the power they
should deal treacherously with the offender by unseasonably forgiving him: so
also does he here, saying, 'I have already forgiven, who in the former Epistle had
already judged.' Then lest they should be hurt, as though overlooked, he adds,
"for your sakes." What then? Did he for men's sake pardon? No; for on this
account he added, "In the person of Christ."
What is "in the person of Christ?" Either he means according to [the will
of] God, or unto the glory of Christ.