THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether water is the proper matter of Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that water is not the proper matter of Baptism.
For Baptism, according to Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v) and Damascene
(De Fide Orth. iv), has a power of enlightening. But enlightenment is
a special characteristic of fire. Therefore Baptism should be
conferred with fire rather than with water: and all the more since
John the Baptist said when foretelling Christ's Baptism (Mt. 3:11):
"He shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and fire."
Objection 2: Further, the washing away of sins is signified in
Baptism. But many other things besides water are employed in
washing, such as wine, oil, and such like. Therefore Baptism can be
conferred with these also; and consequently water is not the proper
matter of Baptism.
Objection 3: Further, the sacraments of the Church flowed from the
side of Christ hanging on the cross, as stated above (Question 62,
Article 5). But not only water flowed therefrom, but also blood.
Therefore it seems that Baptism can also be conferred with blood.
And this seems to be more in keeping with the effect of Baptism,
because it is written (Apoc. 1:5): "(Who) washed us from our sins in
His own blood."
Objection 4: Further, as Augustine (cf. Master of the Sentences, iv, 3)
and Bede (Exposit. in Luc. iii, 21) say, Christ, by "the touch of His
most pure flesh, endowed the waters with a regenerating and
cleansing virtue." But all waters are not connected with the waters of
the Jordan which Christ touched with His flesh. Consequently it
seems that Baptism cannot be conferred with any water; and
therefore water, as such, is not the proper matter of Baptism.
Objection 5: Further, if water, as such, were the proper matter of
Baptism, there would be no need to do anything to the water before
using it for Baptism. But in solemn Baptism the water which is used
for baptizing, is exorcized and blessed. Therefore it seems that
water, as such, is not the proper matter of Baptism.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Jn. 3:5): "Unless a man be born again
of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.4.

I answer that, By Divine institution water is the proper matter of
Baptism; and with reason. First, by reason of the very nature of
Baptism, which is a regeneration unto spiritual life. And this answers
to the nature of water in a special degree; wherefore seeds, from
which all living things, viz. plants and animals are generated, are
moist and akin to water. For this reason certain philosophers held
that water is the first principle of all things.
Secondly, in regard to the effects of Baptism, to which the properties
of water correspond. For by reason of its moistness it cleanses; and
hence it fittingly signifies and causes the cleansing from sins. By
reason of its coolness it tempers superfluous heat: wherefore it
fittingly mitigates the concupiscence of the fomes. By reason of its
transparency, it is susceptive of light; hence its adaptability to
Baptism as the "sacrament of Faith."
Thirdly, because it is suitable for the signification of the mysteries of
Christ, by which we are justified. For, as Chrysostom says (Hom. xxv
in Joan.) on Jn. 3:5, "Unless a man be born again," etc., "When we
dip our heads under the water as in a kind of tomb our old man is
buried, and being submerged is hidden below, and thence he rises
again renewed."
Fourthly, because by being so universal and abundant, it is a matter
suitable to our need of this sacrament: for it can easily be obtained
everywhere.
Reply to Objection 1: Fire enlightens actively. But he who is baptized
does not become an enlightener, but is enlightened by faith, which
"cometh by hearing" (Rm. 10:17). Consequently water is more
suitable, than fire, for Baptism.
But when we find it said: "He shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost and
fire," we may understand fire, as Jerome says (In Matth. ii), to mean
the Holy Ghost, Who appeared above the disciples under the form of
fiery tongues (Acts 2:3). Or we may understand it to mean tribulation,
as Chrysostom says (Hom. iii in Matth.): because tribulation washes
away sin, and tempers concupiscence. Or again, as Hilary says
(Super Matth. ii) that "when we have been baptized in the Holy
Ghost," we still have to be "perfected by the fire of the judgment."
Reply to Objection 2: Wine and oil are not so commonly used for