not the same thing for God himself to do a thing, and for a thing to come to pass
in connection with man's purpose ([προαίρεσις]). For these things indeed were in
connection with man's purpose [but the Resurrection by itself, independently.]—
"And he was mighty," it says, "in word and in deed" [Acts 7:22]: he that was to
have died. Then again he shows how ungrateful they were to their benefactor.
For, just as in the former instance, they were saved by the injured Joseph, so here
again they were saved by another injured person, I mean, Moses. "And when he
was full forty years old," etc. For what though they killed him not actually? In
intention they did kill, as did the others in the former case. There, they sold out
of their own into a strange land: here, they drive from one strange land into
another strange land: in the former case, one in the act of bringing them food; in
this, one in the act of giving them good counsel; one to whom, under God, the
man was indebted for his life! Mark how it shows (the truth of) that saying of
Gamaliel's, "If it be of God, you cannot overthrow it." [Acts 5:39] See the
plotted-against eventually becoming the authors of salvation to those plotting
against them: the people, plotting against itself, and itself plotted against by
others; and for all this, saved! A famine, and it did not consume them: nor was
this all: but they were saved by means of the very person, whom they had
expected to be destroyed (by their means). A royal edict, and it did not consume
them: nay then most did their number increase, when he was dead "who knew"
them. Their own Saviour they wished to kill, but for all that, they had not power
to do it. Do you observe, that by the means whereby the devil tried to bring to
naught the promise of God, by those very means it was advanced?
"And God spoke on this wise," etc. (Recapitulation, v. 6, 7.) This is suitable
to be said here also: that God is rich in ways and means to bring us up from
hence. For this above all showed the riches of God's resources, that in its very
reverses ([ἀ] [ποστροφῇ]) the nation increased, while enslaved, while evilentreated, and sought to be exterminated. And this is the greatness of the
Promise. For had it increased in its own land, it had not been so wonderful. And
besides, it was not for a short time, either, that they were in the strange land: but

for four hundred years. Hence we learn a (great lesson) of philosophic endurance
([φιλοσοφίαν]):— they did not treat them as masters use slaves, but as enemies
and tyrants— and he foretold that they should be set in great liberty: for this is
the meaning of that expression, "They shall serve (Me): and they shall come up
hither again" ([ἐ] [νταὕθα ἐπανελεύσονται]); and with impunity. — And
observe, how, while he seems to concede something to circumcision, he in fact
allows it nothing [Acts 7:8]; since the Promise was before it, and it followed
after.— "And the patriarchs," he says, "moved with envy." [Acts 7:9] Where it
does no harm, he humors ([χαρίζεται]) them: for they prided themselves much
on these also.— And he shows, that the saints were not exempt from tribulation,
but that in their very tribulations they obtained help. And that these persons did
themselves help to bring about the results, who wished to cut short these same
(afflictions): just as these made Joseph the more glorious: just as the king did
Moses, by ordering the children to be killed: since had he not ordered, this would
not have been: just as also that (Hebrew) drives Moses into exile, that there he
may have the Vision, having become worthy. Thus also him who was sold for a
slave, makes He to reign as king there, where he was thought to be a slave. Thus
also does Christ in His death give proof of His power: thus also does He there
reign as king where they sold Him. "And gave him favor and wisdom," etc. [Acts
7:10] This was not only by way of honor, but that he should have confidence in
his own power. "And he made him governor over Egypt and all his house." "Now
there came a dearth," etc. On account of famine— such preparations is he
making— "with threescore and fifteen souls," he says, "Jacob went down into
Egypt, and died, he and our fathers, and were carried over into Sychem, and laid
in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money from the sons of
Emmor the father of Sychem." [Acts 7:11-16]. It shows, that they were not
masters even to the extent of a burying-place. "But when the time of the promise
drew near, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in
Egypt, till another king arose, which knew not Joseph" (v. 17, 18). Observe, that
it is not during the four hundred years that He multiplies them, but (only) when