reward" [Matthew 10:41]; then he who honors and submits and gives way to the
Priest shall certainly be rewarded. For if in the case of hospitality, when you
know not the guest, you receive so high a recompense, much more will you be
requited, if you obey him whom He requires you to obey. "The Scribes and
Pharisees," He says, "sit in Moses' seat; all therefore, whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do, but do not do after their works." [Matthew 23:2-3]
Do you not know what the Priest is? He is an Angel of the Lord. Are they his
own words that he speaks? If you despise him, you despise not him, but God that
ordained him. But how does it appear, you ask, that he is ordained of God? Nay,
if you suppose it otherwise, your hope is rendered vain. For if God works
nothing through his means, thou neither hast any Laver, nor art partaker of the
Mysteries, nor of the benefit of Blessings; you are therefore not a Christian.
What then, you say, does God ordain all, even the unworthy? God indeed does
not ordain all, but He works through all, though they be themselves unworthy,
that the people may be saved. For if He spoke, for the sake of the people, by an
ass, and by Balaam, a most wicked man, much more will He speak by the mouth
of the Priest. What indeed will not God do or say for our salvation? By whom
does He not act? For if He wrought through Judas and those other that
"prophesied," to whom He will say, "I never knew you; depart from Me, you
workers of iniquity" [Matthew 7:22-23]; and if others "cast out devils" [Psalm
6:8]; will He not much more work through the Priests? Since if we were to make
inquisition into the lives of our rulers, we should then become the ordainers of
our own teachers, and all would be confusion; the feet would be uppermost, the
head below. Hear Paul saying, "But with me it is a very small thing that I should
be judged of you, or of man's judgment." [1 Corinthians 4:3] And again, "Why do
you judge your brother?" [Romans 14:10] For if we may not judge our brother,
much less our teacher. If God commands this indeed, you do well, and sinnest if
you do it not; but if the contrary, dare not do it, nor attempt to go beyond the
lines that are marked out. After Aaron had made the golden calf, Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram raised an insurrection against him. And did they not perish? Let

each attend to his own department. For if he teach perverted doctrine, though he
be an Angel, obey him not; but if he teach the truth, take heed not to his life, but
to his words. You have Paul to instruct you in what is right both by words and
works. But you say, "He gives not to the poor, he does not govern well." Whence
do you know this? Blame not, before you are informed. Be afraid of the great
account. Many judgments are formed upon mere opinion. Imitate your Lord,
who said, "I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry of it, and if not, I will know." [Genesis 18:21] But if you
have enquired, and informed yourself, and seen; yet await the Judge, and usurp
not the office of Christ. To Him it belongs, and not to you, to make this
inquisition. You are an inferior servant, not a master. You are a sheep, be not
curious concerning the shepherd, lest you have to give account of your
accusations against him. But you say, How does he teach me that which he does
not practice himself? It is not he that speaks to you. If it be he whom you obey,
you have no reward. It is Christ that thus admonishes you. And what do I say?
You ought not to obey even Paul, if he speaks of himself, or anything human, but
the Apostle, that has Christ speaking in him. Let not us judge one another's
conduct, but each his own. Examine your own life.
But you say, "He ought to be better than I." Wherefore? "Because he is a
Priest." And is he not superior to you in his labors, his dangers, his anxious
conflicts and troubles? But if he is not better, ought thou therefore to destroy
yourself? These are the words of arrogance. For how is he not better than
yourself? He steals, you say, and commits sacrilege! How do you know this?
Why do you cast yourself down a precipice? If you should hear it said that such
an one has a purple robe, though you knew it to be true, and couldest convict
him, you decline to do it, and pretend ignorance, not being willing to run into
unnecessary danger. But in this case you are so far from being backward, that
even without cause you expose yourself to the danger. Nor think you are not
responsible for these words. Hear what Christ says, "Every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment." [Matthew