Homily 24 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts X. 44, 46
"While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which
heard the word. And they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as
many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the
gift of the Holy Ghost. For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify
God."
Observe God's providential management. He does not suffer the speech to
be finished, nor the baptism to take place upon a command of Peter, but, when
He has made it evident how admirable their state of mind is, and a beginning is
made of the work of teaching, and they have believed that assuredly baptism is
the remission of sins, then immediately comes the Spirit upon them. Now this is
done by God's so disposing it as to provide for Peter a mighty ground of
justification. And it is not simply that the Spirit came upon them, but, "they
spoke with tongues:" which was the thing that astonished those who had come
together. They altogether disliked the matter, wherefore it is that the whole is of
God; and as for Peter, it may almost be said, that he is present only to be taught
(with them) the lesson, that they must take the Gentiles in hand, and that they
themselves are the persons by whom this must be done. For whereas after all
these great events, still both in Cæsarea and in Jerusalem a questioning is made
about it, how would it have been if these (tokens) had not gone step by step with
the progress of the affair? Therefore it is that this is carried to a sort of excess.
Peter seizes his advantage, and see the plea he makes of it. "Can any man forbid
water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as
well as we?" [Acts 10:47] Mark the issue to which he brings it; how he has been
travailing to bring this forth. So (entirely) was he of this mind! Can any one, he
asks, "forbid water?" It is the language, we may almost say, of one triumphantly

pressing his advantage ([ἐ] [πεμβαίνοντος]) against such as would forbid, such
as should say that this ought not to be. The whole thing, he says, is complete, the
most essential part of the business, the baptism with which we were baptized.
"And he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ." [Acts
10:48] After he has cleared himself, then, and not before, he commands them to
be baptized: teaching them by the facts themselves. Such was the dislike the
Jews had to it! Therefore it is that he first clears himself, although the very facts
cry aloud, and then gives the command. "Then prayed they him"— well might
they do so— "to tarry certain days:" and with a good courage thenceforth he
does tarry.
"And the Apostles and brethren that were in Judea heard that the Gentiles
had also received the word of God. And when Peter had come up to Jerusalem,
they that were of the circumcision contended with him, saying, You went in to
men uncircumcised, and ate with them." [Acts 11:1-3] After such great things,
"they of the circumcision contended:" not the Apostles; God forbid! It means,
they took no small offense. And see what they allege. They do not say, Why did
you preach? But, Why did you eat with them? But Peter, not stopping to notice
this frigid objection— for frigid indeed it is— takes his stand ([ἵ] [σταται]) on
that great argument, If they had the Spirit Itself given them, how could one
refuse to give them the baptism? But how came it that in the case of the
Samaritans this did not happen, but, on the contrary, neither before their baptism
nor after it was there any controversy, and there they did not take it amiss, nay,
as soon as they heard of it, sent the Apostles for this very purpose? [Acts 8:14]
True, but neither in the present case is this the thing they complain of; for they
knew that it was of Divine Grace: what they say is, Why did you eat with them?
Besides, the difference is not so great for Samaritans as it is for Gentiles.
Moreover, it is so managed (as part of the Divine plan) that he is accused in this
way: on purpose that they may learn: for Peter, without some cause given, would
not have related the vision. But observe his freedom from all elation and
vainglory. For it says, "But Peter rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and