THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.9.

From this same follows a "third" difference, which is that a relation,
especially one of equiparance, is no more to one extreme than to the
other, whereas action and passion bear themselves differently to the
agent and the patient, and to different termini. And hence
assumption determines the term whence and the term whither; for
assumption means a taking to oneself from another. But union
determines none of these things. hence it may be said indifferently
that the human nature is united with the Divine, or conversely. But
the Divine Nature is not said to be assumed by the human, but
conversely, because the human nature is joined to the Divine
personality, so that the Divine Person subsists in human nature.
Reply to Objection 1: Union and assumption have not the same
relation to the term, but a different relation, as was said above.
Reply to Objection 2: What unites and what assumes are not the
same. For whatsoever Person assumes unites, and not conversely.
For the Person of the Father united the human nature to the Son, but
not to Himself; and hence He is said to unite and not to assume. So
likewise the united and the assumed are not identical, for the Divine
Nature is said to be united, but not assumed.
Reply to Objection 3: Assumption determines with whom the union
is made on the part of the one assuming, inasmuch as assumption
means taking unto oneself [ad se sumere], whereas incarnation and
humanation (determine with whom the union is made) on the part of
the thing assumed, which is flesh or human nature. And thus
assumption differs logically both from union and from incarnation or
humanation.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether the union of the two natures in Christ is

the greatest of all unions?
Objection 1: It would seem that the union of the two natures in Christ
is not the greatest of all unions. For what is united falls short of the
unity of what is one, since what is united is by participation, but one
is by essence. Now in created things there are some that are simply
one, as is shown especially in unity itself, which is the principle of
number. Therefore the union of which we are speaking does not
imply the greatest of all unions.
Objection 2: Further, the greater the distance between things united,
the less the union. Now, the things united by this union are most
distant---namely, the Divine and human natures; for they are
infinitely apart. Therefore their union is the least of all.
Objection 3: Further, from union there results one. But from the
union of soul and body in us there arises what is one in person and
nature; whereas from the union of the Divine and human nature there
results what is one in person only. Therefore the union of soul and
body is greater than that of the Divine and human natures; and
hence the union of which we speak does not imply the greatest
unity.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. i, 10) that "man is in the
Son of God, more than the Son in the Father." But the Son is in the
Father by unity of essence, and man is in the Son by the union of the
Incarnation. Therefore the union of the Incarnation is greater than
the unity of the Divine Essence, which nevertheless is the greatest
union; and thus the union of the Incarnation implies the greatest
unity.
I answer that, Union implies the joining of several in some one thing.
Therefore the union of the Incarnation may be taken in two ways:
first, in regard to the things united; secondly, in regard to that in
which they are united. And in this regard this union has a preeminence over other unions; for the unity of the Divine Person, in
which the two natures are united, is the greatest. But it has no preeminence in regard to the things united.
Reply to Objection 1: The unity of the Divine Person is greater than