FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: The term "capital" is taken from "caput" and
applied to something connected with, or partaking of the head, as
having some property thereof, but not as being the head taken
literally. And therefore the capital vices are not only those which
have the character of primary origin, as covetousness which is
called the "root," and pride which is called the beginning, but also
those which have the character of proximate origin in respect of
several sins.
Reply to Objection 2: Sin lacks order in so far as it turns away from
God, for in this respect it is an evil, and evil, according to Augustine
(De Natura Boni iv), is "the privation of mode, species and order."
But in so far as sin implies a turning to something, it regards some
good: wherefore, in this respect, there can be order in sin.
Reply to Objection 3: This objection considers capital sin as so
called from the punishment it deserves, in which sense we are not
taking it here.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the seven capital vices are suitably

reckoned?
Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to reckon seven capital
vices, viz. vainglory, envy, anger, sloth, covetousness, gluttony, lust.
For sins are opposed to virtues. But there are four principal virtues,
as stated above (Question 61, Article 2). Therefore there are only four
principal or capital vices.
Objection 2: Further, the passions of the soul are causes of sin, as
stated above (Question 77). But there are four principal passions of
the soul; two of which, viz. hope and fear, are not mentioned among
the above sins, whereas certain vices are mentioned to which
pleasure and sadness belong, since pleasure belongs to gluttony
and lust, and sadness to sloth and envy. Therefore the principal sins
are unfittingly enumerated.
Objection 3: Further, anger is not a principal passion. Therefore it
should not be placed among the principal vices.
Objection 4: Further, just as covetousness or avarice is the root of
sin, so is pride the beginning of sin, as stated above (Article 2). But
avarice is reckoned to be one of the capital vices. Therefore pride
also should be placed among the capital vices.
Objection 5: Further, some sins are committed which cannot be
caused through any of these: as, for instance, when one sins
through ignorance, or when one commits a sin with a good intention,
e.g. steals in order to give an alms. Therefore the capital vices are
insufficiently enumerated.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Gregory who enumerates
them in this way (Moral. xxxi, 17).
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), the capital vices are those
which give rise to others, especially by way of final cause. Now this
kind of origin may take place in two ways. First, on account of the
condition of the sinner, who is disposed so as to have a strong
inclination for one particular end, the result being that he frequently
goes forward to other sins. But this kind of origin does not come
under the consideration of art, because man's particular dispositions