#### Answers to objections

1. It is answered: God as an unknown is said to be the terminus of our knowledge in the
following respect: that the mind is found to be most perfectly in possession of knowledge of
God when it is recognized that His essence is above everything that the mind is capable of
apprehending in this life; and thus, although what He is remains unknown, yet it is known that
He is.

2. It may be said: From the fact that the divine essence escapes any form of our intellect,
evidently it is not possible to know what He is, but only that He exists.

3. It is answered: Proportion is nothing other than the mutual relation of two things associated by
something in respect to which they either agree or differ. Now, agreement may be of two kinds.

In one way, things may be associated as belonging to the same genus of quantity or quality, as is
the relation of one surface to another or of one number to another inasmuch as one excels the
other or is equal to it, or even as heat is related to heat; and according to this mode of relation
there is no possible proportion between God and creature, since there is no agreement in any
genus.

In another way beings are said to be related when they are associated in a certain order; and in
this way there is proportion between matter and form, between the maker and the thing made.
This also is the kind of proportion required between knower and knowable, since what is
knowable is, in a certain way, the act of the knowing power. Such, too, is the proportion of a
creature to God: that of caused to its cause, and of knower to the knowable; but according as the
excellence of the Creator transcends the creature, there is no proportion of the creature to the
Creator which makes it possible to receive from Him an influx proportionate to His complete
power, or to know Him perfectly, even as He perfectly knows Himself.

4. It may be said: The intellect and the intedligible object are of one genus, as potency and act.
God, however, although not in the genus of intelligible things, as if comprehended under a genus

participating in its nature, nevertheless is related to this genus as its principle. For His effects are
not outside every genus of intelligible beings; wherefore even here, He can be known through
His effects, and in heaven, through His essence. Moreover, a thing seems to be called
"intelligible" more by negation than by, affirmation; for a thing is said to be intelligible inasmuch
as it is either immune from matter or separated from it. Hence, negations may be stated in regard
to divine things with truth; though affirmations are inadequate in expressing agreement, as
Dionysius says (Coel. hier., chap. 2).

5. It may be answered: When a thing is known, not through its own form, but through an effect,
the form of that effect takes the place of the form of the thing itself, and therefore from the effect
it is possible to know whether the cause exists.