of an intellectual impression, it is competent to act of itself: hence we see that, once we
have got the knowledge of a thing, it is in our power to consider it again when we wish:
nor are we at a loss for lack of phantasms, because it is in our power to form phantasms
suitable to the consideration which we wish, unless there happens to be some
impediment on the part of the organ, as in persons out of their mind or in a comatose
state. But if in the potential intellect there are intellectual impressions of all branches of
knowledge, -- as we must say, if that intellect is one and eternal, -- then the necessity of
phantasms for the potential intellect will be the same as in his case who already has
knowledge, and wishes to study and consider some point of that knowledge, for that
also he could not do without phantasms. Since then every man understands by
the potential intellect so far as it is reduced to act by intellectual impressions, so every
man should be able on this theory to regard, whenever he would, all the known points of
all sciences: which is manifestly false, for at that rate no one would need a teacher.
Therefore the potential intellect is not one and eternal.

under Leo X in 1513 against the Averroists of the age: "The soul is immortal, and
individually multipliable, and multiplied according to the multitude of the bodies into
which it is infused." No Catholic can deny the immortality of the individual soul, or hold
any view subversive of individual responsibility, as though saint and sinner alike were
automata, administered by an intelligence and will foreign to themselves. The one really
Universal Intellect is that of God; and the Divine Mind works upon our mortal minds, not
formally, as a constituent of them, but efficiently, as guiding them, while respecting their
native liberty. In his work, De animae beatitudine cap. iii, Averroes says very justly that
the active intellect is so called, not merely in an efficient, but in a formal sense. "The
active intellect is a cause in regard of the potential intellect not only by way of efficiency
and movement, but also by way of final perfection, that is, by way of form and
consummation" (p. 151). It would then be pantheism, which even Averroes avoids, to
make God the `active intellect' of the world, in the Aristotelian sense. But God is the
efficiently illuminating intellect of all other intellects. The modus operandi whereby God
acts upon the minds of mortal men, whether indirectly through sensible objects, or in
any more direct way, is an interesting and comparatively unexplored region of
psychology. The intellectual is allowed on all hands to be the universal; and the
universal is our natural avenue to the divine. "Material forms," says Averroes, "when
abstracted in the soul from their matters, become science and understanding; and
understanding is nothing else than forms abstracted from matter, . . . . nothing else than
a comprehension of things understood, . . . . nothing else than a comprehension of the
order of the world" (Destructio destructionum, disp. 6, p. 86). He goes on to show how
intellect is impeded and retarded by having to study these forms in matter. Mental
experience, a witness too little heard in this discussion, reveals to us this fact, that the
more absorbed we are in intellectual occupation, the more forgetful we are of ourselves.
Aristotle places happiness in contemplation; and contemplation is a process of being
universalised and de-individualised. The pathe of our animal organism, our bodily needs
and apprehensions, drive us back upon ourselves. Happiness puts us out of ourselves:
misery is a painful consciousness of self. Some such painful isolation in the next world,
some state in which the soul is driven in upon itself, excluded from the universal truth
and universal good, and as it were crushed within its own individuality, may be the penal
consequence of selfishness and sin. Phantastic and objectionable on many points as
Averroes is, there is a world of thought in Averroism; and his great opponent St Thomas
owes not a little to the Commentator. Renan indeed goes the length of saying: Albert
(Albertus Magnus) doit tout Avicenne; Saint Thomas, comme philosophe, presque tout
l'Averroisme (Averroes et l'Averroisme p. 236). The reader may consult Roger Bede
Vaughan's St Thomas of Aquin (Longmans, 1871), vol. I, pp. 300, 301, for Averroes's
doctrine of the passive and active intellect; and vol. II, pp. 799-809, for an analysis of St
Thomas's Opuculum de unitate intellectus.