so much as He judges to be fitting, to whom all things are subject. Many
things, too, are foretold by a kind of instinct and inward impulse of such
as know them not: as Caiaphas did not know what he said, but being the
high priest, he prophesied.
23. Therefore, neither concerning the successions of ages, nor concerning
the resurrection of the dead, ought we to consult those philosophers, who
have understood as much as they could the eternity of the Creator, in
whom "we live, and move, and have our being." Since, knowing God
through those things which are made, they have not glorified Him as God,
neither were thankful; but professing themselves wise, they became
fools.3 And whereas they were not fit to fix the eye of the mind so firmly
upon the eternity of the spiritual and unchangeable nature, as to be able
to see, in the wisdom itself of the Creator and Governor of the universe,
those revolutions of the ages, which in that wisdom were already and
were always, but here were about to be so that as yet they were not; or,
again, to see therein those changes for the better, not of the souls only,
but also of the bodies of men, even to the perfection of their proper
measure; whereas then, I say, they were in no way fit to see these things
therein, they were not even judged worthy of receiving any
announcement of them by the holy angels; whether externally through
the senses of the body, or by interior revelations exhibited in the spirit; as
these things actually were manifested to our fathers, who were gifted with
true piety, and who by foretelling them, obtaining credence either by
present signs, or by events close at hand, which turned out as they had
foretold, earned authority to be believed respecting things remotely
future, even to the end of the world. But the proud and deceitful powers
of the air, even if they are found to have said through their soothsayers
some things of the fellowship and citizenship of the saints, and of the true
Mediator, which they heard from the holy prophets or the angels, did so
with the purpose of seducing even the faithful ones of God, if they could,
by these alien truths, to revolt to their own proper falsehoods. But God
did this by those who knew not what they said, in order that the truth
might sound abroad from all sides, to aid the faithful, to be a witness
against the ungodly.

### CHAP. 18.—THE SON OF GOD BECAME INCARNATE IN ORDER THAT WE BEING CLEANSED BY FAITH MAY BE RAISED TO THE UNCHANGEABLE TRUTH.

24. Since, then, we were not fit to take hold of things eternal, and since
the foulness of sins weighed us down, which we had contracted by the
love of temporal things, and which were implanted in us as it were
naturally, from the root of mortality, it was needful that we should be
cleansed. But cleansed we could not be, so as to be tempered together
with things eternal, except it were through things temporal, wherewith
we were already tempered together and held fast. For health is at the
opposite extreme from disease; but the intermediate process of healing
does not lead us to perfect health, unless it has some congruity with the
disease. Things temporal that are useless merely deceive the sick; things
temporal that are useful take up those that need healing, and pass them
on healed, to things eternal. And the rational mind, as when cleansed it
owes contemplation to things eternal; so, when needing cleansing, owes
faith to things temporal. One even of those who were formerly esteemed
wise men among the Greeks has said. The truth stands to faith in the
same relation in which eternity stands to that which has a beginning. And
he is no doubt right in saying so. For what we call temporal, he describes
as having had a beginning. And we also ourselves come under this kind,
not only in respect to the body, but also in respect to the changeableness
of the soul. For that is not properly called eternal which undergoes any
degree of change. Therefore, in so far as we are changeable, in so far we
stand apart from eternity. But life eternal is promised to us through the
truth, from the clear knowledge of which, again, our faith stands as far
apart as mortality does from eternity. We then now put faith in things
done in time on our account, and by that faith itself we are cleansed; in
order that when we have come to sight, as truth follows faith, so eternity
may follow upon mortality. And therefore, since our faith will become
truth, when we have attained to that which is promised to us who believe:
and that which is promised us is eternal life; and the Truth (not that
which shall come to be according as our faith shall be, but that truth
which is always, because in it is eternity,—the Truth then) has said, "And
this is life eternal, that they might know Thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent:" when our faith by seeing shall come
to be truth, then eternity shall possess our now changed mortality. And