more impediments are assigned to matrimony than to the other
sacraments.
Reply to Objection 2: The more perfect things can be hindered in
more ways, in so far as more conditions are required for them. And if
an imperfect thing requires more conditions, there will be more
impediments to it; and thus it is in matrimony.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument would hold, were there no other
and more efficacious remedies for the disease of concupiscence;
which is false.
Reply to Objection 4: Persons are said to be unlawful subjects for
marriage through being contrary to the law whereby marriage is
established. Now marriage as fulfilling an office of nature is
established by the natural law; as a sacrament, by the Divine law; as
fulfilling an office of society, by the civil law. Consequently a person
may be rendered an unlawful subject of marriage by any of the
aforesaid laws. Nor does the comparison with the other sacraments
hold, for they are sacraments only. And since the natural law is
particularized in various ways according to the various states of
mankind, and since positive law, too, varies according to the various
conditions of men, the Master (Sent. iv, D, 34) asserts that at various
times various persons have been unlawful subjects of marriage.
Reply to Objection 5: The law may forbid a thing either altogether, or
in part and in certain cases. Hence between that which is altogether
according to the law and that which is altogether against the law
(which are opposed by contrariety and not according to affirmation
and negation), that which is somewhat according to the law and
somewhat against the law is a middle term. For this reason certain
persons hold a middle place between those who are simply lawful
subjects and those who are simply unlawful.
Reply to Objection 6: Those impediments which do not annul a
marriage already contracted sometimes hinder a marriage from
being contracted, by rendering it not invalid but unlawful. And if it be
contracted it is a true marriage although the contracting parties sin;
just as by consecrating after breaking one's fast one would sin by
disobeying the Church's ordinance, and yet it would be a valid
sacrament because it is not essential to the sacrament that the
consecrator be fasting.

Reply to Objection 7: When we say that the aforesaid impediments
annul marriage already contracted, we do not mean that they
dissolve a marriage contracted in due form, but that they dissolve a
marriage contracted "de facto" and not "de jure." Wherefore if an
impediment supervene after a marriage has been contracted in due
form, it cannot dissolve the marriage.
Reply to Objection 8: The impediments that hinder a good
accidentally are infinite in number, like all accidental causes. But the
causes which of their own nature corrupt a certain good are directed
to that effect, and determinate, even as are the causes which
produce that good; for the causes by which a thing is destroyed and
those by which it is made are either contrary to one another, or the
same but taken in a contrary way.
Reply to Objection 9: The conditions of particular persons taken
individually are infinite in number, but taken in general, they may be
reduced to a certain number; as instanced in medicine and all
operative arts, which consider the conditions of particular persons in
whom acts are.