nought," and "disorderly behavior"? "We did not behave ourselves disorderly
among you," he says, "neither did we eat any man's bread for nought." Here he
shows that perhaps also they were poor; and tell me not, that they were poor. For
he is discoursing concerning the poor, and those who obtained their necessary
subsistence from no other source than from the work of their hands. For he has
not said, that they may have it from their fathers, but that by working they
should eat their own bread. For if I, he says, a herald of the word of doctrine,
was afraid to burden you, much more he who does you no service. For this is
truly a burden. And it is a burden too, when one does not give with much
alacrity; but this is not what he hints at, but as if they were not able to do it
easily. For why do you not work? For God has given you hands for this purpose,
not that you should receive from others, but that you should impart to others.
But "the Lord," he says, "be with you." This prayer also we may offer for
ourselves, if we do the things of the Lord. For hear Christ saying to His
disciples, "Go and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them into the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I commanded you: and, lo, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world." [Matthew 28:19-20] If you do these things,
assuredly. For that the promise is not made to them only, but to those also who
walk in their steps, is manifest from His saying "to the end of the world."
What then does He say to those who are not teachers? Each of you, if he
will, is a teacher, although not of another, yet of himself. Teach yourself first. If
you teach to observe all things whatsoever He commanded, even by this means
you will have many emulating you. For as a lamp, when it is shining, is able to
light ten thousand others, but being extinguished will not give light even to
itself, nor can it lighten other lamps; so also in the case of a pure life, if the light
that is in us be shining, we shall make both disciples and teachers numberless,
being set before them as a pattern to copy. For neither will the words proceeding
from me be able so to benefit the hearers, as your life. For let a man, tell me, be
dear to God, and shining in virtue, and having a wife; (for it is possible for a man

having a wife and children and servants and friends to please God;) will he not
be able much more than I to benefit them all? For me they will hear once or
twice in a month, or not even once, and even though they have kept what they
have heard as far as the threshold of the Church, they presently let it drop away
from them: but seeing the life of that man constantly, they receive great
advantage. For when being insulted he insults not again, does he not almost
instill and engrave upon the soul of the insulter the reverence of his meekness?
And though he does not immediately confess the benefit, being ashamed from
anger, or put to confusion, yet nevertheless he immediately is made sensible of
it. And it is impossible for a man that is insolent, though he be a very beast, to
associate with one who is patient of evil, without going away much benefited.
For although we do not what is good, we however all praise it and admire it.
Again, the wife, if she see her husband gentle, being always with him receives
great advantage, and the child also. It is therefore in the power of every one to be
a teacher. For he says, "Build each other up, even as also you do." [1
Thessalonians 5:11] For tell me, has any loss befallen the family? The wife is
disturbed, as being weaker, and more extravagant, and fond of ornament; the
man if he be a philosopher, and a derider of loss, both consoles her, and
persuades her to bear it with fortitude. Tell me, then, will he not benefit her
much more than our words? For it is easy to talk, but to act, when we are
reduced to the necessity, is in every way difficult. On this account human nature
is wont rather to be regulated by deeds. And such is the superiority of virtue, that
even a slave often benefits a whole family together with the master.
For not in vain, nor without reason, does Paul constantly command them to
practice virtue, and to be obedient to their master, not so much regarding the
service of their masters, as that the word of God and the doctrine be not
blasphemed. But when it is not blasphemed, it will soon also be admired. And I
know of many families, that they have greatly benefited by the virtue of their
slaves. But if a servant placed under authority can improve his master, much
more can the master his servants. Divide then with me, I beseech you, this