and luxurious, but it belongs to those upon the stage, the harlot women, the men
that are trimmed for this intent, parasites, and flatterers; not them that are called
unto heaven, not them that are enrolled into the city above, not them that bear
spiritual arms, but them that are enlisted on the devil's side. For it is he, yea, it is
he, that even made the thing an art, that he might weaken Christ's soldiers, and
soften the nerves of their zeal. For this cause he also built theatres in the cities,
and having trained those buffoons, by their pernicious influence he causes that
kind of pestilence to light upon the whole city, persuading men to follow those
things which Paul bade us flee, "foolish talking and jesting." [Ephesians 5:4]
And what is yet more grievous than these things is the subject of the laughter.
For when they that act those absurd things utter any word of blasphemy or
filthiness, then many among the more thoughtless laugh and are pleased,
applauding in them what they ought to stone them for; and drawing down on
their own heads by this amusement the furnace of fire. For they who praise the
utterers of such words, it is these above all who induce men so to speak:
wherefore they must be more justly accountable for the penalty allotted to these
things. For were there no one to be a spectator in such cases, neither would there
be one to act; but when they see you forsaking your workshops, and your crafts,
and your income from these, and in short everything, for the sake of continuing
there, they derive hence a greater forwardness, and exert a greater diligence
about these things.
And this I say, not freeing them from reproof, but that you may learn that it
is you chiefly who supply the principle and root of such lawlessness; ye who
consume your whole day on these matters, and profanely exhibit the sacred
things of marriage, and make an open mock of the great mystery. For not even he
who acts these things is so much the offender, as you are before him; thou who
biddest him make a play on these things, or rather who not only biddest him, but
art even zealous about it, taking delight, and laughing, and praising what is done,
and in every way gaining strength for such workshops of the devil.
Tell me then, with what eyes will you after this look upon your wife at

home, having seen her insulted there? Or how do you not blush being put in
mind of the partner of your home, when you see nature herself put to an open
shame? Nay, tell me not, that what is done is acting; for this acting has made
many adulterers, and subverted many families. And it is for this most especially
that I grieve, that what is done does not so much as seem evil, but there is even
applause and clamor, and much laughter, at commission of so foul adultery.
What do you say? That what is done is acting? Why, for this selfsame reason
they must be worthy of ten thousand deaths, that what things all laws command
men to flee, they have taken pains to imitate. For if the thing itself be bad, the
imitation thereof also is bad. And I do not yet say how many adulterers they
make who act these scenes of adultery, how they render the spectators of such
things bold and shameless; for nothing is more full of whoredom and boldness
than an eye that endures to look at such things.
And thou in a market-place wouldest not choose to see a woman stripped
naked, or rather not even in a house, but callest such a thing an outrage. And go
up into the theatre, to insult the common nature of men and women, and disgrace
your own eyes? For say not this, that she that is stripped is an harlot; but that the
nature is the same, and they are bodies alike, both that of the harlot, and that of
the free-woman. For if this be nothing amiss, what is the cause that if you were
to see this done in a market place, you would both hasten away yourself, and
drive thence her who was behaving herself unseemly? Or is it that when we are
apart, then such a thing is outrageous, but when we are assembled and all sitting
together, it is no longer equally shameful? Nay, this is absurdity and a disgrace,
and words of the utmost madness; and it were better to besmear the eyes all over
with mud and mire than to be a spectator of such a transgression. For surely mire
is not so much an hurt to an eye, as an unchaste sight, and the spectacle of a
woman stripped naked. Hear, for example, what it was that caused nakedness at
the beginning, and read the occasion of such disgrace. What then did cause
nakedness? Our disobedience, and the devil's counsel. Thus, from the first, even
from the very beginning, this was his contrivance. Yet they were at least