time, "an evil world," not of the creatures. For he seems to me, having had
dominion beneath the sky, not to have fallen from his dominion, even after his
transgression.
"That now works," he says, "in the sons of disobedience."
You observe that it is not by force, nor by compulsion, but by persuasion,
he wins us over; "disobedience" or "untractableness" is his word, as though one
were to say, by guile and persuasion he draws all his votaries to himself. And not
only does he give them a word of encouragement by telling them they have an
associate, but also by ranking himself with them, for he says,
"Among whom we also all once lived."
"All," because he cannot say that any one is excepted.
"In the lusts of our flesh, doing the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and
were by nature children of wrath, even as the rest."
That is, having no spiritual affections. Yet, lest he should slander the flesh,
or lest it should be supposed that the transgression was not great, observe how he
guards the matter,
"Doing," he says, "the desires of the flesh and of the mind."
That is, the pleasurable passions. We provoked God to anger, he says, we
provoked Him to wrath, we were wrath, and nothing else. For as he who is a
child of man is by nature man, so also were we children of wrath even as others;
i.e., no one was free, but we all did things worthy of wrath.
Ver. 4. "But God, being rich in mercy."
Not merely merciful, but rich in mercy; as it is said also in another place;
"In the multitude of your mercies." [Psalm 69:17] And again, "Have mercy upon
me, according to the multitude of your tender mercies." [Psalm 51:1]
Ver. 4. "For His great love, wherewith He loved us."
Why did He love us? For these things are not deserving of love, but of the
sorest wrath, and punishment. And thus it was of great mercy.
Ver. 5. "Even when we were dead through our trespasses He quickened us
together with Christ."

Again is Christ introduced, and it is a matter well worthy of our belief,
because if the Firstfruits live, so do we also. He has quickened both Him, and us.
Do you see that all this is said of Christ incarnate? Beholdest thou "the
exceeding greatness of His power to us-ward who believe?" [Ephesians 1:19]
Them that were dead, them that were children of wrath, them has he quickened.
Beholdest thou "the hope of his calling?"
Ver. 6. "He raised us up with Him and made us sit with Him."
Beholdest thou the glory of His inheritance? That "He has raised us up
together," is plain. But that He "has made us sit with Him in the heavenly places
in Christ Jesus," how does this hold? It holds as truly, as that He has raised us
together. For as yet no one is actually raised, excepting that inasmuch as as the
Head has risen, we also are raised, just as in the history, when Jacob did
obeisance, his wife also did obeisance to Joseph. [Genesis 37:9-10] And so in
the same way "has He also made us to sit with Him." For since the Head sits, the
body sits also with it, and therefore he adds "in Christ Jesus." Or again, if it
means, not this, it means that by the laver of Baptism He has "raised us up with
Him." How then in that case has He made "us to sit with Him?" Because, says
he, "if we suffer we shall also reign with Him," [2 Timothy 2:12] if we be dead
with Him we shall also live with Him. Truly there is need of the Spirit and of
revelation, in order to understand the depth of these mysteries. And then that you
may have no distrust about the matter, observe what he adds further.
Ver. 7. "That in the ages to come, He might show the exceeding riches of
His grace, in kindness towards us, in Christ Jesus."
Whereas he had been speaking of the things which concerned Christ, and
these might be nothing to us, (for what, it might be said, is it to us, that He rose)
therefore he shows that they do moreover extend to us, inasmuch as He is made
one with us. Only that our concern in the matter he states separately. "Us," says
he, "who were dead through our trespasses He raised up with Him, and made us
sit with Him." Wherefore, as I was saying, be not unbelieving, take the
demonstration he adduces both from former things, and from His Headship, and