You see that besides making the way easy, he has rooted up hereby no trifling
disease, namely, in forbidding to boast, and have high thoughts: "that no flesh
should glory:" for hence came the sin, that men insisted on being wiser than the
laws of God; not willing so to obtain knowledge as He had enacted: and
therefore they did not obtain it at all. So also was it from the beginning. He said
unto Adam, "Do such a thing, and such another you must not do." He, as
thinking to find out something more, disobeyed; and even what he had, he lost.
He spoke unto those that came after, "Rest not in the creature; but by means of it
contemplate the Creator." They, forsooth, as if making out something wiser than
what had been commanded, set in motion windings innumerable. Hence they
kept dashing against themselves and one another, and neither found God, nor
concerning the creature had any distinct knowledge; nor had any meet and true
opinion about it. Wherefore again, with a very high hand, ([ἐκ πολλοῦ τοῦ
περίοντος]) lowering their conceit. He admitted the uneducated first, showing
thereby that all men need the wisdom from above. And not only in the matter of
knowledge, but also in all other things, both men and all other creatures He has
constituted so as to be in great need of Him; that they might have this also as a
most forcible motive of submission and attachment, lest turning away they
should perish. For this cause He did not suffer them to be sufficient unto
themselves. For if even now many, for all their indigency, despise Him, were the
case not so, whither would they not have wandered in haughtiness? So that He
stayed them from boasting as they did, not from any grudge to them, but to draw
them away from the destruction thence ensuing.

1 Corinthians 1:30-31
4. "But of Him are you in Christ Jesus, who was made unto us wisdom from
God, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption."
The expression "of Him," I suppose he uses here, not of our introduction
into being, but with reference to the faith: that is, to our having become children
of God, "not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh." [John 1:13] "Think not then,
that having taken away our glorying, He left us so: for there is another, a greater
glorying, His gift. For you are the children of Him in whose presence it is not
meet to glory, having become so through Christ." And since he has said, "The
foolish things of the world He chose, and the base," he signifies that they are
nobler than all, having God for their Father. And of this nobility of ours, not this
person or that, but Christ is the cause, having made us wise, and righteous, and
holy. For so mean the words, "He was made unto us wisdom."
Who then is wiser than we are who have not the wisdom of Plato, but Christ
Himself, God having so willed.
But what means, "of God?" Whenever he speaks great things concerning
the Only-Begotten, he adds mention of the Father, lest any one should think that
the Son is unbegotten. Since therefore he had affirmed His power to be so great,
and had referred the whole unto the Son, saying that He had "become wisdom
unto us, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption;"— through the
Son again referring the whole to the Father, he says, "of God."
But why said he not, He has made us wise, but "was made unto us
wisdom?" To show the copiousness of the gift. As if he had said, He gave unto
us Himself. And observe how he goes on in order. For first He made us wise by
delivering from error, and then righteous and holy, by giving us the Spirit; and
He has so delivered us from all our evils as to be "of Him," and this is not meant
to express communication of being, ([οὐσιώσεως]) but is spoken concerning the