THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.22, C.2.

by these you may be made partakers of the Divine Nature."
Moreover, He reconciled the human race to God, according to Col.
1:19,20: "In Him" (i.e. Christ) "it hath well pleased (the Father) that all
fulness should dwell, and through Him to reconcile all things unto
Himself." Therefore it is most fitting that Christ should be a priest.
Reply to Objection 1: Hierarchical power appertains to the angels,
inasmuch as they also are between God and man, as Dionysius
explains (Coel. Hier. ix), so that the priest himself, as being between
God and man, is called an angel, according to Malachi 2:7: "He is the
angel of the Lord of hosts." Now Christ was greater than the angels,
not only in His Godhead, but also in His humanity, as having the
fulness of grace and glory. Wherefore also He had the hierarchical or
priestly power in a higher degree than the angels, so that even the
angels were ministers of His priesthood, according to Mt. 4:11:
"Angels came and ministered unto Him." But, in regard to His
passibility, He "was made a little lower than the angels," as the
Apostle says (Heb. 2:9): and thus He was conformed to those
wayfarers who are ordained to the priesthood.
Reply to Objection 2: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 26):
"What is like in every particular must be, of course, identical, and not
a copy." Since, therefore, the priesthood of the Old Law was a figure
of the priesthood of Christ, He did not wish to be born of the stock of
the figurative priests, that it might be made clear that His priesthood
is not quite the same as theirs, but differs therefrom as truth from
figure.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 7, Article 7, ad 1),
other men have certain graces distributed among them: but Christ,
as being the Head of all, has the perfection of all graces. Wherefore,
as to others, one is a lawgiver, another is a priest, another is a king;
but all these concur in Christ, as the fount of all grace. Hence it is
written (Is. 33:22): "The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our law-giver,
the Lord is our King: He will" come and "save us."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.22, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ was Himself both priest and

victim?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ Himself was not both priest
and victim. For it is the duty of the priest to slay the victim. But
Christ did not kill Himself. Therefore He was not both priest and
victim.
Objection 2: Further, the priesthood of Christ has a greater similarity
to the Jewish priesthood, instituted by God, than to the priesthood of
the Gentiles, by which the demons were worshiped. Now in the old
Law man was never offered up in sacrifice: whereas this was very
much to be reprehended in the sacrifices of the Gentiles, according
to Ps. 105:38: "They shed innocent blood; the blood of their sons
and of their daughters, which they sacrificed to the idols of
Chanaan." Therefore in Christ's priesthood the Man Christ should
not have been the victim.
Objection 3: Further, every victim, through being offered to God, is
consecrated to God. But the humanity of Christ was from the
beginning consecrated and united to God. Therefore it cannot be
said fittingly that Christ as man was a victim.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 5:2): "Christ hath loved us,
and hath delivered Himself for us, an oblation and a victim to God for
an odor of sweetness."
I answer that, As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 5): "Every visible
sacrifice is a sacrament, that is a sacred sign, of the invisible
sacrifice." Now the invisible sacrifice is that by which a man offers
his spirit to God, according to Ps. 50:19: "A sacrifice to God is an
afflicted spirit." Wherefore, whatever is offered to God in order to
raise man's spirit to Him, may be called a sacrifice.
Now man is required to offer sacrifice for three reasons. First, for the
remission of sin, by which he is turned away from God. Hence the
Apostle says (Heb. 5:1) that it appertains to the priest "to offer gifts
and sacrifices for sins." Secondly, that man may be preserved in a
state of grace, by ever adhering to God, wherein his peace and
salvation consist. Wherefore under the old Law the sacrifice of
peace-offerings was offered up for the salvation of the offerers, as is