FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.2.

be several habits in one power. The reason for this is that the subject
of a habit is a passive power, as stated above (Question 51, Article
2): for it is only an active power that cannot be the subject of a habit,
as was clearly shown above (Question 51, Article 2). Now a passive
power is compared to the determinate act of any species, as matter
to form: because, just as matter is determinate to one form by one
agent, so, too, is a passive power determined by the nature of one
active object to an act specifically one. Wherefore, just as several
objects can move one passive power, so can one passive power be
the subject of several acts or perfections specifically diverse. Now
habits are qualities or forms adhering to a power, and inclining that
power to acts of a determinate species. Consequently several habits,
even as several specifically different acts, can belong to one power.
Reply to Objection 1: Even as in natural things, diversity of species
is according to the form, and diversity of genus, according to matter,
as stated in Metaph. v, text. 33 (since things that differ in matter
belong to different genera): so, too, generic diversity of objects
entails a difference of powers (wherefore the Philosopher says in
Ethic. vi, 1, that "those objects that differ generically belong to
different departments of the soul"); while specific difference of
objects entails a specific difference of acts, and consequently of
habits also. Now things that differ in genus differ in species, but not
vice versa. Wherefore the acts and habits of different powers differ in
species: but it does not follow that different habits are in different
powers, for several can be in one power. And even as several genera
may be included in one genus, and several species be contained in
one species; so does it happen that there are several species of
habits and powers.
Reply to Objection 2: Although a power is simple as to its essence, it
is multiple virtually, inasmuch as it extends to many specifically
different acts. Consequently there is nothing to prevent many
superficially different habits from being in one power.
Reply to Objection 3: A body is informed by its shape as by its own
terminal boundaries: whereas a habit is not the terminal boundary of
a power, but the disposition of a power to an act as to its ultimate
term. Consequently one same power cannot have several acts at the
same time, except in so far as perchance one act is comprised in
another; just as neither can a body have several shapes, save in so
far as one shape enters into another, as a three-sided in a four-sided
figure. For the intellect cannot understand several things at the same

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.54, C.2.

time "actually"; and yet it can know several things at the same time
"habitually."