What then is the subject of enquiry? This same Paul once having come before
Festus, while discoursing to him, and defending himself concerning the charges
which the Jews had alleged against him, and telling how he had seen Jesus, how
he had heard that blessed voice; how he had been struck with blindness and
recovered sight, and had fallen down and risen up again; how he had come a
captive into Damascus, bound without chains; after speaking likewise of the Law
and of the Prophets, and showing that they had foretold all these things, he
captured the judge, and almost persuaded him to come over to himself. For such
are the souls of holy men: when they have fallen into dangers, they do not
consider how they may be delivered from dangers, but strive every way how
they may capture their persecutors. Just so did it then happen. He came in to
defend himself, and he departed taking the judge with him! And to this the judge
bore witness, saying, "Almost you persuade me to be a Christian." [Acts 26:28]
And this ought to have happened today; and this Prefect, on coming among you,
ought to have admired your magnanimity, your fortitude, your perfect
tranquillity; and to have gone away, taking with him a lesson from your good
order, admiring your assembly, praising your congress, and learning from the
actual fact, how great a difference there is between Gentiles and Christians!
8. But as I was saying:— When Paul had caught him, and he said, "Almost
you persuade me to be a Christian," Paul answered thus, "I would to God that
not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether
such as I am, except these bonds." [Acts 26:29] What do you say, O Paul? When
you write to the Ephesians, you say, "I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord,
beseech you, that you walk worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called."
[Ephesians 4:1] And when you speak to Timothy, "Wherein I suffer trouble as an
evil-doer, even unto bonds." [2 Timothy 2:9] And again, when to Philemon, thus;
"Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ." [Philippians 1:1] And again, when debating
with the Jews, you say, "For the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain."
[Acts 28:20] And writing to the Philippians, you say, "Many of the brethren in
the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word

without fear." [Philippians 1:14] Every where you bear about the chain,
everywhere you put forward your bonds, and boastest in the thing. But when you
come to the tribunal, you betray your philosophy, where it were right to have
spoken the most boldly, and sayest to the judge, "I would to God that you might
become a Christian 'without' these bonds!" Yet surely if the bonds were good,
and so good, that they could be the means of making others to grow bold in the
cause of true religion; (for this very thing you declared before, when you said,
"Many of the brethren, waxing confident by my bonds, did speak the word
without fear"); for what reason do you not glory in this thing in the presence of
the judge, but doest even the reverse?
9. Does not what I say appear a question? The solution of it, however, I will
bring forward at once. For Paul acted thus, not from distress or fear, but from an
abundance of wisdom and spiritual understanding. And how this was, I proceed
to explain. He was addressing a Gentile, and an unbeliever, who knew nothing of
our matters. Hence he was unwilling to introduce him by way of disagreeable
things, but as he said, "I became to them that are without law, as without law;"
[1 Corinthians 9:21] so he acted in the present instance. His meaning is, If the
Gentile hear of bonds and tribulations, he will straightway be taking flight; since
he knows not the power of bonds. First, let him become a believer; let him taste
of the word preached, and then he will even of himself hasten towards these
bonds. I have heard the Lord saying, "No man puts a piece of new cloth into an
old garment, for that which is put in to fill it up takes from the garment, and the
rent is made worse. Neither do men put new wine into old wine-skins; else the
wine-skins burst." The soul of this man is an old garment: an old wine-skin. It is
not renewed by the faith, nor renovated by the grace of the Spirit. It is yet weak
and earthly. It affects the things of this life. It flutters eagerly after worldly show.
It loves a glory that is present. Should he hear at once, even from the first, that if
he becomes a Christian he will become immediately a prisoner, and will be
encompassed with a chain; feeling ashamed and indignant, he will recoil from
the word preached. Therefore, says he, "Except these bonds." [Acts 26:28] Not