FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.10.

reason; wherefore it has the character of good. Now it must needs be
either directed or not directed to a due end. Consequently every
human action that proceeds from deliberate reason, if it be
considered in the individual, must be good or bad.
If, however, it does not proceed from deliberate reason, but from
some act of the imagination, as when a man strokes his beard, or
moves his hand or foot; such an action, properly speaking, is not
moral or human; since this depends on the reason. Hence it will be
indifferent, as standing apart from the genus of moral actions.
Reply to Objection 1: For an action to be indifferent in its species
can be understood in several ways. First in such a way that its
species demands that it remain indifferent; and the objection
proceeds along this line. But no action can be specifically indifferent
thus: since no object of human action is such that it cannot be
directed to good or evil, either through its end or through a
circumstance. Secondly, specific indifference of an action may be
due to the fact that as far as its species is concerned, it is neither
good nor bad. Wherefore it can be made good or bad by something
else. Thus man, as far as his species is concerned, is neither white
nor black; nor is it a condition of his species that he should not be
black or white; but blackness or whiteness is superadded to man by
other principles than those of his species.
Reply to Objection 2: The Philosopher states that a man is evil,
properly speaking, if he be hurtful to others. And accordingly,
because he hurts none save himself. And the same applies to all
others who are not hurtful to other men. But we say here that evil, in
general, is all that is repugnant to right reason. And in this sense
every individual action is either good or bad, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Whenever an end is intended by deliberate
reason, it belongs either to the good of some virtue, or to the evil of
some vice. Thus, if a man's action is directed to the support or
repose of his body, it is also directed to the good of virtue, provided
he direct his body itself to the good of virtue. The same clearly
applies to other actions.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.10.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether a circumstance places a moral action in

the species of good or evil?
Objection 1: It would seem that a circumstance cannot place a moral
action in the species of good or evil. For the species of an action is
taken from its object. But circumstances differ from the object.
Therefore circumstances do not give an action its species.
Objection 2: Further, circumstances are as accidents in relation to
the moral action, as stated above (Question 7, Article 1). But an
accident does not constitute the species. Therefore a circumstance
does not constitute a species of good or evil.
Objection 3: Further, one thing is not in several species. But one
action has several circumstances. Therefore a circumstance does
not place a moral action in a species of good or evil.
On the contrary, Place is a circumstance. But place makes a moral
action to be in a certain species of evil; for theft of a thing from a
holy place is a sacrilege. Therefore a circumstance makes a moral
action to be specifically good or bad.
I answer that, Just as the species of natural things are constituted by
their natural forms, so the species of moral actions are constituted
by forms as conceived by the reason, as is evident from what was
said above (Article 5). But since nature is determinate to one thing,
nor can a process of nature go on to infinity, there must needs be
some ultimate form, giving a specific difference, after which no
further specific difference is possible. Hence it is that in natural
things, that which is accidental to a thing, cannot be taken as a
difference constituting the species. But the process of reason is not
fixed to one particular term, for at any point it can still proceed
further. And consequently that which, in one action, is taken as a
circumstance added to the object that specifies the action, can again
be taken by the directing reason, as the principal condition of the
object that determines the action's species. Thus to appropriate
another's property is specified by reason of the property being
"another's," and in this respect it is placed in the species of theft;
and if we consider that action also in its bearing on place or time,
then this will be an additional circumstance. But since the reason
can direct as to place, time, and the like, it may happen that the