soul. And yet Joseph, though he had been sold and made a slave, and had
tenanted a prison, uttered not even then a bitter word against the authors of his
sorrows. But what says he? "Indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the
Hebrews;" [Genesis 40:15] and adds not by whom. For he feels more ashamed
for the wickedness of his brethren, than they who wrought them. Such too ought
to be our disposition, to grieve for them who wrong us more than they
themselves do. For the hurt passes on to them. As then they who kick against
nails, yet are proud of it, are fit objects of pity and lamentation on account of this
madness; so they who wrong those that do them no evil, inasmuch as they
wound their own souls, are fit objects for many moans and lamentations, not for
curses. For nothing is more polluted than a soul that curses, or more impure than
a tongue that offers such sacrifices. You are a man; vomit not forth the poison of
asps. You are a man; become not a wild beast. For this was your mouth made,
not that you should bite but that you should heal the wounds of others.
'Remember the charge I have given you,' says God, 'to pardon and forgive. But
you beseech Me also to be a party to the overthrow of my own commandments,
and devourest your brother, and reddenest your tongue, as madmen do their teeth
on their own members.' How, do you think, the devil is pleased and laughs, when
he hears such a prayer? And how, God is provoked, and turns from and abhors
you, when you beseech things like these? Than which, what can be more
dangerous? For if none should approach the mysteries that has enemies: how
must not he, that not only has, but also prays against them, be excluded even
from the outer courts themselves? Thinking then on these things, and
considering the Subject of the Sacrifice, that He was sacrificed for enemies; let
us not have an enemy: and if we have, let us pray for him; that we too having
obtained forgiveness of the sins we have committed, may stand with boldness at
the tribunal of Christ; to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

## Homily 6 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 3:1
Are we beginning, again to commend ourselves? Or need we, as do some,
epistles of commendation to you or letters of commendation from you?
He anticipates and puts himself an objection which others would have urged
against him, 'Thou vauntest yourself;' and this though he had before employed so
strong a corrective in the expressions, "Who is sufficient for these things?" and,
"of sincerity...speak we." [2 Corinthians 2:16-17] Howbeit he is not satisfied
with these. For such is his character. From appearing to say any thing great of
himself he is far removed, and avoids it even to great superfluity and excess.
And mark, I pray you, by this instance also, the abundance of his wisdom. For a
thing of woeful aspect, I mean tribulations, he so much exalted and showed to be
bright and lustrous, that out of what he said the present objection rose up against
him. And he does so also towards the end. For after having enumerated
numberless perils, insults, straits, necessities, and as many such like things as be,
he added, "We commend not ourselves, but speak as giving you occasion to
glory." [2 Corinthians 5:12] And he expresses this again with vehemence in that
place, and with more of encouragement. For here the words are those of love,
"Need we, as do some, epistles of commendation?" but there what he says is full
of a kind of pride even, necessarily and properly so, of pride, I say, and anger.
"For we commend not ourselves again," says he, "but speak as giving you
occasion to glory;" [2 Corinthians 5:12] and, "Again, think ye that we excuse
ourselves unto you? For in the sight of God speak we in Christ. For I fear lest by
any means when I come I should not find you such as I would, and should myself
be found of you such as you would not." (ib. 12:19, 20.) For to prevent all
appearance of a wish to flatter, as though he desired honor from them, he speaks