SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.5.

knowledge under the guise of faith. The third reason is for the sake
of certitude. For human reason is very deficient in things concerning
God. A sign of this is that philosophers in their researches, by
natural investigation, into human affairs, have fallen into many
errors, and have disagreed among themselves. And consequently, in
order that men might have knowledge of God, free of doubt and
uncertainty, it was necessary for Divine matters to be delivered to
them by way of faith, being told to them, as it were, by God Himself
Who cannot lie.
Reply to Objection 1: The researches of natural reason do not suffice
mankind for the knowledge of Divine matters, even of those that can
be proved by reason: and so it is not superfluous if these others be
believed.
Reply to Objection 2: Science and faith cannot be in the same
subject and about the same object: but what is an object of science
for one, can be an object of faith for another, as stated above
(Question 1, Article 5).
Reply to Objection 3: Although all things that can be known by
science are of one common scientific aspect, they do not all alike
lead man to beatitude: hence they are not all equally proposed to our
belief.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether man is bound to believe anything

explicitly?
Objection 1: It would seem that man is not bound to believe anything
explicitly. For no man is bound to do what is not in his power. Now it
is not in man's power to believe a thing explicitly, for it is written
(Rm. 10:14,15): "How shall they believe Him, of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall
they preach unless they be sent?" Therefore man is not bound to
believe anything explicitly.
Objection 2: Further, just as we are directed to God by faith, so are
we by charity. Now man is not bound to keep the precepts of charity,
and it is enough if he be ready to fulfil them: as is evidenced by the
precept of Our Lord (Mt. 5:39): "If one strike thee on one cheek, turn
to him also the other"; and by others of the same kind, according to
Augustine's exposition (De Serm. Dom. in Monte xix). Therefore
neither is man bound to believe anything explicitly, and it is enough
if he be ready to believe whatever God proposes to be believed.
Objection 3: Further, the good of faith consists in obedience,
according to Rm. 1:5: "For obedience to the faith in all nations." Now
the virtue of obedience does not require man to keep certain fixed
precepts, but it is enough that his mind be ready to obey, according
to Ps. 118:60: "I am ready and am not troubled; that I may keep Thy
commandments." Therefore it seems enough for faith, too, that man
should be ready to believe whatever God may propose, without his
believing anything explicitly.
On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 11:6): "He that cometh to God,
must believe that He is, and is a rewarder to them that seek Him."
I answer that, The precepts of the Law, which man is bound to fulfil,
concern acts of virtue which are the means of attaining salvation.
Now an act of virtue, as stated above (FS, Question 60, Article 5)
depends on the relation of the habit to its object. Again two things
may be considered in the object of any virtue; namely, that which is
the proper and direct object of that virtue, and that which is
accidental and consequent to the object properly so called. Thus it
belongs properly and directly to the object of fortitude, to face the
dangers of death, and to charge at the foe with danger to oneself, for