κὰντεῦθεν δηλῶν]). Now if they were ministering to another, how come they to
seize the authority for themselves? But I would have you consider how in no
wise he lays the blame on them as seizing it for themselves, but on those who
endow them with it. For the ground-work of the error lay in the multitude; since,
had the one fallen away, the other would have been broken up. Here are two
points which he has skilfully provided for: in that first he has prepared, as by
mining ([ὑπορύξας,]) in the quarter where it was necessary to overthrow the
mischief; and next, on their side, in not attracting ill-will, nor yet making them
more contentious.
"Even as Christ ([ὁ] [Κύριος], rec. text.) gave to every man."
For not even this small thing itself was of themselves, but of God, who put
it into their hands. For lest they might say, What then? Are we not to love those
that minister unto us? Yea, says he; but you should know to what extent. For not
even this thing itself is of them, but of God who gave it.

1 Corinthians 3:6
"I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase."
That is, I first cast the word into the ground; but, in order that the seeds
might not wither away through temptations, Apollos added his own part. But the
whole was of God.

1 Corinthians 3:7
6. "So then, neither is he that plants any thing, neither he that waters, but
God that gives the increase."
Do you observe the manner in which he soothes them, so that they should
not be too much irritated, on hearing, "Who is this person," and "Who is that?"
"Nay, both are invidious, namely, both the saying, 'Who is this person? Who the
other,'" and the saying, that "neither he that plants nor he that waters is any
thing." How then does he soften these expressions? First, By attaching the
contempt to his own person, "Who is Paul, and who Apollos?" and next, by
referring the whole to God who gave all things. For after he had said, "Such a
person planted," and added, "He that plants is nothing," he subjoined, "but God
that gives the increase." Nor does he stop even here, but applies again another
healing clause, in the words.

1 Corinthians 3:8
"He that plants and he that waters, are one."
For by means of this he establishes another point also, viz. that they should
not be exalted one against another. His assertion, that they are one, refers to their
inability to do any thing without "God that gives the increase." And thus saying,
he permitted not either those who labored much to lift themselves up against
those who had contributed less; nor these again to envy the former. In the next
place, since this had a tendency to make men more indolent, I mean, all being
esteemed as one, whether they have labored much or little; observe how he sets
this right, saying, "But each shall receive his own reward according to his own
labor." As if he said, Fear not, because I said, You are one; for, compared with
the work of God, they are one; howbeit, in regard to labors, they are not so, but
"each shall receive his own reward."
Then he smooths it still more, having succeeded in what he wished; and
gratifies them, where it is allowed, with liberality.