thunder issuing forth when the law was given on the mountain. For
the purpose of the bodily appearances of those things was that they
might signify, and then pass away." Thus the visible mission is
neither displayed by prophetic vision, which belongs to the
imagination, and not to the body, nor by the sacramental signs of the
Old and New Testament, wherein certain pre-existing things are
employed to signify something. But the Holy Ghost is said to be sent
visibly, inasmuch as He showed Himself in certain creatures as in
signs especially made for that purpose.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the whole Trinity makes those
creatures, still they are made in order to show forth in some special
way this or that person. For as the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are
signified by diverse names, so also can They each one be signified
by different things; although neither separation nor diversity exists
amongst Them.
Reply to Objection 4: It was necessary for the Son to be declared as
the author of sanctification, as explained above. Thus the visible
mission of the Son was necessarily made according to the rational
nature to which it belongs to act, and which is capable of
sanctification; whereas any other creature could be the sign of
sanctification. Nor was such a visible creature, formed for such a
purpose, necessarily assumed by the Holy Ghost into the unity of
His person, since it was not assumed or used for the purpose of
action, but only for the purpose of a sign; and so likewise it was not
required to last beyond what its use required.
Reply to Objection 5: Those visible creatures were formed by the
ministry of the angels, not to signify the person of an angel, but to
signify the Person of the Holy Ghost. Thus, as the Holy Ghost
resided in those visible creatures as the one signified in the sign, on
that account the Holy Ghost is said to be sent visibly, and not as an
angel.
Reply to Objection 6: It is not necessary that the invisible mission
should always be made manifest by some visible external sign; but,
as is said (1 Cor. 12:7)---"the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man unto profit"---that is, of the Church. This utility consists in
the confirmation and propagation of the faith by such visible signs.
This has been done chiefly by Christ and by the apostles, according
to Heb. 2:3, "which having begun to be declared by the Lord, was
confirmed unto us by them that heard."

Thus in a special sense, a mission of the Holy Ghost was directed to
Christ, to the apostles, and to some of the early saints on whom the
Church was in a way founded; in such a manner, however, that the
visible mission made to Christ should show forth the invisible
mission made to Him, not at that particular time, but at the first
moment of His conception. The visible mission was directed to
Christ at the time of His baptism by the figure of a dove, a fruitful
animal, to show forth in Christ the authority of the giver of grace by
spiritual regeneration; hence the Father's voice spoke, "This is My
beloved Son" (Mt. 3:17), that others might be regenerated to the
likeness of the only Begotten. The Transfiguration showed it forth in
the appearance of a bright cloud, to show the exuberance of
doctrine; and hence it was said, "Hear ye Him" (Mt. 17:5). To the
apostles the mission was directed in the form of breathing to show
forth the power of their ministry in the dispensation of the
sacraments; and hence it was said, "Whose sins you shall forgive,
they are forgiven" (Jn. 20:23): and again under the sign of fiery
tongues to show forth the office of teaching; whence it is said that,
"they began to speak with divers tongues" (Acts 2:4). The visible
mission of the Holy Ghost was fittingly not sent to the fathers of the
Old Testament, because the visible mission of the Son was to be
accomplished before that of the Holy Ghost; since the Holy Ghost
manifests the Son, as the Son manifests the Father. Visible
apparitions of the divine persons were, however, given to the
Fathers of the Old Testament which, indeed, cannot be called visible
missions; because, according to Augustine (De Trin. ii, 17), they
were not sent to designate the indwelling of the divine person by
grace, but for the manifestation of something else.