cause he awaits the fullness of His adult age, and throughout it all fulfills the
law, and so comes to His baptism, adding it as something which follows upon
the complete keeping of all the other commandments.
To prove that this was to Him the last good work of those enjoined by the
law, hear His own words: "For thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness."
[Matthew 3:15] Now what He says is like this: We have performed all the duties
of the law, we have not transgressed so much as one commandment. Since
therefore this only remains, this too must be added, and so shall we "fulfill all
righteousness." For He here calls by the name of "righteousness" the full
performance of all the commandments.
2. Now that on this account Christ came to His baptism, is from this
evident. But wherefore was this baptism devised for Him? For that not of
himself did the son of Zacharias proceed to this, but of God who moved him—
this Luke also declares, when he says, "The word of the Lord came unto him,"
[Luke 3:2] that is, His commandment. And he himself too says, "He that sent me
to baptize with water, the same said to me, upon whom you shall see the Spirit
descending like a dove, and remaining on Him, the same is He which baptizes
with the Holy Ghost." [John 1:33] Wherefore then was he sent to baptize? The
Baptist again makes this also plain to us, saying, "I knew Him not, but that He
should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water."
[John 1:31]
And if this was the only cause, how says Luke, that "he came into the
country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of
sins?" [Luke 3:3] And yet it had not remission, but this gift pertained unto the
baptism that was given afterwards; for in this "we are buried with Him," and our
old man was then crucified with Him, and before the cross there does not appear
remission anywhere; for everywhere this is imputed to His blood. And Paul too
says, "But you are washed, but you are sanctified," not by the baptism of John,
but "in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God."
[1 Corinthians 6:11] And elsewhere too he says, "John verily preached a baptism

of repentance," (he says not "of remission,") "that they should believe in Him
that should come after him." [Acts 19:4] For when the sacrifice was not yet
offered, neither had the spirit yet come down, nor sin was put away, nor the
enmity removed, nor the curse destroyed; how was remission to take place?
What means then, "for the remission of sins?"
The Jews were senseless, and had never any feeling of their own sins, but
while they were justly accountable for the worst evils, they were justifying
themselves in every respect; and this more than anything caused their
destruction, and led them away from the faith. This, for example, Paul himself
was laying to their charge, when he said, that "they being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and going about to establish their own, had not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God." [Romans 10:3] And again: "What
shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not after righteousness,
have attained to righteousness; but Israel, which followed after the law of
righteousness, has not attained unto the law of righteousness. Wherefore?
Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by works."
Since therefore this was the cause of their evils, John comes, doing nothing
else but bringing them to a sense of their own sins. This, among other things, his
very garb declared, being that of repentance and confession. This was indicated
also by what he preached, for nothing else did he say, but "bring forth fruits meet
for repentance." [Matthew 3:8] Forasmuch then as their not condemning their
own sins, as Paul also has explained, made them start off from Christ, while their
coming to a sense thereof would set them upon longing to seek after their
Redeemer, and to desire remission; this John came to bring about, and to
persuade them to repent, not in order that they might be punished, but that
having become by repentance more humble, and condemning themselves, they
might hasten to receive remission.
But let us see how exactly he has expressed it; how, having said, that he
"came preaching the baptism of repentance in the wilderness of Judæa," he adds,
"for remission," as though he said, For this end he exhorted them to confess and