than any father, juster than any judge, and more anxious than any husbandman,
in healing these souls of ours? What then could be more insane and senseless
than they who in the midst of so great good order, say that we are deprived of the
providence of God? For just as if some one were to contend that the soul was
murky and cold, he would produce an example of extreme insanity, by his
opinion; so if any one doubts about the providence of God, much rather is he
liable to charges of madness.
Not so manifest is the Sun, as the providence of God is clear. But
nevertheless some dare to say that Demons administer our affairs. What can I
do? You have a loving Master. He chooses rather to be blasphemed by you
through these words, than to commit your affairs to the Demons and persuade
you by the reality how Demons administer. For then you would know their
wickedness well by the experience of it. But rather indeed now it is possible to
set it before you as it were by a certain small example. Certain men possessed of
Demons coming forth out of the tombs met Christ, and the Demons kept
beseeching him to suffer them to enter the herd of swine. And he suffered them,
and they went away, and straightway precipitated them all headlong. Thus do
Demons govern; and yet to them the swine were of no particular account, but
with you there is ever a warfare without a truce, and an implacable fight, and
undying hatred. And if in the case of those with whom they had nothing in
common they did not even endure that they should be allowed a brief breathing
space of time: if they had gotten unto their power us their enemies who are
perpetually stinging them what would they not have done? And what incurable
mischief would they not have accomplished? For for this reason God let them
fall upon the herd of swine, in order that in the case of the bodies of irrational
animals you may learn their wickedness, and that they would have done to the
possessed the things which they did to the swine, had not the demoniacs in their
very madness experienced the providence of God, is evident to all: and now
therefore when you see a man excited by a Demon, worship the Master. Learn
the wickedness of the Demons. For it is possible to see both things in the case of

these Demons, the lovingkindness of God, and the evil of the Demons. The evil
of the Demons when they harass and disturb the soul of the demented: and the
lovingkindness of God whenever he restrains and hinders so savage a Demon,
who has taken up his abode within, and desires to hurl the man headlong, and
does not allow him to use his own power to the full, but suffers him to exhibit
just so much strength, as both to bring the man to his senses, and make his own
wickedness apparent. Do you wish to form another example to see once more
how a Demon arranges matters when God allows him to use his own power?
Consider the herds, the flocks of Job, how in one instant of time he annihilated
all, consider the pitiable death of the children, the blow that was dealt to his
body: and you shall see the savage and inhuman and unsparing character of the
wickedness of the Demons, and from these things you shall know clearly that if
God had entrusted the whole of this world to their authority, they would have
confused and disturbed everything, and would have assigned to us their
treatment of the swine, and of those herds, since not even for a little breathing
space of time could they have endured to spare us our salvation. If Demons were
to arrange affairs, we should be in no better condition than possessed men, yea
rather we should be worse than they. For God did not give them over entirely to
the tyranny of the Demons, otherwise they would suffer far worse things than
these which they now suffer. And I would ask this of those who say these things,
what kind of disorder they behold in the present, that they set down all our
affairs to the arrangement of Demons? And yet we behold the sun for so many
years proceeding day by day in regular order, a manifold band of stars keeping
their own order, the courses of the moon unimpeded, an invariable succession of
night and day, all things, both above and below, as it were in a certain fitting
harmony, yea rather even far more, and more accurately each keeping his own
place, and not departing from the order which God who made them ordained
from the beginning.
7. And what is the use of all this, says one, when the heaven indeed, and
sun, and moon, and the band of stars, and all the rest keep much good order, but