SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.6.

and so, as such, he belongs to the community. Hence by killing
himself he injures the community, as the Philosopher declares
(Ethic. v, 11). Thirdly, because life is God's gift to man, and is subject
to His power, Who kills and makes to live. Hence whoever takes his
own life, sins against God, even as he who kills another's slave, sins
against that slave's master, and as he who usurps to himself
judgment of a matter not entrusted to him. For it belongs to God
alone to pronounce sentence of death and life, according to Dt.
32:39, "I will kill and I will make to live."
Reply to Objection 1: Murder is a sin, not only because it is contrary
to justice, but also because it is opposed to charity which a man
should have towards himself: in this respect suicide is a sin in
relation to oneself. In relation to the community and to God, it is
sinful, by reason also of its opposition to justice.
Reply to Objection 2: One who exercises public authority may
lawfully put to death an evil-doer, since he can pass judgment on
him. But no man is judge of himself. Wherefore it is not lawful for
one who exercises public authority to put himself to death for any
sin whatever: although he may lawfully commit himself to the
judgment of others.
Reply to Objection 3: Man is made master of himself through his freewill: wherefore he can lawfully dispose of himself as to those matters
which pertain to this life which is ruled by man's free-will. But the
passage from this life to another and happier one is subject not to
man's free-will but to the power of God. Hence it is not lawful for man
to take his own life that he may pass to a happier life, nor that he
may escape any unhappiness whatsoever of the present life,
because the ultimate and most fearsome evil of this life is death, as
the Philosopher states (Ethic. iii, 6). Therefore to bring death upon
oneself in order to escape the other afflictions of this life, is to adopt
a greater evil in order to avoid a lesser. In like manner it is unlawful
to take one's own life on account of one's having committed a sin,
both because by so doing one does oneself a very great injury, by
depriving oneself of the time needful for repentance, and because it
is not lawful to slay an evildoer except by the sentence of the public
authority. Again it is unlawful for a woman to kill herself lest she be
violated, because she ought not to commit on herself the very great
sin of suicide, to avoid the lesser sir; of another. For she commits no
sin in being violated by force, provided she does not consent, since
"without consent of the mind there is no stain on the body," as the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.6.

Blessed Lucy declared. Now it is evident that fornication and
adultery are less grievous sins than taking a man's, especially one's
own, life: since the latter is most grievous, because one injures
oneself, to whom one owes the greatest love. Moreover it is most
dangerous since no time is left wherein to expiate it by repentance.
Again it is not lawful for anyone to take his own life for fear he
should consent to sin, because "evil must not be done that good
may come" (Rm. 3:8) or that evil may be avoided especially if the evil
be of small account and an uncertain event, for it is uncertain
whether one will at some future time consent to a sin, since God is
able to deliver man from sin under any temptation whatever.
Reply to Objection 4: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 21), "not even
Samson is to be excused that he crushed himself together with his
enemies under the ruins of the house, except the Holy Ghost, Who
had wrought many wonders through him, had secretly commanded
him to do this." He assigns the same reason in the case of certain
holy women, who at the time of persecution took their own lives, and
who are commemorated by the Church.
Reply to Objection 5: It belongs to fortitude that a man does not
shrink from being slain by another, for the sake of the good of virtue,
and that he may avoid sin. But that a man take his own life in order
to avoid penal evils has indeed an appearance of fortitude (for which
reason some, among whom was Razias, have killed themselves
thinking to act from fortitude), yet it is not true fortitude, but rather a
weakness of soul unable to bear penal evils, as the Philosopher
(Ethic. iii, 7) and Augustine (De Civ. Dei 22,23) declare.