bread . . . and the chalice"; but it is not to be understood that He took
them merely into His hands, as some say. but that He took them in
the same way as He gave them to others to take. Hence when He
said to the disciples, "Take ye and eat," and again, "Take ye and
drink," it is to be understood that He Himself, in taking it, both ate
and drank. Hence some have composed this rhyme:
"The King at supper sits,
The twelve as guests He greets,
Clasping Himself in His hands,
The food Himself now eats."
Reply to Objection 2: As was said above (Question 76, Article 5),
Christ as contained under this sacrament stands in relation to place,
not according to His own dimensions, but according to the
dimensions of the sacramental species; so that Christ is Himself in
every place where those species are. And because the species were
able to be both in the hands and the mouth of Christ, the entire
Christ could be in both His hands and mouth. Now this could not
come to pass were His relation to place to be according to His
proper dimensions.
Reply to Objection 3: As was stated above (Question 79, Article 1, ad
2), the effect of this sacrament is not merely an increase of habitual
grace, but furthermore a certain actual delectation of spiritual
sweetness. But although grace was not increased in Christ through
His receiving this sacrament, yet He had a certain spiritual
delectation from the new institution of this sacrament. Hence He
Himself said (Lk. 22:15): "With desire I have desired to eat this Pasch
with you," which words Eusebius explains of the new mystery of the
New Testament, which He gave to the disciples. And therefore He ate
it both spiritually and sacramentally, inasmuch as He received His
own body under the sacrament which sacrament of His own body He
both understood and prepared; yet differently from others who
partake of it both sacramentally and spiritually, for these receive an
increase of grace, and they have need of the sacramental signs for
perceiving its truth.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.81, C.2.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.81, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ gave His body to Judas?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ did not give His body to Judas.
Because, as we read (Mt. 26:29), our Lord, after giving His body and
blood to the disciples, said to them: "I will not drink from henceforth
of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall drink it with you
new in the kingdom of My Father." From this it appears that those to
whom He had given His body and blood were to drink of it again with
Him. But Judas did not drink of it afterwards with Him. Therefore he
did not receive Christ's body and blood with the other disciples.
Objection 2: Further, what the Lord commanded, He Himself fulfilled,
as is said in Acts 1:1: "Jesus began to do and to teach." But He gave
the command (Mt. 7:6): "Give not that which is holy to dogs."
Therefore, knowing Judas to be a sinner, seemingly He did not give
him His body and blood.
Objection 3: Further, it is distinctly related (Jn. 13:26) that Christ
gave dipped bread to Judas. Consequently, if He gave His body to
him, it appears that He gave it him in the morsel, especially since we
read (Jn. 13:26) that "after the morsel, Satan entered into him." And
on this passage Augustine says (Tract. lxii in Joan.): "From this we
learn how we should beware of receiving a good thing in an evil
way . . . For if he be 'chastised' who does 'not discern,' i.e.
distinguish, the body of the Lord from other meats, how must he be
'condemned' who, feigning himself a friend, comes to His table a
foe?" But (Judas) did not receive our Lord's body with the dipped
morsel; thus Augustine commenting on Jn. 13:26, "When He had
dipped the bread, He gave it to Judas, the son of Simon the
Iscariot ," says (Tract. lxii in Joan.): "Judas did not receive Christ's
body then, as some think who read carelessly." Therefore it seems
that Judas did not receive the body of Christ.
On the contrary, Chrysostom says (Hom. lxxxii in Matth.): "Judas
was not converted while partaking of the sacred mysteries: hence on
both sides his crime becomes the more heinous, both because
imbued with such a purpose he approached the mysteries, and
because he became none the better for approaching, neither from
fear, nor from the benefit received, nor from the honor conferred on
him."