imparted to me any additional knowledge.
Ver. 7. "But contrariwise."
Some hold his meaning to be, not only that the Apostles did not instruct
him, but that they were instructed by him. But I would not say this, for what
could they, each of whom was himself perfectly instructed, have learned from
him? He does not therefore intend this by the expression, "contrariwise," but that
so far were they from blaming, that they praised him: for praise is the contrary of
blame. Some would probably here reply: Why did not the Apostles, if they
praised your procedure, as the proper consequence abolish circumcision? Now to
assert that they did abolish it Paul considered much too bold, and inconsistent
with his own admission. On the other hand, to admit that they had sanctioned
circumcision, would necessarily expose him to another objection. For it would
be said, if the Apostles praised your preaching, yet sanctioned circumcision, they
were inconsistent with themselves. What then is the solution? Is he to say that
they acted thus out of condescension to Judaism? To say this would have shaken
the very foundation of the economy. Wherefore he leaves the subject in suspense
and uncertainty, by the words, "but of those who were reputed to be somewhat; it
makes no matter to me." Which is in effect to say, I accuse not, nor traduce those
holy men; they know what it is they have done; to God must they render their
account. What I am desirous to prove is, that they neither reversed nor corrected
my procedure, nor added to it as in their opinion defective, but gave it their
approbation and assent; and to this Titus and Barnabas bear witness. Then he
adds,
Ver. 7. "When they saw that I had been entrusted with the Gospel of the
Uncircumcision even as Peter with the Gospel of the Circumcision ,"—
The Circumcision and Uncircumcision; meaning, not the things themselves,
but the nations known by these distinctions; wherefore he adds,
Ver. 8. "For He that wrought for Peter unto the Apostleship of the
Circumcision wrought for me also unto the Gentiles."
He calls the Gentiles the Uncircumcision and the Jews the Circumcision,

and declares his own rank to be equal to that of the Apostles; and, by comparing
himself with their Leader not with the others, he shows that the dignity of each
was the same. After he had established the proof of their unanimity, he takes
courage, and proceeds confidently in his argument, not stopping at the Apostles,
but advances to Christ Himself, and to the grace which He had conferred upon
him, and calls the Apostles as his witnesses, saying,
Ver. 9. "And when they perceived the grace that was given unto me, James
and Cephas and John, they who were reputed to be pillars, gave to me and
Barnabas the right hands of fellowship."
He says not when they "heard," but when they "perceived," that is, were
assured by the facts themselves, "they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands
of fellowship." Observe how he gradually proves that his doctrine was ratified
both by Christ and by the Apostles. For grace would neither have been
implanted, nor been operative in him, had not his preaching been approved by
Christ. Where it was for the purpose of comparison with himself, he mentioned
Peter alone; here, when he calls them as witnesses, he names the three together,
"Cephas, James, John," and with an encomium, "who were reputed to be
pillars." Here again the expression "who were reputed" does not impugn the
reality of the fact, but adopts the estimate of others, and implies that these great
and distinguished men, whose fame was universal, bore witness that his
preaching was ratified by Christ, that they were practically informed and
convinced by experience concerning it. "Therefore they gave the right hands of
fellowship" to me, and not to me only, but also to Barnabas, "that we should go
unto the Gentiles, and they unto the Circumcision." Here indeed is exceeding
prudence as well as an incontrovertible proof of their concord. For it shows that
his and their doctrine was interchangeable, and that both approved the same
thing, that they should so preach to the Jews, and he to the Gentiles. Wherefore
he adds,
Ver. 9. "That we should go unto the Gentiles and they unto the
Circumcision."