not for good things only, but also for what seem to be adverse; and how much
soever he may suffer, will count none of his sufferings undeserved. Let us then
also, the more we advance in virtue, so much the more make ourselves contrite;
for indeed this, more than anything else is virtue. Because, as the sharper our
sight is, the more thoroughly do we learn how distant we are from the sky; so the
more we advance in virtue, so much the more are we instructed in the difference
between God and us. And this is no small part of true wisdom, to be able to
perceive our own desert. For he best knows himself, who accounts himself to be
nothing. Thus we see that both David and Abraham, when they had come up to
the highest pitch of virtue, then best fulfilled this; and would call themselves, the
one, "earth and ashes," [Genesis 18:27] the other, "a worm;" and all the saints
too, like these, acknowledge their own wretchedness. So that he surely who is
lifted up in boasting, is the very person to be most ignorant of himself.
Wherefore also in our common practice we are wont to say of the proud, "he
knows not himself," "he is ignorant of himself." And he that knows not himself,
whom will he know? For as he that knows himself will know all things, so he
who knows not this, neither will he know the rest.
Such an one was he that says, "I will exalt my throne above the Heavens."
and did not account himself to be worthy so much as of the title of the apostles,
after so many and so great deeds of goodness.
Him therefore let us emulate and follow. And we shall follow him, if we rid
ourselves of earth, and of things on earth. For nothing makes a man to be so
ignorant of himself, as the being rivetted to worldly concerns: nor does anything
again so much cause men to be rivetted to worldly concerns, as ignorance of
one's self: for these things depend upon each other. I mean, that as he that is fond
of outward glory, and highly esteems the things present, if he strive for ever, is
not permitted to understand himself; so he that overlooks these things will easily
know himself; and having come to the knowledge of himself, he will proceed in
order to all the other parts of virtue.
In order therefore that we may learn this good knowledge, let us,

disengaged from all the perishable things that kindle in us so great flame, and
made aware of their vileness, show forth all lowliness of mind, and self-restraint:
that we may attain unto blessings, both present and future: by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be glory, might, and honor, to
the Father, together with the Holy and Good Spirit, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.

## Homily 26 on Matthew

Matt. VIII. 5.
" And when He was entered into Capernaum, there came unto Him a
centurion, beseeching Him, and saying, Lord, my servant lies at home sick of the
palsy, grievously tormented."
The leper came unto Him "when He had come down from the mountain,"
but this centurion, "when He was entered into Capernaum." Wherefore then did
neither the one nor the other go up into the mountain? Not out of remissness, for
indeed the faith of them both was fervent, but in order not to interrupt His
teaching.
But having come unto Him, he says, "My servant lies at home sick of the
palsy, grievously tormented." Now some say, that by way of excuse he
mentioned also the cause, why he had not brought him. "For neither was it
possible," says he, "paralyzed as he was, and tormented, and at his last gasp, to
lift and convey him." For that he was at the point of expiring, Luke says; "He
was even ready to die." But I say, this is a sign of his having great faith, even
much greater than theirs, who let one down through the roof. [Luke 5:19] For
because he knew for certain, that even a mere command was enough for the
raising up of the patient, he thought it superfluous to bring him.
What then does Jesus? What He had in no case done before, here He does.
For whereas on every occasion He was used to follow the wish of His
supplicants, here He rather springs toward it, and offers not only to heal him, but
also to come to the house. And this He does, that we might learn the virtue of the
centurion. For if He had not made this offer, but had said, "Go your way, let your
servant be healed;" we should have known none of these things.
This at least He did, in an opposite way, in the case also of the Phœnician
woman. For here, when not summoned to the house, of His own accord He says,