because of the feast, they lead Him to the governor.
But mark, I pray you, how the act was forced on, so as to take place at the
feast. For so was it typified from the first.
"Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that He was
condemned, repented, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver."
This was a charge both against him, and against these men; against him, not
because he repented, but because he did so, late, and slowly, and became selfcondemned (for that he delivered Him up, he himself confessed); and against
them, for that having the power to reverse it, they repented not.
But mark, when it is that he feels remorse. When his sin was completed,
and had received an accomplishment. For the devil is like this; he suffers not
those that are not watchful to see the evil before this, lest he whom he has taken,
should repent. At least, when Jesus was saying so many things, he was not
influenced, but when his offense was completed, then repentance came upon
him; and not then profitably. For to condemn it, and to throw down the pieces of
silver, and not to regard the Jewish people, were all acceptable things; but to
hang himself, this again was unpardonable, and a work of an evil spirit. For the
devil led him out of his repentance too soon, so that he should reap no fruit from
thence; and carries him off, by a most disgraceful death, and one manifest to all,
having persuaded him to destroy himself.
But mark, I pray you, the truth shining forth on every side, even by what the
adversaries both do and suffer. For indeed even the very end of the traitor stops
the mouths of them that had condemned Him, and suffers them not to have so
much as any shadow of an excuse, that is surely shameless. For what could they
have to say, when the traitor is shown to pass such a sentence on himself.
But let us see also the words, what is said; "He brought again the thirty
pieces of silver to the chief priests, and says, I have sinned in that I have
betrayed innocent blood. And they said, what is that to us? See thou to that. And
he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and
hanged himself."

For neither could he bear his conscience scourging him. But mark, I pray
you, the Jews too suffering the same things. For these men also, when they ought
to have been amended by what they suffered, do not stop, until they have
completed their sin. For his sin had been completed, for it was a betrayal; but
theirs not yet. But when they too had accomplished theirs, and had nailed Him to
the cross then they also are troubled; at one time saying, "Write not, this is the
king of the Jews" [John 19:21] (and yet why are you afraid? Why are you
troubled at a dead body that is nailed upon the cross?); at another time they
guard over Him, saying, "Lest His disciples steal Him away, and say that He is
risen again; so the last error shall be worse than the first." And yet if they do it,
the thing is refuted, if it be not true. But how should they say so, which did not
dare so much as to stand their ground, when He was seized; and the chief of
them even thrice denied Him, not bearing a damsel's threat. But, as I said, the
chief priests were now troubled; for that they knew the act was a transgression of
the law is manifest, from their saying, "See thou to that."
Hear, you covetous, consider what befell him; how he at the same time lost
the money, and committed the sin, and destroyed his own soul. Such is the
tyranny of covetousness. He enjoyed not the money, neither the present life, nor
that to come, but lost all at once, and having got a bad character even with those
very men, so hanged himself.
But, as I said, after the act, then some see clearly. See at any rate these men
too for a time not willing to have a clear perception of the fact, but saying, "See
thou to that:" which thing of itself is a most heavy charge against them. For this
is the language of men bearing witness to their daring and their transgression,
but intoxicated by their passion, and not willing to forbear their satanical
attempts, but senselessly wrapping themselves up in a veil of feigned ignorance.
For if indeed these things had been said after the crucifixion, and His being
slain, of a truth even then the saying would have had no reasonable meaning,
nevertheless it would not have condemned them so much; but now having Him
yet in your own hands, and having power to release Him, how could ye be able