THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.2.

Apostle calls it (Rm. 4:11): whereas before circumcision was
instituted, men were incorporated in Christ by "faith alone," as
Gregory says (Moral. iv), together with the offering of sacrifices, by
means of which the Fathers of old made profession of their faith.
Again, since Christ's coming, men are incorporated in Christ by
faith; according to Eph. 3:17: "That Christ may dwell by faith in your
hearts." But faith in a thing already present is manifested by a sign
different from that by which it was manifested when that thing was
yet in the future: just as we use other parts of the verb, to signify the
present, the past, and the future. Consequently although the
sacrament itself of Baptism was not always necessary for salvation,
yet faith, of which Baptism is the sacrament, was always necessary.
Reply to Objection 2: As we have stated in the FS, Question 81,
Article 3, ad 2, those who are baptized are renewed in spirit by
Baptism, while their body remains subject to the oldness of sin,
according to Rm. 8:10: "The body, indeed, is dead because of sin,
but the spirit liveth because of justification." Wherefore Augustine
(Contra Julian. vi) proves that "not everything that is in man is
baptized." Now it is manifest that in carnal generation man does not
beget in respect of his soul, but in respect of his body. Consequently
the children of those who are baptized are born with original sin;
wherefore they need to be baptized.
Reply to Objection 3: Those who are sanctified in the womb, receive
indeed grace which cleanses them from original sin, but they do not
therefore receive the character, by which they are conformed to
Christ. Consequently, if any were to be sanctified in the womb now,
they would need to be baptized, in order to be conformed to Christ's
other members by receiving the character.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a man can be saved without Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that no man can be saved without Baptism. For
our Lord said (Jn. 3:5): "Unless a man be born again of water and the
Holy Ghost, he cannot enter the kingdom of God." But those alone
are saved who enter God's kingdom. Therefore none can be saved
without Baptism, by which a man is born again of water and the Holy
Ghost.
Objection 2: Further, in the book De Eccl. Dogm. xli, it is written: "We
believe that no catechumen, though he die in his good works, will
have eternal life, except he suffer martyrdom, which contains all the
sacramental virtue of Baptism." But if it were possible for anyone to
be saved without Baptism, this would be the case specially with
catechumens who are credited with good works, for they seem to
have the "faith that worketh by charity" (Gal. 5:6). Therefore it seems
that none can be saved without Baptism.
Objection 3: Further, as stated above (Article 1; Question 65, Article
4), the sacrament of Baptism is necessary for salvation. Now that is
necessary "without which something cannot be" (Metaph. v).
Therefore it seems that none can obtain salvation without Baptism.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Super Levit. lxxxiv) that "some
have received the invisible sanctification without visible sacraments,
and to their profit; but though it is possible to have the visible
sanctification, consisting in a visible sacrament, without the invisible
sanctification, it will be to no profit." Since, therefore, the sacrament
of Baptism pertains to the visible sanctification, it seems that a man
can obtain salvation without the sacrament of Baptism, by means of
the invisible sanctification.
I answer that, The sacrament or Baptism may be wanting to someone
in two ways. First, both in reality and in desire; as is the case with
those who neither are baptized, nor wished to be baptized: which
clearly indicates contempt of the sacrament, in regard to those who
have the use of the free-will. Consequently those to whom Baptism
is wanting thus, cannot obtain salvation: since neither sacramentally
nor mentally are they incorporated in Christ, through Whom alone
can salvation be obtained.