For, wherever the form of corporeity is found to be divided, there must be a plurality of bodies;
but this division does not take place except by division of matter. Since division of matter is only
by dimensions, because of which matter has situation, it is impossible that this matter should be
distinct from that unless it is distinct according to situation. But this would not be the case if two
bodies were posited as being in the same place; for then they would not be two bodies but one
body, a thing which is impossible. Since, therefore, matter subject to dimensions is found in all
corporeal things, it must be by reason of the very nature of corporeity that any two bodies are
prohibited from being in the same place at the same time.

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: A proposition may be called not-intelligible in two ways. In one way, it may be
on the part of the one understanding, because of the deficiency of his intellect, as is the case in
relation to this proposition: "In the three divine Persons there is one essence." In a proposition of
this kind, there can be, indeed, no contradiction.

In another way, non-intelligibility may be on the part of the proposition, and this again for two
reasons. In one way because it implies a contradiction, absolutely, as for example, "The rational
is irrational"; and not even by a miracle can propositions of this sort be made true. In another
way, because they imply a contradiction in a certain manner, as this proposition: "The dead man
rose to life by his own (proper) power"; for, by the fact that he is said to be "dead," it is posited
that he is destitute of every principle of life. Propositions of this kind can be made true by the
miraculous operation of a superior power; and such is the case in regard to this proposition. For
just as there can be found no natural cause of diversity for two bodies in the same place, so, by
divine power, it is possible that two bodies be in the same place and that, although united in
situation, their, distinction be conserved, as does miraculously happen.

2. It may be said: Whatever may be this corpulentia, which is said to be removed from glorified
bodies, nevertheless it is evident that corporeity will not be removed from them; therefore, neither
will the cause which naturally prohibits any one of them from simultaneously occupying the
same place with another; but only by a miracle is it possible that a glorified body be in the same
place simultaneously with other bodies.

3. It may be answered: Light is not a body, but a certain quality, as Damascene says, and
Avicenna also. But Augustine gives light the same name as fire, as is evident from the fact that
he speaks of light as contradistinguished from air, water, and earth.

4. It may be answered: The three species of fire spoken of by the Philosopher are to be
understood in such a way that by "light" is understood fire existing in its proper matter, and
granted also, as some say, that fire in its own proper sphere emits no light. For it does not belong
to the nature of light to be luminous, but by participation in it other things become so. The same
is true of fire: for, although in its own sphere it emits no light, nevertheless, by participation in it,
other things become refulgent. By flame, however, is to be understood fire in the air; and by
carbo, fire in terrestrial matter. In aqueous matter, however, fire cannot continue in such a way as
to have the nature of fire, because water has qualities which are altogether opposed to fire.