His birth (it being meet for Him to be worshipped in His very swaddling clothes,
that the marvellous and strange nature of the thing might appear), the star, a long
time before, makes itself visible. Whereas if at the moment of His birth in
Palestine, and not before, it had been seen by them in the East, they, consuming a
long time in their journey, would not have seen Him in swaddling clothes on
their arrival. As to his slaying the children "from two years old and under," let us
not marvel; for his wrath and dread, for the sake of a fuller security, added very
much to the time, so that not one might escape.
Having therefore called them, he says, "Go and search diligently for the
young Child; and when you have found Him, bring me word again, that I may
come and worship Him also." [Matthew 2:8]
Do you see his extreme folly? Why, if you say these things in sincerity,
wherefore do you inquire privily? But if intending to plot against Him, how is it
you do not perceive, that from the fact of their being asked secretly the wise men
will be able to perceive your craft? But as I have already said, a soul taken
captive by any wickedness becomes more utterly senseless than any thing.
And he said not, "go and learn concerning the King," but "concerning the
young Child;" for he could not even endure to call Him by the name of His
dominion.
4. But the wise men perceive nothing of this, by reason of their exceeding
reverence (for they never could have expected that he could have gone on to so
great wickedness, and would have attempted to form plots against a dispensation
so marvellous): and they depart suspecting none of these things, but from what
was in themselves auguring all that would be in the rest of mankind.
"And, lo! The star, which they saw in the east, went before them."
[Matthew 2:9]
For therefore only was it hidden, that having lost their guide, they might
come to be obliged to make inquiry of the Jews, and so the matter might be
made evident to all. Since after they have made inquiries, and have had His
enemies for informants, it appears to them again. And mark how excellent was

the order; how in the first place after the star the people of the Jews receives
them, and the king, and these bring in the prophecy to explain what had
appeared: how next, after the prophet, an angel again took them up and taught
them all things; but for a time they journey from Jerusalem to Bethlehem by the
guidance of the star, the star again journeying with them from that place also;
that hence too you might learn, that this was not one of the ordinary stars, for
there is not so much as one star that has this nature. And it not merely moved,
but "went before them," drawing and guiding them on in mid-day.
"But what need of this star any more," one may ask, "when the place was
ascertained?" In order that the Child also might be seen. For there was not
anything to make Him manifest, since the house was not conspicuous, neither
was His mother glorious, or distinguished. There was need then of the star, to set
them by the place. Wherefore it re-appears on their coming out of Jerusalem, and
stays not, before it has reached the manger.
And marvel was linked on to marvel; for both were strange things, as well
the magi worshipping, as the star going before them; and enough to attract even
such as were made all of stone. For if the wise men had said, they had heard
prophets say these things, or that angels had discoursed with them in private,
they might have been disbelieved; but now, when the vision of the star appeared
on high, even they that were exceeding shameless had their mouths stopped.
Moreover, the star, when it stood over the young Child, stayed its course
again: which thing itself also was of a greater power than belongs to a star, now
to hide itself, now to appear, and having appeared to stand still. Hence they too
received an increase of faith. For this cause they rejoiced also, that they had
found what they were seeking, that they had proved messengers of truth, that not
without fruit had they come so great a journey; so great a longing (so to speak)
had they for Christ. For first it came and stood over His very head, showing that
what is born is Divine; next standing there, it leads them to worship Him; being
not simply barbarians, but the wiser sort among them.
Do you see, with how great fitness the star appeared? Why; because even