instant of His conception on account of the full and ample indwelling of God in Him. But
concerning the eternal generation of the Word they differ considerably; Nestorius
confessing it, Photinus denying it entirely.

by the Word Incarnate, a life fraught with the miseries, needs and liabilities of ordinary
humanity, whereas the glory and impassibility, which He assumed only at His
resurrection, was His by right from His mother's womb. This is the meaning of that term,
so celebrated in modern theology, kenosis. If we regard the divine nature, the
Incarnation itself was, as St Thomas says, "no loss of God's own greatness," which
nothing can possibly diminish. Again, if we regard the human nature assumed at the
Incarnation, that humanity, again to employ St Thomas's words, "was not emptied, but
exalted," -- and that much more by the hypostatic union than by any Nestorian
inhabitatio divinitatis. Either way explained, the passage tells against Nestorius.

## CHAPTER XXXV--Against the Error of Eutyches
EUTYCHES, to save the unity of person in Christ against Nestorius, said that in
Christ there was only one nature. He went on to explain how before the union there
were two distinct natures, one divine and one human; but in the union they both met so
as to form one. He said then that the person of Christ was of two natures, but did not
subsist in two natures. The falsity of this statement is apparent on many counts.
1. In Christ Jesus there was a Body, and a natural Soul, and the Divinity. The Body of
Christ, even after the union, was not the Divinity of the Word: for the Body of Christ,
even after the union, was passible, visible to bodily eyes, and distinct in lineaments and
limbs, all of which attributes are alien to the Divinity of the Word. In like manner the Soul
of Christ after union was distinct from the Divinity of the Word, because the Soul of
Christ, even after the union, was affected by the passions of sadness and grief and
anger (Mark iii, 5: xiv, 34), which again can in no way be adapted to the Divinity of the
Word. But soul and body make up human nature. Thus then, even after union, there
was a human nature in Christ, other than the Divinity of the Word, which is the divine
nature.
2. Being in the form of God, he took the form of a servant (Phil. ii, 6, 7). It cannot be said
that the form of God and the form of a servant are the same, for nothing takes that
which it already has. In Eutyches's view, Christ having already the form of God, could
not have taken the form of a servant, the two being the same. Nor can it be said that the
form of God in Christ was changed by the union, for so Christ after the union would not
be God. Nor again can it be said that the form of the servant was mingled with the form
of God, for mingled elements do not remain entire, but both are partially changed:
hence it should not be said that He had taken the form of a servant, but something of
that form. Thus the Apostle's words must mean that in Christ, even after union, there
were two forms, therefore two natures.
3. If we suppose a blending of both natures, divine and human, neither would remain,
but some third thing; and thus Christ would be neither God nor man. Eutyches then
cannot be understood to mean that one nature was made out of the two. He can only
mean that after union only one of the natures remained. Either then in Christ only the
divine nature remained, and what seemed in Him human was merely phenomenal, as
the Manicheans said; or the divine nature was changed into a human nature, as
Apollinaris said: against both of whom we have argued above (Chapp.XXIX,