as half-life. But there is a difference of opinion as to the mode of
sensation.
For some say that the glorified bodies will be impassible, and
consequently "not susceptible to impressions from
without" [Question 74, Article 4, On the contrary] and much less so
than the heavenly bodies, because they will have actual sensations,
not by receiving species from sensibles, but by emission of species.
But this is impossible, since in the resurrection the specific nature
will remain the same in man and in all his parts. Now the nature of
sense is to be a passive power as the Philosopher proves (De Anima
ii, text. 51,54). Wherefore if the saints, in the resurrection, were to
have sensations by emitting and not by receiving species, sense in
them would be not a passive but an active power, and thus it would
not be the same specifically with sense as it is now, but would be
some other power bestowed on them; for just as matter never
becomes form, so a passive power never becomes active.
Consequently others say that the senses will be actualized by
receiving species, not indeed from external sensibles, but by an
outflow from the higher powers, so that as now the higher powers
receive from the lower, so on the contrary the lower powers will then
receive from the higher. But this mode of reception does not result in
real sensation, because every passive power, according to its
specific nature, is determined to some special active principle, since
a power as such bears relation to that with respect to which it is said
to be the power. Wherefore since the proper active principle in
external sensation is a thing existing outside the soul and not an
intention thereof existing in the imagination or reason, if the organ of
sense be not moved by external things, but by the imagination or
other higher powers, there will be no true sensation. Hence we do
not say that madmen or other witless persons (in whom there is this
kind of outflow of species towards the organs of sense, on account
of the powerful influence of the imagination) have real sensations,
but that it seems to them that they have sensations. Consequently
we must say with others that sensation in glorified bodies will result
from the reception of things outside the soul. It must, however, be
observed that the organs of sense are transmuted by things outside
the soul in two ways. First by a natural transmutation, when namely
the organ is disposed by the same natural quality as the thing
outside the soul which acts on that organ: for instance, when the
hand is heated by touching a hot object, or becomes fragrant
through contact with a fragrant object. Secondly, by a spiritual
transmutation, as when a sensible quality is received in an

instrument, according to a spiritual mode of being, when, namely,
the species or the intention of a quality, and not the quality itself is
received: thus the pupil receives the species of whiteness and yet
does not itself become white. Accordingly the first reception does
not cause sensation, properly speaking, because the senses are
receptive of species in matter but without matter. that is to say
without the material "being" which the species had outside the soul
(De Anima ii, text. 121). This reception transmutes the nature of the
recipient, because in this way the quality is received according to its
material "being." Consequently this kind of reception will not be in
the glorified bodies, but the second, which of itself causes actual
sensation, without changing the nature of the recipient.
Reply to Objection 1: As already explained, by this passion that
takes place in actual sensation and is no other than the aforesaid
reception of species, the body is not drawn away from natural
quality, but is perfected by a spiritual change. Wherefore the
impassibility of glorified bodies does not exclude this kind of
passion.
Reply to Objection 2: Every subject of passion receives the action of
the agent according to its mode. Accordingly if there be a thing that
is naturally adapted to be altered by an active principle, with a
natural and a spiritual alteration, the natural alteration precedes the
spiritual alteration, just as natural precedes intentional being. If
however a thing be naturally adapted to be altered only with a
spiritual alteration it does not follow that it is altered naturally. For
instance the air is not receptive of color, according to its natural
being, but only according to its spiritual being, wherefore in this way
alone is it altered: whereas, on the contrary, inanimate bodies are
altered by sensible qualities only naturally and not spiritually. But in
the glorified bodies there cannot be any natural alteration, and
consequently there will be only spiritual alteration.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as there will be new reception of species
in the organs of sensation, so there will be new judgment in the
common sense: but there will be no new judgment on the point in the
intellect; such is the case with one who sees what he knew before.
The saying of Augustine, that "there our thoughts will not be
changeable," refers to the thoughts of the intellectual part: therefore
it is not to the point.
Reply to Objection 4: When one of two things is the type of the other,