shameless. Therefore, just as we administer our reproofs with so much sparing of
your feelings, so do ye also with all seriousness receive the correction; and
attend with carefulness to what is said.
5. We discoursed to you yesterday about the power which is in prayer. I
pointed out how the devil then lies in wait, deceiver that he is. For since he sees
very great gain accruing to us from prayer, then most he assails us, in order that
he may disable us from our defence; that he may send us off home emptyhanded. And just as before magistrates, when the officers of the court who are
about the person of the magistrate have a hostile feeling toward those who come
before him, they by their staves drive them away to a distance, preventing their
coming near and resorting to lamentation and so obtaining compassion; so also
the devil, when he has seen us coming to the judge, drives us away to a distance,
not by any staff, but through our own slackness. For he knows, he knows clearly,
that if they have come to him in a sober spirit, and have told the sins committed,
and have mourned with their soul fervent, they will depart having received full
forgiveness; for God loves mankind; and on this account he is beforehand with
them, and debars them from access, in order that they may obtain no one of the
things which they need. But the soldiers of magistrates with violence scare away
those who are coming to them; but he with no compulsion, but by deceiving us,
and throwing us into security. On this account we are not deserving even of
allowance, since we voluntarily deprive ourselves of the good things. Prayer
with earnestness is a light of the understanding and soul— a light unquenchable
and perpetual. On this account he throws into our minds countless rubbish-heaps
of imaginations; and things which we never had imagined, these collecting
together at the very moment of prayer he pours down upon our souls. And just as
winds often rushing from an opposite quarter by a violent gust extinguish a
lamp's flame as it is being lighted, so also the devil, when he has seen the flame
of our prayer being kindled, blowing it on every side with the blasts of countless
thoughts, does not desist before and until he has quenched the light. But the very
thing which they who are kindling those lamps do, this let us also do. And what

do they do? When they see a violent wind coming, by laying their finger upon
the opening of the lamp they bar the entrance against the wind. For so long as he
assails from without we shall be able to stand against him; but when we have
opened to him the doors of the mind, and have received the enemy inside; after
that we are no longer able to withstand even a little; but, having on all sides
completely extinguished the memory, just as a smoking lamp, he allows our
mouth to utter empty words. But just as they put their finger upon the opening of
the lamp, so let us lay consideration upon our mind: let us close off from the
wicked spirit the entrance, in order that he may not quench our light of prayer.
Remember both those illustrations, both that of the soldiers and the magistrate,
and that respecting the lamp. For with this purpose we adduce to you these
illustrations; with which we are conversant, in which we live, in order that, after
we have departed hence and have returned home, we may from things of familiar
occurrence receive a reminder of what has been said.
6. Prayer is a strong piece of armour and a great security. You heard
yesterday how the three children, fettered as they were, destroyed the power of
the fire; how they trampled down the blaze; how they overcame the furnace, and
conquered the operation of the element. Hear today again how the noble and
great Isaac overcame the nature itself of bodies through prayer. They destroyed
the power of fire, this man today loosed the bonds of incapacitated nature. And
learn how he effected this. "Isaac," it says, "prayed concerning his wife, because
she was barren." This has today been read to you; yesterday the sermon was
about prayer; and today again there is a demonstration of the power of prayer.
See how the grace of the Spirit has ordered that what has been read today
harmonises with what was said yesterday. "Isaac," it says, "prayed concerning
Rebecca his wife, because she was barren." This first is worth inquiring into, for
what cause she was barren. She was of a life admirable and replete with much
chastity— both herself and her husband. We cannot lay hold of the life of those
just ones, and say that the barrenness was the work of sin. And not only was she
herself barren, but also his mother Sarah, who had borne him; not only was his