set forth the little value of his own baptism, and had shown that it has nothing
more than to lead them to repentance (for he did not say with water of remission,
but of repentance), he sets forth Christ's also, which is full of the unspeakable
gift. Thus he seems to say, Lest, on being told that He comes after me, you
should despise Him as having come later; learn the virtue of His gift, and you
will clearly know that I uttered nothing worthy nor great, when I said, "I am not
worthy to unloose the latchet of His shoe." So too when you are told, "He is
mightier than I," do not think I said this in the way of making a comparison. For
I am not worthy to be ranked so much as among His servants, no, not even the
lowest of His servants, nor to receive the least honored portion of His ministry.
Therefore He did not merely say, "His shoes," but not even "the latchet," which
kind of office was counted the last of all. Then to hinder your attributing what he
had said to humility, he adds also the proof from the facts: "For He shall baptize
you," says he, "with the Holy Ghost and with fire."
6. Do you see how great is the wisdom of the Baptist? How, when He
Himself is preaching, He says everything to alarm, and fill them with anxiety;
but when He is sending men to Him, whatever was mild and apt to recover them:
not bringing forward the axe, nor the tree that is cut down and burnt, and cast
into the fire, nor the wrath to come, but remission of sins, and removing of
punishment, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, and
adoption, and brotherhood, and a partaking of the inheritance, and an abundant
supply of the Holy Ghost. For all these things he obscurely denoted, when he
said, "He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost;" at once, by the very figure of
speech, declaring the abundance of the grace (for he said not, "He will give you
the Holy Ghost," but "He will baptize you with the Holy Ghost"); and by the
specification of fire on the other hand indicating the vehement and
uncontrollable quality of His grace.
Imagine only what sort of men it was meet for the hearers to become, when
they considered that they were at once to be like the prophets, and like those
great ones. For it was on this account, you see, that he made mention at all of

fire; that he might lead them to reflect on the memory of those men. Because, of
all the visions that appeared unto them, I had almost said, the more part appeared
in fire; thus God discoursed with Moses in the bush, thus with all the people in
the mount Sinai, thus with Ezekiel on the cherubim. [Ezekiel 1:27]
And mark again how he rouses the hearer, by putting that first which was to
take place after all. For the Lamb was to be slain, and sin to be blotted out, and
the enmity to be destroyed, and the burial to take place, and the resurrection, and
then the Spirit to come. But none of these things does he mention as yet, but that
first which was last, and for the sake of which all the former were done, and
which was fittest to proclaim His dignity; so that when the hearer should be told
that he was to receive so great a Spirit he might search with himself, how and in
what manner this shall be, while sin so prevails; that finding him full of thought
and prepared for that lesson, he might thereupon introduce what he had to say
touching the Passion, no man being any more offended, under the expectation of
such a gift.
Wherefore he again cried out, saying, "Behold the Lamb of God, which
bears the sin of the world." He did not say, "which remits," but, that which
implies a more guardian care, "which hears it." For it is not all one, simply to
remit, and to take it upon Himself. For the one was to be done without peril, the
other with death.
And again, he said, "He is Son of God." [John 1:34] But not even this
declared His rank openly to the hearers (for they did not so much as know yet
how to conceive of Him as a true Son): but by so great a gift of the Spirit that
also was established. Therefore the Father also in sending John gave him, as you
know, this as a first token of the dignity of Him that had come, saying, "Upon
whom you shall see the Spirit descending and remaining, the same is He which
baptizes with the Holy Ghost." Wherefore himself too says, "I saw and bare
record that this is the Son of God;" as though the one were to all time the clear
evidence of the other.
7. Then, as having uttered the gentler part of his message, and soothed and