undertaking cannot well be conceived." The fundamental object of the Gnostic speculations was
doubtless to solve the two grand problems of all religious philosophy, viz., How to account for the
existence of evil; and, How to reconcile the finite with the infinite. But these ancient theorists were
not more successful in grappling with such questions than have been their successors in modern
times. And by giving loose reins to their imagination, they built up the most incongruous and
ridiculous systems; while, by deserting the guidance of Scripture they were betrayed into the most
pernicious and extravagant errors.
Accordingly, the patience of the reader is sorely tried, in following our author through those
mazes of absurdity which he treads, in explaining and refuting these Gnostic speculations. This is
especially felt in the perusal of the first two books, which, as has been said, are principally devoted
to an exposition and subversion of the various heretical systems. But the vagaries of the human
mind, however melancholy in themselves, are never altogether destitute of instruction. And in
dealing with those set before us in this work, we have not only the satisfaction of becoming
acquainted with the currents of thought prevalent in these early times, but we obtain much valuable
information regarding the primitive Church, which, had it not been for these heretical schemes,
might never have reached our day.
Not a little of what is contained in the following pages will seem almost unintelligible to the
English reader. And it is scarcely more comprehensible to those who have pondered long on the
original. We have inserted brief notes of explanation where these seemed specially necessary. But
we have not thought it worth while to devote a great deal of space to the elucidation of those obscure
Gnostic views which, in so many varying forms, are set forth in this work. For the same reason,
we give here no account of the origin, history, and successive phases of Gnosticism. Those who
wish to know the views of the learned on these points, may consult the writings of Neander, Baur,
and others, among the Germans, or the lectures of Dr. Burton in English; while a succinct description
of the whole matter will be found in the "Preliminary Observations on the Gnostic System," prefixed
to Harvey's edition of Irenæus.
The great work of Irenæus, now for the first time translated into English, is unfortunately no
longer extant in the original. It has come down to us only in an ancient Latin version, with the
exception of the greater part of the first book, which has been preserved in the original Greek,
through means of copious quotations made by Hippolytus and Epiphanius. The text, both Latin
and Greek, is often most uncertain. Only three mss. of the work Against Heresies are at present
known to exist. Others, however, were used in the earliest printed editions put forth by Erasmus.
And as these codices were more ancient than any now available, it is greatly to be regretted that
they have disappeared or perished. One of our difficulties throughout, has been to fix the readings
we should adopt, especially in the first book. Varieties of reading, actual or conjectural, have been
noted only when some point of special importance seemed to be involved.
After the text has been settled, according to the best judgment which can be formed, the work
of translation remains; and that is, in this case, a matter of no small difficulty. Irenæus, even in the
original Greek, is often a very obscure writer. At times he expresses himself with remarkable