SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: Patience is said to have a perfect work in
bearing hardships: for these give rise first to sorrow, which is
moderated by patience; secondly, to anger, which is moderated by
meekness; thirdly, to hatred, which charity removes; fourthly, to
unjust injury, which justice forbids. Now that which removes the
principle is the most perfect.
Yet it does not follow, if patience be more perfect in this respect, that
it is more perfect simply.
Reply to Objection 2: Possession denotes undisturbed ownership;
wherefore man is said to possess his soul by patience, in so far as it
removes by the root the passions that are evoked by hardships and
disturb the soul.
Reply to Objection 3: Patience is said to be the root and safeguard of
all the virtues, not as though it caused and preserved them directly,
but merely because it removes their obstacles.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.135, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is possible to have patience without

grace?
Objection 1: It seems that it is possible to have patience without
grace. For the more his reason inclines to a thing, the more is it
possible for the rational creature to accomplish it. Now it is more
reasonable to suffer evil for the sake of good than for the sake of
evil. Yet some suffer evil for evil's sake, by their own virtue and
without the help of grace; for Augustine says (De Patientia iii) that
"men endure many toils and sorrows for the sake of the things they
love sinfully." Much more, therefore, is it possible for man, without
the help of grace, to bear evil for the sake of good, and this is to be
truly patient.
Objection 2: Further, some who are not in a state of grace have more
abhorrence for sinful evils than for bodily evils: hence some
heathens are related to have endured many hardships rather than
betray their country or commit some other misdeed. Now this is to
be truly patient. Therefore it seems that it is possible to have
patience without the help of grace.
Objection 3: Further, it is quite evident that some go through much
trouble and pain in order to regain health of the body. Now the health
of the soul is not less desirable than bodily health. Therefore in like
manner one may, without the help of grace, endure many evils for
the health of the soul, and this is to be truly patient.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 61:6): "From Him," i.e. from God, "is
my patience."
I answer that, As Augustine says (De Patientia iv), "the strength of
desire helps a man to bear toil and pain: and no one willingly
undertakes to bear what is painful, save for the sake of that which
gives pleasure." The reason of this is because sorrow and pain are
of themselves displeasing to the soul, wherefore it would never
choose to suffer them for their own sake, but only for the sake of an
end. Hence it follows that the good for the sake of which one is
willing to endure evils, is more desired and loved than the good the
privation of which causes the sorrow that we bear patiently. Now the
fact that a man prefers the good of grace to all natural goods, the
loss of which may cause sorrow, is to be referred to charity, which