THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.12.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether it is lawful to receive this sacrament

daily?
Objection 1: It does not appear to be lawful to receive this sacrament
daily, because, as Baptism shows forth our Lord's Passion, so also
does this sacrament. Now one may not be baptized several times,
but only once, because "Christ died once" only "for our sins,"
according to 1 Pt. 3:18. Therefore, it seems unlawful to receive this
sacrament daily.
Objection 2: Further, the reality ought to answer to the figure. But the
Paschal Lamb, which was the chief figure of this sacrament, as was
said above (Question 73, Article 9) was eaten only once in the year;
while the Church once a year commemorates Christ's Passion, of
which this sacrament is the memorial. It seems, then, that it is lawful
to receive this sacrament not daily, but only once in the year.
Objection 3: Further, the greatest reverence is due to this sacrament
as containing Christ. But it is a token of reverence to refrain from
receiving this sacrament; hence the Centurion is praised for saying
(Mt. 8:8), "Lord, I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under my
roof"; also Peter, for saying (Lk. 5:8), "Depart from me, for I am a
sinful man, O Lord." Therefore, it is not praiseworthy for a man to
receive this sacrament daily.
Objection 4: Further, if it were a praiseworthy custom to receive this
sacrament frequently, then the oftener it were taken the more praiseworthy it would be. But there would be greater frequency if one were
to receive it several. times daily; and yet this is not the custom of the
Church. Consequently, it does not seem praiseworthy to receive it
daily.
Objection 5: Further, the Church by her statutes intends to promote
the welfare of the faithful. But the Church's statute only requires
Communion once a year; hence it is enacted (Extra, De Poenit. et
Remiss. xii): "Let every person of either sex devoutly receive the
sacrament of the Eucharist at least at Easter; unless by the advice of
his parish priest, and for some reasonable cause, he considers he
ought to refrain from receiving for a time." Consequently, it is not
praiseworthy to receive this sacrament daily.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.12.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Dom., Serm. xxviii): "This
is our daily bread; take it daily, that it may profit thee daily."
I answer that, There are two things to be considered regarding the
use of this sacrament. The first is on the part of the sacrament itself,
the virtue of which gives health to men; and consequently it is
profitable to receive it daily so as to receive its fruits daily. Hence
Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv): "If, whenever Christ's blood is shed,
it is shed for the forgiveness of sins, I who sin often, should receive
it often: I need a frequent remedy." The second thing to be
considered is on the part of the recipient, who is required to
approach this sacrament with great reverence and devotion.
Consequently, if anyone finds that he has these dispositions every
day, he will do well to receive it daily. Hence, Augustine after saying,
"Receive daily, that it may profit thee daily," adds: "So live, as to
deserve to receive it daily." But because many persons are lacking in
this devotion, on account of the many drawbacks both spiritual and
corporal from which they suffer, it is not expedient for all to
approach this sacrament every day; but they should do so as often
as they find themselves properly disposed. Hence it is said in De
Eccles. Dogmat. liii: "I neither praise nor blame daily reception of the
Eucharist."
Reply to Objection 1: In the sacrament of Baptism a man is
conformed to Christ's death, by receiving His character within him.
And therefore, as Christ died but once, so a man ought to be
baptized but once. But a man does not receive Christ's character in
this sacrament; He receives Christ Himself, Whose virtue endures for
ever. Hence it is written (Heb. 10:14): "By one oblation He hath
perfected for ever them that are sanctified." Consequently, since
man has daily need of Christ's health-giving virtue, he may
commendably receive this sacrament every day.
And since Baptism is above all a spiritual regeneration, therefore, as
a man is born naturally but once, so ought he by Baptism to be
reborn spiritually but once, as Augustine says (Tract. xi in Joan.),
commenting on Jn. 3:4, "How can a man be born again, when he is
grown old?" But this sacrament is spiritual food; hence, just as
bodily food is taken every day, so is it a good thing to receive this
sacrament every day. Hence it is that our Lord (Lk. 11:3), teaches us
to pray, "Give us this day our daily bread": in explaining which
words Augustine observes (De Verb. Dom., Serm. xxviii): "If you
receive it," i.e. this sacrament, every day, "every day is today for