who is abominable and depraved will recognize virtue, that mist being
withdrawn. Or if men still argue perversely, you shall have from God the greater
praise and admiration.
Grieve not now, I pray you, neither despond; since the very apostles were to
some a "savor of death;" [1 Corinthians 2:16] to others, a "savor of life." And if
there be nothing to lay hold of in yourself, you are rid of all their charges; or
rather, you have become the more blessed. Shine out therefore in your life, and
take no account of them who speak evil of you. For it cannot, it cannot be, that
one careful of virtue, should not have many enemies. However, this is nothing to
the virtuous man. For by such means his brightness will increase the more
abundantly.
Let us then, bearing these things in mind, look to one object only; how to
order our own life with strictness. For thus we shall also guide to the life that is
there, such as are now sitting in darkness. For such is the virtue of that light, as
not only to shine here, but also to conduct its followers there. For when men see
us despising all things present, and preparing ourselves for that which is to
come, our actions will persuade them sooner than any discourse. For who is
there so senseless, that at sight of one, who within a day or two was living in
luxury and wealth, now stripping himself of all, and putting on wings, and
arrayed to meet both hunger and poverty, and all hardship, and dangers, and
blood, and slaughter, and everything that is counted dreadful; will not from this
sight derive a clear demonstration of the things which are to come?
But if we entangle ourselves in things present, and plunge ourselves in them
more and more, how will it be possible for them to be persuaded that we are
hastening to another sojourn?
And what excuse after this shall we have, if the fear of God avail not so
much with us, as human glory availed with the Greek philosophers? For some of
them did really both lay aside wealth, and despised death, that they might make a
show before men; wherefore also their hopes became vain. What plea then shall
deliver us, when with so great things set before us, and with so high a rule of

self-denial laid open to us, we are not able even to do as they did, but ruin both
ourselves and others besides? For neither is the harm so great when a heathen
commits transgression, as when a Christian does the same. Of course not; for
their character is already lost, but ours, by reason of the grace of God, is even
among the ungodly venerable and glorious. Therefore when they would most
revile us, and aggravate their evil speech, they add some such taunt as, "Thou
Christian:" a taunt which they would not utter, did they not secretly entertain a
great opinion of our doctrine.
Have you not heard how many, and how great precepts Christ enjoined?
Now when will you be able to fulfill one of those commandments, while you
leave all, and go about gathering interest, tacking together usuries, setting on
foot transactions of business, buying herds of slaves, procuring silver vessels,
purchasing houses, fields, goods without end? And I would this were all. But
when to these unseasonable pursuits, you add even injustice, removing
landmarks, taking away houses by violence, aggravating poverty, increasing
hunger, when will you be able to set your foot on these thresholds?
13. But sometimes you show mercy to the poor. I know it as well as you.
But even in this again great is the mischief. For you do this either in pride or in
vainglory, so as not to profit even by your good deeds. What can be more
wretched than this, to be making your shipwreck in the very harbor? To prevent
this, when you have done any good action, seek not thanks from me, that you
may have God your debtor. For, "Lend," says He, "unto them from whom you do
not expect to receive."
You have your Debtor; why leave Him, and require it of me, a poor and
wretched mortal? What? Is that Debtor displeased, when the debt is required of
Him? What? Is He poor? Is He unwilling to pay? Do you see not His
unspeakable treasures? Do you see not His indescribable munificence? Lay hold
then on Him, and make your demand; for He is pleased when one thus demands
the debt of Him. Because, if He see another required to pay for what He Himself
owes, He will feel as though He were insulted, and repay you no more; nay, He