Holy Trinity must have been at one time imperfect, and at another time
entire: imperfect until the Son came to be created, as the Arians
maintain, and then entire afterwards." If we follow the teachings of
Revelation, and adopt the revealed idea of God, we may not discuss mere
and simple unity, nor mere and simple trinality; but we must discuss
unity in trinality, and trinality in unity. We may not think of a monad
which originally, and in the order either of nature or of time, is not trinal,
but becomes so. The instant there is a monad, there is a triad; the instant
there is a unity, there are Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The Christian
Trinity is not that of Sabellius: namely, an original untrinal monad that
subsequently, in the order of nature if not of time, becomes a triad;
whereby four factors are introduced into the problem. God is not one and
three, but one in three. There is no primary monad, as such, and without
trinality, to which the three distinctions are secondary adjuncts. The
monad, or essence, never exists in and by itself as untrinalized, as in the
Sabellian scheme. It exists only as in the three Persons; only as trinalized.
The Essence, consequently, is not prior to the Persons, either in the order
of nature or of time, nor subsequent to them, but simultaneously and
eternally in and with them.
The Primitive church took this ground with confidence. Unity and
trinality were inseparable in their view. The term God meant for them the
Trinity. A "theologian," in their nomenclature, was a trinitarian. They
called the Apostle John ὁ θεόλογος, because he was enlightened by the
Holy Spirit to make fuller disclosures, in the preface to his Gospel,
concerning the deity of the Logos and the doctrine of the Trinity, than
were the other evangelists. And they gave the same epithet to Gregory
Nazianzum, because of the acumen and insight of his trinitarian treatises.
This work of Augustin adopts the same position, and defends it with an
ability second to none.
3. A third advantage of this method of illustrating the doctrine of the
Trinity is, that it goes to show that the personality of God depends upon
the trinality of the Divine Essence—that if there are no interior
distinctions in the Infinite Being, he cannot be self-contemplative, selfcognitive, or self-communing.
This is an important and valuable feature of the method in question,

when viewed in its bearing upon the modern assertion that an Infinite
Being cannot be personal. This treatise of Augustin does not develope the
problem upon this point, but it leads to it. In illustrating the Trinity by
the ternaries in nature, and especially in the human mind, he aims only to
show that trinality of a certain kind does not conflict with unity of a
certain kind. Memory, understanding, and will are three faculties, yet one
soul. Augustin is content with elucidating the Divine unity by such
illustrations. The elucidation of the Divine personality by them, was not
attempted in his day nor in the Mediæval and Reformation churches. The
conflict with pantheism forced this point upon the attention of the
Modern church.
At the same time, these Christian fathers who took the problem of the
Trinity into the centre of the Divine essence, and endeavored to show its
necessary grounds there, prepared the way for showing, by the same
method, that trinality is not only consistent with personality, but is
actually indispensable to it. In a brief essay like this, only the briefest
hints can be indicated.
If God is personal, he is self-conscious. Self-consciousness is, (1), the
power which a rational spirit, or mind, has of making itself its own object;
and, (2), of knowing that it has done so. If the first step is taken, and not
the second, there is no self-consciousness. For the subject would not
know that the object is the self. And the second step cannot be taken, if
the first has not been. These two acts of a rational spirit, or mind, involve
three distinctions in it, or three modes of it. The whole mind as a subject
contemplates the very same whole mind as an object. Here are two
distinctions, or modes of one mind. And the very same whole mind
perceives that the contemplating subject and the contemplated object are
one and the same essence or being. Here are three modes of one mind,
each distinct from the others, yet all three going to make up the one selfconscious spirit. Unless there were these three distinctions, there would
be no self-knowledge. Mere singleness, a mere subject without an object,
is incompatible with self-consciousness.
In denying distinctions in the Divine Essence, while asserting its
personality, Deism, with Socinianism and Mohammedanism, contends
that God can be self-knowing and self-communing as a single subject