SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.3.

On the contrary, Blessed Ambrose established singing in the Church
of Milan, a Augustine relates (Confess. ix).
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the praise of the voice is
necessary in order to arouse man's devotion towards God.
Wherefore whatever is useful in conducing to this result is
becomingly adopted in the divine praises. Now it is evident that the
human soul is moved in various ways according to various melodies
of sound, as the Philosopher state (Polit. viii, 5), and also Boethius
(De Musica, prologue). Hence the use of music in the divine praises
is a salutary institution, that the souls of the faint-hearted may be the
more incited to devotion. Wherefore Augustine say (Confess. x, 33):
"I am inclined to approve of the usage of singing in the church, that
so by the delight of the ears the faint-hearted may rise to the feeling
of devotion": and he says of himself (Confess. ix, 6): "I wept in Thy
hymns and canticles, touched to the quick by the voices of Thy
sweet-attuned Church."
Reply to Objection 1: The name of spiritual canticle may be given not
only to those that are sung inwardly in spirit, but also to those that
are sung outwardly with the lips, inasmuch as such like canticles
arouse spiritual devotion.
Reply to Objection 2: Jerome does not absolutely condemn singing,
but reproves those who sing theatrically in church not in order to
arouse devotion, but in order to show off, or to provoke pleasure.
Hence Augustine says (Confess. x, 33): "When it befalls me to be
more moved by the voice than by the words sung, I confess to have
sinned penally, and then had rather not hear the singer."
Reply to Objection 3: To arouse men to devotion by teaching and
preaching is a more excellent way than by singing. Wherefore
deacons and prelates, whom it becomes to incite men's minds
towards God by means of preaching and teaching, ought not to be
instant in singing, lest thereby they be withdrawn from greater
things. Hence Gregory says (Regist. iv, ep. 44): "It is a most
discreditable custom for those who have been raised to the
diaconate to serve as choristers, for it behooves them to give their
whole time to the duty of preaching and to taking charge of the
alms."
Reply to Objection 4: As the Philosopher says (Polit. viii, 6),

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.3.

"Teaching should not be accompanied with a flute or any artificial
instrument such as the harp or anything else of this kind: but only
with such things as make good hearers." For such like musical
instruments move the soul to pleasure rather than create a good
disposition within it. In the Old Testament instruments of this
description were employed, both because the people were more
coarse and carnal---so that they needed to be aroused by such
instruments as also by earthly promises---and because these
material instruments were figures of something else.
Reply to Objection 5: The soul is distracted from that which is sung
by a chant that is employed for the purpose of giving pleasure. But if
the singer chant for the sake of devotion, he pays more attention to
what he says, both because he lingers more thereon, and because,
as Augustine remarks (Confess. x, 33), "each affection of our spirit,
according to its variety, has its own appropriate measure in the
voice, and singing, by some hidden correspondence wherewith it is
stirred." The same applies to the hearers, for even if some of them
understand not what is sung, yet they understand why it is sung,
namely, for God's glory: and this is enough to arouse their devotion.