to what has been said, although much toil is needful on my part, so that I should
not be completely overwhelmed by the passions of my soul, yet I endure the toil,
and I do not shun the conflict. For even now I am taken captive by vainglory, but
I often recover myself, and I see at a glance that I have been taken, and there are
times when I rebuke my soul, which has been enslaved; outrageous desires even
now come over me, but they kindle only a languid flame, since my bodily eyes
cannot fasten upon any fuel to feed the fire. From speaking ill of any, or from
hearing any one evil spoken of, I am utterly removed, since I have no one to talk
with; for surely these walls would never give tongue; yet it is not altogether in
like manner possible to avoid anger, although there be none to provoke it. For
often when the recollection of outrageous men has come over me, and of the
deeds done by them, it makes my heart swell. But not permanently, for I quickly
subdue its kindling, and persuade it to be quiet, saying that it is very inexpedient
and extremely despicable to leave one's own fault alone, and to busy one's self
about the faults of one's neighbors. But were I to come among the multitude, and
to be involved in countless excitements, I should not be able to have the benefit
of this warning, nor to experience reflections which take me thus to task. But just
as they who are driven over precipices by a torrent, or in some other way, are
able to foresee the destruction to which they are finally going, and are unable to
think of any means of help, so I, when I have fallen into the great tumult of my
passions, shall be able to see at a glance my chastisement daily increasing. But to
be master of myself as I am now, and to rebuke diseases of this sort raging on
every side, would not be equally easy for me as it was before. For my soul is
weak and puny, and easily mastered, not only by these passions, but by envy,
which is bitterer than all of them. Neither does it know how to bear insults or
honors temperately. But these do exceedingly elate it, while those depress it. As,
then, savage wild beasts, when they are in good condition, and in full vigor,
overcome those that fight with them, particularly, too, if they be feeble and
unskillful; but if any one were to weaken them by starvation, he will put their
rage to sleep, and will extinguish most of their strength; so that one, not over

valiant, might take up the conflict and battle with them: so also with the passions
of the soul. He who makes them weak, places them in subjection to right reason;
but he who nourishes them carefully, makes his battle with them harder, and
renders them so formidable that he passes all his time in bondage and fear.
What then is the food of these wild beasts? Of vainglory, indeed, it is
honors and applause; of pride, abundance of authority and power; of envy, the
reputation of one's neighbors; of avarice, the munificence of the generous; of
incontinence, luxury and the constant society of women; and other passions have
their proper nutriment? And all these things will sorely attack me if I come forth
into the world, and will tear my soul to pieces, will be the more formidable and
will make my battle with them the harder. Whereas, while I am established here
they will be subdued; and then, indeed, only with great exertion; yet at the same
time, by the Grace of God, they will be subdued, and there will not be anything
worse then than their bark. For these reasons I keep to this cell, and am
inaccessible, self-contained, and unsociable, and I put up with hearing countless
complaints of this kind, although I would gladly efface them, and have been
vexed and grieved because I cannot; for it is not easy for me to become sociable,
and at the same time to remain in my present security. Therefore I beseech you,
too, to pity rather than to censure one beset with such great difficulty.
But we cannot yet persuade you. Accordingly the time is now come that I
should utter to you the only thing which I have left unspoken. Perhaps it may
seem to many to be incredible, but even so I shall not be ashamed to bring it
before the world, for though what is said is proof of an evil conscience and of
many sins, yet, since God, who is about to judge us, knows all accurately, what
gain will result to us from the ignorance of men? What then is this, which is yet
unspoken? From that day on which you imparted to me the suspicion of the
bishopric, my whole system has often been in danger of being completely
unhinged, such was the fear, such the despondency which seized my soul; for on
considering the glory of the Bride of Christ, the holiness, the spiritual beauty and
wisdom, and comeliness, and then reckoning up my own faults, I used not to