contribute?— But, to show that it is the living separately that is expensive and
causes poverty, let there be a house in which are ten children: and the wife and
the man, let the one work at her wool, the other bring his earnings from his
outdoor occupation: now tell me, in which way would these spend most? By
taking their meals together and occupying one house, or by living separately? Of
course, by living separately. For if the ten children must live apart, they would
need ten several rooms, ten tables, ten attendants, and the income otherwise in
proportion. Is it not for this very reason, that where there is a great number of
servants, they have all one table, that the expense may not be so great? For so it
is, division always makes diminution, concord and agreement make increase.
The dwellers in the monasteries live just as the faithful did then: now did ever
any of these die of hunger? Was ever any of them not provided for with plenty of
everything? Now, it seems, people are more afraid of this than of falling into a
boundless and bottomless deep. But if we had made actual trial of this, then
indeed we should boldly venture upon this plan ([τοὕ πράγματος]). What grace
too, think you, would there not be! For if at that time, when there was no
believer but only the three thousand and the five thousand: when all, throughout
the world, were enemies, when they could nowhere look for comfort, they yet
boldly entered upon this plan with such success; how much more would this be
the case now, when by the grace of God there are believers everywhere
throughout the world? What Gentile would be left? For my part, I think there
would not be one: we should so attract all, and draw them to us? But yet if we do
but make fair progress, I trust in God that even this shall be realized. Only do as
I say, and let us successfully achieve things in their regular order; if God grant
life, I trust that we shall soon bring you over to this way of life.
In the first place, as regards that law about swearing: accomplish that;
establish it firmly: and let him that has kept it make known him that has not, and
call him to account withal and rebuke him sternly. For the (supra, Hom. viii.)
appointed time ([ἡ] [προθεσμία]), is at hand and I am holding inquisition in the
matter, and him that is found guilty I will banish and exclude. But God forbid

that any such should be found among us; rather may it appear, that all have
strictly kept this spiritual watchword. And as in war it is by the watchword that
friends and strangers are shown, so let it be now; for indeed now also we are
engaged in a war; that we may know our brethren that are properly such. For
what a good thing it is that we should have this to be our cognizance both here
and in a foreign land! What a weapon this, against the very head of the devil! A
mouth that cannot swear will soon both engage God in prayers, and smite the
devil a deadly blow. A mouth that cannot swear will also be incapable of using
insulting language. Cast out this fire from your tongue, as you would from a
house: this fire, drag it out. Give your tongue a little rest: make the sore less
virulent. Yea, I beseech you, do this, that I may go on to set you another lesson:
for as long as this is not rightly done, I dare not pass on to any other. Let this
lesson be got perfectly, and you shall have a consciousness of the achievement,
and then I will introduce you to other laws, or rather not I, but Christ. Implant in
your soul this good thing, and little by little you shall be a paradise of God, far
better than that paradise of old. No serpent among you, no deadly tree, nor any
such thing. Fix this habit deep. If this be done, not ye only that are present shall
be benefitted, but all that are in all the world; and not they alone, but those that
are to succeed hereafter. For a good habit having once entered, and being kept by
all, will be handed on to long ages, and no circumstances shall be able to erase it.
If he that gathered sticks on the sabbath was stoned—the man that is doing a far
more heinous work than that gathering, the man that is amassing a load of sins,
for such is the multitude of oaths, what shall he undergo? What shall he not have
to endure? You will receive great assistance from God, if this be well achieved
by you. If I were to say, Be not abusive, immediately you will plead to me your
indignation; should I say, Be not envious, you will urge some other excuse. But
in this case you have nothing of the kind to say. On which account I began with
the easy precepts, which indeed is also the uniform practice in all arts. And thus
one comes to the higher duties, by learning first those which are easier far. How
easy it is you will see, when by the grace of God having succeeded in this, you