John 4:37
"Herein is that saying true, One sows and another reaps."
These words the many used whenever one party had supplied toil and
another had reaped the fruits; and He says, "that the proverb is in this instance
especially true, for the Prophets labored, and you reap the fruits of their labors."
He said not "the rewards," (for neither did their great labor go unrewarded,) but
"the fruits." This also Daniel did, for he too makes mention of a proverb,
"Wickedness proceeds from the wicked"; and David in his lamenting makes
mention of a similar proverb. Therefore He said beforehand, "that both he that
sows and he that reaps may rejoice together." For since He was about to declare,
that "one has sowed and another reaps," lest any one should deem that the
Prophets were deprived of their reward, He asserts something strange and
paradoxical, such as never chances in sensual things, but is peculiar to spiritual
only. For in things of sense, if it chance that one sow and another reap, they do
not "rejoice together," but those who sowed are sad, as having labored for others,
and those who reap alone rejoice. But here it is not so, but those who reap not
what they sowed rejoice alike with those who reap; whence it is clear that they
too share the reward.

John 4:38
"I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labors; other men labored, and
you are entered into their labors."
By this He the more encourages them; for when it seemed a very hard
matter to go through all the world and preach the Gospel, He shows them that it
is even most easy. The very difficult work was that other, which required great
labor, the putting in the seed, and introducing the uninitiated soul to the
knowledge of God. But wherefore utters He these sayings? It is that when He
sends them to preach they may not be confounded, as though sent on a difficult
task. "For that of the Prophets," He says, "was the more difficult, and the fact
witnesses to My word, that you have come to what is easy; because as in harvest
time the fruits are collected with ease, and in one moment the floor is filled with
sheaves, which await not the revolutions of the seasons, and winter, and spring,
and rain, so it is now. The facts proclaim it aloud." While He was in the midst of
saying these things, the Samaritans came forth, and the fruit was at once
gathered together. On this account He said, "Lift up your eyes, and look on the
fields, that they are white." Thus He spoke, and the fact was clear, and the words
seen (true) by the event. For says St. John,

John 4:39
"Many of the Samaritans of that city believed on Him for the saying of the
woman which testified, He told me all that ever I did."
They perceived that the woman would not from favor have admired One
who had rebuked her sins, nor to gratify another have paraded her own course of
life.
3. Let us then also imitate this woman, and in the case of our own sins not
be ashamed of men, but fear, as is meet, God who now beholds what is done, and
who hereafter punishes those who do not now repent. At present we do the
opposite of this, for we fear not Him who shall judge us, but shudder at those
who do not in anything hurt us, and tremble at the shame which comes from
them. Therefore in the very thing which we fear, in this do we incur punishment.
For he who now regards only the reproach of men, but when God sees is not
ashamed to do anything unseemly, and who will not repent and be converted, in
that day will be made an example, not only before one or two, but in the sight of
the whole world. For that a vast assembly is seated there to behold righteous
actions as well as those which are not such, let the parable of the sheep and the
goats teach you, as also the blessed Paul when He says, "For we must all appear
before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in
his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad" [2
Corinthians 5:10], and again, "Who will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness." [1 Corinthians 4:5] Have you done or imagined any evil thing, and do
you hide it from man? Yet from God you hide it not. But for this thou cares
nothing; the eyes of men, these are your fear. Think then that you will not be
able to escape the sight even of men in that day ; for all things as in a picture
shall then be set before our very eyes, so that each shall be self-condemned. This
is clear even from the instance of Dives, for the poor man whom he had
neglected, Lazarus I mean, he saw standing before his eyes, and the finger which