SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.9.

orders: although a religious who is not in orders is bound to regular
observance to which persons in holy orders are not bound.
Reply to Objection 1: We might answer briefly these quotations from
Chrysostom by saying that he speaks not of a priest of lesser order
who has the cure of souls, but of a bishop, who is called a highpriest; and this agrees with the purpose of that book wherein he
consoles himself and Basil in that they were chosen to be bishops.
We may, however, pass this over and reply that he speaks in view of
the difficulty. For he had already said: "When the pilot is surrounded
by the stormy sea and is able to bring the ship safely out of the
tempest, then he deserves to be acknowledged by all as a perfect
pilot"; and afterwards he concludes, as quoted, with regard to the
monk, "who is not to be compared with one who, cast among the
people . . . remains firm"; and he gives the reason why, because
"both in the calm end in the storm he piloted himself to safety." This
proves nothing more than that the state of one who has the cure of
souls is fraught with more danger than the monastic state; and to
keep oneself innocent in face of a greater peril is proof of greater
virtue. on the other hand, it also indicates greatness of virtue if a
man avoid dangers by entering religion; hence he does not say that
"he would prefer the priestly office to the monastic solitude," but
that "he would rather please" in the former than in the latter, since
this is a proof of greater virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: This passage quoted from Augustine also
clearly refers to the question of difficulty which proves the greatness
of virtue in those who lead a good life, as stated above (ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine there compares monks with clerics
as regards the pre-eminence of order, not as regards the distinction
between religious and secular life.
Reply to Objection 4: Those who are taken from the religious state to
receive the cure of souls, being already in sacred orders, attain to
something they had not hitherto, namely the office of the cure, yet
they do not put aside what they had already. For it is said in the
Decretals (XVI, qu. i, can. De Monachis): "With regard to those
monks who after long residence in a monastery attain to the order of
clerics, we bid them not to lay aside their former purpose."
On the other hand, parish priests and archdeacons, when they enter

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.9.

religion, resign their cure, in order to enter the state of perfection.
This very fact shows the excellence of the religious life. When
religious who are not in orders are admitted to the clerical state and
to the sacred orders, they are clearly promoted to something better,
as stated: this is indicated by the very way in which Jerome
expresses himself: "So live in the monastery as to deserve to be a
clerk."
Reply to Objection 5: Parish priests and archdeacons are more like
bishops than religious are, in a certain respect, namely as regards
the cure of souls which they have subordinately; but as regards the
obligation in perpetuity, religious are more like a bishop, as appears
from what we have said above (Articles 5,6).
Reply to Objection 6: The difficulty that arises from the arduousness
of the deed adds to the perfection of virtue; but the difficulty that
results from outward obstacles sometimes lessens the perfection of
virtue---for instance, when a man loves not virtue so much as to wish
to avoid the obstacles to virtue, according to the saying of the
Apostle (1 Cor. 9:25), "Everyone that striveth for the mastery
refraineth himself from all things": and sometimes it is a sign of
perfect virtue---for instance, when a man forsakes not virtue,
although he is hindered in the practice of virtue unawares or by
some unavoidable cause. In the religious state there is greater
difficulty arising from the arduousness of deeds; whereas for those
who in any way at all live in the world, there is greater difficulty
resulting from obstacles to virtue, which obstacles the religious has
had the foresight to avoid.