them in common with all the people, 'Behold the Lamb of God?'?" That it may
not seem to be a matter of arrangement; for had they gone away from him to
Christ after having been privately admonished by him, and as though to do him a
favor, they would perhaps soon have started away again; but now, having taken
upon them the following Him, from teaching which had been general, they
afterwards remained His firm disciples, as not having followed Him in order to
gratify the teacher, but as looking purely to their own advantage.
The Prophets and Apostles then all preached Him absent; the Prophets
before His coming according to the flesh, the Apostles after He was taken up;
John alone proclaimed Him present. Wherefore he calls himself the "friend of
the Bridegroom" [John 3:29], since he alone was present at the marriage, he it
was that did and accomplished all, he made a beginning of the work. And
"looking upon Jesus walking, he says, Behold the Lamb of God." Not by voice
alone, but with his eyes also he bore witness to, and expressed his admiration of,
Christ, rejoicing and glorying. Nor does he for awhile address any word of
exhortation to his followers, but only shows wonder and astonishment at Him
who was present, and declares to all the Gift which He came to give, and the
manner of purification. For "the Lamb" declares both these things. And he said
not, "Who shall take," or "Who has taken"; but, "Who takes away the sins of the
world"; because this He ever does. He took them not then only when He
suffered, but from that time even to the present does He take them away, not
being repeatedly crucified, (for He offered One Sacrifice for sins,) but by that
One continually purging them. As then The Word shows us His pre-eminence,
and The Son His superiority in comparison with others, so "The Lamb, The
Christ, that Prophet, the True Light, the Good Shepherd," and whatever other
names are applied to Him with the addition of the article, mark a great
difference. For there were many "Lambs," and "Prophets," and "Christs," and
"sons," but from all these John separates Him by a wide interval. And this he
secured not by the article only, but by the addition of "Only-Begotten"; for He
had nothing in common with the creation.

If it seems to any unseasonable that these things should be spoken at "the
tenth hour" (that was the time of day, for he says, "It was about the tenth
hour"— [John 1:39], such an one seems to me to be much mistaken. In the case
indeed of the many, and those who serve the flesh, the season after feasting is not
very suitable for any matters of pressing moment, because their hearts are
burdened with meats: but here was a man who did not even partake of common
food, and who at evening was as sober as we are at morning, (or rather much
more so; for often the remains of our evening food that are left within us, fill our
souls with imaginations, but he loaded his vessel with none of these things;) he
with good reason spoke late in the evening of these matters. Besides, he was
tarrying in the wilderness by Jordan, where all came to his baptism with great
fear, and caring little at that time for the things of this life; as also they continued
with Christ three days, and had nothing to eat. [Matthew 15:32] For this is the
part of a zealous herald and a careful husbandman, not to desist before he see
that the planted seed has got a firm hold. "Why then did he not go about all the
parts of Judæa preaching Christ, rather than stand by the river waiting for Him
to come, that he might point Him out when He came?" Because he wished that
this should be effected by His works; his own object being in the mean time only
to make Him known, and to persuade some to hear of eternal life. But to Him he
leaves the greater testimony, that of works, as also He says, "I receive not
testimony of men. The works which My Father has given Me, the same bear
witness of Me." [c. v. 34, 36] Observe how much more effectual this was; for
when he had thrown in a little spark, at once the blaze rose on high. For they
who before had not even given heed to his words, afterwards say, "All things
which John spoke were true." [John 10:41]
3. Besides, if he had gone about saying these things, what was being done
would have seemed to be done from some human motive, and the preaching to
be full of suspicion.
"And the two disciples heard him, and followed Jesus."
Yet John had other disciples, but they not only did not "follow Jesus," but