Relieve the poor. Bring not trouble on yourself, by ravaging others. Be not bold
nor insolent. God says this, but no one hearkens. Is not hell then justly
threatened, and the fire, and the worm that dies not? How long are we thus to
thrust ourselves down the precipice? How long are we to walk upon thorns, and
pierce ourselves with nails, and be grateful for it? We subject ourselves to cruel
tyrants, and refuse the gentle Master, who imposes nothing grievous, nor
barbarous, nor burdensome, nor unprofitable, but all things such as are useful,
and valuable, and beneficial. Let us then arouse ourselves, and be self-collected,
and gather our forces. Let us love God as we ought, that we may obtain the
blessings promised to those that love Him, through the grace and mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, to the Father, etc.

## Homily 1 on Second Timothy

[2 Timothy 1:1, 2]
"Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the
promise of life which is in Jesus Christ, to Timothy, my dearly beloved son:
Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord."
What is the reason of his writing this second Epistle to Timothy? He had
said, "I hope to come unto you shortly" [1 Timothy 3:14], and as this had not
taken place, instead of coming to him, he consoles him by a letter, when he was
grieving perhaps for his absence, and oppressed by the cares of the government,
which he had now taken in hand. For even great men, when they are placed at
the helm, and are charged with the direction of the Church, feel the strangeness
of their position, and are overwhelmed, as it were, by the waves of business.
This was particularly the case when the Gospel was first preached, when the
ground was everywhere unturned, and all was opposition and hostility. There
were, besides, heresies commencing from the Jewish teachers, as he has shown
in his former Epistle. Nor does he only comfort him by letters, he invites him to
come to him: "Do your diligence," he says, "to come shortly unto me," and,
"when you come, bring with you the books, but especially the parchments." [2
Timothy 4:9-13] And he seems to have written this Epistle when his end was
approaching. For he says, "I am now ready to be offered up"; and again, "At my
first answer no man stood with me." [2 Timothy 4:6-16] To set all this right, he
both offers consolation from his own trials, and also says,
"Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, according to the
promise of life which is in Christ Jesus."
Thus at the very commencement he raises up his mind. Tell me not, he says,
of the dangers here. These obtain for us eternal life, where there is no peril,
where grief and mourning flee away. For He has not made us Apostles only that

we might encounter dangers, but that we might even suffer and die. And as it
would not be a consolation to recount to him his own troubles, but rather an
increase of his grief, he begins immediately with offering comfort, saying,
"According to the promise of life which is in Jesus Christ." But if it is a
"promise," seek it not here. For, "hope that is seen is not hope." [Romans 8:24]
Ver. 2. "To Timothy, my dearly beloved son."
Not merely his "son," but, "dearly beloved"; since it is possible for sons not
to be beloved. Not such, he means, are you; I call you not merely a son, but a
"dearly beloved son." As he calls the Galatians his children, but at the same time
complains of them; "My little children," he says, "of whom I travail in birth
again." [Galatians 4:19] And he bears particular testimony to his virtue by
calling him "beloved." For where love does not arise from nature, it must arise
from the merit of the object. Those who are born of us, are loved not only on
account of their virtue, but from the force of nature; but when those who are of
the faith are beloved, it is on account of nothing but their merit, for what else can
it be? And this especially in the case of Paul, who never acted from partiality.
And further, he shows by calling him his "beloved son," that it was not because
he was offended with him, or despised him, or condemned him; that he did not
come to him.
Ver. 2. "Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and Christ Jesus
our Lord."
These things which he before prayed for, he again invokes upon him. And
observe how, at the very beginning, he excuses himself for not having come to
him, nor seen him. For his words, "Till I come," and, "Hoping to come to you
shortly," had led Timothy to expect his coming soon. For this he excuses
himself, but he does not immediately mention the cause of his not coming, lest
he should grieve him mightily. For he was detained in prison by the emperor. But
when at the end of the Epistle he invited him to come to him, then he informed
him of it. He does not at the outset plunge him into sorrow, but encourages the
hope that he shall see him. "Greatly desiring to see you," and "Do your diligence