FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.8.

word, in so far as man is ready to break out into a declaration of his
thought; while the third degree consists in the consummation of the
deed. Consequently these three differ in respect of the various
degrees of sin. Nevertheless it is evident that these three belong to
the one complete species of sin, since they proceed from the same
motive. For the angry man, through desire of vengeance, is at first
disturbed in thought, then he breaks out into words of abuse, and
lastly he goes on to wrongful deeds; and the same applies to lust
and to any other sin.
Reply to Objection 1: All sins of thought have the common note of
secrecy, in respect of which they form one degree, which is,
however, divided into three stages, viz. of cogitation, pleasure, and
consent.
Reply to Objection 2: Sins of words and deed are both done openly,
and for this reason Gregory (Moral. iv, 25) reckons them under one
head: whereas Jerome (in commenting on Ezech. 43:23)
distinguishes between them, because in sins of word there is
nothing but manifestation which is intended principally; while in sins
of deed, it is the consummation of the inward thought which is
principally intended, and the outward manifestation is by way of
sequel. Habit and despair are stages following the complete species
of sin, even as boyhood and youth follow the complete generation of
a man.
Reply to Objection 3: Sin of thought and sin of word are not distinct
from the sin of deed when they are united together with it, but when
each is found by itself: even as one part of a movement is not
distinct from the whole movement, when the movement is
continuous, but only when there is a break in the movement.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether excess and deficiency diversify the

species of sins?
Objection 1: It would seem that excess and deficiency do not
diversify the species of sins. For excess and deficiency differ in
respect of more and less. Now "more" and "less" do not diversify a
species. Therefore excess and deficiency do not diversify the
species of sins.
Objection 2: Further, just as sin, in matters of action, is due to
straying from the rectitude of reason, so falsehood, in speculative
matters, is due to straying from the truth of the reality. Now the
species of falsehood is not diversified by saying more or less than
the reality. Therefore neither is the species of sin diversified by
straying more or less from the rectitude of reason.
Objection 3: Further, "one species cannot be made out of two," as
Porphyry declares [Isagog.; Arist. Metaph. i]. Now excess and
deficiency are united in one sin; for some are at once illiberal and
wasteful---illiberality being a sin of deficiency, and prodigality, by
excess. Therefore excess and deficiency do not diversify the species
of sins.
On the contrary, Contraries differ specifically, for "contrariety is a
difference of form," as stated in Metaph. x, text. 13,14. Now vices that
differ according to excess and deficiency are contrary to one
another, as illiberality to wastefulness. Therefore they differ
specifically.
I answer that, While there are two things in sin, viz. the act itself and
its inordinateness, in so far as sin is a departure from the order of
reason and the Divine law, the species of sin is gathered, not from its
inordinateness, which is outside the sinner's intention, as stated
above (Article 1), but one the contrary, from the act itself as
terminating in the object to which the sinner's intention is directed.
Consequently wherever we find a different motive inclining the
intention to sin, there will be a different species of sin. Now it is
evident that the motive for sinning, in sins by excess, is not the
same as the motive for sinning, in sins of deficiency; in fact, they are
contrary to one another, just as the motive in the sin of intemperance
is love for bodily pleasures, while the motive in the sin of