attention of so many cities? For as to the fact that he did no wondrous works,
hear the evangelist, saying, "John did no miracle." And whence did Elias
become admirable? Was it not from his boldness towards the king? From his zeal
towards God? From his voluntary poverty? From his garment of sheep's skin,
and his cave, and his mountains? For his miracles he did after all these. And as
to Job, what manner of miracle did he work in sight of the devil, that he was
amazed at him? No miracle indeed, but a life that shone and displayed an
endurance firmer than any adamant. What manner of miracle did David, yet
being young, that God should say, "I have found David the son of Jesse, a man
after my own heart?" [Acts 13:22] And Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, what
dead body did they raise? What leper did they cleanse? Do you not know that the
miracles, except we be sober, do even harm in many cases? Thus many of the
Corinthians were severed one from another; thus many of the Romans were
carried away with pride; thus was Simon cast out. Thus he, who at a certain time
had a desire to follow Christ, was rejected, when he had been told, "The foxes
have holes, and the birds of the air nests." [Matthew 8:20] For each of these, one
aiming at the wealth, another at the glory, which the miracles bring, fell away
and perished. But care of practice, and love of virtue, so far from generating
such a desire, does even take it away when it exists.
And Himself too, when He was making laws for His own disciples, what
said He? "Do miracles, that men may see you"? By no means. But what? "Let
your light shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in Heaven." [Matthew 5:16] And to Peter again He said not, "If
you love me," "do miracles," but "feed my sheep." [John 21:16] And whereas He
everywhere distinguishes him with James and John above all the rest, for what, I
pray you, did He distinguish them? For their miracles? Nay, all alike cleansed
the lepers, and raised the dead; and to all alike He gave that authority.
Whence then had these the advantage? From the virtue in their soul. Do you
see how everywhere practice is required, and the proof by works? "For by their
fruits," says He, "you shall know them." [Matthew 7:16] And what commends

our own life? Is it indeed a display of miracles, or the perfection of an excellent
conversation? Very evidently it is the second; but as to the miracles, they both
have their origin from hence, and terminate herein. For both he that shows forth
an excellent life, draws to himself this gift, and he that receives the gift, receives
it for this end, that he may amend other men's lives. Since even Christ for this
end wrought those miracles, that having made Himself thereby credible, and
drawn men unto Him, He might bring virtue into our life. Wherefore also He
lays more stress of the two on this. For He is not at all satisfied with the signs
only, but He also threatens hell, and promises a kingdom, and lays down those
startling laws, and all things He orders to this end, that He may make us equal to
the angels.
And why say I, that Christ does all for this object? Why, even thou, should
one give you your choice, to raise dead men by His name, or to die for His
name; which I pray you, of the two would you rather accept? Is it not quite plain,
the latter? And yet the one is a miracle, the other but a work. And what, if one
offered you to make grass gold, or to be able to despise all wealth as grass,
would you not rather accept this latter? And very reasonably. For mankind would
be attracted by this more than any way. For if they saw the grass changed into
gold, they would covet themselves also to acquire that power, as Simon did, and
the love of money would be increased in them; but if they saw us all contemning
and neglecting gold, as though it were grass, they would long ago have been
delivered from this disease.
4. Do you see that our practice has more power to do good? By practice I
mean, not your fasting, nor yet your strewing sackcloth and ashes under you, but
if you despise wealth, as it ought to be despised; if you be kindly affectioned, if
you give your bread to the hungry, if you control anger, if you cast out vainglory,
if you put away envy. So He Himself used to teach: for, "Learn of me," says He,
"for I am meek and lowly in heart." [Matthew 11:29] He did not say, "for I
fasted," although surely He might have spoken of the forty days, yet He says not
this; but, "I am meek and lowly in heart." And again, when sending them out, He