as he is a believer. Accordingly plurality of wives neither wholly
destroys nor in any way hinders the first end of marriage, since one
man is sufficient to get children of several wives, and to rear the
children born of them. But though it does not wholly destroy the
second end, it hinders it considerably for there cannot easily be
peace in a family where several wives are joined to one husband,
since one husband cannot suffice to satisfy the requisitions of
several wives, and again because the sharing of several in one
occupation is a cause of strife: thus "potters quarrel with one
another" [Aristotle, Rhet. ii, 4], and in like manner the several wives
of one husband. The third end, it removes altogether, because as
Christ is one, so also is the Church one. It is therefore evident from
what has been said that plurality of wives is in a way against the law
of nature, and in a way not against it.
Reply to Objection 1: Custom does not prejudice the law of nature as
regards the first precepts of the latter, which are like the general
concepts of the mind in speculative matters. But those which are
drawn like conclusions from these custom enforces, as Tully
declares (De Inv. Rhet. ii), or weakens. Such is the precept of nature
in the matter of having one wife.
Reply to Objection 2: As Tully says (De Inv. Rhet. ii), "fear of the law
and religion have sanctioned those things that come from nature and
are approved by custom." Wherefore it is evident that those dictates
of the natural law, which are derived from the first principles as it
were of the natural law, have not the binding force of an absolute
commandment, except when they have been sanctioned by Divine or
human law. This is what Augustine means by saying that "they did
not disobey the commandments of the law, since it was not
forbidden by any law."
The Reply to the Third Objection follows from what has been said.
Reply to Objection 4: Natural right has several significations. First a
right is said to be natural by its principle, because it is instilled by
nature: and thus Tully defines it (De Inv. Rhet. ii) when he says:
"Natural right is not the result of opinion but the product of an innate
force." And since even in natural things certain movements are
called natural, not that they be from an intrinsic principle, but
because they are from a higher moving principle---thus the
movements that are caused in the elements by the impress of
heavenly bodies are said to be natural, as the Commentator states

(De Coelo et Mundo iii, 28), therefore those things that are of Divine
right are said to be of natural right, because they are caused by the
impress and influence of a higher principle, namely God. Isidore
takes it in this sense, when he says (Etym. v) that "the natural right is
that which is contained in the Law and the Gospel." Thirdly, right is
said to be natural not only from its principle but also from its matter,
because it is about natural things. And since nature is
contradistinguished with reason, whereby man is a man, it follows
that if we take natural right in its strictest sense, those things which
are dictated by natural reason and pertain to man alone are not said
to be of natural right, but only those which are dictated by natural
reason and are common to man and other animals. Thus we have the
aforesaid definition, namely: "Natural right is what nature has taught
all animals." Accordingly plurality of wives, though not contrary to
natural right taken in the third sense, is nevertheless against natural
right taken in the second sense, because it is forbidden by the Divine
law. It is also against natural right taken in the first sense, as
appears from what has been said, for such is nature's dictate to
every animal according to the mode befitting its nature. Wherefore
also certain animals, the rearing of whose offspring demands the
care of both, namely the male and female, by natural instinct cling to
the union of one with one, for instance the turtle-dove, the dove, and
so forth.
The Reply to the Fifth Objection is clear from what has been said.
Since, however, the arguments adduced "on the contrary side"
would seem to show that plurality of wives is against the first
principles of the natural law, we must reply to them.
Accordingly we reply to the Sixth Objection that human nature was
founded without any defect, and consequently it is endowed not only
with those things without which the principal end of marriage is
impossible of attainment, but also with those without which the
secondary end of marriage could not be obtained without difficulty:
and in this way it sufficed man when he was first formed to have one
wife, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 7: In marriage the husband gives his wife power
of his body, not in all respects, but only in those things that are
required by marriage. Now marriage does not require the husband to
pay the debt every time his wife asks for it, if we consider the
principal end for which marriage was instituted, namely the good of