SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.6.

law which directs the acts of all the virtues to the common good.
Reply to Objection 1: Justice is specified or enumerated with the
other virtues, not as a general but as a special virtue, as we shall
state further on (Articles 7,12).
Reply to Objection 2: Temperance and fortitude are in the sensitive
appetite, viz. in the concupiscible and irascible. Now these powers
are appetitive of certain particular goods, even as the senses are
cognitive of particulars. On the other hand justice is in the
intellective appetite as its subject, which can have the universal
good as its object, knowledge whereof belongs to the intellect.
Hence justice can be a general virtue rather than temperance or
fortitude.
Reply to Objection 3: Things referable to oneself are referable to
another, especially in regard to the common good. Wherefore legal
justice, in so far as it directs to the common good, may be called a
general virtue: and in like manner injustice may be called a general
sin; hence it is written (1 Jn. 3:4) that all "sin is iniquity."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether justice, as a general virtue, is essentially

the same as all virtue?
Objection 1: It would seem that justice, as a general virtue, is
essentially the same as all virtue. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. v,
1) that "virtue and legal justice are the same as all virtue, but differ in
their mode of being." Now things that differ merely in their mode of
being or logically do not differ essentially. Therefore justice is
essentially the same as every virtue.
Objection 2: Further, every virtue that is not essentially the same as
all virtue is a part of virtue. Now the aforesaid justice, according to
the Philosopher (Ethic. v. 1) "is not a part but the whole of virtue."
Therefore the aforesaid justice is essentially the same as all virtue.
Objection 3: Further, the essence of a virtue does not change
through that virtue directing its act to some higher end even as the
habit of temperance remains essentially the same even though its
act be directed to a Divine good. Now it belongs to legal justice that
the acts of all the virtues are directed to a higher end, namely the
common good of the multitude, which transcends the good of one
single individual. Therefore it seems that legal justice is essentially
all virtue.
Objection 4: Further, every good of a part can be directed to the
good of the whole, so that if it be not thus directed it would seem
without use or purpose. But that which is in accordance with virtue
cannot be so. Therefore it seems that there can be no act of any
virtue, that does not belong to general justice, which directs to the
common good; and so it seems that general justice is essentially the
same as all virtue.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that "many are
able to be virtuous in matters affecting themselves, but are unable to
be virtuous in matters relating to others," and (Polit. iii, 2) that "the
virtue of the good man is not strictly the same as the virtue of the
good citizen." Now the virtue of a good citizen is general justice,
whereby a man Is directed to the common good. Therefore general
justice is not the same as virtue in general, and it is possible to have
one without the other.