FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

3). The third remedy aimed at the removal of this confusion, and
provided that the dead should be succeeded by their next of kin: in
the first place, the son; secondly, the daughter; thirdly, the brother;
fourthly, the father's brother; fifthly, any other next of kin.
Furthermore, in order to preserve the distinction of property, the Law
enacted that heiresses should marry within their own tribe, as
recorded in Num. 36:6.
Secondly, the Law commanded that, in some respects, the use of
things should belong to all in common. Firstly, as regards the care of
them; for it was prescribed (Dt. 22:1-4): "Thou shalt not pass by, if
thou seest thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray; but thou shalt
bring them back to thy brother," and in like manner as to other
things. Secondly, as regards fruits. For all alike were allowed on
entering a friend's vineyard to eat of the fruit, but not to take any
away. And, specially, with respect to the poor, it was prescribed that
the forgotten sheaves, and the bunches of grapes and fruit, should
be left behind for them (Lev. 19:9; Dt. 24:19). Moreover, whatever
grew in the seventh year was common property, as stated in Ex.
23:11 and Lev. 25:4.
Thirdly, the law recognized the transference of goods by the owner.
There was a purely gratuitous transfer: thus it is written (Dt.
14:28,29): "The third day thou shalt separate another tithe . . . and the
Levite . . . and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow . . .
shall come and shall eat and be filled." And there was a transfer for a
consideration, for instance, by selling and buying, by letting out and
hiring, by loan and also by deposit, concerning all of which we find
that the Law made ample provision. Consequently it is clear that the
Old Law provided sufficiently concerning the mutual relations of one
man with another.
Reply to Objection 1: As the Apostle says (Rm. 13:8), "he that loveth
his neighbor hath fulfilled the Law": because, to wit, all the precepts
of the Law, chiefly those concerning our neighbor, seem to aim at
the end that men should love one another. Now it is an effect of love
that men give their own goods to others: because, as stated in 1 Jn.
3:17: "He that . . . shall see his brother in need, and shall shut up his
bowels from him: how doth the charity of God abide in him?" Hence
the purpose of the Law was to accustom men to give of their own to
others readily: thus the Apostle (1 Tim. 6:18) commands the rich "to
give easily and to communicate to others." Now a man does not give
easily to others if he will not suffer another man to take some little

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

thing from him without any great injury to him. And so the Law laid
down that it should be lawful for a man, on entering his neighbor's
vineyard, to eat of the fruit there: but not to carry any away, lest this
should lead to the infliction of a grievous harm, and cause a
disturbance of the peace: for among well-behaved people, the taking
of a little does not disturb the peace; in fact, it rather strengthens
friendship and accustoms men to give things to one another.
Reply to Objection 2: The Law did not prescribe that women should
succeed to their father's estate except in default of male issue:
failing which it was necessary that succession should be granted to
the female line in order to comfort the father, who would have been
sad to think that his estate would pass to strangers. Nevertheless
the Law observed due caution in the matter, by providing that those
women who succeeded to their father's estate, should marry within
their own tribe, in order to avoid confusion of tribal possessions, as
stated in Num. 36:7,8.
Reply to Objection 3: As the Philosopher says (Polit. ii, 4), the
regulation of possessions conduces much to the preservation of a
state or nation. Consequently, as he himself observes, it was
forbidden by the law in some of the heathen states, "that anyone
should sell his possessions, except to avoid a manifest loss." For if
possessions were to be sold indiscriminately, they might happen to
come into the hands of a few: so that it might become necessary for
a state or country to become void of inhabitants. Hence the Old Law,
in order to remove this danger, ordered things in such a way that
while provision was made for men's needs, by allowing the sale of
possessions to avail for a certain period, at the same time the said
danger was removed, by prescribing the return of those possessions
after that period had elapsed. The reason for this law was to prevent
confusion of possessions, and to ensure the continuance of a
definite distinction among the tribes.
But as the town houses were not allotted to distinct estates,
therefore the Law allowed them to be sold in perpetuity, like movable
goods. Because the number of houses in a town was not fixed,
whereas there was a fixed limit to the amount of estates, which could
not be exceeded, while the number of houses in a town could be
increased. On the other hand, houses situated not in a town, but "in
a village that hath no walls," could not be sold in perpetuity: because
such houses are built merely with a view to the cultivation and care
of possessions; wherefore the Law rightly made the same