not two powers.
I answer that, The higher and lower reason, as they are understood
by Augustine, can in no way be two powers of the soul. For he says
that "the higher reason is that which is intent on the contemplation
and consultation of things eternal": forasmuch as in contemplation it
sees them in themselves, and in consultation it takes its rules of
action from them. But he calls the lower reason that which "is intent
on the disposal of temporal things." Now these two---namely, eternal
and temporal ---are related to our knowledge in this way, that one of
them is the means of knowing the other. For by way of discovery, we
come through knowledge of temporal things to that of things eternal,
according to the words of the Apostle (Rm. 1:20), "The invisible
things of God are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made": while by way of judgment, from eternal things already
known, we judge of temporal things, and according to laws of things
eternal we dispose of temporal things.
But it may happen that the medium and what is attained thereby
belong to different habits: as the first indemonstrable principles
belong to the habit of the intellect; whereas the conclusions which
we draw from them belong to the habit of science. And so it happens
that from the principles of geometry we draw a conclusion in another
science---for example, perspective. But the power of the reason is
such that both medium and term belong to it. For the act of the
reason is, as it were, a movement from one thing to another. But the
same movable thing passes through the medium and reaches the
end. Wherefore the higher and lower reasons are one and the same
power. But according to Augustine they are distinguished by the
functions of their actions, and according to their various habits: for
wisdom is attributed to the higher reason, science to the lower.
Reply to Objection 1: We speak of parts, in whatever way a thing is
divided. And so far as reason is divided according to its various
acts, the higher and lower reason are called parts; but not because
they are different powers.
Reply to Objection 2: The lower reason is said to flow from the
higher, or to be ruled by it, as far as the principles made use of by
the lower reason are drawn from and directed by the principles of the
higher reason.

Reply to Objection 3: The "scientific" part, of which the Philosopher
speaks, is not the same as the higher reason: for necessary truths
are found even among temporal things, of which natural science and
mathematics treat. And the "opinionative" and "ratiocinative" part is
more limited than the lower reason; for it regards only things
contingent. Neither must we say, without any qualification, that a
power, by which the intellect knows necessary things, is distinct
from a power by which it knows contingent things: because it knows
both under the same objective aspect---namely, under the aspect of
being and truth. Wherefore it perfectly knows necessary things
which have perfect being in truth; since it penetrates to their very
essence, from which it demonstrates their proper accidents. On the
other hand, it knows contingent things, but imperfectly; forasmuch
as they have but imperfect being and truth. Now perfect and
imperfect in the action do not vary the power, but they vary the
actions as to the mode of acting, and consequently the principles of
the actions and the habits themselves. And therefore the
Philosopher postulates two lesser parts of the soul---namely, the
"scientific" and the "ratiocinative," not because they are two powers,
but because they are distinct according to a different aptitude for
receiving various habits, concerning the variety of which he inquires.
For contingent and necessary, though differing according to their
proper genera, nevertheless agree in the common aspect of being,
which the intellect considers, and to which they are variously
compared as perfect and imperfect.
Reply to Objection 4: That distinction given by Damascene is
according to the variety of acts, not according to the variety of
powers. For "opinion" signifies an act of the intellect which leans to
one side of a contradiction, whilst in fear of the other. While to
"judge" or "measure" [mensurare] is an act of the intellect, applying
certain principles to examine propositions. From this is taken the
word "mens" [mind]. Lastly, to "understand" is to adhere to the
formed judgment with approval.