the generation of an animal, the animal is generated first, then the
man or the horse. So therefore food first of all receives a certain
common virtue in regard to all the parts of the body, which virtue is
subsequently determinate to this or that part.
Now it is not possible that the semen be a kind of solution from what
is already transformed into the substance of the members. For this
solution, if it does not retain the nature of the member it is taken
from, it would no longer be of the nature of the begetter, and would
be due to a process of corruption; and consequently it would not
have the power of transforming something else into the likeness of
that nature. But if it retained the nature of the member it is taken
from, then, since it is limited to a certain part of the body, it would
not have the power of moving towards (the production of) the whole
nature, but only the nature of that part. Unless one were to say that
the solution is taken from all the parts of the body, and that it retains
the nature of each part. Thus the semen would be a small animal in
act; and generation of animal from animal would be a mere division,
as mud is generated from mud, and as animals which continue to
live after being cut in two: which is inadmissible.
It remains to be said, therefore, that the semen is not something
separated from what was before the actual whole; rather is it the
whole, though potentially, having the power, derived from the soul of
the begetter, to produce the whole body, as stated above (Article 1;
Question 108, Article 1). Now that which is in potentiality to the
whole, is that which is generated from the food, before it is
transformed into the substance of the members. Therefore the
semen is taken from this. In this sense the nutritive power is said to
serve the generative power: because what is transformed by the
nutritive power is employed as semen by the generative power. A
sign of this, according to the Philosopher, is that animals of great
size, which require much food, have little semen in proportion to the
size of their bodies, and generated seldom; in like manner fat men,
and for the same reason.
Reply to Objection 1: Generation is from the substance of the
begetter in animals and plants, inasmuch as the semen owes its
virtue to the form of the begetter, and inasmuch as it is in potentiality
to the substance.
Reply to Objection 2: The likeness of the begetter to the begotten is
on account not of the matter, but of the form of the agent that

generates its like. Wherefore in order for a man to be like his
grandfather, there is no need that the corporeal seminal matter
should have been in the grandfather; but that there be in the semen a
virtue derived from the soul of the grandfather through the father. In
like manner the third objection is answered. For kinship is not in
relation to matter, but rather to the derivation of the forms.
Reply to Objection 4: These words of Augustine are not to be
understood as though the immediate seminal virtue, or the corporeal
substance from which this individual was formed were actually in
Adam: but so that both were in Adam as in principle. For even the
corporeal matter, which is supplied by the mother, and which he
calls the corporeal substance, is originally derived from Adam: and
likewise the active seminal power of the father, which is the
immediate seminal virtue (in the production) of this man.
But Christ is said to have been in Adam according to the "corporeal
substance," not according to the seminal virtue. Because the matter
from which His Body was formed, and which was supplied by the
Virgin Mother, was derived from Adam; whereas the active virtue
was not derived from Adam, because His Body was not formed by
the seminal virtue of a man, but by the operation of the Holy Ghost.
For "such a birth was becoming to Him," [Hymn for Vespers at
Christmas; Breviary, O. P.], WHO IS ABOVE ALL GOD FOR EVER
BLESSED. Amen.