in Christ. It is a universal plan, which concerns all men and women created in the image
and likeness of God (cf. Gen. 1:26). Just as all are included in the creative work of God
"in the beginning," so all are eternally included in the divine plan of salvation, which is to
be completely revealed, in the "fullness of time," with the final coming of Christ. In fact,
the God who is the "Father of our Lord Jesus Christ"-these are the next words of the same
Letter-"chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
blameless before him. He destined us in love to be his sons through Jesus Christ,
according to the purpose of his will, to the praise of his glorious grace, which he freely
bestowed on us in the Beloved. In him we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace" (Eph. 1:4-7).

The divine plan of salvation-which was fully revealed to us with the coming of Christ-is
eternal. And according to the teaching contained in the Letter just quoted and in other
Pauline Letters (cf. Col. 1:12- 14; Rom. 3:24; Gal. 3:13; 2 Cor. 5:18-29), it is also
eternally linked to Christ. It includes everyone, but it reserves a special place for the
"woman" who is the Mother of him to whom the Father has entrusted the work of
salvation. As the Second Vatican Council says, "she is already prophetically
foreshadowed in that promise made to our first parents after their fall into sin"-according
to the Book of Genesis . "Likewise she is the Virgin who is to conceive and bear
a son, whose name will be called Emmanuel"- according to the words of Isaiah . In this way the Old Testament prepares that "fullness of time" when God "sent
forth his Son, born of woman...so that we might receive adoption as sons." The coming
into the world of the Son of God is an event recorded in the first chapters of the Gospels
according to Luke and Matthew.

8. Mary is definitively introduced into the mystery of Christ through this event: the
Annunciation by the angel. This takes place at Nazareth, within the concrete
circumstances of the history of Israel, the people which first received God's promises.
The divine messenger says to the Virgin: "Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with you" (Lk. 1:28). Mary "was greatly troubled at the saying, and considered in her mind what sort of
greeting this might be" (Lk. 1:29): what could those extraordinary words mean, and in
particular the expression "full of grace" (kecharitoméne).

If we wish to meditate together with Mary on these words, and especially on the
expression "full of grace," we can find a significant echo in the very passage from the
Letter to the Ephesians quoted above. And if after the announcement of the heavenly
messenger the Virgin of Nazareth is also called "blessed among women" (cf. Lk. 1:42), it
is because of that blessing with which "God the Father" has filled us "in the heavenly
places, in Christ." It is a spiritual blessing which is meant for all people and which bears
in itself fullness and universality ("every blessing"). It flows from that love which, in the
Holy Spirit, unites the consubstantial Son to the Father. At the same time, it is a blessing
poured out through Jesus Christ upon human history until the end: upon all people. This
blessing, however, refers to Mary in a special and exceptional degree: for she was greeted
by Elizabeth as "blessed among women."