SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.44, C.2.

that genus, for instance in medicine or architecture, according to 1
Cor. 3:10: "As a wise architect, I have laid a foundation." On the
other hand, he who knows the cause that is simply the highest,
which is God, is said to be wise simply, because he is able to judge
and set in order all things according to Divine rules.
Now man obtains this judgment through the Holy Ghost, according
to 1 Cor. 2:15: "The spiritual man judgeth all things," because as
stated in the same chapter (1 Cor. 2:10), "the Spirit searcheth all
things, yea the deep things of God." Wherefore it is evident that
wisdom is a gift of the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 1: A thing is said to be good in two senses: first
in the sense that it is truly good and simply perfect, secondly, by a
kind of likeness, being perfect in wickedness; thus we speak of a
good or a perfect thief, as the Philosopher observes (Metaph. v, text.
21). And just as with regard to those things which are truly good, we
find a highest cause, namely the sovereign good which is the last
end, by knowing which, man is said to be truly wise, so too in evil
things something is to be found to which all others are to be referred
as to a last end, by knowing which, man is said to be wise unto evil
doing, according to Jer. 4:22: "They are wise to do evils, but to do
good they have no knowledge." Now whoever turns away from his
due end, must needs fix on some undue end, since every agent acts
for an end. Wherefore, if he fixes his end in external earthly things,
his "wisdom" is called "earthly," if in the goods of the body, it is
called "sensual wisdom," if in some excellence, it is called "devilish
wisdom" because it imitates the devil's pride, of which it is written
(Job 41:25): "He is king over all the children of pride."
Reply to Objection 2: The wisdom which is called a gift of the Holy
Ghost, differs from that which is an acquired intellectual virtue, for
the latter is attained by human effort, whereas the latter is
"descending from above" (James 3:15). In like manner it differs from
faith, since faith assents to the Divine truth in itself, whereas it
belongs to the gift of wisdom to judge according to the Divine truth.
Hence the gift of wisdom presupposes faith, because "a man judges
well what he knows" (Ethic. i, 3).
Reply to Objection 3: Just as piety which pertains to the worship of
God is a manifestation of faith, in so far as we make profession of
faith by worshipping God, so too, piety manifests wisdom. For this
reason piety is stated to be wisdom, and so is fear, for the same

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.44, C.2.

reason, because if a man fear and worship God, this shows that he
has a right judgment about Divine things.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.44, C.3.