of house He had come, that of the publicans, and who they were that followed
Him, sinners and publicans; and all these things made her to be of good hope.
What then does Christ? He suffers her not to be hid, but brings her into the
midst, and makes her manifest for many purposes.
It is true indeed that some of the senseless ones say, "He does this for love
of glory. For why," say they, "did He not suffer her to be hid?" What do you say,
unholy, yea, all unholy one? He that enjoins silence, He that passes by miracles
innumerable, is He in love with glory?
For what intent then does He bring her forward? In the first place He puts
an end to the woman's fear, lest being pricked by her conscience, as having
stolen the gift, she should abide in agony. In the second place, He sets her right,
in respect of her thinking to be hid. Thirdly, He exhibits her faith to all, so as to
provoke the rest also to emulation; and His staying of the fountains of her blood
was no greater sign than He affords in signifying His knowledge of all things.
Moreover the ruler of the synagogue, who was on the point of thorough unbelief,
and so of utter ruin, He corrects by the woman. Since both they that came said,
"Trouble not the Master, for the damsel is dead;" and those in the house laughed
Him to scorn, when He said, "She sleeps;" and it was likely that the father too
should have experienced some such feeling. Therefore to correct this weakness
beforehand, He brings forward the simple woman. For as to that ruler being
quite of the grosser sort, hear what He says unto him: "Fear not, do thou believe
only, and she shall be made whole." [Luke 8:50]
Thus He waited also on purpose for death to come on, and that then He
should arrive; in order that the proof of the resurrection might be distinct. With
this view He both walks more leisurely, and discourses more with the woman;
that He might give time for the damsel to die, and for those to come, who told of
it, and said, "Trouble not the Master." This again surely the evangelist obscurely
signifies, when he says, "While He yet spoke, there came from the house certain
which said, Your daughter is dead, trouble not the Master." For His will was that
her death should be believed, that her resurrection might not be suspected. And

this He does in every instance. So also in the case of Lazarus, He waited a first
and a second and a third day. [John 11:6, 39]
On account then of all these things He brings her forward, and says,
"Daughter, be of good cheer," even as He had said also to the paralyzed person,
"Son, be of good cheer." Because in truth the woman was exceedingly alarmed;
therefore He says, "be of good cheer," and He calls her "daughter;" for her faith
had made her a daughter. After that comes also her praise: "Your faith has made
you whole."
But Luke tells us also other things more than these concerning the woman.
Thus, when she had approached Him, says he, and had received her health,
Christ did not immediately call her, but first He says, "Which is he that touched
me?" Then when Peter and they that were with Him said, Master, the multitude
throng You, and press You, and sayest Thou, who touched me? [Luke 8:45]
(which was a very sure sign both that He was encompassed with real flesh, and
that He trampled on all vainglory, for they did not follow Him at all afar off, but
thronged Him on every side); He for His part continued to say, "Somebody has
touched me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me;" answering after a
grosser manner according to the impression of His hearers. But these things He
said, that He might also induce her of herself to make confession. For on this
account neither did He immediately convict her, in order that having signified
that He knows all things clearly, He might induce her of her own accord to
publish all, and work upon her to proclaim herself what had been done, and that
He might not incur suspicion by saying it.
Do you see the woman superior to the ruler of the synagogue? She detained
Him not, she took no hold of Him, but touched Him only with the end of her
fingers, and though she came later, she first went away healed. And he indeed
was bringing the Physician altogether to his house, but for her a mere touch
suffered. For though she was bound by her affliction, yet her faith had given her
wings. And mark how He comforts her, saying, "Your faith has saved you." Now
surely, had He drawn her forward for display, He would not have added this; but