FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the beatitudes are suitably enumerated?

Objection 1: It would seem that the beatitudes are unsuitably
enumerated. For the beatitudes are assigned to the gifts, as stated
above (Article 1, ad 1). Now some of the gifts, viz. wisdom and
understanding, belong to the contemplative life: yet no beatitude is
assigned to the act of contemplation, for all are assigned to matters
connected with the active life. Therefore the beatitudes are
insufficiently enumerated.
Objection 2: Further, not only do the executive gifts belong to the
active life, but also some of the directive gifts, e.g. knowledge and
counsel: yet none of the beatitudes seems to be directly connected
with the acts of knowledge or counsel. Therefore the beatitudes are
insufficiently indicated.
Objection 3: Further, among the executive gifts connected with the
active life, fear is said to be connected with poverty, while piety
seems to correspond to the beatitude of mercy: yet nothing is
included directly connected with justice. Therefore the beatitudes
are insufficiently enumerated.
Objection 4: Further, many other beatitudes are mentioned in Holy
Writ. Thus, it is written (Job 5:17): "Blessed is the man whom God
correcteth"; and (Ps. i, 1): "Blessed is the man who hath not walked
in the counsel of the ungodly"; and (Prov. 3:13): "Blessed is the man
that findeth wisdom." Therefore the beatitudes are insufficiently
enumerated.
Objection 5: On the other hand, it seems that too many are
mentioned. For there are seven gifts of the Holy Ghost: whereas
eight beatitudes are indicated.
Objection 6: Further, only four beatitudes are indicated in the sixth
chapter of Luke. Therefore the seven or eight mentioned in Matthew
5 are too many.
I answer that, These beatitudes are most suitably enumerated. To
make this evident it must be observed that beatitude has been held
to consist in one of three things: for some have ascribed it to a
sensual life, some, to an active life, and some, to a contemplative life

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.4.

[Question 3]. Now these three kinds of happiness stand in different
relations to future beatitude, by hoping for which we are said to be
happy. Because sensual happiness, being false and contrary to
reason, is an obstacle to future beatitude; while happiness of the
active life is a disposition of future beatitude; and contemplative
happiness, if perfect, is the very essence of future beatitude, and, if
imperfect, is a beginning thereof.
And so Our Lord, in the first place, indicated certain beatitudes as
removing the obstacle of sensual happiness. For a life of pleasure
consists of two things. First, in the affluence of external goods,
whether riches or honors; from which man is withdrawn---by a virtue
so that he uses them in moderation---and by a gift, in a more
excellent way, so that he despises them altogether. Hence the first
beatitude is: "Blessed are the poor in spirit," which may refer either
to the contempt of riches, or to the contempt of honors, which
results from humility. Secondly, the sensual life consists in following
the bent of one's passions, whether irascible or concupiscible. From
following the irascible passions man is withdrawn---by a virtue, so
that they are kept within the bounds appointed by the ruling of
reason---and by a gift, in a more excellent manner, so that man,
according to God's will, is altogether undisturbed by them: hence the
second beatitude is: "Blessed are the meek." From following the
concupiscible passions, man is withdrawn---by a virtue, so that man
uses these passions in moderation---and by gift, so that, if
necessary, he casts them aside altogether; nay more, so that, if need
be, he makes a deliberate choice of sorrow [Question 35, Article 3];
hence the third beatitude is: "Blessed are they that mourn."
Active life consists chiefly in man's relations with his neighbor,
either by way of duty or by way of spontaneous gratuity. To the
former we are disposed---by a virtue, so that we do not refuse to do
our duty to our neighbor, which pertains to justice---and by a gift, so
that we do the same much more heartily, by accomplishing works of
justice with an ardent desire, even as a hungry and thirsty man eats
and drinks with eager appetite. Hence the fourth beatitude is:
"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice." With regard to
spontaneous favors we are perfected---by a virtue, so that we give
where reason dictates we should give, e.g. to our friends or others
united to us; which pertains to the virtue of liberality--and by a gift,
so that, through reverence for God, we consider only the needs of
those on whom we bestow our gratuitous bounty: hence it is written
(Lk. 14:12,13): "When thou makest a dinner or supper, call not thy