## CHAPTER XCVII--How the Arrangements of Providence follow a Plan
GOD by His providence directs all things to the end of the divine goodness, not that
anything accrues as an addition to His goodness by the things that He makes, but His
aim is the impression of the likeness of His goodness so far as possible on creation. But
inasmuch as every created substance must fall short of the perfection of the divine
goodness, it was needful to have diversity in things for the more perfect communication
of the divine goodness, that what cannot perfectly be represented by one created
exemplar, might be represented by divers such exemplars in divers ways in a more
perfect manner. Thus man multiplies his words to express by divers expressions the
conception of his mind, which cannot all be put in one word. And herein we may
consider the excellence of the divine perfection shown in this, that the perfect goodness
which is in God united and simple, cannot be in creatures except according to diversity
of modes and in many subjects. Things are different by having different forms, whence
they take their species. Thus then the end of creation furnishes a reason for the
diversity of forms in things.
From the diversity of forms follows a difference of activities, and further a diversity of
agents and patients, properties and accidents.
Evidently then it is not without reason that divine providence distributes to creatures
different accidents and actions and impressions and allocations. Hence it is said: The
Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth, hath established the heavens in prudence. By
his wisdom the depths have broken out, and the clouds grow thick with dew (Prov. iii,
19, 20).
As it is necessary for one wishing to build a house to look out for timber, but his looking
out for pitch-pine (ligna abietina) depends on his mere will, not on his plan of building a
house; so it is necessary for God to love His own goodness, but it does not thence
necessarily follow that He should wish to have that goodness represented by creatures,
since the divine goodness is perfect without that. Hence the bringing of creatures into
being depends on the mere will of God, although it is done in consideration of the divine
goodness. Supposing however that God wishes to communicate His goodness by way
of similitude as far as possible, it logically follows thence that there should be creatures
of different sorts: but it does not follow of necessity that creatures should be of this or
that grade of perfection, or exist in this or that number. But supposing that it is in the
divine will to wish this number in creation, and this grade of perfection in each creature,
it thence follows logically that creation be in such and such form, and such and such
matter; and so of further consequences. Manifestly then providence disposes of things
according to a certain plan, and yet this plan presupposes the divine will.
What has been said shuts out two errors, the error of those who believe that all things
follow mere will without reason, which is the error of sundry Doctors of the
Mohammedan law, as Rabbi Moses says; according to whose teaching, the only
difference between fire warming and fire freezing is God's so willing the former