show, and hypocrisy. Faith therefore, without works, is fitly called a mere form
without the power. For as a fair and florid body, when it has no strength, is like a
painted figure, so is a right faith apart from works. For let us suppose any one to
be "covetous, a traitor, heady," and yet to believe aright; of what advantage is it,
if he wants all the qualities becoming a Christian, if he does not the works that
characterize godliness, but outdoes the Greeks in impiety, when he is a mischief
to those with whom he associates, causes God to be blasphemed, and the
doctrine to be slandered by his evil deeds?
"From such turn away," he says. But how is this, if men are to be so "in the
latter times"? There were probably then such, in some degree at least, though not
to the same excess. But, in truth, through him he warns all to turn away from
such characters.
Ver. 6. "For of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive
silly women laden with sins, led away with various lust."
Ver. 7. "Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth."
Do you see them employing the artifice of that old deceiver, the weapons
which the devil used against Adam? "Entering into houses," he says. Observe
how he shows their impudence by this expression, their dishonorable ways, their
deceitfulness. "Leading captive silly women," so that he who is easy to be
deceived is a "silly woman," and nothing like a man: for to be deceived is the
part of silly women. "Laden with sins." See whence arises their persuasion, from
their sins, from their being conscious to themselves of nothing good! And with
great propriety has he said "laden." For this expression marks the multitude of
their sins, and their state of disorder and confusion; "led away with various
lusts." He does not accuse nature, for it is not women simply, but such women as
these, that he blames. And why "various lusts"? By that are implied their various
faults, their luxury, their disorderly conduct, their wantonness. "Divers lust," he
says, that is, of glory, of wealth, of pleasure, of self-will, of honor: and
perchance other vile desires are implied.

"Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth." He
does not say thus to excuse, but to threaten them severely; for their
understanding was callous, because they had weighed themselves down with
lusts and sins.
Ver. 8. "Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the truth."
Who are these? The magicians in the time of Moses. But how is it their
names are nowhere else introduced? Either they were handed down by tradition,
or it is probable that Paul knew them by inspiration.
"Men of corrupt minds," he says, "reprobate concerning the faith."
Ver. 9. "But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifested
unto all men, as theirs also was."
"They shall proceed no further"; how then does he say elsewhere, "They
will increase unto more ungodliness"? [2 Timothy 2:16] He there means, that
beginning to innovate and to deceive, they will not pause in their error, but will
always invent new deceits and corrupt doctrines, for error is never stationary.
But here he says, that they shall not be able to deceive, nor carry men away with
them, for however at first they may seem to impose upon them, they will soon
and easily be detected. For that he is speaking to this effect appears from what
follows. "For their folly shall be manifest unto all." Whence? Every way— "as
theirs also was." For if errors flourish at first, they do not continue to the end, for
so it is with things that are not fair by nature, but fair in appearance; they
flourish for a time, and then are detected, and come to nought. But not such are
our doctrines, and of these you are a witness, for in our doctrines there is no
deceit, for who would choose to die for a deceit?
Ver. 10. "But you have fully known my doctrine." Wherefore be strong; for
thou were not merely present, but followed closely. Here he seems to imply that
the period had been long, in that he says, "You have followed up my doctrine";
this refers to his discourse. "Manner of life"; this to his conduct. "Purpose"; this
to his zeal, and the firmness of his soul. I did not say these things, he says, and