To My Lady
The most reverend and divinely favored deaconess Olympias, I John,
Bishop, send greeting in the Lord.
1. Come now let me relieve the wound of your despondency, and disperse
the thoughts which gather this cloud of care around you. For what is it which
upsets your mind, and why are you sorrowful and dejected? Is it because of the
fierce black storm which has overtaken the Church, enveloping all things in
darkness as of a night without a moon, and is growing to a head every day,
travailing to bring forth disastrous shipwrecks, and increasing the ruin of the
world? I know all this as well as you; none shall gainsay it, and if you like I will
form an image of the things now taking place so as to present the tragedy yet
more distinctly to you. We behold a sea upheaved from the very lowest depths,
some sailors floating dead upon the waves, others engulfed by them, the planks
of the ships breaking up, the sails torn to tatters, the masts sprung, the oars
dashed out of the sailors' hands, the pilots seated on the deck, clasping their
knees with their hands instead of grasping the rudder, bewailing the hopelessness
of their situation with sharp cries and bitter lamentations, neither sky nor sea
clearly visible, but all one deep and impenetrable darkness, so that no one can
see his neighbour, while mighty is the roaring of the billows, and monsters of the
sea attack the crews on every side.
But how much further shall I pursue the unattainable? For whatever image
of our present evils I may seek speech shrinks baffled from the attempt.
Nevertheless even when I look at these calamities I do not abandon the hope of
better things, considering as I do who the pilot is in all this— not one who gets
the better of the storm by his art, but calms the raging waters by his rod. But if
He does not effect this at the outset and speedily, such is His custom— He does
not at the beginning put down these terrible evils, but when they have increased,

and come to extremities, and most persons are reduced to despair, then He works
wondrously, and beyond all expectation, thus manifesting his own power, and
training the patience of those who undergo these calamities. Do not therefore be
cast down. For there is only one thing, Olympias, which is really terrible, only
one real trial, and that is sin; and I have never ceased continually harping upon
this theme; but as for all other things, plots, enmities, frauds, calumnies, insults,
accusations, confiscation, exile, the keen sword of the enemy, the peril of the
deep, warfare of the whole world, or anything else you like to name, they are but
idle tales. For whatever the nature of these things may be they are transitory and
perishable, and operate in a mortal body without doing any injury to the vigilant
soul. Therefore the blessed Paul, desiring to prove the insignificance both of the
pleasures and sorrows relating to this life, declared the whole truth in one
sentence when he said— "For the things which are seen are temporal."
[2 Corinthians 4:18] Why then do you fear temporal things which pass away like
the stream of a river. For such is the nature of present things whether they be
pleasant or painful. And another prophet compared all human prosperity not to
grass, but to another material even more flimsy, describing the whole of it "as
the flower of grass." For he did not single out any one part of it, as wealth alone,
or luxury alone, or power, or honour; but having comprised all the things which
are esteemed splendid among men under the one designation of glory he said
"all the glory of man is as the flower of grass." [Isaiah 40:6]
2. Nevertheless, you will say, adversity is a terrible thing and grievous to be
borne. Yet look at it again compared with another image and then also learn to
despise it. For the railings, and insults, and reproaches, and gibes inflicted by
enemies, and their plots are compared to a worn-out garment, and moth-eaten
wool when God says "Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of
their revilings, for they shall wax old as does a garment, and like moth-eaten
wool so shall they be consumed." [Isaiah 50:7-8] Therefore let none of these
things which are happening trouble you, but ceasing to invoke the aid of this or
that person, and to run after shadows (for such are human alliances), do thou