again." If therefore He rose not again, it is quite clear that these men (having
been deceived and made enemies to an entire nation for His sake, and come to be
without home and without city) would have abhorred Him, and would not have
been willing to invest Him with such glory; as having been deceived, and having
fallen into the utmost dangers on His account. For that they would not even have
been able, unless the resurrection had been true, to feign it, this does not so much
as need reasoning.
For in what were they confident? In the shrewdness of their reasonings?
Nay of all men they were the most unlearned. But in the abundance of their
possessions? Nay, they had neither staff nor shoes. But in the distinction of their
race? Nay, they were mean, and of mean ancestors. But in the greatness of their
country? Nay, they were of obscure places. But in their own numbers? Nay, they
were not more than eleven, and they were scattered abroad. But in their Master's
promises? What kind of promises? For if He were not risen again, neither would
those be likely to be trusted by them. And how should they endure a frantic
people. For if the chief of them endured not the speech of a woman, keeping the
door, and if all the rest too, on seeing Him bound, were scattered abroad, how
should they have thought to run to the ends of the earth, and plant a feigned tale
of a resurrection? For if he stood not a woman's threat, and they not so much as
the sight of bonds, how were they able to stand against kings, and rulers, and
nations, where were swords, and gridirons, and furnaces, and ten thousand
deaths day by day, unless they had the benefit of the power and grace of Him
who rose again? Such miracles and so many were done, and none of these things
did the Jews regard, but crucified Him, who had done them, and were they likely
to believe these men at their mere word about a resurrection? These things are
not, they are not so, but the might of Him, who rose again, brought them to pass.
2. But mark, I pray you, their craft, how ridiculous it is. "We remember,"
these are their words, "that that deceiver said, while He was yet alive, After three
days I rise again." Yet if He were a deceiver, and boastfully uttered falsehood,
why are you afraid and run to and fro, and use so much diligence? We are afraid,

it is replied, lest perchance the disciples steal Him away, and deceive the
multitude. And yet this has been proved to have no probability at all. Malice,
however, is a thing contentious and shameless, and attempts what is
unreasonable.
And they command it to be made sure for three days, as contending for
doctrines, and being minded to prove that before that time also He was a
deceiver, and they extend their malice even to His tomb. For this reason then He
rose sooner, that they might not say that He spoke falsely, and was stolen. For
this, His rising sooner, was open to no charge, but to be later would have been
full of suspicion. For indeed if He had not risen then, when they were sitting
there, and watching, but when they had withdrawn after the three days, they
would have had something to say, and to speak against it, although foolishly. For
this reason then He anticipated the time. For it was meet the resurrection should
take place, while they were sitting by and watching. Therefore also it was fit it
should take place within the three days, since if it had been when they were
passed, and the men had withdrawn, the matter would have been regarded with
suspicion. Wherefore also He allowed them to seal it, as they were minded, and
soldiers sat around it.
And they cared not about doing these things, and working on a Sabbath day,
but they looked to one object only, their own wicked purpose, as though by that
they were to succeed; which was a mark of extreme folly, and of fear now
greatly dismaying them. For they who seized Him, when living, are afraid of
Him when dead. And yet if He had been a mere man, they had reason to have
taken courage. But that they might learn, that when living also He endured of
His own will, what He did endure; behold, both a seal, a stone, and a watch, and
they were not able to hold Him. But there was one result only, that the burial was
published, and the resurrection thereby proved. For indeed soldiers sat by it, and
Jews are on the watch.
"But in the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn towards the first day of
the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre. And