rather signifies the number of persons of one essence; and on this
account we cannot say that the Father is the Trinity, as He is not
three persons. Yet it does not mean the relations themselves of the
Persons, but rather the number of persons related to each other; and
hence it is that the word in itself does not express regard to another.
Reply to Objection 2: Two things are implied in a collective term,
plurality of the "supposita," and a unity of some kind of order. For
"people" is a multitude of men comprehended under a certain order.
In the first sense, this word "trinity" is like other collective words;
but in the second sense it differs from them, because in the divine
Trinity not only is there unity of order, but also with this there is
unity of essence.
Reply to Objection 3: "Trinity" is taken in an absolute sense; for it
signifies the threefold number of persons. "Triplicity" signifies a
proportion of inequality; for it is a species of unequal proportion,
according to Boethius (Arithm. i, 23). Therefore in God there is not
triplicity, but Trinity.
Reply to Objection 4: In the divine Trinity is to be understood both
number and the persons numbered. So when we say, "Trinity in
Unity," we do not place number in the unity of the essence, as if we
meant three times one; but we place the Persons numbered in the
unity of nature; as the "supposita" of a nature are said to exist in that
nature. On the other hand, we say "Unity in Trinity"; meaning that the
nature is in its "supposita."
Reply to Objection 5: When we say, "Trinity is trine," by reason of
the number implied, we signify the multiplication of that number by
itself; since the word trine imports a distinction in the "supposita" of
which it is spoken. Therefore it cannot be said that the Trinity is
trine; otherwise it follows that, if the Trinity be trine, there would be
three "supposita" of the Trinity; as when we say, "God is trine," it
follows that there are three "supposita" of the Godhead.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the Son is other than the Father?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Son is not other than the Father.
For "other" is a relative term implying diversity of substance. If, then,
the Son is other than the Father, He must be different from the
Father; which is contrary to what Augustine says (De Trin. vii), that
when we speak of three persons, "we do not mean to imply
diversity."
Objection 2: Further, whosoever are other from one another, differ in
some way from one another. Therefore, if the Son is other than the
Father, it follows that He differs from the Father; which is against
what Ambrose says (De Fide i), that "the Father and the Son are one
in Godhead; nor is there any difference in substance between them,
nor any diversity."
Objection 3: Further, the term alien is taken from "alius" [other]. But
the Son is not alien from the Father, for Hilary says (De Trin. vii) that
"in the divine persons there is nothing diverse, nothing alien,
nothing separable." Therefore the Son is not other that the Father.
Objection 4: Further, the terms "other person" and "other
thing" [alius et aliud] have the same meaning, differing only in
gender. So if the Son is another person from the Father, it follows
that the Son is a thing apart from the Father.
On the contrary, Augustine [Fulgentius, De Fide ad Petrum I] says:
"There is one essence of the Father and Son and Holy Ghost, in
which the Father is not one thing, the Son another, and the Holy
Ghost another; although the Father is one person, the Son another,
and the Holy Ghost another."
I answer that, Since as Jerome remarks [In substance, Ep. LVII], a
heresy arises from words wrongly used, when we speak of the
Trinity we must proceed with care and with befitting modesty;
because, as Augustine says (De Trin. i, 3), "nowhere is error more
harmful, the quest more toilsome, the finding more fruitful." Now, in
treating of the Trinity, we must beware of two opposite errors, and
proceed cautiously between them---namely, the error of Arius, who
placed a Trinity of substance with the Trinity of persons; and the
error of Sabellius, who placed unity of person with the unity of