SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.12.

the blessings of God whereby "whoever is delivered, is most
certainly delivered," as Augustine says in his book on the
Predestination of the saints (De Dono Persev. xiv).
Secondly, charity may be considered as such, and thus it is
incapable of anything that is against its nature. Wherefore charity
cannot sin at all, even as neither can heat cool, nor unrighteousness
do good, as Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 24).
Thirdly, charity can be considered on the part of its subject, which is
changeable on account of the free-will. Moreover charity may be
compared with this subject, both from the general point of view of
form in comparison with matter, and from the specific point of view
of habit as compared with power. Now it is natural for a form to be in
its subject in such a way that it can be lost, when it does not entirely
fill the potentiality of matter: this is evident in the forms of things
generated and corrupted, because the matter of such things receives
one form in such a way, that it retains the potentiality to another
form, as though its potentiality were not completely satisfied with the
one form. Hence the one form may be lost by the other being
received. On the other hand the form of a celestial body which
entirely fills the potentiality of its matter, so that the latter does not
retain the potentiality to another form, is in its subject inseparably.
Accordingly the charity of the blessed, because it entirely fills the
potentiality of the rational mind, since every actual movement of that
mind is directed to God, is possessed by its subject inseparably:
whereas the charity of the wayfarer does not so fill the potentiality of
its subject, because the latter is not always actually directed to God:
so that when it is not actually directed to God, something may occur
whereby charity is lost.
It is proper to a habit to incline a power to act, and this belongs to a
habit, in so far as it makes whatever is suitable to it, to seem good,
and whatever is unsuitable, to seem evil. For as the taste judges of
savors according to its disposition, even so does the human mind
judge of things to be done, according to its habitual disposition.
Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 5) that "such as a man is, so
does the end appear to him." Accordingly charity is inseparable from
its possessor, where that which pertains to charity cannot appear
otherwise than good, and that is in heaven, where God is seen in His
Essence, which is the very essence of goodness. Therefore the
charity of heaven cannot be lost, whereas the charity of the way can,
because in this state God is not seen in His Essence, which is the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.12.

essence of goodness.
Reply to Objection 1: The passage quoted speaks from the point of
view of the power of the Holy Ghost, by Whose safeguarding, those
whom He wills to move are rendered immune from sin, as much as
He wills.
Reply to Objection 2: The charity which can fail by reason of itself is
no true charity; for this would be the case, were its love given only
for a time, and afterwards were to cease, which would be
inconsistent with true love. If, however, charity be lost through the
changeableness of the subject, and against the purpose of charity
included in its act, this is not contrary to true charity.
Reply to Objection 3: The love of God ever works great things in its
purpose, which is essential to charity; but it does not always work
great things in its act, on account of the condition of its subject.
Reply to Objection 4: Charity by reason of its act excludes every
motive for sinning. But it happens sometimes that charity is not
acting actually, and then it is possible for a motive to intervene for
sinning, and if we consent to this motive, we lose charity.