FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.6.

way: and such a hindrance to operation is not incompatible with
Happiness, but prevents it from being perfect in every way. And thus
it is that separation from the body is said to hold the soul back from
tending with all its might to the vision of the Divine Essence. For the
soul desires to enjoy God in such a way that the enjoyment also may
overflow into the body, as far as possible. And therefore, as long as
it enjoys God, without the fellowship of the body, its appetite is at
rest in that which it has, in such a way, that it would still wish the
body to attain to its share.
Reply to Objection 5: The desire of the separated soul is entirely at
rest, as regards the thing desired; since, to wit, it has that which
suffices its appetite. But it is not wholly at rest, as regards the
desirer, since it does not possess that good in every way that it
would wish to possess it. Consequently, after the body has been
resumed, Happiness increases not in intensity, but in extent.
Reply to Objection 6: The statement made (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35) to the
effect that "the souls of the departed see not God as the angels do,"
is not to be understood as referring to inequality of quantity;
because even now some souls of the Blessed are raised to the
higher orders of the angels, thus seeing God more clearly than the
lower angels. But it refers to inequality of proportion: because the
angels, even the lowest, have every perfection of Happiness that
they ever will have, whereas the separated souls of the saints have
not.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether perfection of the body is necessary for

happiness?
Objection 1: It would seem that perfection of the body is not
necessary for man's perfect Happiness. For perfection of the body is
a bodily good. But it has been shown above (Question 2) that
Happiness does not consist in bodily goods. Therefore no perfect
disposition of the body is necessary for man's Happiness.
Objection 2: Further, man's Happiness consists in the vision of the
Divine Essence, as shown above (Question 3, Article 8). But the body
has not part in this operation, as shown above (Article 5). Therefore
no disposition of the body is necessary for Happiness.
Objection 3: Further, the more the intellect is abstracted from the
body, the more perfectly it understands. But Happiness consists in
the most perfect operation of the intellect. Therefore the soul should
be abstracted from the body in every way. Therefore, in no way is a
disposition of the body necessary for Happiness.
On the contrary, Happiness is the reward of virtue; wherefore it is
written (Jn. 13:17): "You shall be blessed, if you do them." But the
reward promised to the saints is not only that they shall see and
enjoy God, but also that their bodies shall be well-disposed; for it is
written (Is. 66:14): "You shall see and your heart shall rejoice, and
your bones shall flourish like a herb." Therefore good disposition of
the body is necessary for Happiness.
I answer that, If we speak of that happiness which man can acquire
in this life, it is evident that a well-disposed body is of necessity
required for it. For this happiness consists, according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. i, 13) in "an operation according to perfect
virtue"; and it is clear that man can be hindered, by indisposition of
the body, from every operation of virtue.
But speaking of perfect Happiness, some have maintained that no
disposition of body is necessary for Happiness; indeed, that it is
necessary for the soul to be entirely separated from the body. Hence
Augustine (De Civ. Dei xxii, 26) quotes the words of Porphyry who
said that "for the soul to be happy, it must be severed from
everything corporeal." But this is unreasonable. For since it is