Reply to Objection 1: Gregory is speaking of those monks who have
jurisdiction, through having charge of a parish; about whom some
had maintained that from the very fact that they were monks, they
could not absolve or impose penance, which is false.
Reply to Objection 2: The sacrament of the Eucharist does not
require the power of command over a man, whereas this sacrament
does, as stated above: and so the argument proves nothing.
Nevertheless it is not lawful to receive the Eucharist from another
than one's own priest, although it is a real sacrament that one
receives from another.
Reply to Objection 3: The choice of a discreet priest is not left to us
in such a way that we can do just as we like; but it is left to the
permission of a higher authority, if perchance one's own priest
happens to be less suitable for applying a salutary remedy to our
sins.
Reply to Objection 4: Since it is the duty of prelates to dispense the
sacraments, which the clean alone should handle, they are allowed
by law (De Poenit. et Remiss., Cap. Ne pro dilatione) to choose a
priest for their confessor; who in this respect is the prelate's
superior; even as one physician is cured by another, not as a
physician but as a patient.
Reply to Objection 5: In those cases wherein the penitent has reason
to fear some harm to himself or to the priest by reason of his
confessing to him, he should have recourse to the higher authority,
or ask permission of the priest himself to confess to another; and if
he fails to obtain permission, the case is to be decided as for a man
who has no priest at hand; so that he should rather choose a layman
and confess to him. Nor does he disobey the law of the Church by so
doing, because the precepts of positive law do not extend beyond
the intention of the lawgiver, which is the end of the precept, and in
this case, is charity, according to the Apostle (1 Tim. 1:5). Nor is any
slur cast on the priest, for he deserves to forfeit his privilege, for
abusing the power intrusted to him.
Reply to Objection 6: The necessity of confessing to one's own
priest does not straiten the way of salvation, but determines it
sufficiently. A priest, however, would sin if he were not easy in
giving permission to confess to another, because many are so weak

that they would rather die without confession than confess to such a
priest. Wherefore those priests who are too anxious to probe the
consciences of their subjects by means of confession, lay a snare of
damnation for many, and consequently for themselves.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether it is lawful for anyone to confess to

another than his own priest, in virtue of a privilege or a
command given by a superior?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful for anyone to confess
to another than his own priest, even in virtue of a privilege or
command given by a superior. For no privilege should be given that
wrongs a third party. Now it would be prejudicial to the subject's own
priest, if he were to confess to another. Therefore this cannot be
allowed by a superior's privilege, permission, or command.
Objection 2: Further, that which hinders the observance of a Divine
command cannot be the subject of a command or privilege given by
man. Now it is a Divine command to the rectors of churches to
"know the countenance of their own cattle" (Prov. 27:23); and this is
hindered if another than the rector hear the confession of his
subjects. Therefore this cannot be prescribed by any human
privilege or command.
Objection 3: Further, he that hears another's confession is the
latter's own judge, else he could not bind or loose him. Now one man
cannot have several priests or judges of his own, for then he would
be bound to obey several men, which would be impossible, if their
commands were contrary or incompatible. Therefore one may not
confess to another than one's own priest, even with the superior's
permission.
Objection 4: Further, it is derogatory to a sacrament, or at least
useless, to repeat a sacrament over the same matter. But he who has
confessed to another priest, is bound to confess again to his own
priest, if the latter requires him to do so, because he is not absolved
from his obedience, whereby he is bound to him in this respect.
Therefore it cannot be lawful for anyone to confess to another than
his own priest.
On the contrary, He that can perform the actions of an order can
depute the exercise thereof to anyone who has the same order. Now
a superior, such as a bishop, can hear the confession of anyone
belonging to a priest's parish, for sometimes he reserves certain
cases to himself, since he is the chief rector. Therefore he can also
depute another priest to hear that man.