FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.104, C.4.

were observed, or ordered to be observed, as though they derived
their binding force through being institutions of the Old Law: for it
would be a deadly sin to intend to observe them thus.
The reason for this difference may be gathered from what has been
said above (Article 2). For it has been stated that the ceremonial
precepts are figurative primarily and in themselves, as being
instituted chiefly for the purpose of foreshadowing the mysteries of
Christ to come. On the other hand, the judicial precepts were not
instituted that they might be figures, but that they might shape the
state of that people who were directed to Christ. Consequently, when
the state of that people changed with the coming of Christ, the
judicial precepts lost their binding force: for the Law was a
pedagogue, leading men to Christ, as stated in Gal. 3:24. Since,
however, these judicial precepts are instituted, not for the purpose of
being figures, but for the performance of certain deeds, the
observance thereof is not prejudicial to the truth of faith. But the
intention of observing them, as though one were bound by the Law,
is prejudicial to the truth of faith: because it would follow that the
former state of the people still lasts, and that Christ has not yet
come.
Reply to Objection 1: The obligation of observing justice is indeed
perpetual. But the determination of those things that are just,
according to human or Divine institution, must needs be different,
according to the different states of mankind.
Reply to Objection 2: The judicial precepts established by men retain
their binding force for ever, so long as the state of government
remains the same. But if the state or nation pass to another form of
government, the laws must needs be changed. For democracy,
which is government by the people, demands different laws from
those of oligarchy, which is government by the rich, as the
Philosopher shows (Polit. iv, 1). Consequently when the state of that
people changed, the judicial precepts had to be changed also.
Reply to Objection 3: Those judicial precepts directed the people to
justice and equity, in keeping with the demands of that state. But
after the coming of Christ, there had to be a change in the state of
that people, so that in Christ there was no distinction between
Gentile and Jew, as there had been before. For this reason the
judicial precepts needed to be changed also.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.104, C.4.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.104, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is possible to assign a distinct division

of the judicial precepts?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is impossible to assign a distinct
division of the judicial precepts. Because the judicial precepts direct
men in their relations to one another. But those things which need to
be directed, as pertaining to the relationship between man and man,
and which are made use of by men, are not subject to division, since
they are infinite in number. Therefore it is not possible to assign a
distinct division of the judicial precepts.
Objection 2: Further, the judicial precepts are decisions on moral
matters. But moral precepts do not seem to be capable of division,
except in so far as they are reducible to the precepts of the
decalogue. Therefore there is no distinct division of the judicial
precepts.
Objection 3: Further, because there is a distinct division of the
ceremonial precepts, the Law alludes to this division, by describing
some as "sacrifices," others as "observances." But the Law contains
no allusion to a division of the judicial precepts. Therefore it seems
that they have no distinct division.
On the contrary, Wherever there is order there must needs be
division. But the notion of order is chiefly applicable to the judicial
precepts, since thereby that people was ordained. Therefore it is
most necessary that they should have a distinct division.
I answer that, Since law is the art, as it were, of directing or ordering
the life of man, as in every art there is a distinct division in the rules
of art, so, in every law, there must be a distinct division of precepts:
else the law would be rendered useless by confusion. We must
therefore say that the judicial precepts of the Old Law, whereby men
were directed in their relations to one another, are subject to division
according to the divers ways in which man is directed.
Now in every people a fourfold order is to be found: one, of the
people's sovereign to his subjects; a second of the subjects among
themselves; a third, of the citizens to foreigners; a fourth, of
members of the same household, such as the order of the father to
his son; of the wife to her husband; of the master to his servant: and