offspring, not of abstinence and moderate diet, but of gluttony and repletion.
And if you will look to the diseases of the soul that arise from them, you will see
that feelings of coveting, sloth, melancholy, dullness, impurity, and folly of all
kinds, have their origin here. For after such banquets the souls of the luxurious
become no better than asses, being torn to pieces by such wild beasts as these
(passions). Shall I say also how many pains and displeasures they have who wait
upon luxury? I could not enumerate them all, but by a single principal point I
will make the whole clear. At a table such as I speak of, that is, a sumptuous one,
men never eat with pleasure; for abstinence is the mother of pleasure as well as
health, while repletion is the source and root not only of diseases, but of
displeasure. For where there is satiety there desire cannot be, and where there is
no desire, how can there be pleasure? And therefore we should find that the poor
are not only of better understanding and healthier than the rich, but also that they
enjoy a greater degree of pleasure. Let us, when we reflect on this, flee
drunkenness and luxury, not that of the table alone, but all other which is found
in the things of this life, and let us take in exchange for it the pleasure arising
from spiritual things, and, as the Prophet says, delight ourselves in the Lord;
"Delight yourself in the Lord, and He shall give you the desires of your heart"
[Psalm 37:4]; that so that we may enjoy the good things both here and hereafter,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and
with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, world without end.
Amen.

Homily 23 on the Gospel of John
John 2:11
"This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee."
1. Frequent and fierce is the devil in his attacks, on all sides besieging our
salvation; we therefore must watch and be sober, and everywhere fortify
ourselves against his assault, for if he but gain some slight vantage ground, he
goes on to make for himself a broad passage, and by degrees introduces all his
forces. If then we have any care at all for our salvation, let us not allow him to
make his approaches even in trifles, that thus we may check him beforehand in
important matters; for it would be the extreme of folly, if, while he displays such
eagerness to destroy our souls, we should not bring even an equal amount in
defense of our own salvation.
I say not this without a cause, but because I fear lest that wolf be even now
standing unseen by us in the midst of the fold, and some sheep become a prey to
him, being led astray from the flock and from hearkening by its own carelessness
and his craft. Were the wounds sensible, or did the body receive the blows, there
would be no difficulty in discerning his plots; but since the soul is invisible, and
since that it is which receives the wounds, we need great watchfulness that each
may prove himself; for none knows the things of a man as the spirit of a man
that is in him. [1 Corinthians 2:11] The word is spoken indeed to all, and is
offered as a general remedy to those who need it, but it is the business of every
individual hearer to take what is suited to his complaint. I know not who are
sick, I know not who are well. And therefore I use every sort of argument, and
introduce remedies suited to all maladies, at one time condemning covetousness,
after that touching on luxury, and again on impurity, then composing something
in praise of and exhortation to charity, and each of the other virtues in their turn.