SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.2.

Ghost is said to move the rational creature by way of counsel,
wherefore counsel is reckoned among the gifts of the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 1: Prudence or euboulia (deliberating well),
whether acquired or infused, directs man in the research of counsel
according to principles that the reason can grasp; hence prudence
or euboulia (deliberating well) makes man take good counsel either
for himself or for another. Since, however, human reason is unable
to grasp the singular and contingent things which may occur, the
result is that "the thoughts of mortal men are fearful, and our
counsels uncertain" (Wis. 9:14). Hence in the research of counsel,
man requires to be directed by God who comprehends all things:
and this is done through the gift of counsel, whereby man is directed
as though counseled by God, just as, in human affairs, those who
are unable to take counsel for themselves, seek counsel from those
who are wiser.
Reply to Objection 2: That a man be of such good counsel as to
counsel others, may be due to a gratuitous grace; but that a man be
counselled by God as to what he ought to do in matters necessary
for salvation is common to all holy persons.
Reply to Objection 3: The children of God are moved by the Holy
Ghost according to their mode, without prejudice to their free-will
which is the "faculty of will and reason" [Sent. iii, D, 24]. Accordingly
the gift of counsel is befitting the children of God in so far as the
reason is instructed by the Holy Ghost about what we have to do.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.51, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the gift of counsel corresponds to the

virtue of prudence?
Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of counsel does not fittingly
correspond to the virtue of prudence. For "the highest point of that
which is underneath touches that which is above," as Dionysius
observes (Div. Nom. vii), even as a man comes into contact with the
angel in respect of his intellect. Now cardinal virtues are inferior to
the gifts, as stated above (FS, Question 68, Article 8). Since, then,
counsel is the first and lowest act of prudence, while command is its
highest act, and judgment comes between, it seems that the gift
corresponding to prudence is not counsel, but rather a gift of
judgment or command.
Objection 2: Further, one gift suffices to help one virtue, since the
higher a thing is the more one it is, as proved in De Causis. Now
prudence is helped by the gift of knowledge, which is not only
speculative but also practical, as shown above (Question 9, Article
3). Therefore the gift of counsel does not correspond to the virtue of
prudence.
Objection 3: Further, it belongs properly to prudence to direct, as
stated above (Question 47, Article 8). But it belongs to the gift of
counsel that man should be directed by God, as stated above (Article
1). Therefore the gift of counsel does not correspond to the virtue of
prudence.
On the contrary, The gift of counsel is about what has to be done for
the sake of the end. Now prudence is about the same matter.
Therefore they correspond to one another.
I answer that, A lower principle of movement is helped chiefly, and is
perfected through being moved by a higher principle of movement,
as a body through being moved by a spirit. Now it is evident that the
rectitude of human reason is compared to the Divine Reason, as a
lower motive principle to a higher: for the Eternal Reason is the
supreme rule of all human rectitude. Consequently prudence, which
denotes rectitude of reason, is chiefly perfected and helped through
being ruled and moved by the Holy Ghost, and this belongs to the
gift of counsel, as stated above (Article 1). Therefore the gift of
counsel corresponds to prudence, as helping and perfecting it.