FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.4.

Consequently exterior worship had to be subject to variations
according to the variations in the internal worship, in which a
threefold state may be distinguished. One state was in respect of
faith and hope, both in heavenly goods, and in the means of
obtaining them---in both of these considered as things to come.
Such was the state of faith and hope in the Old Law. Another state of
interior worship is that in which we have faith and hope in heavenly
goods as things to come; but in the means of obtaining heavenly
goods, as in things present or past. Such is the state of the New
Law. The third state is that in which both are possessed as present;
wherein nothing is believed in as lacking, nothing hoped for as being
yet to come. Such is the state of the Blessed.
In this state of the Blessed, then, nothing in regard to worship of God
will be figurative; there will be naught but "thanksgiving and voice of
praise" (Is. 51:3). Hence it is written concerning the city of the
Blessed (Apoc. 21:22): "I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God
Almighty is the temple thereof, and the Lamb." Proportionately,
therefore, the ceremonies of the first-mentioned state which
foreshadowed the second and third states, had need to cease at the
advent of the second state; and other ceremonies had to be
introduced which would be in keeping with the state of divine
worship for that particular time, wherein heavenly goods are a thing
of the future, but the Divine favors whereby we obtain the heavenly
boons are a thing of the present.
Reply to Objection 1: The Old Law is said to be "for ever" simply and
absolutely, as regards its moral precepts; but as regards the
ceremonial precepts it lasts for even in respect of the reality which
those ceremonies foreshadowed.
Reply to Objection 2: The mystery of the redemption of the human
race was fulfilled in Christ's Passion: hence Our Lord said then: "It is
consummated" (Jn. 19:30). Consequently the prescriptions of the
Law must have ceased then altogether through their reality being
fulfilled. As a sign of this, we read that at the Passion of Christ "the
veil of the temple was rent" (Mt. 27:51). Hence, before Christ's
Passion, while Christ was preaching and working miracles, the Law
and the Gospel were concurrent, since the mystery of Christ had
already begun, but was not as yet consummated. And for this reason
Our Lord, before His Passion, commanded the leper to observe the
legal ceremonies.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.4.

Reply to Objection 3: The literal reasons already given (Question
102) for the ceremonies refer to the divine worship, which was
founded on faith in that which was to come. Hence, at the advent of
Him Who was to come, both that worship ceased, and all the reasons
referring thereto.
Reply to Objection 4: The faith of Abraham was commended in that
he believed in God's promise concerning his seed to come, in which
all nations were to blessed. Wherefore, as long as this seed was yet
to come, it was necessary to make profession of Abraham's faith by
means of circumcision. But now that it is consummated, the same
thing needs to be declared by means of another sign, viz. Baptism,
which, in this respect, took the place of circumcision, according to
the saying of the Apostle (Col. 2:11, 12): "You are circumcised with
circumcision not made by hand, in despoiling of the body of the
flesh, but in the circumcision of Christ, buried with Him in Baptism."
As to the sabbath, which was a sign recalling the first creation, its
place is taken by the "Lord's Day," which recalls the beginning of the
new creature in the Resurrection of Christ. In like manner other
solemnities of the Old Law are supplanted by new solemnities:
because the blessings vouchsafed to that people, foreshadowed the
favors granted us by Christ. Hence the feast of the Passover gave
place to the feast of Christ's Passion and Resurrection: the feast of
Pentecost when the Old Law was given, to the feast of Pentecost on
which was given the Law of the living spirit: the feast of the New
Moon, to Lady Day, when appeared the first rays of the sun, i.e.
Christ, by the fulness of grace: the feast of Trumpets, to the feasts of
the Apostles: the feast of Expiation, to the feasts of Martyrs and
Confessors: the feast of Tabernacles, to the feast of the Church
Dedication: the feast of the Assembly and Collection, to feast of the
Angels, or else to the feast of All Hallows.