what he does; but when thou, seeing what he is, fallest into the same evils, and
art not brought to your right senses by the sight, what excuse can there be for
you? If coming to a feast thou see at the very outset of the feast some one
drunken and acting unseemly, would not he, who after seeing him makes himself
drunk, be much more inexcusable? Just so it is here. Do we think it any excuse
to say, I was not the first to begin? This is against us, that even the sight of the
other in that condition did not bring us to our right senses. It is just as if one
should say, "I did not murder him first." For this very thing makes you deserving
of punishment, that even upon the warning of such a spectacle thou did not
restrain yourself. If you should see the drunken man in the act of vomiting,
retching, bursting, his eyes strained, filling the table with his filthiness,
everybody hurrying out of his way, and then should fall into the same state
yourself, would you not be more hateful? Like him is he that is in a passion:
more than he who vomits, he has his veins distended, his eyes inflamed, his
bowels racked; he vomits forth words far more filthy than that food; all crude
what he utters, nothing duly digested, for his passion will not let it be. But as in
that case excess of fumes ([χυμων]), making an uproar in the stomach, often
rejects all its contents; so here, excess of heat, making a tumult in the soul
suffers him not to conceal what it were right to leave unsaid, but things fit and
unfit to be spoken, he says all alike, not putting the hearers but himself to shame.
As then we get out of the way of those that vomit, so let us from those who are
angry. Let us cast dust upon their vomit: By doing what? By holding our peace:
let us call the dogs to eat up the vomit. I know that you are disgusted at hearing
this: but I wish you to feel this same disgust when you see these things take
place, and not to be pleased at the thing. The abusive man is filthier than the dog
that returns to its own vomit. For if indeed having vomited once he were done
with it, he would not be like that dog: but if he vomits the same things again, it is
plain that he does so from having eaten the same again. What then is more
abominable than such an one? What filthier than that mouth which chews such
food? And yet this is a work of nature, but the other not or rather both the one

and the other are contrary to nature. How? Since it is not according to nature to
be causelessly abusive, but against nature: he speaks nothing then like a man, but
part as beast, part as madman. As then the disease of the body is contrary to
nature, so also is this. And to show that it is contrary to nature, if he shall
continue in it, he will perish little by little: but if he continue in that which is
natural, he will not perish. I had rather sit at table with a man who eats dirt, than
with one who speaks such words. See ye not the swine devouring dung? So also
do these. For what is more stinking than the words which abusive men utter? It is
their study to speak nothing wholesome, nothing pure, but whatever is base,
whatever is unseemly, that they study both to do and say: and what is worse,
they think to disgrace others, while they in fact are disgracing themselves. For
that it is themselves they disgrace is plain. For, leaving out of the question those
who speak lies (in their railings), say it be some notorious harlot, or even from
the stage some other (abandoned creature), and let that person be having a fight
with some other person: then let the latter cast this up to the former (what she or
he is), and the former retort upon the latter the same reproach: which of them is
most damaged by the words? For the former is but called what in fact he or she
is, which is not the case with the other: so that the first gets nothing more in the
way of shame (than there was before), while to the other there accrues a great
accession of disgrace. But again, let there be some hidden actions (mod. text
[εἰργασμένα] "which have been done"), and let only the person abusing know of
them: then, holding his peace until now, let him openly parade ([ἐ]
[κπομπευέτω]) the reproach: even so, he himself is more disgraced than the
other. How? By making himself the herald of the wickedness, so getting for
himself either the imputation of not being privy to any such thing, or the
character of one not fit to be trusted. And you shall see all men immediately
accuse him: "If indeed he had been privy to a murder being done, he ought to
have revealed it all:" and so they regard him with aversion as not human even,
they hate him, they say he is a wild beast, fierce and cruel: while the other they
pardon much rather than him. For we do not so much hate those that have