2 Corinthians 5:20
"We are ambassadors therefore on behalf of Christ, as though God were
entreating by us; we beseech you on behalf of Christ, be ye reconciled to God."
Do you see how he has extolled the thing by introducing Christ thus in the
form of a suppliant ; yea rather not Christ only, but even the Father? For what he
says is this: 'The Father sent the Son to beseech, and to be His Ambassador unto
mankind. When then He was slain and gone, we succeeded to the embassy; and
in His stead and the Father's we beseech you. So greatly does He prize mankind
that He gave up even the Son, and that knowing He would be slain, and made us
Apostles for your sakes; so that he said with reason, "All things are for your
sakes." [2 Corinthians 4:15] "We are therefore ambassadors on behalf of Christ,"
that is, instead of Christ; for we have succeeded to His functions.' But if this
appears to you a great thing, hear also what follows wherein he shows that they
do this not in His stead only, but also in stead of the Father. For therefore he also
added, "As though God were entreating by us." 'For not by the Son Himself only
does He beseech, but also by us who have succeeded to the office of the Son.
Think not therefore,' he says, 'that by us you are entreated; Christ Himself, the
Father Himself of Christ, beseeches you by us. What can come up to this excess
[of goodness]? He was outraged who had conferred innumerable benefits;
having been outraged, He not only exacted not justice, but even gave His son
that we might be reconciled. They that received Him were not reconciled, but
even slew Him. Again, He sent other ambassadors to beseech, and though these
are sent, it is Himself that entreats. And what does He entreat? "Be reconciled
unto God." And he said not, 'Reconcile God to yourselves;' for it is not He that
bears enmity, but you; for God never bears enmity. Urging moreover his cause,
like an ambassador on his mission, he says,

2 Corinthians 5:21
"For Him who knew no sin He made to be sin on our account."
'I say nothing of what has gone before, that you have outraged Him, Him
that had done you no wrong, Him that had done you good, that He exacted not
justice, that He is first to beseech, though first outraged; let none of these things
be set down at present. Ought ye not in justice to be reconciled for this one thing
only that He has done to you now?' And what has He done? "Him that knew no
sin He made to be sin, for you." For had He achieved nothing but done only this,
think how great a thing it were to give His Son for those that had outraged Him.
But now He has both well achieved mighty things, and besides, has suffered Him
that did no wrong to be punished for those who had done wrong. But he did not
say this: but mentioned that which is far greater than this. What then is this?
"Him that knew no sin," he says, Him that was righteousness itself , "He made
sin," that is suffered as a sinner to be condemned, as one cursed to die. "For
cursed is he that hangs on a tree." [Galatians 3:13] For to die thus was far
greater than to die; and this he also elsewhere implying, says, "Becoming
obedient unto death, yea the death of the cross." [Philippians 2:8] For this thing
carried with it not only punishment, but also disgrace. Reflect therefore how
great things He bestowed on you. For a great thing indeed it were for even a
sinner to die for any one whatever; but when He who undergoes this both is
righteous and dies for sinners; and not dies only, but even as one cursed; and not
as cursed [dies] only, but thereby freely bestows upon us those great goods
which we never looked for; (for he says, that "we might become the
righteousness of God in Him;") what words, what thought shall be adequate to
realize these things? 'For the righteous,' says he, 'He made a sinner; that He
might make the sinners righteous.' Yea rather, he said not even so, but what was
greater far; for the word he employed is not the habit, but the quality itself. For