THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.40, C.3.

not as needing it Himself, but as teaching us . . . And for this did He
proceed no further than Moses and Elias, lest His assumption of our
flesh might seem incredible." The mystical meaning, as Gregory
says (Hom. xvi in Evang.), is that by Christ's example the number
"forty" is observed in His fast, because the power of the "decalogue
is fulfilled throughout the four books of the Holy Gospel: since ten
multiplied by four amounts to forty." Or, because "we live in this
mortal body composed of the four elements, and by its lusts we
transgress the commandments of the Lord, which are expressed in
the decalogue." Or, according to Augustine (Questions. lxxxiii, qu.
81): "To know the Creator and the creature is the entire teaching of
wisdom. The Creator is the Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. Now the creature is partly invisible, as the soul, to which the
number three may be ascribed, for we are commanded to love God in
three ways, 'with our whole heart, our whole soul, and our whole
mind'; and partly visible, as the body, to which the number four is
applicable on account of its being subject to heat, moisture, cold,
and dryness. Hence if we multiply ten, which may be referred to the
entire moral code, by four, which number may be applied to the
body, because it is the body that executes the law, the product is the
number forty: in which," consequently, "the time during which we
sigh and grieve is shown forth." And yet there was no inconsistency
in Christ's returning to the common manner of living, after fasting
and (retiring into the) desert. For it is becoming to that kind of life,
which we hold Christ to have embraced, wherein a man delivers to
others the fruits of his contemplation, that he devote himself first of
all to contemplation, and that he afterwards come down to the
publicity of active life by associating with other men. Hence Bede
says on Mk. 2:18: "Christ fasted, that thou mightest not disobey the
commandment; He ate with sinners, that thou mightest discern His
sanctity and acknowledge His power."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.40, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ should have led a life of poverty in

this world?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should not have led a life of
poverty in this world. Because Christ should have embraced the
most eligible form of life. But the most eligible form of life is that
which is a mean between riches and poverty; for it is written (Prov.
30:8): "Give me neither beggary nor riches; give me only the
necessaries of life." Therefore Christ should have led a life, not of
poverty, but of moderation.
Objection 2: Further, external wealth is ordained to bodily use as to
food and raiment. But Christ conformed His manner of life to those
among whom He lived, in the matter of food and raiment. Therefore it
seems that He should have observed the ordinary manner of life as
to riches and poverty, and have avoided extreme poverty.
Objection 3: Further, Christ specially invited men to imitate His
example of humility, according to Mt. 11:29: "Learn of Me, because I
am meek and humble of heart." But humility is most commendable in
the rich; thus it is written (1 Tim. 6:11): "Charge the rich of this world
not to be high-minded." Therefore it seems that Christ should not
have chosen a life of poverty.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 8:20): "The Son of Man hath not
where to lay His head": as though He were to say as Jerome
observes: "Why desirest thou to follow Me for the sake of riches and
worldly gain, since I am so poor that I have not even the smallest
dwelling-place, and I am sheltered by a roof that is not Mine?" And
on Mt. 17:26: "That we may not scandalize them, go to the sea,"
Jerome says: "This incident, taken literally, affords edification to
those who hear it when they are told that our Lord was so poor that
He had not the wherewithal to pay the tax for Himself and His
apostles."
I answer that, It was fitting for Christ to lead a life of poverty in this
world. First, because this was in keeping with the duty of preaching,
for which purpose He says that He came (Mk. 1:38): "Let us go into
the neighboring towns and cities, that I may preach there also: for to
this purpose am I come." Now in order that the preachers of God's
word may be able to give all their time to preaching, they must be