to hold fast to the Spirit, and in order that they might cherish It. For He Himself
was able to have wrought these things, but He concedes to the Spirit the working
of miracles, on this account, that they might understand His dignity. For as the
Father could have brought into being things which are, yet the Son did so, that
we might understand His power, so also is it in this case. On this account He
Himself was made Flesh, reserving the inward working for the Spirit, shutting up
the mouths of those who take the argument of His ineffable love for an occasion
of impiety. For when they say that the Son was made flesh because He was
inferior to the Father, we will reply to them, "what then will you say of the
Spirit?" He took not the flesh, and yet certainly on this account ye will not call
Him greater than the Son, nor the Son inferior to Him. Therefore, in the case of
baptism also the Trinity is included. The Father is able to effect the whole, as is
the Son, and the Holy Ghost; yet, since concerning the Father no man doubts,
but the doubt was concerning the Son, and the Holy Ghost, They are included in
the rite, that by Their community in supplying those unspeakable blessings, we
may also fully learn Their community in dignity. For that both the Son is able by
Himself to do that which in the case of baptism He is able to do with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost the same, hear these things said plainly. For to the Jews He
said, "That ye may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive sins"
[Mark 2:10]; and again, "That ye may become children of light" [John 12:36]:
and, "I give to them eternal life." [John 10:28] Then after this, "That they might
have life, and might have it more abundantly." [John 10:10] Now let us see the
Spirit also performing the same thing. Where can we see it? "But the
manifestation of the Spirit," it says, "is given to every man to profit withal" [1
Corinthians 12:7; c. vi. 63]; He then that gives these things, much more remits
sins. And again, "It is the Spirit that quickens"; and, "Shall quicken you by His
Spirit which dwells in you" [Romans 8:11]; and, "The Spirit is Life because of
righteousness" [Romans 8:10]; and, "If you are led by the Spirit, you are not
under the Law." [Galatians 5:18] "For you have not received the Spirit of
bondage again to fear, but you have received the Spirit of adoption." [Romans

8:15] All the wonders too which they then wrought, they wrought at the coming
of the Spirit. And Paul writing to the Corinthians, said, "But you have been
washed, but you have been sanctified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
by the Spirit of our God." [1 Corinthians 6:11] Since then they had heard many
things of the Father, and had seen the Son work many things, but as yet knew
nothing clearly of the Spirit, that Spirit does miracles, and brings in the perfect
knowledge. But (as I said before) that He may not thence be supposed to be
greater, on this account Christ says, "Whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He
speak; and He will show you things to come." Since, if this be not so, how could
it be otherwise than absurd, if He was about to hear then, and on account of
those who were being made disciples? For according to you, He would not even
then know, except on account of those who were about to hear. What could be
more unlawful than this saying? Besides, what would He have to hear? Did He
not speak all these things by the Prophets? For if He was about to teach
concerning the dissolution of the Law, it had been spoken of: if concerning
Christ, His Divinity and the Dispensation, these had been spoken of also. What
could He say more clearly after this?
"And shall show you things to come." Here most of all Christ shows His
Dignity, for to foretell things to come is especially the property of God. Now if
He also learn this from others, He will have nothing more than the Prophets, but
here Christ declares a knowledge brought into exact accordance with God, that it
is impossible that He should speak anything else. But the, "shall receive of
Mine," means, "shall receive, either of the grace which came into My Flesh, or
of the knowledge which I also have, not as needing it, nor as learning it from
another, but because it is One and the same." "And wherefore spoke He thus, and
not otherwise?" Because they understand not yet the word concerning the Spirit,
wherefore He provides for one thing only, that the Spirit should be believed and
received by them, and that they should not be offended. For since He had said,
"One is your Teacher, even Christ" [Matthew 23:10], that they might not deem
that they should disobey Him in obeying the Spirit, He says, "His teaching and