The Marian dimension of the life of a disciple of Christ is expressed in a special way
precisely through this filial entrusting to the Mother of Christ, which began with the
testament of the Redeemer on Golgotha. Entrusting himself to Mary in a filial manner,
the Christian, like the Apostle John, "welcomes" the Mother of Christ "into his own
home" and brings her into everything that makes up his inner life, that is to say into his
human and Christian "I": he "took her to his own home." Thus the Christian seeks to be
taken into that "maternal charity" with which the Redeemer's Mother "cares for the
brethren of her Son," "in whose birth and development she cooperates" in the
measure of the gift proper to each one through the power of Christ's Spirit. Thus also is
exercised that motherhood in the Spirit which became Mary's role at the foot of the Cross
and in the Upper Room.

46. This filial relationship, this self-entrusting of a child to its mother, not only has its
beginning in Christ but can also be said to be definitively directed towards him. Mary can
be said to continue to say to each individual the words which she spoke at Cana in
Galilee: "Do whatever he tells you." For he, Christ, is the one Mediator between God and
mankind; he is "the way, and the truth, and the life" (Jn. 14:6); it is he whom the Father
has given to the world, so that man "should not perish but have eternal life" (Jn. 3:16).
The Virgin of Nazareth became the first "witness" of this saving love of the Father, and
she also wishes to remain its humble handmaid always and everywhere. For every
Christian, for every human being, Mary is the one who first "believed," and precisely
with her faith as Spouse and Mother she wishes to act upon all those who entrust
themselves to her as her children. And it is well known that the more her children
persevere and progress in this attitude, the nearer Mary leads them to the "unsearchable
riches of Christ"(Eph. 3:8). And to the same degree they recognize more and more clearly
the dignity of man in all its fullness and the definitive meaning of his vocation, for
"Christ...fully reveals man to man himself."

This Marian dimension of Christian life takes on special importance in relation to women
and their status. In fact, femininity has a unique relationship with the Mother of the
Redeemer, a subject which can be studied in greater depth elsewhere. Here I simply wish

to note that the figure of Mary of Nazareth sheds light on womanhood as such by the very
fact that God, in the sublime event of the Incarnation of his Son, entrusted himself to the
ministry, the free and active ministry of a woman. It can thus be said that women, by
looking to Mary, find in her the secret of living their femininity with dignity and of
achieving their own true advancement. In the light of Mary, the Church sees in the face of
women the reflection of a beauty which mirrors the loftiest sentiments of which the
human heart is capable: the self-offering totality of love; the strength that is capable of
bearing the greatest sorrows; limitless fidelity and tireless devotion to work; the ability to
combine penetrating intuition with words of support and encouragement.