things of God had not revealed them, we should not have learned them. Such an
object of care was this whole subject to God, as to be among His secrets.
Wherefore we needed also that Teacher who knows these things perfectly; for
"the Spirit," [1 Corinthians 2:10-12] says he, "searches all things, even the deep
things of God." For the word "to search" is here indicative not of ignorance, but
of accurate knowledge: it is the very same mode of speaking which he used even
of God, saying, "He that searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the
Spirit." [Romans 8:27] Then having spoken with exactness concerning the
knowledge of the Spirit, and having pointed out that it is as fully equal to God's
knowledge, as the knowledge of a man itself to itself; and also, that we have
learned all things from it and necessarily from it; he added, "which things also
we speak, not in words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches; comparing spiritual things with spiritual." Do you see to what point he
exalted us because of the Teacher's dignity? For so much are we wiser than they
as there is difference between Plato and the Holy Spirit; they having for masters
the heathen rhetoricians but we, the Holy Spirit.
8. But what is this, "comparing spiritual things with spiritual?" When a
thing is spiritual and of dubious meaning, we adduce testimonies from the things
which are spiritual. For instance, I say, Christ rose again— was born of a Virgin;
I adduce testimonies and types and demonstrations; the abode of Jonah in the
whale and his deliverance afterwards; the child-bearing of the barren, Sarah,
Rebecca, and the rest; the springing up of the trees which took place in paradise
[Genesis 2:5] when there had been no seeds sown, no rains sent down, no furrow
drawn along. For the things to come were fashioned out and figured forth, as in
shadow, by the former things, that these which are now might be believed when
they came in. And again we show, how of the earth was man, and how of man
alone the woman; and this without any intercourse whatever; how the earth itself
of nothing, the power of the Great Artificer being every where sufficient for all
things. Thus "with spiritual things" do I "compare spiritual," and in no instance
have I need of the Wisdom which is without— neither its reasonings nor its

embellishments. For such persons do but agitate the weak understanding and
confuse it; and are not able to demonstrate clearly any one of the things which
they affirm, but even have the contrary effect. They rather disturb the mind and
fill it with darkness and much perplexity. Wherefore he says, "with spiritual
things comparing spiritual." Do you see how superfluous he shows it to be? And
not only superfluous, but even hostile and injurious: for this is meant by the
expressions, "lest the Cross of Christ be made of none effect," and, "that our
('your faith,' rec. text) faith should not stand in the wisdom of men." And he
points out here, that it is impossible for those who confidently entrust every
thing to it, to learn any useful thing: for