Homily 23 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts X. 23, 24
"Then called he them in, and lodged them. And on the morrow Peter went
away with them, and certain brethren from Joppa accompanied him. And the
morrow after they entered into Cæsarea. And Cornelius waited for them, and
had called together his kinsmen and near friends."
"He" called them in, and lodged them. Good, that first he gives the men
friendly treatment, after the fatigue of their journey, and makes them at home
with him; "and on the morrow," sets out with them. And certain accompany him:
this too as Providence ordered it, that they should be witnesses afterwards when
Peter would need to justify himself. "And Cornelius was waiting for them, and
had called together his kinsmen and near friends." This is the part of a friend,
this the part of a devout man, that where such blessings are concerned, he takes
care that his near friends shall be made partakers of all. Of course (his "near"
friends), those in whom he had ever full confidence; fearing, with such an
interest at stake, to entrust the matter to others. In my opinion, it was by
Cornelius himself that both friends and kinsmen had been brought to a better
mind. "And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet,
and worshipped him." [Acts 10:25] This, both to teach the others, and by way of
giving thanks to God, and showing his own humility: thereby making it plain,
that though he had been commanded, yet in himself he had great piety. What
then did Peter? "But Peter took him up, saying, Stand up; I myself also am a
man." [Acts 10:26] Do you mark how, before all else (the Apostles) teach them
this lesson, not to think great things of them? "And as he talked with him, he
went in, and found many that had come together. And he said unto them, You
know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to keep company,
or come unto one of another nation; but God has showed me that I should not

call any man common or unclean." (v. 27, 28.) Observe, he straightway speaks
of the mercy of God, and points out to them that it is a great grace that God has
shown them. Observe also how while he utters great things, at the same time he
speaks modestly. For he does not say, We, being men who do not deign to keep
company with any (such), have come to you: but what says he? "You know"—
God commanded this — "that it is against law to keep company with, or come
unto, one of another nation." Then he goes on to say, "And to me God has
shown"— this he says, that none may account the thanks due to him— "that I
should call no man"— that it may not look like obsequiousness to him, "no
human being," says he— "common or unclean." [Acts 10:29] "Wherefore
also"— that they may not think the affair a breach of the law on his part, nor
(Cornelius) suppose that because he was in a station of command therfore he had
complied, but that they may ascribe all to God—"wherefore also I came without
gainsaying as soon as I was sent for:" (though) not only to keep company, but
even to come unto (him) was not permitted. "I ask therefore, for what intent you
have sent for me." Already Peter had heard the whole matter from the soldiers
also, but he wishes them first to confess, and to make them amenable to the
Faith. What then does Cornelius? He does not say, Why, did not the soldiers tell
you? But observe again, how humbly he speaks. For he says, "From the fourth
day I was fasting until this hour; and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house,
and, behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing, and said, Cornelius, your
prayer is heard, and your alms have come up for a memorial before God. And at
the ninth hour," he says, "I was praying." (v. 30, 31.) It seems to me, that this
man had also fixed for himself set times of a life under stricter rule, and on
certain days. For this is why he he says, "From the fourth day." See how great a
thing prayer is! When he advanced in piety, then the Angel appears to him.
"From the fourth day:" i.e. of the week; not "four days ago." For, "on the
morrow Peter went away with them, and on the morrow after they entered into
Cæsarea:" this is one day: and the day on which the persons sent came (to
Joppa) one day: and on the third (the Angel) appeared: so that there are two days