10. Again, as to the second production which proceeds from these [Æons who have been
mentioned],—that, namely, of Homo and Ecclesia,—their very fathers, falsely styled Gnostics,
strive among themselves, each one seeking to make good his own opinions, and thus convicting
themselves of being wicked thieves. They maintain that it is more suitable to [the theory of]
production— as being, in fact, truth-like—that the Word was produced by man, and not man by
the Word; and that man existed prior to the Word, and that this is really He who is God over all.
And thus it is, as I have previously remarked, that heaping together with a kind of plausibility all
human feelings, and mental exercises, and formation of intentions, and utterances of words, they
have lied with no plausibility at all against God. For while they ascribe the things which happen to
men, and whatsoever they recognise themselves as experiencing, to the divine reason, they seem
to those who are ignorant of God to make statements suitable enough. And by these human passions,
drawing away their intelligence, while they describe the origin and production of the Word of God
in the fifth place, they assert that thus they teach wonderful mysteries, unspeakable and sublime,
known to no one but themselves. It was, [they affirm,] concerning these that the Lord said, "Seek,
and ye shall find," that is, that they should inquire how Nous and Aletheia proceeded from Bythus
and Sage; whether Logos and Zoe again derive their origin from these and then, whether Anthropos
and Ecclesia proceed from Logos and Zoe.

### Chapter XIV.—Valentinus and his followers derived the principles of their system from the
heathen; the names only are changed.
1. Much more like the truth, and more pleasing, is the account which Antiphanes, one of the
ancient comic poets, gives in his Theogony as to the origin of all things. For he speaks Chaos as
being produced from Night and Silence; relates that then Love sprang from Chaos and Night;
from this again, Light; and that from this, in his opinion, were derived all the rest of the first
generation of the gods. After these he next introduces a second generation of gods, and the creation
of the world; then he narrates the formation of mankind by the second order of the gods. These
men (the heretics), adopting this fable as their own, have ranged their opinions round it, as if by a
sort of natural process, changing only the names of the things referred to, and setting forth the very
same beginning of the generation of all things, and their production. In place of Night and Silence
they substitute Bythus and Sige; instead of Chaos, they put Nous; and for Love (by whom, says

Matt. vii. 7.
named Theogonia ascribed. He is supposed to be the same poet as is cited by Athenæus, but that writer quotes from a work styled
!"#$%&'()* +%,-..
saying that Love is the eternal intellect, reducing Chaos into order."