the act of the body, although the soul is essentially the form of the
body.
Reply to Objection 5: The soul communicates that existence in which
it subsists to the corporeal matter, out of which and the intellectual
soul there results unity of existence; so that the existence of the
whole composite is also the existence of the soul. This is not the
case with other non-subsistent forms. For this reason the human
soul retains its own existence after the dissolution of the body;
whereas it is not so with other forms.
Reply to Objection 6: To be united to the body belongs to the soul by
reason of itself, as it belongs to a light body by reason of itself to be
raised up. And as a light body remains light, when removed from its
proper place, retaining meanwhile an aptitude and an inclination for
its proper place; so the human soul retains its proper existence
when separated from the body, having an aptitude and a natural
inclination to be united to the body.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the intellectual principle is multiplied

according to the number of bodies?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intellectual principle is not
multiplied according to the number of bodies, but that there is one
intellect in all men. For an immaterial substance is not multiplied in
number within one species. But the human soul is an immaterial
substance; since it is not composed of matter and form as was
shown above (Question 75, Article 5). Therefore there are not many
human souls in one species. But all men are of one species.
Therefore there is but one intellect in all men.
Objection 2: Further, when the cause is removed, the effect is also
removed. Therefore, if human souls were multiplied according to the
number of bodies, it follows that the bodies being removed, the
number of souls would not remain; but from all the souls there would
be but a single remainder. This is heretical; for it would do away with
the distinction of rewards and punishments.
Objection 3: Further, if my intellect is distinct from your intellect, my
intellect is an individual, and so is yours; for individuals are things
which differ in number but agree in one species. Now whatever is
received into anything must be received according to the condition
of the receiver. Therefore the species of things would be received
individually into my intellect, and also into yours: which is contrary
to the nature of the intellect which knows universals.
Objection 4: Further, the thing understood is in the intellect which
understands. If, therefore, my intellect is distinct from yours, what is
understood by me must be distinct from what is understood by you;
and consequently it will be reckoned as something individual, and be
only potentially something understood; so that the common
intention will have to be abstracted from both; since from things
diverse something intelligible common to them may be abstracted.
But this is contrary to the nature of the intellect; for then the intellect
would seem not to be distinct from the imagination. It seems,
therefore, to follow that there is one intellect in all men.
Objection 5: Further, when the disciple receives knowledge from the
master, it cannot be said that the master's knowledge begets
knowledge in the disciple, because then also knowledge would be an