SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.3.

and the remaining three are comprised under the officious lie,
wherein something useful to another person is intended. This
usefulness regards either external things, and then we have the sixth
kind of lie, which "profits someone in saving his money"; or his
body, and this is the seventh kind, which "saves a man from death";
or the morality of his virtue, and this is the eighth kind, which "saves
him from unlawful defilement of his body."
Now it is evident that the greater the good intended, the more is the
sin of lying diminished in gravity. Wherefore a careful consideration
of the matter will show that these various kinds of lies are
enumerated in their order of gravity: since the useful good is better
than the pleasurable good, and life of the body than money, and
virtue than the life of the body.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.109, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether every lie is a sin?

Objection 1: It seems that not every lie is a sin. For it is evident that
the evangelists did not sin in the writing of the Gospel. Yet they
seem to have told something false: since their accounts of the words
of Christ and of others often differ from one another: wherefore
seemingly one of them must have given an untrue account.
Therefore not every lie is a sin.
Objection 2: Further, no one is rewarded by God for sin. But the
midwives of Egypt were rewarded by God for a lie, for it is stated that
"God built them houses" (Ex. 1:21). Therefore a lie is not a sin.
Objection 3: Further, the deeds of holy men are related in Sacred
Writ that they may be a model of human life. But we read of certain
very holy men that they lied. Thus (Gn. 12 and 20) we are told that
Abraham said of his wife that she was his sister. Jacob also lied
when he said that he was Esau, and yet he received a blessing (Gn.
27:27-29). Again, Judith is commended (Judith 15:10,11) although
she lied to Holofernes. Therefore not every lie is a sin.
Objection 4: Further, one ought to choose the lesser evil in order to
avoid the greater: even so a physician cuts off a limb, lest the whole
body perish. Yet less harm is done by raising a false opinion in a
person's mind, than by someone slaying or being slain. Therefore a
man may lawfully lie, to save another from committing murder, or
another from being killed.
Objection 5: Further, it is a lie not to fulfill what one has promised.
Yet one is not bound to keep all one's promises: for Isidore says
(Synonym. ii): "Break your faith when you have promised ill."
Therefore not every lie is a sin.
Objection 6: Further, apparently a lie is a sin because thereby we
deceive our neighbor: wherefore Augustine says (Lib. De Mend. xxi):
"Whoever thinks that there is any kind of lie that is not a sin deceives
himself shamefully, since he deems himself an honest man when he
deceives others." Yet not every lie is a cause of deception, since no
one is deceived by a jocose lie; seeing that lies of this kind are told,
not with the intention of being believed, but merely for the sake of
giving pleasure. Hence again we find hyperbolical expressions in