## Homily 9 on Romans

Rom. IV. 23
"Now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him for
righteousness; but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe in Him
that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead."
After saying many great things of Abraham, and his faith, and
righteousness, and honor before God, lest the hearer should say, What is this to
us, for it is he that was justified? He places us close to the Patriarch again. So
great is the power of spiritual words. For of one of the Gentiles, one who was
recently come near, one who had done no work, he not only says that he is in
nothing inferior to the Jew who believes (i.e. as a Jew), but not even to the
Patriarch, but rather, if one must give utterance to the wondrous truth, even much
greater. For so noble is our birth, that his faith is but the type of ours. And he
does not say, If it was reckoned unto him, it is probable it will be also to us, that
he might not make it matter of syllogism. But he speaks in authentic words of
the divine law, and makes the whole a declaration of the Scripture. For why was
it written, he says, save to make us see that we also were justified in this way?
For it is the same God Whom we have believed, and upon the same matters, if it
be not in the case of the same persons. And after speaking of our faith, he also
mentions God's unspeakable love towards man, which he ever presents on all
sides, bringing the Cross before us. And this he now makes plain by saying,
Ver. 25. "Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification."
See how after mentioning the cause of His death, he makes the same cause
likewise a demonstration of the resurrection. For why, he means, was He
crucified? Not for any sin of His own. And this is plain from the Resurrection.
For if He were a sinner, how should He have risen? But if He rose, it is quite

plain that He was not a sinner. But if He was not a sinner, how came He to be
crucified?— For others—and if for others, then surely he rose again. Now to
prevent your saying, How, when liable for so great sins, came we to be justified?
He points out One that blots out all sins, that both from Abraham's faith,
whereby he was justified, and from the Saviour's Passion, whereby we were
freed from our sins, he might confirm what he had said. And after mentioning
His Death, he speaks also of His Resurrection. For the purpose of His dying was
not that He might hold us liable to punishment and in condemnation, but that He
might do good unto us. For for this cause He both died and rose again, that He
might make us righteous.
Chap. v. ver. 1. "Therefore being justified by faith, let us have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ."
What does "Let us have peace" mean? Some say, "Let us not be at variance,
through a peevish obstinacy for bringing in the Law." But to me he seems to be
speaking now of our conversation. For after having said much on the subject of
faith, he had set it before righteousness which is by works, to prevent any one
from supposing what he said was a ground for listlessness, he says, "let us have
peace," that is, let us sin no more, nor go back to our former estate. For this is
making war with God. And "how is it possible," says one, "to sin no more?"
How was the former thing possible? For if when liable for so many sins we were
freed from all by Christ, much more shall we be able through Him to abide in the
estate wherein we are. For it is not the same thing to receive peace when there
had been none, and to keep it when it has been given, since to acquire surely is
harder than to keep. Yet nevertheless the more difficult has been made easy, and
carried out into effect. That which is the easier thing then will be what we shall
easily succeed in, if we cling to Him who has wrought even the other for us. But
here it is not the easiness only which he seems to me to hint at, but the
reasonableness. For if He reconciled us when we were in open war with Him, it
is reasonable that we should abide in a state of reconciliation, and give unto Him
this reward for that He may not seem to have reconciled untoward and unfeeling