SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.9.

says (ad inquisit. Januar. ii; Ep. lv): "Those who tell fortunes from
the Gospel pages, though it is to be hoped that they do so rather
than have recourse to consulting the demons, yet does this custom
also displease me, that anyone should wish to apply the Divine
oracles to worldly matters and to the vain things of this life."
Fourthly, if anyone resort to the drawing of lots in ecclesiastical
elections, which should be carried out by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost. Wherefore, as Bede says (Super Act. Apost. i): "Before
Pentecost the ordination of Matthias was decided by lot," because as
yet the fulness of the Holy Ghost was not yet poured forth into the
Church: "whereas the same deacons were ordained not by lot but by
the choice of the disciples." It is different with earthly honors, which
are directed to the disposal of earthly things: in elections of this kind
men frequently have recourse to lots, even as in the distribution of
earthly possessions.
If, however, there be urgent necessity it is lawful to seek the divine
judgment by casting lots, provided due reverence be observed.
Hence Augustine says (Ep. ad Honor. ccxxviii), "If, at a time of
persecution, the ministers of God do not agree as to which of them
is to remain at his post lest all should flee, and which of them is to
flee, lest all die and the Church be forsaken, should there be no other
means of coming to an agreement, so far as I can see, they must be
chosen by lot." Again he says (De Doctr. Christ. xxviii): "If thou
aboundest in that which it behooves thee to give to him who hath
not, and which cannot be given to two; should two come to you,
neither of whom surpasses the other either in need or in some claim
on thee, thou couldst not act more justly than in choosing by lot to
whom thou shalt give that which thou canst not give to both."
This suffices for the Reply to the First and Second Objections.
Reply to Objection 3: The trial by hot iron or boiling water is directed
to the investigation of someone's hidden sin, by means of something
done by a man, and in this it agrees with the drawing of lots. But in
so far as a miraculous result is expected from God, it surpasses the
common generality of sortilege. Hence this kind of trial is rendered
unlawful, both because it is directed to the judgment of the occult,
which is reserved to the divine judgment, and because such like
trials are not sanctioned by divine authority. Hence we read in a
decree of Pope Stephen V [II, qu. v., can. Consuluist i]: "The sacred
canons do not approve of extorting a confession from anyone by
means of the trial by hot iron or boiling water, and no one must

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.9.

presume, by a superstitious innovation, to practice what is not
sanctioned by the teaching of the holy fathers. For it is allowable that
public crimes should be judged by our authority, after the culprit has
made spontaneous confession, or when witnesses have been
approved, with due regard to the fear of God; but hidden and
unknown crimes must be left to Him Who alone knows the hearts of
the children of men." The same would seem to apply to the law
concerning duels, save that it approaches nearer to the common
kind of sortilege, since no miraculous effect is expected thereupon,
unless the combatants be very unequal in strength or skill.