more disgraceful and dishonorable than this?
Again: if we do not get the better of senseless forms of matter, how shall we
have the advantage of the incorporeal powers? If we despise not vile earth and
abject stones, how shall we bring into subjection the principalities and
authorities? How shall we practise temperance? I mean, if silver dazzle and
overpower us, when shall we be able to hurry by a fair face? For, in fact, some
are so sold under this tyranny, as be moved somehow even at the mere show of
the gold, and in playfulness to say, that the very eyes are the better for a gold
coin coming in sight. But make not such jests, whoever you are; for nothing so
injures the eyes, both those of the body and those of the soul, as the lust of these
things. For instance; it was this grievous longing that put out the lamps of those
virgins, and cast them out of the bride chamber. This sight, which (as you said)
"does good to the eyes," suffered not the wretched Judas to hearken unto the
Lord's voice, but led him even to the halter, made him burst asunder in the midst;
and, after all that, conducted him on to hell.
What then can be more lawless than this? What more horrible? I do not
mean the substance of riches, but the unseasonable and frantic desire of them?
Why, it even drops human gore, and looks murder, and is fiercer than any wild
beast, tearing in pieces them that fall in its way, and what is much worse, it
suffers them not even to have any sense of being so mangled. For reason would
that those who are so treated should stretch forth their hand to them that pass by,
and call them to their assistance, but these are even thankful for such rendings of
their flesh, than which what can be more wretched?
Let us then, bearing in mind all these things, flee the incurable disease; let
us heal the wounds it has made, and withdraw ourselves from such a pest: in
order that both here we may live a secure and untroubled life, and attain to the
future treasure; unto which God grant that we may all attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom unto the Father together
with the Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.

## Homily 10 on Matthew

Matthew 3:1-2.
"In those days comes John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of
Judæa, and saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand."
How "in those days"? For not then, surely, when He was a child, and came
to Nazareth, but thirty years after, John comes; as Luke also testifies. How then
is it said, "in those days"? The Scripture is always wont to use this manner of
speech, not only when it is mentioning what occurs in the time immediately
after, but also of things which are to come to pass many years later. Thus also,
for example, when His disciples came unto Him as He sat on the Mount of
Olives, and sought to learn about His coming, and the taking of Jerusalem:
[Matthew 24:3] and yet ye know how great is the interval between those several
periods. I mean, that having spoken of the subversion of the mother city, and
completed His discourse on that subject, and being about to pass to that on the
consummation, he inserted, " Then shall these things also come to pass;"
[Matthew 24:23] not bringing together the times by the word then, but indicating
that time only in which these things were to happen. And this sort of thing he
does now also, saying, "In those days." For this is not put to signify the days that
come immediately after, but those in which these things were to take place,
which he was preparing to relate.
"But why was it after thirty years," it may be said, "that Jesus came unto
His baptism"? After this baptism He was thenceforth to do away with the law:
wherefore even until this age, which admits of all sins, He continues fulfilling it
all; that no one might say, that because He Himself could not fulfill it, He did it
away. For neither do all passions assail us at all times; but while in the first age
of life there is much thoughtlessness and timidity, in that which comes after it,
pleasure is more vehement, and after this again the desire of wealth. For this