which we rejoice are mutable and changeable, and subject to variation. And not
only does this grievous circumstance attend them, but moreover while they
remain they do not afford us a pleasure sufficient to repel and veil the sadness
that comes upon us from other quarters. But the fear of God contains both these
requisites. It is steadfast and immoveable, and sheds so much gladness that we
can admit no sense of other evils. For the man who fears God as he ought, and
trusts in Him, gathers from the very root of pleasure, and has possession of the
whole fountain of cheerfulness. And as a spark falling upon a wide ocean
quickly disappears, so whatever events happen to the man who fears God, these,
falling as it were upon an immense ocean of joy, are quenched and destroyed!
This indeed is most to be wondered at, that while things which minister sadness
are present, the man should remain joyful. For if there was nothing to produce
grief, it would be no great matter to him that he was able continually to rejoice.
But that at a time when he is urged to sadness by the pressure of many things, he
is superior to all these, and is blithe in the midst of sorrow, this is truly a matter
for astonishment! And as no one would have wondered that the three Children
were not burnt, if they had remained far off from the furnace of Babylon! (for
the circumstance that astonished all was, that having been so long in such close
contact with the fire, they left it more free from hurt than those who had not been
in contact with it); so also we are able to say of the saints, that if no temptation
had fastened itself upon them, we should not have wondered at their continual
rejoicing. But the point worthy of admiration, and that which surpasses human
nature, is this, that being encircled on all sides with innumerable waves, their
condition is easier than that of those who enjoy an entire calm!
7. From what has been said, it is evident that among those who are outside
the church it is impossible to find any situation in life, encircled with continual
gladness from the things without. But that the believer cannot possibly be
deprived of the enjoyment of a continued pleasure is what I will now proceed to
prove, to the end that you may not only learn, but also emulate this painless
condition of life. For suppose a man having nothing for which to condemn

himself, but cherishing a good conscience, and yearning after the future state,
and the fulfilment of those good hopes; what, I ask, will be able to throw such a
person into sadness? Does not death seem the most insupportable of all things?
Yet the expectation of this is so far from grieving him, that it makes him the
more joyful; for he knows that the arrival of death is a release from labour, and a
speeding toward the crowns and rewards laid up for those who have contended
in the race of piety and virtue. But is it the untimely end of his children? Nay, he
will also bear this nobly, and will take up the words of Job, "The Lord gave, the
Lord has taken away; as it seemed good unto the Lord, so is it come to pass.
Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever." [Job 1:21] But if death and loss of
children cannot grieve, much less can the loss of money, or dishonour, or
reproaches, or false accusations, at any time affect a soul so great and noble; no,
nor anguish of body, since the Apostles were scourged, yet they were not made
sad. This, indeed, was a great thing; but what is much more, instead of being
made sad, they considered their very scourgings, as a ground of additional
pleasure. "And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they
were counted worthy to suffer shame for the name of Christ." [Acts 5:41] Did
any person insult and revile such a one? Well, he was taught by Christ to rejoice
in these revilings. "Rejoice," says He, "and be exceeding glad, when they shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; for great is your reward in
heaven." [Matthew 5:11-12] But suppose a man has fallen into disease? Well, he
has heard another admonishing, and saying, "In disease and poverty trust thou in
Him; for as gold is tried in the fire, so are acceptable men in the furnace of
humiliation." [Sirach 2:4-5] Since, therefore, neither death, nor loss of money,
nor bodily disease, nor dishonour, nor reproach, nor any other thing of that
nature, will be able to grieve him, but makes him even the more joyful, what
foundation for sadness will he have at any time?
8. "What then," says some one, used not the Saint to be in sadness? Do you
not hear Paul saying, "I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my
heart?" [Romans 9:2] This, indeed, is the thing to wonder at, that sorrow