glory; for nothing hinders us from knowing a thing through various
mediums, as a thing may be known at the one time through a
probable medium and through a demonstrative one. In like manner,
an angel can know God by His essence, and this appertains to his
knowledge of glory; and at the same time he can know God by his
own essence, which belongs to his natural knowledge.
Reply to Objection 2: All things which make up beatitude are
sufficient of themselves. But in order for them to exist, they
presuppose the natural gifts; because no beatitude is selfsubsisting, except the uncreated beatitude.
Reply to Objection 3: There cannot be two operations of the one
faculty at the one time, except the one be ordained to the other. But
natural knowledge and love are ordained to the knowledge and love
of glory. Accordingly there is nothing to hinder natural knowledge
and love from existing in the angel conjointly with those of glory.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether a beatified angel can sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that a beatified angel can sin. For, as was
said above (Article 7), beatitude does not do away with nature. But it
is of the very notion of created nature, that it can fail. Therefore a
beatified angel can sin.
Objection 2: Further, the rational powers are referred to opposites,
as the Philosopher observes (Metaph. iv, text. 3). But the will of the
angel in beatitude does not cease to be rational. Therefore it is
inclined towards good and evil.
Objection 3: Further, it belongs to the liberty of free-will for man to
be able to choose good or evil. But the freedom of will is not
lessened in the beatified angels. Therefore they can sin.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xi) that "there is in the
holy angels that nature which cannot sin." Therefore the holy angels
cannot sin.
I answer that, The beatified angels cannot sin. The reason for this is,
because their beatitude consists in seeing God through His essence.
Now, God's essence is the very essence of goodness. Consequently
the angel beholding God is disposed towards God in the same way
as anyone else not seeing God is to the common form of goodness.
Now it is impossible for any man either to will or to do anything
except aiming at what is good; or for him to wish to turn away from
good precisely as such. Therefore the beatified angel can neither will
nor act, except as aiming towards God. Now whoever wills or acts in
this manner cannot sin. Consequently the beatified angel cannot sin.
Reply to Objection 1: Created good, considered in itself, can fail. But
from its perfect union with the uncreated good, such as is the union
of beatitude, it is rendered unable to sin, for the reason already
alleged.
Reply to Objection 2: The rational powers are referred to opposites
in the things to which they are not inclined naturally; but as to the
things whereunto they have a natural tendency, they are not referred
to opposites. For the intellect cannot but assent to naturally known
principles; in the same way, the will cannot help clinging to good,