as deprecating the bonds themselves, God forbid! But condescending to the
other's infirmity; for he himself loved and welcomed his bonds, even as a woman
fond of ornament does her jewels of gold. Whence is this apparent? "I rejoice,"
says he, "in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh." [Colossians 1:24] And again; "Unto you it is
given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in Him, but to suffer for His
sake." [Philippians 1:29] And again; "And not only so, but we also glory in
tribulations." [Romans 5:3] Wherefore, if he rejoices and glories in this, and
calls it a gift of grace, it is manifest that when he was addressing the judge, he
spoke to him as he did, for the reason assigned. Moreover, also in a different
passage, when he happened to find a necessity for glorying, he shows the very
same by saying, "Most gladly, therefore, will I glory in my infirmities......in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, that the power of Christ
may rest upon me." [2 Corinthians 12:9-10] And again; "If I must needs glory, I
will glory of the things which concern mine infirmities." [2 Corinthians 11:30]
And elsewhere, comparing himself with others, and exhibiting to us his
superiority in the comparison, he thus speaks; "Are they ministers of Christ? (I
speak as a fool), I am more." [2 Corinthians 11:23] And wishing to show this
superiority, he did not say that he had raised the dead, nor that he had expelled
demons, nor that he had cleansed lepers, nor that he had done any other thing of
the sort, but that he had suffered those innumerable hardships. Hence when he
said, I am more, he presently cites the multitude of his trials; "In stripes, above
measure, in deaths oft, in prisons more frequent.....of the Jews five times received
I forty stripes save one, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night
and a day I have been in the deep;" and all the rest. Thus Paul everywhere
glories in tribulations; and prides himself upon this circumstance exceedingly.
And very justly. For this it is which especially shows the power of Christ, viz.
that the Apostles conquered by such means; by bonds, by tribulations, by
scourgings, and the worst of ills.
10. For these two things Christ had announced, tribulation and remission,

labours and crowns, toils and rewards, things pleasant and sad. Nevertheless, to
the present life he assigns the sorrowful things; but for the life to come, he has
stored up those which are pleasant; at once showing that He did not mean to
deceive men, and wishing by this arrangement to diminish the burden of human
woes. For the imposter first holds out the things which are pleasant, and
afterwards brings forward those which are disagreeable. Thus for example:—
Kidnappers, when they intend to steal and carry off little children, do not
promise them blows and stripes, or any other thing of that kind, but offer them
cakes, and sweetmeats, and such like, by which the age of childhood is usually
gratified; in order that, enticed by these things, they may sell their liberty, and
may fall into the utmost peril. Moreover, bird-catchers, and fishermen, thus
entice the prey which they pursue, offering first their usual food, and such as is
agreeable to them, and by this means concealing the snare. So that this is
especially the work of imposters, first to hold out things which are agreeable, but
afterwards to introduce the things which are disagreeable. But the case is
altogether the reverse with those who are really careful and provident for others.
Fathers at least act quite in a contrary manner to kidnappers. When they send
their children to school, they set masters over them, threaten them with stripes,
and encompass them with fear on all sides. But when they have thus spent the
first portion of their lives, and their habits are formed, they then put them in
possession of honour, and power, and luxury, and all the wealth that is theirs.
11. And thus God has acted. After the manner of provident fathers, and not
after that of kidnappers, He has first involved us in things that are grievous;
handing us over to present tribulation, as it were to schoolmasters and teachers;
in order that being chastened and sobered by these things, after showing forth all
patience, and learning all right discipline, we may afterwards, when formed into
due habits, inherit the kingdom of heaven. He first prepares and fits us for the
management of the wealth He is to give, and then puts us into the actual
possession of riches. For if He had not acted thus, the giving of riches would
have been no boon, but a punishment and a vengeance. For even as a son that is