we do not even receive those whom we know, but shut our doors against all? Let
our house be Christ's general receptacle: let us demand of them as a reward, not
money, but that they make our house the receptacle for Christ; let us run about
everywhere, let us drag them in, let us seize our booty: greater are the benefits
we receive than what we confer. He does not bid you kill a calf: give thou bread
to the hungry, raiment to the naked, shelter to the stranger. But that you may not
make this your pretext, there is a common apartment, that of the Church; throw
your money into that, and then you have received them: since (Abraham) there
had the reward of those things also which were done by his servants. "He gave
the calf to a young man, and he hasted to dress it." [Genesis 18:7] So well
trained were his servants also! They ran, and murmured not as ours do: for he
had made them pious. He drew them out to war, and they murmured not: so well
disciplined were they. [Genesis 14:14] For he had equal care for all as for
himself: he all but said as Job did, "We were alike formed in the same womb."
[Job 33:6] Therefore let us also take thought for their salvation, and let us make
it our duty to care for our servants, that they may be good; and let our servants
also be instructed in the things pertaining to God. Then will virtue not be
difficult to us, if we train them orderly. Just as in war, when the soldiers are welldisciplined, the general carries on war easily, but the contrary happens, when this
is not so; and when the sailors too are of one mind, the pilot easily handles the
rudder-strings; so here likewise. For say now, if your servants have been so
schooled, you will not be easily exasperated, you will not have to find fault, will
not be made angry, will not need to abuse them. It may be, you will even stand in
awe of your servants, if they are worthy of admiration, and they will be helpers
with you, and will give you good counsel. But from all these shall all things
proceed that are pleasing to God, and thus shall the whole house be filled with
blessing, and we, performing things pleasing to God, shall enjoy abundant
succor from above, unto which may we all attain, through the grace and mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost, together
be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 46 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXI. 18, 19
"And the day following Paul went in with us unto James: and all the elders
were present. And when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what
things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry."
This was the Bishop of Jerusalem; and to him (Paul) is sent on an earlier
occasion. This (James) was brother of the Lord; a great and admirable man. (To
him, it says,) "Paul entered in with us." Mark the (Bishop's) unassuming
behavior: "and the elders" (were present). Again Paul relates to them the things
relating to the Gentiles, not indulging in vainglory, God forbid, but wishing to
show forth the mercy of God, and to fill them with great joy. [Acts 15] See
accordingly: "when they heard it," it says, "they glorified God,"— not praised
nor admired Paul: for in such wise had he narrated, as referring all to Him—
"and said unto him, You see, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are
which believed." Observe with what modest deference they too speak: "they said
to him:" not (James) as Bishop discourses authoritatively, but they take Paul as
partner with them in their view; "You see, brother:" as though immediately and
at the outset apologizing for themselves, and saying, "We did not wish this. Do
you see the necessity of the thing? 'how many thousands,' say they, 'of Jews there
are which' have come together." And they say not, "how many thousands we
have made catechumens," but, "there are. And these," say they, "are all zealous
for the law." [Acts 21:20] Two reasons— the number of them, and their views.
For neither had they been few, would it have been right to despise them: nor, if
they were many and did not all cling to the law, would there have been need to
make much account of them. Then also a third cause is given: "And they all," it
says, "have been informed of you"— they say not,"have heard," but
[κατηχήθησαν], that is, so they have believed, and have been taught, "that you