own duty, not in exacting that of his neighbor. Thus, if you mark it, Abraham
took his brother's son: his wife found no fault with him. He commanded her to
travel a long journey; she spoke not even against this but followed. Again, after
those many miseries and labors and toils having become lord of all, he yielded
the precedency to Lot. And so far from Sarah being offended at this, she did not
even open her mouth, nor uttered any such thing as many of the women of these
days utter, when they see their own husbands coming off inferior in such
allotments, and especially in dealing with inferiors; reproaching them, and
calling them fools and senseless and unmanly and traitors and stupid. But no
such thing did she say or think, but was pleased with all things that were done by
him.
And another thing, and that a greater: after that Lot had the choice put in his
power, and had thrown the inferior part upon his uncle, a great danger fell upon
him.
Whereof the patriarch hearing, armed all his people, and set himself against
the whole army of the Persians with his own domestics only, and not even then
did she detain him, nor say, as was likely, "O man, where are you going,
thrusting yourself down precipices, and exposing yourself to so great hazards;
for one who wronged you and seized on all that was yours, shedding your blood?
Yea, and even if you make light of yourself, yet have pity on me which have left
house and country and friends and kindred, and have followed you in so long a
pilgrimage; and involve me not in widowhood, and in the miseries of
widowhood." None of these things she said: she thought not of them but bore all
in silence.
After this, her womb continuing barren, she herself suffers not the grief of
women nor laments: but he complains, though not to his wife, but to God. And
see how each preserves his own appropriate part: for he neither despised Sarah
as childless, nor reproached her with any such thing: and she again was anxious
to devise some consolation to him for her childlessness by means of the
handmaid. For these things had not yet been forbidden then as now. For now

neither is it lawful for women to indulge their husbands in such things, nor for
the men, with or without the wife's knowledge, to form such connexions, even
though the grief of their childlessness should infinitely harass them: since they
also shall hear the sentence, "their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be
quenched." For now it is not permitted, but then it had not been forbidden.
Wherefore both his wife commanded this, and he obeyed, yet not even thus for
pleasure's sake. But "behold," it will be said, "how he cast Hagar out again at
her bidding." Well, this is what I want to point out, that both he obeyed her in all
things, and she him. But do not thou give heed to these things only, but examine,
thou who urgest this plea, into what had gone before also, Hagar's insulting her,
her boasting herself against her mistress; than which what can be more vexatious
to a free and honorable woman?
8. Let not then the wife tarry for the virtue of the husband and then show
her own, for this is nothing great; nor, on the other hand, the husband, for the
obedience of the wife and then exercise self-command; for neither would this
any more be his own well-doing; but let each, as I said, furnish his own share
first. For if to the Gentiles smiting us on the right, we must turn the other cheek;
much more ought one to bear with harsh behavior in a husband.
And I say not this for a wife to be beaten; far from it: for this is the
extremest affront, not to her that is beaten, but to him who beats. But even if by
some misfortune thou have such a yokefellow allotted you, take it not ill, O
woman, considering the reward which is laid up for such things and their praise
too in this present life. And to you husbands also this I say: make it a rule that
there can be no such offense as to bring you under the necessity of striking a
wife. And why say I a wife? Since not even upon his handmaiden could a free
man endure to inflict blows and lay violent hands. But if the shame be great for a
man to beat a maidservant, much more to stretch forth the right hand against her
that is free. And this one might see even from heathen legislatures who no longer
compel her that has been so treated to live with him that beat her, as being
unworthy of her fellowship. For surely it comes of extreme lawlessness when