John 8:12
"I am the light of the world."
Not "of Galilee," not of Palestine, nor of Judæa. What then say the Jews?

John 8:13
"You bear record of yourself, your record is not true."
Alas! For their folly, He continually referred them to the Scriptures, and
now they say, "You bear record of yourself." What was the record He bare? "I am
the light of the world." A great thing to say, great of a truth, but it did not greatly
amaze them, because He did not now make Himself equal to the Father, nor
assert that He was His Son, nor that He was God, but for a while calls Himself
"a light." They indeed desired to disprove this also, and yet this was a much
greater thing than to say,
"He that follows Me, shall not walk in darkness."
Using the words "light" and "darkness" in a spiritual sense, and meaning
thereby "abides not in error." In this place He draws on Nicodemus, and brings
him in as having spoken very boldly, and praises the servants who had also done
so. For to "cry aloud," is the act of one desirous to cause that they also should
hear. At the same time He hints at these who were secretly contriving
treacheries, being both in darkness and error, but that they should not prevail
over the light. And He reminds Nicodemus of the words which He had uttered
before, "Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest
his deeds should be reproved." [John 3:20] For since they had asserted that none
of the rulers had believed on Him, therefore He says, that "he that does evil
comes not to the light," to show that their not having come proceeds not from the
weakness of the light, but from their own perverse will.
"They answered and said unto Him, Do you bear witness to yourself?"
What then says He?

John 8:14
"Though I bear record of Myself, My record is true; for I know whence I come,
and whither I go; but you cannot tell whence I come."
What He had before said, these men bring forward as if it had been
specially asserted. What then does Christ? To refute this, and to show that He
used those expressions as suitable to them and to their suspicions, who supposed
Him to be a mere man, He says, "Though I bear record of Myself, My record is
true, for I know whence I come." What is this? "I am of God, am God, the Son of
God, and God Himself is a faithful witness unto Himself, but you know Him not;
ye willingly err, knowing ye pretend not to know, but say all that you say
according to mere human imagination, choosing to understand nothing beyond
what is seen."

John 8:15
"You judge after the flesh."
As to live after the flesh is to live badly, so to judge after the flesh is to
judge unjustly. "But I judge no man."

John 8:16
"And yet if I judge, My judgment is true."
What He says, is of this kind; "You judge unjustly." "And if," says some one,
"we judge unjustly, why dost Thou not rebuke us? Why dost Thou not punish us?
Why dost Thou not condemn us?" "Because," He says, "I came not for this." This
is the meaning of, "I judge no man; yet if I judge, My judgment is true." "For
had I been willing to judge, you would have been among the condemned. And
this I say, not judging you. Yet neither do I tell you that I say it, not judging you,
as though I were not confident that had I judged you, I should have convicted
you; since if I had judged you, I must justly have condemned you. But now the
time of judgment is not yet." He alluded also to the judgment to come, saying,
"I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent Me."
Here He hinted, that not He alone condemns them, but the Father also. Then
He concealed this, by leading them to His own testimony.