THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.37, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ was becomingly presented in the

temple?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was unbecomingly presented
in the Temple. For it is written (Ex. 13:2): "Sanctify unto Me every
first-born that openeth the womb among the children of Israel." But
Christ came forth from the closed womb of the Virgin; and thus He
did not open His Mother's womb. Therefore Christ was not bound by
this law to be presented in the Temple.
Objection 2: Further, that which is always in one's presence cannot
be presented to one. But Christ's humanity was always in God's
presence in the highest degree, as being always united to Him in
unity of person. Therefore there was no need for Him to be presented
to the Lord.
Objection 3: Further, Christ is the principal victim, to whom all the
victims of the old Law are referred, as the figure to the reality. But a
victim should not be offered up for a victim. Therefore it was not
fitting that another victim should be offered up for Christ.
Objection 4: Further, among the legal victims the principal was the
lamb, which was a "continual sacrifice", as is stated Num. 28:6: for
which reason Christ is also called "the Lamb---Behold the Lamb of
God" (Jn. 1: 29). It was therefore more fitting that a lamb should be
offered for Christ than "a pair of turtle doves or two young pigeons."
On the contrary is the authority of Scripture which relates this as
having taken place (Lk. 2:22).
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), Christ wished to be "made
under the Law, that He might redeem them who were under the
Law" (Gal. 4:4,5), and that the "justification of the Law might be"
spiritually "fulfilled" in His members. Now, the Law contained a
twofold precept touching the children born. one was a general
precept which affected all---namely, that "when the days of the
mother's purification were expired," a sacrifice was to be offered
either "for a son or for a daughter," as laid down Lev. 12:6. And this
sacrifice was for the expiation of the sin in which the child was
conceived and born; and also for a certain consecration of the child,
because it was then presented in the Temple for the first time.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.37, C.4.

Wherefore one offering was made as a holocaust and another for sin.
The other was a special precept in the law concerning the first-born
of "both man and beast": for the Lord claimed for Himself all the firstborn in Israel, because, in order to deliver the Israelites, He "slew
every first-born in the land of Egypt, both men and cattle" (Ex.
12:12,13,29), the first-born of Israel being saved; which law is set
down Ex. 13. Here also was Christ foreshadowed, who is "the Firstborn amongst many brethren" (Rm. 8:29).
Therefore, since Christ was born of a woman and was her first-born,
and since He wished to be "made under the Law," the Evangelist
Luke shows that both these precepts were fulfilled in His regard.
First, as to that which concerns the first-born, when he says (Lk.
2:22,23): "They carried Him to Jerusalem to present Him to the Lord:
as it is written in the law of the Lord, 'Every male opening the womb
shall be called holy to the Lord.'" Secondly, as to the general precept
which concerned all, when he says (Lk. 2:24): "And to offer a
sacrifice according as it is written in the law of the Lord, a pair of
turtle doves or two young pigeons."
Reply to Objection 1: As Gregory of Nyssa says (De Occursu Dom.):
"It seems that this precept of the Law was fulfilled in God incarnate
alone in a special manner exclusively proper to Him. For He alone,
whose conception was ineffable, and whose birth was
incomprehensible, opened the virginal womb which had been closed
to sexual union, in such a way that after birth the seal of chastity
remained inviolate." Consequently the words "opening the womb"
imply that nothing hitherto had entered or gone forth therefrom.
Again, for a special reason is it written "'a male,' because He
contracted nothing of the woman's sin": and in a singular way "is He
called 'holy,' because He felt no contagion of earthly corruption,
whose birth was wondrously immaculate" (Ambrose, on Lk. 2:23).
Reply to Objection 2: As the Son of God "became man, and was
circumcised in the flesh, not for His own sake, but that He might
make us to be God's through grace, and that we might be
circumcised in the spirit; so, again, for our sake He was presented to
the Lord, that we may learn to offer ourselves to God" [Athanasius,
on Lk. 2:23]. And this was done after His circumcision, in order to
show that "no one who is not circumcised from vice is worthy of
Divine regard" [Bede, on Lk. 2:23].