enough to be as an olive tree, but also to be fruitful. For there are persons who in
doing alms give little, [only once] in the course of the whole year, or in each
week, or who give away a mere chance matter. These are indeed olive trees, but
not fruitful ones, but even withered. For because they show compassion they are
olive trees, but because they do it not liberally, they are not fruitful olive trees.
But let us be fruitful.
I have often said and I say now also: the greatness of the charity is not
shown by the measure of what is given, but by the disposition of the giver. You
know the case of the widow. It is well continually to bring this example
[forward], that not even the poor man may despair of himself, when he looks on
her who threw in the two mites. Some contributed even hair in the fitting up of
the temple, and not even these were rejected. [Exodus 35:23] But if when they
had gold, they had brought hair, they [would have been] accursed: but if, having
this only, they brought it, they were accepted. For this cause Cain also was
blamed, not because he offered worthless things, but because they were the most
worthless he had. "Accursed" (it is said) "is he which has a male, and sacrifices
unto God a corrupt thing." [Malachi 1:14] He did not speak absolutely, but, "he
that has" (he says) and spares [it]. If then a man have nothing, he is freed from
blame, or rather he has a reward. For what is of less value than two farthings, or
more worthless than hair? What than a pint of meal? But nevertheless these were
approved equally with the calves and the gold. For "a man is accepted according
to that he has, not according to that he has not." [2 Corinthians 8:12] And, it
says, "according as your hand has, do good." [Proverbs 3:27]
Wherefore, I entreat you, let us readily empty out what we have for the
poor. Even if it be little we shall receive the same reward with them who have
cast the most; or rather, more than those who cast in ten thousand talents. If we
do these things we shall obtain the unspeakable treasures of God; if we not only
hear, but practice also, if we do not praise [charity], but also show [it] by our
deeds. Which may we all attain, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the
Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and for ever

and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 33 on Hebrews

Hebrews 12:28-29
" Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have
grace [or gratitude,] whereby we serve God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear. For our God is a consuming fire."
1. In another place he says the same, "for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal" [2 Corinthians 4:18];
and from this makes an exhortation with regard to the evils which we endure in
this present life; and here he does this, and says, let us continue steadfast; "let us
have thankfulness," i.e., let us give thanks unto God. For not only we ought not
to be discouraged at present things, but even to show the greatest gratitude to
Him, for those to come.
"Whereby we serve God acceptably," that is to say, 'for thus is it possible to
serve God acceptably,' by giving him thanks in all things. "Do all things" (he
says) "without murmurings and disputings." [Philippians 2:14] For whatever
work a man does with murmuring, he cuts away and loses his reward; as the
Israelites— how great a penalty they paid for their murmurings. Wherefore he
says, "Neither murmur ye." [1 Corinthians 10:10] It is not therefore possible to
"serve" Him "acceptably" without a sense of gratitude to Him for all things, both
for our trials, and the alleviations of them. That is, let us utter nothing hasty,
nothing disrespectful, but let us humble ourselves that we may be reverential.
For this is "with reverence and godly fear."