says he, "against myself." What misdeed then was he to judge, when he "knew
nothing against himself?" Yet, says he, "he was not justified." [1 Corinthians
6:3] We then who have our conscience filled with ten thousand wounds, and are
conscious to ourselves of nothing good, but quite the contrary; what can we say?
And how could it be, if he knew nothing against himself that he was not
justified? Because it was possible for him to have committed certain sins, not
however, knowing that they were sins. From this make your estimate how great
shall be the strictness of the future judgment. It is not, you see, as considering
himself unblameable that he says it is so unmeet for him to be judged by them,
but to stop the mouths of those who were doing so unreasonably. At least in
another place, even though men's sins be notorious, he permits not judgment
unto others, because the occasion required it. "For why do you judge your
brother," says he, [Romans 14:10] or, "thou, why do you set at nought your
brother?" For thou were not enjoined, O man, to judge others, but to test your
own doings. Why then do you seize upon the office of the Lord? Judgment is
His, not yours.
To which effect, he adds, "Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the
Lord come; who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make
manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall each man have his praise from
God." What then? Is it not right that our teachers should do this? It is right in the
case of open and confessed sins, and that with fitting opportunity, and even then
with pain and inward vexation: not as these were acting at that time, of vainglory and arrogance. For neither in this instance is he speaking of those sins
which all own to be such, but about preferring one before another, and making
comparisons of modes of life. For these things He alone knows how to judge
with accuracy, who is to judge our secret doings, which of these be worthy of
greater and which of less punishment and honor. But we do all this according to
what meets our eye. "For if in my own errors," says he, "I know nothing clearly,
how can I be worthy to pass sentence on other men? And how shall I who know
not my own case with accuracy, be able to judge the state of others?" Now if

Paul felt this, much more we. For (to proceed) he spoke these things, not to
exhibit himself as faultless, but to show that even should there be among them
some such person, free from transgression, not even he would be worthy to
judge the lives of others: and that if he, though conscious to himself of nothing
declare himself guilty, much more they who have ten thousand sins to be
conscious of in themselves.
4. Having thus, you see, stopped the mouths of those who pass such
sentences, he travails next with strong feeling ready to break out and come upon
the unclean person. And like as when a storm is coming on, some clouds fraught
with darkness run before it; afterwards, when the crash of the thunders arises and
works the whole heavens into one black cloud, then all at once the rain bursts
down upon the earth: so also did it then happen. For though he might in deep
indignation have dealt with the fornicator, he does not so; but with fearful words
he first represses the swelling pride of the man, since in truth, what had occurred
was a twofold sin, fornication, and, that which is worse than fornication, the not
grieving over the sin committed. For not so much does he bewail the sin, as him
that committed it and did not as yet repent. Thus, "I shall bewail many of those,"
says he, not simply "who have sinned heretofore," but he adds, "who have not
repented of the uncleanness and impurity which they wrought." [2 Corinthians
12:21] For he who after sinning has practised repentance, is a worthy object not
of grief but of gratulations, having passed over into the choir of the righteous.
For, [Isaiah 43:26] "declare thou your iniquities first, that you may be justified:"
but if after sinning one is void of shame, he is not so much to be pitied for falling
as for lying where he is fallen.
Now if it be a grievous fault not to repent after sins; to be puffed up because
of sins, what sort of punishment does it deserve? For if he who is elate for his
good deeds is unclean, what pardon shall he meet with who has that feeling with
regard to his sins?
Since then the fornicator was of this sort, and had rendered his mind so
headstrong and unyielding through his sin, he of course begins by casting down