itself. Again if anything is the matter with the eyes, all complain and all are idle:
and neither do the feet walk nor the hands work, nor does the stomach enjoy its
accustomed food; and yet the affection is of the eyes. Why do you cause the
stomach to pine? Why keep your feet still? Why bind your hands? Because they
are tied to the feet, and in an unspeakable manner the whole body suffers. For if
it shared not in the suffering, it would not endure to partake of the care.
Wherefore having said, "that the members may have the same care one for
another," he added, "whether one member suffers, all the members suffer with it;
or one member is honored, all the members rejoice with it." "And how do they
rejoice with it?" say you. The head is crowned, and the whole man is honored.
The mouth speaks, and the eyes laugh and are delighted. Yet the credit belongs
not to the beauty of the eyes, but to the tongue. Again if the eyes appear
beautiful, the whole woman is embellished: as indeed these also, when a straight
nose and upright neck and other members are praised, rejoice and appear
cheerful: and again they shed tears in great abundance over their griefs and
misfortunes, though themselves continue uninjured.
6. Let us all then, considering these things, imitate the love of these
members; let us not in any wise do the contrary, trampling on the miseries of our
neighbor and envying his good things. For this is the part of madmen and
persons beside themselves. Just as he that digs out his own eye has displayed a
very great proof of senselessness; and he that devours his own hand exhibits a
clear evidence of downright madness.
Now if this be the case with regard to the members, so likewise, when it
happens among the brethren, it fastens on us the reputation of folly and brings on
no common mischief. For as long as he shines, your comeliness also is apparent
and the whole body is beautified. For not at all does he confine the beauty to
himself alone, but permits you also to glory. But if you extinguish him, you
bring a common darkness upon the whole body, and the misfortune you cause is
common to all the members: as indeed if you preserve him in brightness, you
preserve the bloom of the entire body. For no man says, "the eye is beautiful:"

but what? "such a woman is beautiful." And if it also be praised, it comes after
the common encomium. So likewise it happens in the Church. I mean, if there be
any celebrated persons, the community reaps the good report of it. For the
enemies are not apt to divide the praises, but connect them together. And if any
be brilliant in speech, they do not praise him alone but likewise the whole
Church. For they do not say only, "such a one is a wonderful man," but what?
"the Christians have a wonderful teacher:" and so they make the possession
common.
7. And now let me ask, do heathens bind together, and do you divide and
war with your own body, and withstand your own members? Do you not know
that this overturns all? For even a "kingdom," says he, "divided against itself
shall not stand." [Matthew 12:25]
But nothing so divides and separates as envy and jealousy, that grievous
disease, and exempt from all pardon, and in some respect worse than "the root of
all evils." [1 Timothy 6:12] For the covetous is then pleased when himself has
received: but the envious is then pleased, when another has failed to receive, not
when himself has received. For he thinks the misfortunes of others a benefit to
himself, rather than prosperity; going about a common enemy of mankind, and
smiting the members of Christ, than which what can be more akin to madness? A
demon is envious, but of men, not of any demon: but thou being a man enviest
men, and withstandest what is of your own tribe and family, which not even a
demon does. And what pardon shall you obtain, what excuse? Trembling and
turning pale at sight of a brother in prosperity, when you ought to crown yourself
and to rejoice and exult.
If indeed you wish to emulate him, I forbid not that: emulate, but with a
view to be like him who is approved: not in order to depress him but that you
may reach the same lofty point, that you may display the same excellence. This
is wholesome rivalry, imitation without contention: not to grieve at the good
things of others but to be vexed at our own evils: the contrary to which is the
result of envy. For neglecting its own evils, it pines away at the good fortune of