4. For the body is not possessed of greater power than the soul, since indeed the former is
inspired, and vivified, and increased, and held together by the latter; but the soul possesses and
rules over the body. It is doubtless retarded in its velocity, just in the exact proportion in which the
body shares in its motion; but it never loses the knowledge which properly belongs to it. For the
body may be compared to an instrument; but the soul is possessed of the reason of an artist. As,
therefore, the artist finds the idea of a work to spring up rapidly in his mind, but can only carry it
out slowly by means of an instrument, owing to the want of perfect pliability in the matter acted
upon, and thus the rapidity of his mental operation, being blended with the slow action of the
instrument, gives rise to a moderate kind of movement [towards the end contemplated]; so also the
soul, by being mixed up with the body belonging to it, is in a certain measure impeded, its rapidity
being blended with the body's slowness. Yet it does not lose altogether its own peculiar powers;
but while, as it were, sharing life with the body, it does not itself cease to live. Thus, too, while
communicating other things to the body, it neither loses the knowledge of them, nor the memory
of those things which have been witnessed.
5. If, therefore, the soul remembers nothing of what took place in a former state of existence,
but has a perception of those things which are here, it follows that she never existed in other bodies,
nor did things of which she has no knowledge, nor [once] knew things which she cannot [now
mentally] contemplate. But, as each one of us receives his body through the skilful working of
God, so does he also possess his soul. For God is not so poor or destitute in resources, that He
cannot confer its own proper soul on each individual body, even as He gives it also its special
character. And therefore, when the number [fixed upon] is completed, [that number] which He had
predetermined in His own counsel, all those who have been enrolled for life [eternal] shall rise
again, having their own bodies, and having also their own souls, and their own spirits, in which
they had pleased God. Those, on the other hand, who are worthy of punishment, shall go away into
it, they too having their own souls and their own bodies, in which they stood apart from the grace
of God. Both classes shall then cease from any longer begetting and being begotten, from marrying
and being given in marriage; so that the number of mankind, corresponding to the fore-ordination
of God, being completed, may fully realize the scheme formed by the Father.

### Chapter XXXIV.—Souls can be recognised in the separate state, and are immortal although
they once had a beginning.
thinks the whole clause corresponds to !#'(%* !'+ !"#$%&%$ (,- ./0'(,1, which we have rendered above.