FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.2.

species, and heat in the first species of quality; whereas Aristotle
puts heat in the third.
Wherefore Porphyrius, as Simplicius reports (Commentary), says
that passion or passion-like quality, disposition and habit, differ in
bodies by way of intensity and remissness. For when a thing
receives heat in this only that it is being heated, and not so as to be
able to give heat, then we have passion, if it is transitory; or passionlike quality if it is permanent. But when it has been brought to the
point that it is able to heat something else, then it is a disposition;
and if it goes so far as to be firmly fixed and to become difficult to
change, then it will be a habit: so that disposition would be a certain
intensity of passion or passion-like quality, and habit an intensity or
disposition. But Simplicius disapproves of this, for such intensity
and remissness do not imply diversity on the part of the form itself,
but on the part of the diverse participation thereof by the subject; so
that there would be no diversity among the species of quality. And
therefore we must say otherwise that, as was explained above
(Question 49, Article 2, ad 1), the adjustment of the passion-like
qualities themselves, according to their suitability to nature, implies
the notion of disposition: and so, when a change takes place in
these same passion-like qualities, which are heat and cold, moisture
and dryness, there results a change as to sickness and health. But
change does not occur in regard to like habits and dispositions,
primarily and of themselves.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the soul is the subject of habit in respect

of its essence or in respect of its power?
Objection 1: It would seem that habit is in the soul in respect of its
essence rather than in respect of its powers. For we speak of
dispositions and habits in relation to nature, as stated above
(Question 49, Article 2). But nature regards the essence of the soul
rather than the powers; because it is in respect of its essence that
the soul is the nature of such a body and the form thereof. Therefore
habits are in the soul in respect of its essence and not in respect of
its powers.
Objection 2: Further, accident is not the subject of accident. Now
habit is an accident. But the powers of the soul are in the genus of
accident, as we have said in the FP, Question 77, Article 1, ad 5.
Therefore habit is not in the soul in respect of its powers.
Objection 3: Further, the subject is prior to that which is in the
subject. But since habit belongs to the first species of quality, it is
prior to power, which belongs to the second species. Therefore habit
is not in a power of the soul as its subject.
On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. i, 13) puts various habits in
the various powers of the soul.
I answer that, As we have said above (Question 49, Articles 2,3),
habit implies a certain disposition in relation to nature or to
operation. If therefore we take habit as having a relation to nature, it
cannot be in the soul---that is, if we speak of human nature: for the
soul itself is the form completing the human nature; so that,
regarded in this way, habit or disposition is rather to be found in the
body by reason of its relation to the soul, than in the soul by reason
of its relation to the body. But if we speak of a higher nature, of
which man may become a partaker, according to 2 Pt. 1, "that we
may be partakers of the Divine Nature": thus nothing hinders some
habit, namely, grace, from being in the soul in respect of its essence,
as we shall state later on (Question 110, Article 4).
On the other hand, if we take habit in its relation to operation, it is
chiefly thus that habits are found in the soul: in so far as the soul is
not determined to one operation, but is indifferent to many, which is