also disgrace your children by leaving them poor, if it chance that you depart this
life before the wife: and you give her incomparably more occasions for
connecting herself with a second bridegroom. Or do you not see that many
women make this the excuse for a second marriage— that they may not be
despised; that they want to have some man to take the management of their
property? Then let us not bring about so great evils for the sake of money; but let
us dismiss all (such aims), and seek a beautiful soul, that we may also succeed in
obtaining love. This is the exceeding wealth, this the great treasure, this the
endless good things: whereunto may we all attain by the grace and loving
kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
together be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 50 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXIII. 31, 32, 33
"Then the soldiers, as it was commanded them, took Paul, and brought him
by night to Antipatris. On the morrow they left the horsemen to go with him, and
returned to the castle: who, when they came to Cæsarea, and delivered the
epistle to the governor, presented Paul also before him."
Like some king whom his body-guards escort, so did these convey Paul; in
such numbers too, and by night, for fear of the wrath of the people. Now then
you will say that they have got him out of the city, they desist from their
violence? No indeed. But (the tribune) would not have sent him off with such
care for his safety, but that while he himself had found nothing amiss in him, he
knew the murderous disposition of his adversaries. "And when the governor had
read the letter, he asked of what province he was. And when he understood that
he was of Cilicia; I will hear you, said he, when your accusers are also come."
Already Lysias has spoken for his exculpation; (but the Jews seek to) gain the
hearer beforehand. "And he ordered him to be kept in custody in Herod's
prætorium" (v. 34, 35): again Paul is put in bonds. "And after five days came
down the high priest Ananias with the elders." See how for all this they do not
desist; hindered as they were by obstacles without number, nevertheless they
come, only to be put to shame here also. "And with an orator, one Tertullus."
And what need was there of "an orator? Which (persons) also informed the
governor against Paul." [Acts 24:1] See how this man also from the very outset
(b) with his praises seeks to gain the judge beforehand. "And when he was called
forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Seeing that by you we enjoy great
quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this nation by your
providence, we accept it always, and in all places, most noble Felix, with all
thankfulness." (v. 2, 3.) Then as having much to say, he passes by the rest: