greater reverence towards Him, when at His mere word waiting upon your
fellow-servant you refresh him in all things. Refresh him, and believe Him, who
receives it, and says, You give to me. For unless you had given to Him, He
would not have counted you worthy of a kingdom. If you had not turned away
from Him, He would not have sent you to hell, if you had overlooked a chance
person; but because it is He Himself that is despised, therefore great is the
blame.
Thus also Paul persecuted Him, in persecuting them that are His; wherefore
too He said, "Why do you persecute me?" [Acts 9:4] Thus therefore let us feel, as
bestowing on Christ Himself when we bestow. For indeed His words are more
sure than our sight. When therefore you see a poor man, remember His words,
by which He declared, that it is He Himself who is fed. For though that which
appears be not Christ, yet in this man's form Christ Himself receives and begs.
But are you ashamed to hear that Christ begs? Rather be ashamed when
thou dost not give to Him begging of you. For this is shame, this is vengeance
and punishment. Since for Him to beg is of His goodness, wherefore we ought
even to glory therein; but for you not to give, is of your inhumanity. But if you
believe not now, that in passing by a poor man that is a believer, you pass by
Him, you will believe it then, when He will bring you into the midst and say,
"Inasmuch as you did it not to these, you did it not to me." But God forbid that
we should so learn it, and grant rather that we may believe now, and bring forth
fruit, and hear that most blessed voice that brings us into the kingdom.
But perhaps some one will say, "You are every day discoursing to us of
almsgiving and humanity." Neither will I cease to speak of this. For if you had
attained to it, in the first place, not even so ought I to desist, for fear of making
you the more remiss; yet had ye attained, I might have relaxed a little; but if you
have not arrived even at the half; say not these things to me, but to yourselves.
For indeed you do the same in blaming me, as if a little child, hearing often of
the letter alpha, and not learning it, were to blame its teacher, because he is
continually and for ever reminding him about it.

For who from these discourses has become more forward in the giving of
alms? Who has cast down his money? Who has given the half of his substance?
Who the third part? No one. How then should it be other than absurd, when you
do not learn, to require us to desist from teaching? You ought to do the contrary.
Though we were minded to desist, you ought to stop us and to say, we have not
yet learned these things, and how is it you have desisted from reminding us of
them? If it befell any one to suffer from his eye, and I happened to be a
physician, and then having covered it up and anointed it, and having applied
other treatment, I had not benefited it much, and so had desisted; would he not
have come to the doors of my surgery and cried out against me, accusing me of
great remissness, for that I had of myself withdrawn, while the disease remained;
and if, on being blamed, I had said in reply to these things, that I had covered it
up, and anointed it; would he have endured it? By no means, but would
immediately have said; "And what is the advantage, if I still suffer pain." Reason
thus also with respect to your soul. But what if after having often fomented a
hand that was lifeless and shrunk, I had not succeeded in mollifying it? Should I
not have heard the same thing? And even now a hand that is shrunk and withered
we bathe, and for this reason, until we can stretch it out perfectly, we will not
desist. Would that you too were to discourse of nothing else, at home and at
market, at table and at night, and as a dream. For if we were always careful
about these things by day, even in our dreams we should be engaged in them.
What do you say? Am I forever speaking of almsgiving? I would wish
myself that there were not great need for me to address this advice to you, but
that I were to speak of the battle against the Jews, and heathens, and heretics; but
when you are not yet sound, how can any one arm you for the fight? How should
he lead you to the array, yet having wounds and gashes. Since if indeed I saw
you thoroughly sound in health, I should lead you forth to that battle array, and
you would see by the grace of Christ ten thousands lying dead, and their heads
cast one upon another. In other books at any rate, many discourses have been
spoken by us touching these things, but not even so are we able thoroughly to