SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.2.

### ARTICLE 1. Whether memory is a part of prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that memory is not a part of prudence.
For memory, as the Philosopher proves (De Memor. et Remin. i), is in
the sensitive part of the soul: whereas prudence is in the rational
part (Ethic. vi, 5). Therefore memory is not a part of prudence.
Objection 2: Further, prudence is acquired and perfected by
experience, whereas memory is in us from nature. Therefore memory
is not a part of prudence.
Objection 3: Further, memory regards the past, whereas prudence
regards future matters of action, about which counsel is concerned,
as stated in Ethic. vi, 2,7. Therefore memory is not a part of
prudence.
On the contrary, Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 53) places memory among
the parts of prudence.
I answer that, Prudence regards contingent matters of action, as
stated above (Question 47, Article 5). Now in such like matters a man
can be directed, not by those things that are simply and necessarily
true, but by those which occur in the majority of cases: because
principles must be proportionate to their conclusions, and "like must
be concluded from like" (Ethic. vi, Anal. Post. i. 32). But we need
experience to discover what is true in the majority of cases:
wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 1) that "intellectual virtue is
engendered and fostered by experience and time." Now experience
is the result of many memories as stated in Metaph. i, 1, and
therefore prudence requires the memory of many things. Hence
memory is fittingly accounted a part of prudence.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 47, Articles 3,6),
prudence applies universal knowledge to particulars which are
objects of sense: hence many things belonging to the sensitive
faculties are requisite for prudence, and memory is one of them.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as aptitude for prudence is in our nature,
while its perfection comes through practice or grace, so too, as Tully
says in his Rhetoric [Ad Herenn. de Arte Rhet. iii, 16,24], memory not
only arises from nature, but is also aided by art and diligence.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.2.

There are four things whereby a man perfects his memory. First,
when a man wishes to remember a thing, he should take some
suitable yet somewhat unwonted illustration of it, since the
unwonted strikes us more, and so makes a greater and stronger
impression on the mind; the mind; and this explains why we
remember better what we saw when we were children. Now the
reason for the necessity of finding these illustrations or images, is
that simple and spiritual impressions easily slip from the mind,
unless they be tied as it were to some corporeal image, because
human knowledge has a greater hold on sensible objects. For this
reason memory is assigned to the sensitive part of the soul.
Secondly, whatever a man wishes to retain in his memory he must
carefully consider and set in order, so that he may pass easily from
one memory to another. Hence the Philosopher says (De Memor. et
Remin. ii): "Sometimes a place brings memories back to us: the
reason being that we pass quickly from the one to the other."
Thirdly, we must be anxious and earnest about the things we wish to
remember, because the more a thing is impressed on the mind, the
less it is liable to slip out of it. Wherefore Tully says in his Rhetoric
[Ad Herenn. de Arte Rhet. iii.] that "anxiety preserves the figures of
images entire." Fourthly, we should often reflect on the things we
wish to remember. Hence the Philosopher says (De Memoria i) that
"reflection preserves memories," because as he remarks (De
Memoria ii) "custom is a second nature": wherefore when we reflect
on a thing frequently, we quickly call it to mind, through passing
from one thing to another by a kind of natural order.
Reply to Objection 3: It behooves us to argue, as it were, about the
future from the past; wherefore memory of the past is necessary in
order to take good counsel for the future.