the thing that is good, that he may have whereof to give to him that has need."
Where are they which are called pure; they that are full of all defilement,
and yet dare to give themselves a name like this? For it is possible, very
possible, to put off the reproach, not only by ceasing from the sin, but by
working some good thing also. Perceive ye how we ought to get quit of the sin?
"They stole." This is the sin. "They steal no more." This is not to do away the sin.
But how shall they? If they labor, and charitably communicate to others, thus
will they do away the sin. He does not simply desire that we should work, but so
"work" as to "labor," so as that we may "communicate" to others. For the thief
indeed works, but it is that which is evil.
Ver. 29. "Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your mouth."
What is "corrupt speech"? That which is said elsewhere to be also "idle,
backbiting, filthy communication, jesting, foolish talking." See ye how he is
cutting up the very roots of anger? Lying, theft, unseasonable conversation. The
words, however, "Let him steal no more," he does not say so much excusing
them, as to pacify the injured parties, and to recommend them to be content, if
they never suffer the like again. And well too does he give advice concerning
conversation; inasmuch as we shall pay the penalty, not for our deeds only, but
also for our words.
"But such as is good," he proceeds, "for edifying, as the need may be, that it
may give grace to them that hear."
That is to say, What edifies your neighbor, that only speak, not a word
more. For to this end God gave you a mouth and a tongue, that you might give
thanks to Him, that you might build up your neighbor. So that if you destroy that
building, better were it to be silent, and never to speak at all. For indeed the
hands of the workmen, if instead of raising the walls, they should learn to pull
them down, would justly deserve to be cut off. For so also says the Psalmist;
"The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips." [Psalm 12:3] The mouth—this is the
cause of all evil; or rather not the mouth, but they that make an evil use of it.
From thence proceed insults, revilings, blasphemies, incentives to lusts, murders,

adulteries, thefts, all have their origin from this. And how, you will say, do
murders? Because from insult you will go on to anger, from anger to blows, from
blows to murder. And how, again, adultery? "Such a woman," one will say,
"loves you, she said something nice about you." This at once unstrings your
firmness, and thus are your passions kindled within you.
Therefore Paul said, "such as is good." Since then there is so vast a flow of
words, he with good reason speaks indefinitely, charging us to use expressions of
that kind, and giving us a pattern of communication. What then is this? By
saying, "for edifying," either he means this, that he who hears you may be
grateful to you: as, for instance, a brother has committed fornication; do not
make a display of the offense, nor revel in it; you will be doing no good to him
that hears you; rather, it is likely, you will hurt him, by giving him a stimulus.
Whereas, advise him what to do, and you are conferring on him a great
obligation. Discipline him how to keep silence, teach him to revile no man, and
you have taught him his best lesson, you will have conferred upon him the
highest obligation. Discourse with him on contrition, on piety, on almsgiving; all
these things will soften his soul, for all these things he will own his obligation.
Whereas by exciting his laughter, or by filthy communication, you will rather be
inflaming him. Applaud the wickedness, and you will overturn and ruin him.
Or else he means thus, "that it may make them, the hearers, full of grace."
For as sweet ointment gives grace to them that partake of it, so also does good
speech. Hence it was moreover that one said, "Your name is as ointment poured
forth." [Canticles 1:3] It caused them to exhale that sweet perfume. You see that
what he continually recommends, he is saying now also, charging every one
according to his several ability to edify his neighbors. Thou then that givest such
advice to others, how much more to yourself!
Ver. 30. "And grieve not," he adds, "the Holy Spirit of God."
A matter this more terrible and startling, as he also says in the Epistle to the
Thessalonians; for there too he uses an expression of this sort. "He that rejects,
rejects not man, but God." [1 Thessalonians 4:8] So also here. If you utter a