John 6:31
"Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness."
Nothing more senseless, nothing more unreasonable, than these men! While
the miracle was yet in their hands, as though none had been done, they spoke
after this manner, "What sign do you show?" and having thus spoken, they do
not even allow Him the right of choosing the sign, but think to force Him to
exhibit none other than such a one as was wrought in the days of their fathers;
wherefore they say, "Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness," thinking by
this to provoke Him to work such a miracle as might supply them with carnal
nourishment. Else why did they mention none other of the miracles of old,
though many took place in those times, both in Egypt and at the sea and in the
wilderness, but only that of the manna? Was it not because they greatly desired
that one by reason of the tyranny of their bellies? You who when you saw His
miracle called him a Prophet, and attempted to make Him a king, how is that
now, as though none had been wrought, you have become thankless and illminded, and ask for a sign, uttering words fit for parasites, or hungry dogs? Does
the manna now seem wonderful to you? Your soul is not now parched up.
Mark too their hypocrisy. They said not, "Moses did this sign, what doest
thou?" thinking it would annoy Him; but for a while they address Him with great
reverence, through expectation of food. So they neither said, "God did this, what
doest thou?" that they might not seem to make Him equal with God; nor did they
bring forward Moses, that they might not seem to lower Him, but put the matter
in an intermediate form, "Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness." He
indeed might have replied, "I, but now, have wrought greater wonders than did
Moses, requiring no rod, having no need of prayer, but doing all of Myself; and,
if you call to remembrance the manna, see, I have given you bread." But this was
not the season for such speeches; and the one thing He earnestly desired was, to
bring them to spiritual food. And observe His infinite wisdom and His manner of

answering.

John 6:32
"Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but My Father gives you the true
bread from heaven."
Why said He not, "It was not Moses that gave it to you, but I"; but puts God
in the place of Moses, and Himself instead of manna? Because the infirmity of
His hearers was great. As is seen from what follows. For not even when He had
spoken thus did He secure their attention, although He said at first, "You seek
Me, not because ye saw the miracle, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and
were filled." [John 6:26] Now because they sought these (carnal) things, He
would have corrected them by His succeeding words, yet not even so did they
desist. When He promised the Samaritan woman that He would give her "the
water," He made no mention of the Father. What says He? "If you knew who it is
that says unto you, Give Me to drink, you would have asked of Him, and He
would have given unto you living water" [John 4:10]; and again, "The water
which I shall give." He referrs her not to The Father. But here He makes mention
of The Father, that you may understand how great was the faith of the Samaritan
woman, and how great the infirmity of the Jews.
Was then the manna not from heaven? How then is it said to be from
heaven? In the same manner as Scripture speaks of "fowls of heaven" [Psalm
8:8]; and again, "The Lord thundered from heaven." [Psalm 18:13] And He calls
that other the "true bread," not because the miracle of the manna was false, but
because it was a type, and not the very truth. But in mentioning Moses, He does
not compare Himself to him, for the Jews did not as yet prefer Him to Moses, of
whom they still had a higher opinion. So that after saying, "Moses gave not," He
adds not that "I give," but says that The Father, and not Moses, gives. They,
when they heard this, replied, "Give us this bread to eat"; for they yet thought
that it was something material, they yet expected to gratify their appetites, and so
hastily ran to Him. What does Christ? Leading them on little by little, He says,