Use not filthy communication. Is this difficult? For if it had not been
enjoined, ought we not to have done right in this, to avoid appearing degraded?
For that the contrary conduct is troublesome, I mean the using filthy
communication, is manifest from the fact that the soul is ashamed and blushes if
it have been led to say any such thing and would not unless perhaps it were
drunk. For when sitting in a public place, even if you do it at home, why do you
not do it there? Because of those that are present. Why do you not readily do the
same thing before your wife? That you may not insult her. So then thou dost it
not, lest you should insult your wife; and do you not blush at insulting God? For
He is everywhere present, and hears all things.
Be not drunken, He says. For this very thing of itself, is it not a
chastisement? He did not say, Put your body on the rack, but what? Do not give
it free rein so as to take away the authority of the mind: on the contrary "make
not provision for the lusts thereof." [Romans 13:14]
Do not (He says) seize by violence what is not your own; do not overreach;
do not forswear yourself. What labors do these things require! What sweatings!
Speak evil of no man (He says) nor accuse falsely. The contrary indeed is a
labor. For when you have spoken ill of another, immediately you are in danger,
in suspicion, [saying] Did he of whom I spoke, hear? Whether he be great or
small. For should he be a great man, immediately you will be indeed in danger;
but if small, he will requite you with as much, or rather with what is far more
grievous; for he will say evil of you in a greater degree. We are enjoined nothing
difficult, nothing burdensome, if we have the will. And if we have not the will,
even the easiest things will appear burdensome to us. What is easier than eating?
But from great effeminacy many feel disgust even at this, and I hear many say,
that it is weariness even to eat. None of these things is wearisome if you have
but the will. For everything depends on the will after the grace from above. Let
us will good things that we may attain also to the good things eternal, in Christ
Jesus our Lord, whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost be glory,
might, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 14 on Hebrews

Hebrews 8:1-2
"Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such an
High Priest; who is set down on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the
heavens: a minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which the Lord
pitched, and not man."
1. Paul mixes the lowly things with the lofty, ever imitating his Master, so
that the lowly become the path to the lofty, and through the former we are led to
the latter, and when we are amid the great things we learn that these [lowly ones]
were a condescension. This accordingly he does here also. After declaring that
"He offered up Himself," and showing Him to be a "High Priest," what does he
say? "Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: we have such an
High Priest who is set down on the right hand of the throne of the majesty." And
yet this is not [the office] of a Priest, but of Him whom the Priest should serve.
"A minister of the sanctuary," not simply a minister, but "a minister of the
sanctuary. And of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched and not man."
You see the condescension. Did he not a little before make a separation, saying:
"Are they not all ministering spirits?" [Hebrews 1:14] and therefore (he says) it
is not said to them, "Sit on my right hand," [Hebrews 1:13] for He that sits is not
a minister. How is it then that it is here said, "a minister," and "a minister of the
Sanctuary"? For he means here the Tabernacle.
See how he raised up the minds of the believing Jews. For as they would be
apt to imagine that we have no such tabernacle [as they had], see here (he says)
is the Priest, Great, yea, much greater than the other, and who has offered a more
wonderful sacrifice. But is not all this mere talk? Is it not a boast, and merely
said to win over our minds? On this account he established it first from the oath,