FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.3.

other affections of the human soul, in the point of their being
movements of the sensitive appetite, whereas the other emotions of
the soul, which are not passions, are movements of the intellective
appetite or will; but only in the point of the passions being, as they
maintained, any emotions in disaccord with reason. These emotions
could not be in a wise or virtuous man if they arose deliberately:
while it would be possible for them to be in a wise man, if they arose
suddenly: because, in the words of Aulus Gellius [Noct. Attic. xix, 1],
quoted by Augustine (De Civ. Dei ix, 4), "it is not in our power to call
up the visions of the soul, known as its fancies; and when they arise
from awesome things, they must needs disturb the mind of a wise
man, so that he is slightly startled by fear, or depressed with
sorrow," in so far as "these passions forestall the use of reason
without his approving of such things or consenting thereto."
Accordingly, if the passions be taken for inordinate emotions, they
cannot be in a virtuous man, so that he consent to them deliberately;
as the Stoics maintained. But if the passions be taken for any
movements of the sensitive appetite, they can be in a virtuous man,
in so far as they are subordinate to reason. Hence Aristotle says
(Ethic. ii, 3) that "some describe virtue as being a kind of freedom
from passion and disturbance; this is incorrect, because the
assertion should be qualified": they should have said virtue is
freedom from those passions "that are not as they should be as to
manner and time."
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher quotes this, as well as many
other examples in his books on Logic, in order to illustrate, not his
own mind, but that of others. It was the opinion of the Stoics that the
passions of the soul were incompatible with virtue: and the
Philosopher rejects this opinion (Ethic. ii, 3), when he says that
virtue is not freedom from passion. It may be said, however, that
when he says "a gentle man is not passionate," we are to understand
this of inordinate passion.
Reply to Objection 2: This and all similar arguments which Tully
brings forward in De Tusc. Quaest. iv take the passions in the
execution of reason's command.
Reply to Objection 3: When a passion forestalls the judgment of
reason, so as to prevail on the mind to give its consent, it hinders
counsel and the judgment of reason. But when it follows that
judgment, as through being commanded by reason, it helps towards

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.3.

the execution of reason's command.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether sorrow is compatible with moral virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that sorrow is incompatible with virtue.
Because the virtues are effects of wisdom, according to Wis. 8:7:
"She," i.e. Divine wisdom, "teacheth temperance, and prudence, and
justice, and fortitude." Now the "conversation" of wisdom "hath no
bitterness," as we read further on (verse 16). Therefore sorrow is
incompatible with virtue also.
Objection 2: Further, sorrow is a hindrance to work, as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. vii, 13; x, 5). But a hindrance to good
works is incompatible with virtue. Therefore sorrow is incompatible
with virtue.
Objection 3: Further, Tully calls sorrow a disease of the mind (De
Tusc. Quaest. iv). But disease of the mind is incompatible with
virtue, which is a good condition of the mind. Therefore sorrow is
opposed to virtue and is incompatible with it.
On the contrary, Christ was perfect in virtue. But there was sorrow in
Him, for He said (Mt. 26:38): "My soul is sorrowful even unto death."
Therefore sorrow is compatible with virtue.
I answer that, As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 8), the Stoics held
that in the mind of the wise man there are three eupatheiai, i.e. "three
good passions," in place of the three disturbances: viz. instead of
covetousness, "desire"; instead of mirth, "joy"; instead of fear,
"caution." But they denied that anything corresponding to sorrow
could be in the mind of a wise man, for two reasons.
First, because sorrow is for an evil that is already present. Now they
held that no evil can happen to a wise man: for they thought that,
just as man's only good is virtue, and bodily goods are no good to
man; so man's only evil is vice, which cannot be in a virtuous man.
But this is unreasonable. For, since man is composed of soul and
body, whatever conduces to preserve the life of the body, is some
good to man; yet not his supreme good, because he can abuse it.
Consequently the evil which is contrary to this good can be in a wise
man, and can cause him moderate sorrow. Again, although a
virtuous man can be without grave sin, yet no man is to be found to
live without committing slight sins, according to 1 Jn. 1:8: "If we say