much surer to do the same? But have you condemned yourself, and is God to
approve of you and praise you? And how can this be reasonable? And all the
while you are deserving of a greater punishment, than he who is of you
condemned. For sinning merely, is not the same thing with falling again into the
same sins you have chastised another for committing. See, how he has
strengthened the charge! For if you, he means, punish a person who has
committed less sins, though by it you will put yourself to shame, how shall not
God cast you in your suit, and condemn you more severely, who have committed
greater transgressions, and this too when He will never make Himself ashamed,
and you are already condemned by your own reckoning. But if you say, I know
that I deserve punishment; yet through His long-suffering thinkest slightingly of
it, and art confident because thou dost not suffer punishment immediately; this
surely is a reason why you ought to be afraid and tremble. For the fact that you
have not yet suffered punishment, will not result in your not suffering any
punishment, but in your suffering a more severe one if you abide unamended.
And so he goes on to say:
Ver. 4. "Or despises thou the riches of His goodness and forbearance and
long-sufferring; not knowing that the goodness of God leads you to repentance?"
For after praising God's long-suffering, showing the gain thereof to be very
great to them that heeded it (and this was the drawing sinners to repentance); he
adds to the terror. For as to them, who avail themselves of it aright, it is a ground
of safety; so to them that slight it, it is conducive to a greater vengeance. For
whenever you utter this common notion, that God does not exact justice, because
He is good and long-suffering, he says, You do but mention what will make the
vengeance intenser. For God shows His goodness that you may get free from
your sins, not that you may add to them. If then thou make not this use thereof,
the judgment will be more fearful. Wherefore it is a chief ground for abstaining
from sin, that God is long-suffering, and not for making the benefit a plea for
obstinacy. For if He be long-suffering, He most certainly punishes. Whence does
this appear? From what is next said. For if the wickedness be great and the

wicked have not been requited, it is absolutely necessary that they should be
requited. For if men do not overlook these things, how should God make an
oversight? And so from this point he introduces the subject of the judgment. For
the fact of showing many who, if they repent not, are liable, yet still are not
punished here, introduces with it necessarily the judgment, and that with
increase. Wherefore he says,
Ver. 5. "But after your hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto
yourself wrath."
For when a man is neither to be softened by goodness nor to be turned back
by fear, what can be harder than such an one? For after that he had showed the
goodness of God towards men, he then shows His vengeance that it is
unbearable for him who does not even so return to repentance. And observe with
what propriety he uses the words! "You treasure up unto yourself wrath," he
says, so making it plain what is certainly laid up, and showing that it is not He
that judges, but he that is condemned, who is the author of this. For he says, "you
store up for yourself," not God for you. For He did all, whatsoever things were
fitting, and created you with a power to discern between good and what was not
so, and showed long-suffering over you, and called you to repentance, and
threatened a fearful day, so by every means drawing you to repentance. But if
you should continue unyielding, "you store up unto yourself wrath against the
day of wrath and revelation and (so all manuscripts but two) the righteous
judgment of God." For lest on hearing of wrath you should think of any passion,
he adds, "the righteous judgment of God." And he said "revelation" with good
reason, for then is this revealed when each man receives his desert. For here
many men often annoy and practise harm to one without justice. But hereafter it
is not so.
Ver. 6, 7. "Who will render to every man according to his deeds, to them
who by patient continuance in well doing," etc.
Since he had become awestriking and harsh by discoursing of the judgment
and of the punishment that shall be, he does not immediately, as one might