Gen. xlix. 10—12, LXX.

before thine eyes, and thou wilt not believe thy life." And again, "Has not this same one thy
Father owned thee, and made thee, and created thee?"

### Chapter XI.—The old prophets and righteous men knew beforehand of the advent of Christ,
and earnestly desired to see and hear Him, He revealing himself in the Scriptures by the Holy
Ghost, and without any change in Himself, enriching men day by day with benefits, but
conferring them in greater abundance on later than on former generations.
1. But that it was not only the prophets and many righteous men, who, foreseeing through the
Holy Spirit His advent, prayed that they might attain to that period in which they should see their
Lord face to face, and hear His words, the Lord has made manifest, when He says to His disciples,
"Many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not
seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them." In what way, then,
did they desire both to hear and to see, unless they had foreknowledge of His future advent? But
how could they have foreknown it, unless they had previously received foreknowledge from Himself?
And how do the Scriptures testify of Him, unless all things had ever been revealed and shown to
believers by one and the same God through the Word; He at one time conferring with His creature,
and at another propounding His law; at one time, again, reproving, at another exhorting, and then
setting free His servant, and adopting him as a son (in filium); and, at the proper time, bestowing
an incorruptible inheritance, for the purpose of bringing man to perfection? For He formed him for
growth and increase, as the Scripture says: "Increase and multiply."
2. And in this respect God differs from man, that God indeed makes, but man is made; and
truly, He who makes is always the same; but that which is made must receive both beginning, and
middle, and addition, and increase. And God does indeed create after a skilful manner, while, [as
regards] man, he is created skilfully. God also is truly perfect in all things, Himself equal and similar
to Himself, as He is all light, and all mind, and all substance, and the fount of all good; but man
receives advancement and increase towards God. For as God is always the same, so also man, when
found in God, shall always go on towards God. For neither does God at any time cease to confer
benefits upon, or to enrich man; nor does man ever cease from receiving the benefits, and being
enriched by God. For the receptacle of His goodness, and the instrument of His glorification, is the
man who is grateful to Him that made him; and again, the receptacle of His just judgment is the
ungrateful man, who both despises his Maker and is not subject to His Word; who has promised
that He will give very much to those always bringing forth fruit, and more [and more] to those who