the former arguments he had been laboring to show that he makes good here
also. What then is this? That even if there be but a few saved, the promise yet
stands good. This is why he does not merely say "people," but "people which He
foreknew." Then proceeding with the proof that the "people" were not cast off,
"For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin."
I, he says, the instructor, the preacher. Now since this seemed contrary to
what was said before in the words, "Who has believed our report?" and, "All the
day long have I stretched forth My hands to a disobedient and gainsaying
people;" and, "I will provoke you to jealousy by them which are no people;" he
was not satisfied with the deprecation, nor with having said, "God forbid," but
makes it good by taking it up again and saying, "God has not cast away His
people." But this is not a confirmation, men may say, but an assertion. Observe
then the confirmation, both the first, and that which follows it. For the first is
that he was himself of that race. But He would not, if on the point of casting
them off, have chosen from them him to whom He entrusted all the preaching,
and the affairs of the world, and all mysteries, and the whole economy. This then
is one proof, but the next, after it, is his saying, that "people whom He foreknew,"
that is, who He knew clearly were suited to it, and would receive the faith.
[Pococke on Hos. p. 23. See Acts 2:41; 4:4; 21:20] For three, five, even ten
thousand were believers from among them. And so to prevent any from saying,
Are you the people, then? And because you have been called, has the nation
been called? He proceeds.
Ver. 2. "He has not cast off His people, whom He foreknew."
As though he said, I have with me three, five, or ten thousand. What then?
Has the people come to be three, five, or ten thousand? That seed that compared
with the stars of heaven for multitude, or the sand of the sea? Is this the way you
deceive us and put a cheat upon us, by making the whole people yourself and the
few that are with you; and did you inflate us with idle hopes, and say that the
promise has been fulfilled, when all are lost, and the salvation comes down to a
few? This is all bombast and vanity! We cannot away with such sophistry as

this! Now, that they may not say this, see how in the sequel he proceeds to the
answer, not giving the objection indeed, but before it grounding the answer to it
upon ancient history. What then is the answer?
Ver. 2-5. "Do you not know," he says, "what the Scripture says of Elias?
How he (so most; manuscripts Sav. who) makes intercession to God against
Israel, saying, Lord, they have killed Your prophets, and dug down Your altars;
and I am left alone, and they seek my life. But what says the answer of God unto
him? I have reserved to Myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the
knee to the image of Baal. Even so then at this present time also, there is a
remnant according to the election of grace."
What he means is nearly this. "God has not cast off His people." For had He
done so, He would have admitted none of them. But if He did admit some, He
has not cast them off. Still it is said, if He had not cast off, He would have
admitted all. This does not follow; since in Elijah's time the part to be saved had
come down to "seven thousand:" and now also there are probably many that
believe. But if you do not know who they are, this is no wonder, for that prophet,
who was so great and good a man, did not know. But God ordered things for
Himself when even the prophet knew them not. But consider his judgment. Now
in proving what was before him, he covertly augments the charge against them.
For this is why he gave the whole passage, that he might parade before them
their untowardness, and show that they had been so from of old. For if he had
not wished this, but had directed his whole attention to prove that the people lay
in the few, he would have said that even in Elijah's time, seven thousand were
left. But now he reads to them the passage further back, as having been
throughout at pains to show that it was no strange thing that they did with Christ,
and the Apostles, but their habitual practice. For to prevent their saying that it
was as a deceiver we put Christ to death, and as impostors that we persecute the
Apostles, he brings forward the text which says, "Lord, they have killed Your
prophets, and dug down your altars." [1 Kings 19:14] Then in order not to make
his discourse galling to them, he attaches another reason to the bringing forward