According to the first way, since all the knowledge of our intellect is derived from sense
experience, what is made known to us by our senses is known prior to what is known by the

intellect; and this is the singular, or the sensibleintelligible.

According to the other meaning, that is, according to the order of objects in any one potency, the
proper object of each potency is what is first knowable by it. Since, however, in the human
intellect there is an active potency and a passive one, the object of the passive potency, namely,
the possible intellect, will be that which is in act through the active potency, that is, through the
active intellect, since to the passive potency there must correspond that which activates it.

The active intellect, however, does not render intelligible separate forms, which are of themselves
intelligible, but those forms which it abstracts from phantasms; and hence forms of this I er kind
are those which our intellect knows. And amongese forms, the ones that first come to be
abstracted by the intellect hold the place of priority. These, furthermore, are the forms that
comprehend more notesÑeither after the manner of a total universal or after the manner of an
integral wholeÑtherefore the more universal things are first known to the intellect; a composite
is known before its component parts, and a definition before the parts of the definition.

In this respect there is a certain imitation of the intellect found in the sense powers, which also
receive as their objects things which in a certain way are abstracted from matter. For even in the
case of the senses, singular things of a more general nature are the first known, as "this body" is
known sooner than "this animal."

Thus it is evident that God and other separate substances cannot in any way be the first objects of
our intellection, but are understood from other things, as is said in Rom. 1:20: "For the invisible
things of Him, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made."

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: From the words of Augustine and from other similar sayings, it is not to be
understood thai the uncreated truth itself is the proximate principle by which we know and judge
of things, but that through the light conferred upon us, which is a similitude of that truth, we
have cognition and judgment. Nor would this light have any efficacy except from the First Light:
just as in methods of demonstration second principles would have no certitude unless founded
upon the truth of first principles. Nevertheless it should not be thought that even this (natural)
light is the first thing known by us. For we do not know other things by means of it, as if it were
a medium for cognition of the knowable, but because (as agent) it makes other things knowable.
Wherefore it could not itself be known unless it were contained among knowable things; even as
light could not be seen by the eye unless manifested in color itself.