FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.3.

same species; and thus we call it a disposition, retaining the name of
the genus, when it is had imperfectly, so as to be easily lost:
whereas we call it a habit, when it is had perfectly, so as not to be
lost easily. And thus a disposition becomes a habit, just as a boy
becomes a man. Secondly, they may be distinguished as diverse
species of the one subaltern genus: so that we call dispositions,
those qualities of the first species, which by reason of their very
nature are easily lost, because they have changeable causes; e.g.
sickness and health: whereas we call habits those qualities which,
by reason of their very nature, are not easily changed, in that they
have unchangeable causes, e.g. sciences and virtues. And in this
sense, disposition does not become habit. The latter explanation
seems more in keeping with the intention of Aristotle: for in order to
confirm this distinction he adduces the common mode of speaking,
according to which, when a quality is, by reason of its nature, easily
changeable, and, through some accident, becomes difficultly
changeable, then it is called a habit: while the contrary happens in
regard to qualities, by reason of their nature, difficultly changeable:
for supposing a man to have a science imperfectly, so as to be liable
to lose it easily, we say that he is disposed to that science, rather
than that he has the science. From this it is clear that the word
"habit" implies a certain lastingness: while the word "disposition"
does not.
Nor does it matter that thus to be easy and difficult to change are
specific differences (of a quality), although they belong to passion
and movement, and not the genus of quality. For these differences,
though apparently accidental to quality, nevertheless designate
differences which are proper and essential to quality. In the same
way, in the genus of substance we often take accidental instead of
substantial differences, in so far as by the former, essential
principles are designated.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether habit implies order to an act?

Objection 1: It would seem that habit does not imply order to an act.
For everything acts according as it is in act. But the Philosopher
says (De Anima iii, text 8), that "when one is become knowing by
habit, one is still in a state of potentiality, but otherwise than before
learning." Therefore habit does not imply the relation of a principle to
an act.
Objection 2: Further, that which is put in the definition of a thing,
belongs to it essentially. But to be a principle of action, is put in the
definition of power, as we read in Metaph. v, text. 17. Therefore to be
the principle of an act belongs to power essentially. Now that which
is essential is first in every genus. If therefore, habit also is a
principle of act, it follows that it is posterior to power. And so habit
and disposition will not be the first species of quality.
Objection 3: Further, health is sometimes a habit, and so are
leanness and beauty. But these do not indicate relation to an act.
Therefore it is not essential to habit to be a principle of act.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Bono Conjug. xxi) that "habit is
that whereby something is done when necessary." And the
Commentator says (De Anima iii) that "habit is that whereby we act
when we will."
I answer that, To have relation to an act may belong to habit, both in
regard to the nature of habit, and in regard to the subject in which
the habit is. In regard to the nature of habit, it belongs to every habit
to have relation to an act. For it is essential to habit to imply some
relation to a thing's nature, in so far as it is suitable or unsuitable
thereto. But a thing's nature, which is the end of generation, is
further ordained to another end, which is either an operation, or the
product of an operation, to which one attains by means of operation.
Wherefore habit implies relation not only to the very nature of a
thing, but also, consequently, to operation, inasmuch as this is the
end of nature, or conducive to the end. Whence also it is stated
(Metaph. v, text. 25) in the definition of habit, that it is a disposition
whereby that which is disposed, is well or ill disposed either in
regard to itself, that is to its nature, or in regard to something else,
that is to the end.