man? He lost ten children, the ten at one fell swoop, the ten in the very bloom of
youth, ten who displayed much virtue, and that not by the common law of
nature, but by a violent and pitiable death. Who could be able to recount so great
a calamity? No one. Whenever therefore you lose son and daughter together,
have recourse to this just man, and you shall find altogether much comfort for
yourself. Were these then the only misfortunes which happened to him? The
desertion and treachery of his friends, and the gibes, and raillery, and the
mockery and derision, and the tearing in pieces by all, was something
intolerable. For the character of calamities is not of such a kind, that they who
reproach us about our calamities are wont to vex our soul. Not only was there no
one to soothe him but many even on many sides beset him with taunts. And you
see him lamenting this bitterly, and saying "but even you too fell upon me." And
he calls them pitiless, and says "My neighbours have rejected me, and my
servants spoke against me, and I called the sons of my concubines, and they
turned away from me." "And others" says he "sport upon me, and I became the
common talk of all. And my very raiment" says he "abhorred me." These things
at least are unbearable to hear, still more to endure in their reality, extreme
poverty, and intolerable disease new and strange, the loss of children so many
and so good, and in such a manner, reproaches and gibes, and insults from men.
Some indeed mocked and some reproached and others despised; not only
enemies, but even friends; not only friends, but even servants, and they not only
mock and reproach, but even abhorred him, and this not for two or three, or ten
days, but for many months; and (a circumstance which happened in that man's
case alone) not even had he comfort by night, but the delusions of terrors by
night were a greater aggravation of his misfortunes by day. For that he endured
more grievous things in his sleep, hear what he says "why dost thou frighten me
in sleep, and terrify me in visions?" What man of iron, what heart of steel could
have endured so many misfortunes? For if each of these was unbearable in itself,
consider what a tumult their simultaneous approach excited. But nevertheless he
bore all these, and in all that happened to him he sinned not, nor was there guile

in his lips.
7. Let the sufferings of that man then be the medicines for our ills, and his
grievous surging sea the harbour of our sufferings, and in each of the accidents
which befal us, let us consider this saint, and seeing one person exhausting the
misfortunes of the universe, we shall conduct ourselves bravely in those which
fall to our share, and as to some affectionate mother, stretching forth her hands
on all sides, and receiving and reviving her terrified children, so let us always
flee to this book, and even if the pitiable troubles of all men assail us, let us take
sufficient comfort for all and so depart. And if you sayest, he was Job, and for
this reason bore all this, but I am not like him; you supply me with a greater
accusation against yourself and fresh praise of him. For it is more likely that you
should be able to bear all this than he. Why pray? Because he indeed was before
the day of grace and of the law, when there was not much strictness of life, when
the grace of the Spirit was not so great, when sin was hard to fight against, when
the curse prevailed and when death was terrible. But now our wrestlings have
become easier, all these things being removed after the coming of Christ; so that
we have no excuse, when we are unable to reach the same standard as he, after
so long a time, and such advantage, and so many gifts given to us by God.
Considering therefore all these things, that misfortunes were greater for him, and
that when the conflict was more grievous, then he stripped for the contest; let us
bear all that comes upon us nobly, and with much thankfulness, in order that we
may be able to obtain the same crown as he, by the grace and lovingkindness of
Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom be glory to the Father together with the Holy
Spirit, now and always and for ever and ever. Amen.