THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.71, C.4.

they are not sacraments but sacramentals.
Reply to Objection 3: The disposition that suffices for receiving the
baptismal grace is the faith and intention, either of the one baptized,
if it be an adult, or of the Church, if it be a child. But these things that
are done in the exorcism, are directed to the removal of the
impediments. And therefore one may receive the effect of Baptism
without them.
Yet they are not to be omitted save in a case of necessity. And then,
if the danger pass, they should be supplied, that uniformity in
Baptism may be observed. Nor are they supplied to no purpose after
Baptism: because, just as the effect of Baptism may be hindered
before it is received, so can it be hindered after it has been received.
Reply to Objection 4: Of those things that are done after Baptism in
respect of the person baptized, something is done which is not a
mere sign, but produces an effect, for instance, the anointing on the
top of the head, the effect of which is the preservation of baptismal
grace. And there is something which has no effect, but is a mere
sign, for instance, the baptized are given a white garment to signify
the newness of life.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.71, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it belongs to a priest to catechize and

exorcize the person to be baptized?
Objection 1: It seems that it does not belong to a priest to catechize
and exorcize the person to be baptized. For it belongs to the office of
ministers to operate on the unclean, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier.
v). But catechumens who are instructed by catechism, and
"energumens" who are cleansed by exorcism, are counted among
the unclean, as Dionysius says in the same place. Therefore to
catechize and to exorcize do not belong to the office of the priests,
but rather to that of the ministers.
Objection 2: Further, catechumens are instructed in the Faith by the
Holy Scripture which is read in the church by ministers: for just as
the Old Testament is recited by the Readers, so the New Testament
is read by the Deacons and Subdeacons. And thus it belongs to the
ministers to catechize. In like manner it belongs, seemingly, to the
ministers to exorcize. For Isidore says (Epist. ad Ludifred.): "The
exorcist should know the exorcisms by heart, and impose his hands
on the energumens and catechumens during the exorcism."
Therefore it belongs not to the priestly office to catechize and
exorcize.
Objection 3: Further, "to catechize" is the same as "to teach," and
this is the same as "to perfect." Now this belongs to the office of a
bishop, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. v). Therefore it does not
belong to the priestly office.
On the contrary, Pope Nicolas I says: "The catechizing of those who
are to be baptized can be undertaken by the priests attached to each
church." And Gregory says (Hom. xxix super Ezech.): "When priests
place their hands on believers for the grace of exorcism, what else
do they but cast out the devils?"
I answer that, The minister compared to the priest, is as a secondary
and instrumental agent to the principal agent: as is implied in the
very word "minister." Now the secondary agent does nothing without
the principal agent in operating. And the more mighty the operation,
so much the mightier instruments does the principal agent require.
But the operation of the priest in conferring the sacrament itself is
mightier than in those things that are preparatory to the sacrament.