high, as that nature should be despised, and kindred rejected, and the Word
preferred to all, chasing all mightily away. For if no tyranny of nature is strong
enough to withstand your sayings, but it is dissolved and trodden under foot,
what else shall be able to get the better of you? Not, however, that your life will
be in security, because these things shall be; but rather ye will have for your
common enemies and foes them that dwell in the whole world.
5. Where now is Plato? Where Pythagoras? Where the long chain of the
Stoics? For the first, after having enjoyed great honor, was so practically refuted,
as even to be sold out of the country, and to succeed in none of his objects, no,
not go much as in respect of one tyrant: yea, he betrayed his disciples, and ended
his life miserably. And the Cynics, mere pollutions as they were, have all passed
by like a dream and a shadow. And yet assuredly no such thing ever befell them,
but rather they were accounted glorious for their heathen philosophy, and the
Athenians made a public monument of the epistles of Plato, sent them by Dion;
and they passed all their time at ease, and abounded in wealth not a little. Thus,
for instance, Aristippus was used to purchase costly harlots; and another made a
will, leaving no common inheritance; and another, when his disciples had laid
themselves down like a bridge, walked on them; and he of Sinope, they say, even
behaved himself unseemly in the market place.
Yea, these are their honorable things. But there is no such thing here, but a
strict temperance, and a perfect decency, and a war against the whole world in
behalf of truth and godliness, and to be slain every day, and not until hereafter
their glorious trophies.
But there are some also, one may say, skilled in war among them; as
Themistocles, Pericles. But these things too are children's toys, compared with
the acts of the fishermen. For what can you say? That he persuaded the
Athenians to embark in their ships, when Xerxes was marching upon Greece?
Why in this case, when it is not Xerxes marching, but the devil with the whole
world, and his evil spirits innumerable assailing these twelve men, not at one
crisis only, but throughout their whole life, they prevailed and vanquished; and

what was truly marvellous, not by slaying their adversaries, but by converting
and reforming them.
For this especially you should observe throughout, that they slew not, nor
destroyed such as were plotting against them, but having found them as bad as
devils, they made them rivals of angels, enfranchising human nature from this
evil tyranny, while as to those execrable demons that were confounding all
things, they drove them out of the midst of markets, and houses, or rather even
from the very wilderness. And to this the choirs of the monks bear witness,
whom they have planted everywhere, clearing out not the habitable only, but
even the uninhabitable land. And what is yet more marvellous, they did not this
in fair conflict, but in the enduring of evil they accomplished it all. Since men
actually had them in the midst, twelve unlearned persons, binding, scourging,
dragging them about, and were not able to stop their mouths; but as it is
impossible to bind the sunbeam, so also their tongue. And the reason was, "it
was not they" themselves "that spoke," but the power of the Spirit. Thus for
instance did Paul overcome Agrippa, and Nero, who surpassed all men in
wickedness. "For the Lord," says he, "stood with me, and strengthened me, and
delivered me out of the mouth of the lion." [2 Timothy 4:17]
But do thou also admire them, how when it was said to them, "Take no
thought," they yet believed, and accepted it, and none of the terrors amazed
them. And if you say, He gave them encouragement enough, by saying, "It shall
be the Spirit of your Father that shall speak;" even for this am I most amazed at
them, that they doubted not, nor sought deliverance from their perils; and this,
when not for two or three years were they to suffer these things, but all their life
long. For the saying, "He that endures to the end, the same shall be saved," is an
intimation of this.
For His will is, that not His part only should be contributed, but that the
good deeds should be also done of them. Mark, for instance, how from the first,
part is His, part His disciples'. Thus, to do miracles is His, but to provide nothing
is theirs. Again, to open all men's houses, was of the grace from above; but to