governments at small distances and thick together, that all might abide in
concord and much good order. Therefore even before the race was increased to a
multitude, when the first two only were in being, He bade him govern, and her
obey. And in order again that He might not despise her as inferior, and separate
from her, see how He honored her, and made them one, even before her creation.
For, "Let us make for man," says He, "a help meet," implying that she was made
for his need, and thereby drawing him unto her who was made for his sake: since
to all those things are we more kindly disposed, which are done for our sakes.
But that she, on the other hand, might not be elated, as being granted him for
help, nor might burst this bond, He makes her out of his side, signifying that she
is a part of the whole body. And that neither might the man be elated therefore,
He no longer permits that to belong to him alone which before was his alone, but
effected the contrary to this, by bringing in procreation of children, and herein
too giving the chief honor unto the man, not however allowing the whole to be
his.
Do you see how many bonds of love God has wrought? And these indeed
by force of nature He has lodged in us as pledges of concord. For both our being
of the same substance leads to this; (for every animal loves its like;) and the
woman being produced from the man, and again the children from both. Whence
also many kinds of affection arise. For one we love as a father, another as a
grandfather; one as a mother, another as a nurse; and one as a son or grandson or
great-grandson again, and another as a daughter, or grand-daughter; and one as a
brother, another as a nephew; and one as a sister, another as a niece. And why
need one recount all the names of consanguinity?
And He devised also another foundation of affection. For having forbidden
the marriage of kindred, he led us out unto strangers and drew them again unto
us. For since by this natural kindred it was not possible that they should be
connected with us, he connected us anew by marriage, uniting together whole
families by the single person of the bride, and mingling entire races with races.
For, "marry not," says the Lord, [Leviticus 18:6] "your sister, nor your

father's sister, nor any damsel which has such consanguinity with you," as utterly
hinders the marriage; naming the degrees of such relationship. It is enough for
your affection towards them that you were the fruit of the same birth-pangs, and
that the others are in a different relation to you. Why do you narrow the breadth
of love? Why do you idly throw away a ground of affection towards her, such as
that you might thereby provide yourself with distinct source for affection to
spring from; I mean, by taking a wife from another family, and through her a
chain of kinsmen, both mother, and father, and brethren, and their connexions!
7. Do you see by how many ways He has bound us together? Nevertheless,
not even this sufficed Him, but He likewise made us to stand in need of one
another, that thus also He might bring us together, because necessities above all
create friendships. For no other reason neither suffered He all things to be
produced in every place, that hence also He might compel us to mix with one
another. But having set us in need of one another, He on the other hand made the
intercourse easy. Since if this were not so, the matter would have turned out
painful and difficult in another way. For if one that wanted a physician, or a
carpenter, or any other workman, had need to set off on a long foreign sojourn,
the whole had come to nought. Here then is why He founded cities also, and
brought all into one place. And accordingly that we might easily keep up
intercourse with distant countries, He spread the level of the sea between us, and
gave us the swiftness of winds, thereby making our voyages easy. And at the
beginning He even gathered all men together in one spot, and did not disperse
them until they who first received the gift abused their concord unto sin.
However, He has drawn us together in every way; both by nature, and by
consanguinity, and by language, and by place; and as he willed not that we
should fall from paradise; (for had He willed it, He would not have placed there
at all "the man whom He had formed," but he that disobeyed was the cause;) so
neither was it His will that men should have various tongues; since otherwise He
would have made it so from the beginning. But now "the whole earth was of one
language, and all had one speech." [Genesis 11:1]