For indeed fear had driven out all else, for it was beyond measure, and it
became beyond measure, since God had to an exceeding degree deprived him of
His help, and He did exceedingly deprive him thereof, because there was to an
exceeding degree in him the passion of self-will and contradiction. In order then
that He might pluck it up by the roots, therefore He suffered the terror to
overtake him.
For in proof that this passion was grievous in him, he was not content with
his former words, gainsaying both prophet and Christ, but also after these things
when Christ had said unto him, "Verily I say unto you, that this night, before the
cock crow, you shall deny me thrice," he replies, "Though I should die with You, I
will not deny You in any wise." And Luke signifies moreover, that the more
Christ warned him, so much the more did Peter exceedingly oppose Him.
What mean these things, O Peter? When He was saying, "One of you shall
betray me," you feared lest you should be the traitor, and constrained the disciple
to ask, although conscious to yourself of no such thing; but now, when He is
plainly crying out, and saying, "All shall be offended," are you gainsaying it, and
not once only, but twice and often? For this is what Luke says.
Whence then did this come to him? From much love, from much pleasure. I
mean, that after that he was delivered from that distressing fear about the
betrayal, and knew the traitor, he then spoke confidently, and lifted himself up
over the rest, saying, "Though all men shall be offended, yet will I not be
offended." And in some degree too his conduct sprung from jealousy, for at
supper they reasoned "which of them is the greater," [Luke 22:24] to such a
degree did this passion trouble them. Therefore He checked him, not compelling
him to the denial, God forbid! But leaving him destitute of His help, and
convicting human nature.
See at any rate after these things how he was subdued. For after the
resurrection, when he had said, "And what shall this man do?" [John 21:21] and
was silenced, he ventured no more to gainsay as here, but held his peace. Again,
towards the assumption, when he heard, "It is not for you to know times or

seasons," [Acts 1:7] again he holds his peace, and contradicts not. After these
things, on the house, and by the sheet, when he heard a voice saying to him,
"What God has cleansed, call not thou common," [Acts 10:15] even though he
knew not for the time what the saying could be, he is quiet, and strives not.
4. All these things did that fall effect, and whereas before that he attributes
all to himself, saying, "Though all men shall be offended, yet will I not be
offended;" and, "If I should die, I will not deny You" (when he should have said,
If I receive the assistance from You)—yet after these things altogether the
contrary, "Why do ye give heed to us, as though by our own power or holiness
we had made him to walk?"
Hence we learn a great doctrine, that a man's willingness is not sufficient,
unless any one receive the succor from above; and that again we shall gain
nothing by the succor from above, if there be not a willingness. And both these
things do Judas and Peter show; for the one, though he had received much help,
was profited nothing, because he was not willing, neither contributed his part;
but this one, though he was ready in mind, because he received no assistance,
fell. For indeed of these two things is virtue's web woven.
Wherefore I entreat you neither (when you have cast all upon God) to sleep
yourselves, nor, when laboring earnestly, to think to accomplish all by your own
toils. For neither is it God's will that we should be supine ourselves, therefore He
works it not all Himself; nor yet boasters, therefore He did not give all to us; but
having removed what was hurtful in either way, left that which is useful for us.
Therefore He suffered even the chief apostle to fall, both rendering him more
humbled in mind, and training him thenceforth to greater love. "For to whom
more is forgiven," it is said, "he loves more." [Luke 7:47]
Let us then in everything believe God, and gainsay Him in nothing, though
what is said seem to be contrary to our thoughts and senses, but let His word be
of higher authority than both reasonings and sight. Thus let us do in the
mysteries also, not looking at the things set before us, but keeping in mind His
sayings.