others, such as those who are in debt and like persons.
Reply to Objection 1: The reception of spiritual power involves also
an obligation to certain bodily actions, and consequently it is
hindered by bodily subjection.
Reply to Objection 2: A man may take an occasion for humility from
many other things which do not prove a hindrance to the exercise of
Orders.
Reply to Objection 3: The blessed Paulinus did this out of the
abundance of his charity, being led by the spirit of God; as was
proved by the result of his action, since by his becoming a slave,
many of his flock were freed from slavery. Hence we must not draw a
conclusion from this particular instance, since "where the spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty" (2 Cor. 3:17).
Reply to Objection 4: The sacramental signs signify by reason of
their natural likeness. Now a woman is a subject by her nature,
whereas a slave is not. Hence the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 5: If he be ordained, his master knowing and not
dissenting, by this very fact he becomes a freedman. But if his
master be in ignorance, the bishop and he who presented him are
bound to pay the master double the slave's value, if they knew him to
be a slave. Otherwise if the slave has possessions of his own, he is
bound to buy his freedom, else he would have to return to the
bondage of his master, notwithstanding the impossibility of his
exercising his Order.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a man should be debarred from receiving

Orders on account of homicide?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man ought not to be debarred from
receiving Orders on account of homicide. Because our Orders
originated with the office of the Levites, as stated in the previous
Distinction (Sent. iv, D, 24). But the Levites consecrated their hands
by shedding the blood of their brethren (Ex. 32:29). Therefore neither
should anyone in the New Testament be debarred from receiving
Orders on account of the shedding of blood.
Objection 2: Further, no one should be debarred from a sacrament
on account of an act of virtue. Now blood is sometimes shed for
justice' sake, for instance by a judge; and he who has the office
would sin if he did not shed it. Therefore he is not hindered on that
account from receiving Orders.
Objection 3: Further, punishment is not due save for a fault. Now
sometimes a person commits homicide without fault, for instance by
defending himself, or again by mishap. Therefore he ought not to
incur the punishment of irregularity.
On the contrary, Against this there are many canonical statutes [Cap.
Miror; cap. Clericum; cap. De his Cler., dist. 1; cap. Continebatur, De
homic. volunt.], as also the custom of the Church.
I answer that, All the Orders bear a relation to the sacrament of the
Eucharist, which is the sacrament of the peace vouchsafed to us by
the shedding of Christ's blood. And since homicide is most opposed
to peace, and those who slay are conformed to Christ's slayers
rather than to Christ slain, to whom all the ministers of the aforesaid
sacrament ought to be conformed, it follows that it is unlawful,
although not invalid, for homicides to be raised to Orders.
Reply to Objection 1: The Old Law inflicted the punishment of blood,
whereas the New Law does not. Hence the comparison fails between
the ministers of the Old Testament and those of the New, which is a
sweet yoke and a light burden (Mt. 11:30).
Reply to Objection 2: Irregularity is incurred not only on account of
sin, but chiefly on account of a person being unfit to administer the