punishment only, but even to make him just, and to count him worthy of those
immortal honors. Do not then suppose that this one is lowered in that it is not
reckoned unto the former of grace. For this is the very thing that makes the
believer glorious; the fact of his enjoying so great grace, of his displaying so
great faith. And note too that the recompense is greater. For to the former a
reward is given, to the latter righteousness. Now righteousness is much greater
than a reward. For righteousness is a recompense which most fully comprehends
several rewards. Therefore after proving this from Abraham, he introduces
David also as giving his suffrage in favor of the statement made. What then does
David say? And whom does he pronounce blessed? Is it him that triumphs in
works, or him that has enjoyed grace? Him that has obtained pardon and a gift?
And when I speak of blessedness, I mean the chiefest of all good things; for as
righteousness is greater than a reward, so is blessedness greater than
righteousness. Having then shown that the righteousness is better, not owing to
Abraham's having received it only but also from reasonings (for he has whereof
to boast, he says, before God ); he again uses another mode of showing that it is
more dignified, by bringing David in to give his suffrage this way. For he also,
he says, pronounces him blessed who is so made righteous, saying,
Ver. 7. "Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven."
And he seems to be bringing a testimony beside his purpose. For it does not
say, Blessed are they whose faith is reckoned for righteousness. But he does so
on purpose, not through inadvertency, to show the greater superiority. For if he
be blessed that by grace received forgiveness, much more is he that is made just,
and that exhibits faith. For where blessedness is, there all shame is removed, and
there is much glory, since blessedness is a greater degree both of reward and of
glory. And for this cause what is the advantage of the other he states as
unwritten, "Now to him that works is the reward reckoned not of grace;" but
what the advantage of the faithful is, he brings Scriptural testimony to prove,
saying, As David says, "Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and
whose sins are covered." What, he means, is it that you say? Is it that "it is not of

debt but of grace that he receives forgiveness?" But see it is this person who is
pronounced blessed. For he would not have pronounced him so, unless he saw
him in the enjoyment of great glory. And he does not say this "forgiveness" then
comes upon the circumcision; but what says he?
Ver. 9. "Comes this blessedness then" (which is the greater thing) "upon the
circumcision or upon the uncircumcision?"
For now the subject of enquiry is, With whom is this good and great thing
to be found; is it with the circumcision or with the uncircumcision? And notice
its superiority! For he shows that it is so far from shunning the uncircumcision,
that it even dwelt gladly with it before the circumcision. For since he that
pronounced it blessed was David, who was himself also in a state of
circumcision, and he was speaking to those in that state, see how eagerly Paul
contends for applying what he said to the uncircumcised. For after joining the
ascription of blessedness to righteousness, and showing that they are one and the
same thing, he enquires how Abraham came to be righteous. For if the ascription
of blessedness belong to the righteous, and Abraham was made righteous, let us
see how he was made righteous, as uncircumcised or circumcised?
Uncircumcised, he says.
"For we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness."
After mentioning the Scripture above (for he said, "What says the
Scripture? Abraham believed in God, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness,") here he goes on to secure also the judgment of the speakers, and
shows that justification took place in the uncircumcision. Then from these
grounds he solves another objection which is starting up. For if when in
uncircumcision, one might say he was justified, to what purpose was the
circumcision brought in?
Ver. 11. "He received it," he says, "a sign and seal of the righteousness that
was by the faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised."
See you how he shows the Jews to be as it were of the class of parasites (i.e.
guests), rather than those in uncircumcision, and that these were added to the