THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.5.

as His shame: but if we consider its effect, which is our salvation, it
will appear as endowed with Divine power, by which it triumphed
over the enemy, according to Col. 2:14,15: "He hath taken the same
out of the way, fastening it to the cross, and despoiling the
principalities and powers, He hath exposed them confidently, in
open show, triumphing over them in Himself." Wherefore the Apostle
says (1 Cor. 1:18): "The Word of the cross to them indeed that perish
is foolishness; but to them that are saved---that is, to us---it is the
power of God."
Reply to Objection 2: Although Christ's cross was not united to the
Word of God in Person, yet it was united to Him in some other way,
viz. by representation and contact. And for this sole reason
reverence is shown to it.
Reply to Objection 3: By reason of the contact of Christ's limbs we
worship not only the cross, but all that belongs to Christ. Wherefore
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 11): "The precious wood, as
having been sanctified by the contact of His holy body and blood,
should be meetly worshiped; as also His nails, His lance, and His
sacred dwelling-places, such as the manger, the cave and so forth."
Yet these very things do not represent Christ's image as the cross
does, which is called "the Sign of the Son of Man" that "will appear
in heaven," as it is written (Mt. 24:30). Wherefore the angel said to
the women (Mk. 16:6): "You seek Jesus of Nazareth, Who was
crucified": he said not "pierced," but "crucified." For this reason we
worship the image of Christ's cross in any material, but not the
image of the nails or of any such thing.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.25, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the Mother of God should be worshipped

with the adoration of "latria"?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Mother of God is to be worshiped
with the adoration of "latria." For it seems that the same honor is due
to the king's mother as to the king: whence it is written (3 Kgs. 2:19)
that "a throne was set for the king's mother, and she sat on His right
hand." Moreover, Augustine [Sermon on the Assumption, work of an
anonymous author] says: "It is right that the throne of God, the
resting-place of the Lord of Heaven, the abode of Christ, should be
there where He is Himself." But Christ is worshiped with the
adoration of "latria." Therefore His Mother also should be.
Objection 2: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 16): "The
honor of the Mother reflects on the Son." But the Son is worshiped
with the adoration of "latria." Therefore the Mother also.
Objection 3: Further, Christ's Mother is more akin to Him than the
cross. But the cross is worshiped with the adoration of "latria."
Therefore also His Mother is to be worshiped with the same
adoration.
On the contrary, The Mother of God is a mere creature. Therefore the
worship of "latria" is not due to her.
I answer that, Since "latria" is due to God alone, it is not due to a
creature so far as we venerate a creature for its own sake. For
though insensible creatures are not capable of being venerated for
their own sake, yet the rational creature is capable of being
venerated for its own sake. Consequently the worship of "latria" is
not due to any mere rational creature for its own sake. Since,
therefore, the Blessed Virgin is a mere rational creature, the worship
of "latria" is not due to her, but only that of "dulia": but in a higher
degree than to other creatures, inasmuch as she is the Mother of
God. For this reason we say that not any kind of "dulia" is due to her,
but "hyperdulia."
Reply to Objection 1: The honor due to the king's mother is not equal
to the honor which is due to the king: but is somewhat like it, by
reason of a certain excellence on her part. This is what is meant by
the authorities quoted.