God," has gone on to say, "And every one that loveth is born of God, and
knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love."
Here, manifestly, he has called that love God, which he said was of God;
therefore God of God is love. But because both the Son is born of God the
Father, and the Holy Spirit proceeds from God the Father, it is rightly
asked which of them we ought here to think is the rather called the love
that is God. For the Father only is so God as not to be of God; and hence
the love that is so God as to be of God, is either the Son or the Holy Spirit.
But when, in what follows, the apostle had mentioned the love of God, not
that by which we love Him, but that by which He "loved us, and sent His
Son to be a propitiator for our sins," and thereupon had exhorted us also
to love one another, and that so God would abide in us,—because,
namely, he had called God Love; immediately, in his wish to speak yet
more expressly on the subject, "Hereby," he says, "know we that we dwell
in Him, and He in us, because He hath given us of His Spirit." Therefore
the Holy Spirit, of whom He hath given us, makes us to abide in God, and
Him in us; and this it is that love does. Therefore He is the God that is
love. Lastly, a little after, when he had repeated the same thing, and had
said "God is love," he immediately subjoined, "And he who abideth in
love, abideth in God, and God abideth in him;" whence he had said above,
"Hereby we know that we abide in Him, and He in us, because He hath
given us of His Spirit." He therefore is signified, where we read that God
is love. Therefore God the Holy Spirit, who proceedeth from the Father,
when He has been given to man, inflames him to the love of God and of
his neighbor, and is Himself love. For man has not whence to love God,
unless from God; and therefore he says a little after, "Let us love Him,
because He first loved us." The Apostle Paul, too, says, "The love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us."

### CHAP. 18.—NO GIFT OF GOD IS MORE EXCELLENT THAN LOVE

32. There is no gift of God more excellent than this. It alone distinguishes
the sons of the eternal kingdom and the sons of eternal perdition. Other
gifts, too, are given by the Holy Spirit; but without love they profit
nothing. Unless, therefore, the Holy Spirit is so far imparted to each, as to
make him one who loves God and his neighbor, he is not removed from
the left hand to the right. Nor is the Spirit specially called the Gift, unless

on account of love. And he who has not this love, "though he speak with
the tongues of men and angels, is sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal;
and though he have the gift of prophecy, and know all mysteries and all
knowledge, and though he have all faith, so that he can remove
mountains, he is nothing; and though he bestow all his goods to feed the
poor, and though he give his body to be burned, it profiteth him nothing."
How great a good, then, is that without which goods so great bring no one
to eternal life! But love or charity itself,—for they are two names for one
thing,—if he have it that does not speak with tongues, nor has the gift of
prophecy, nor knows all mysteries and all knowledge, nor gives all his
goods to the poor, either because he has none to give or because some
necessity hinders, nor delivers his body to be burned, if no trial of such a
suffering overtakes him, brings that man to the kingdom, so that faith
itself is only rendered profitable by love, since faith without love can
indeed exist, but cannot profit. And therefore also the Apostle Paul says,
"In Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncircumcision, but faith that worketh by love:" so distinguishing it
from that faith by which even "the devils believe and tremble." Love,
therefore, which is of God and is God, is specially the Holy Spirit, by
whom the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, by which love the
whole Trinity dwells in us. And therefore most rightly is the Holy Spirit,
although He is God, called also the gift of God.7 And by that gift what else
can properly be understood except love, which brings to God, and without
which any other gift of God whatsoever does not bring to God?