who, to wean men's hearts from worldly glory to the love of divine glory, chose to
endure a death of no ordinary sort, but a death of the deepest ignominy.
19. It was necessary for Christ to suffer (Luke xxiv, 46), not only to afford an example of
braving death for the love of truth, but also for the expiation of the sins of other men;
which expiation He made by His own sinless Self choosing to suffer the death due to
sin, and so satisfying for others by taking on Himself the penalty due to others. And
though the sole grace of God is sufficient for the forgiveness of sins, nevertheless in the
process of that forgiveness something is required on his part to whom the sin is
forgiven, namely, to offer satisfaction to him whom he has offended. And because
men could not do this for themselves, Christ did it for all, suffering a voluntary death for
charity.
20. Although when it is a question of punishing sins, he must be punished who has
sinned, nevertheless, when it is a question of making satisfaction, one may bear
another's penalty. When punishment is inflicted for sin, his iniquity is put into the scale
who has sinned: but when satisfaction is made by the offender's voluntary taking upon
himself a penalty to appease him whom he has offended, account is taken in that case
of the affection and good will of him who makes the satisfaction. And this appears best
in the case of one taking upon himself a penalty instead of another, and God accepting
the satisfaction of one for another (B. III, Chap.CLIX ad fin.)
25. Though the death of Christ is sufficient satisfaction for original sin, there is nothing
incongruous in the miseries consequent upon original sin remaining in all men,
even in those who are made partakers of the redemption of Christ. It was a fit and
advantageous arrangement for the punishment to remain after the guilt was taken
away: -- first, for the conformity of the faithful with Christ, as of members with their head,
that as Christ endured many sufferings, so His faithful should be subject to sufferings,
and so arrive at immortality, as the Apostle says: If we suffer with him, so that we be
glorified with him (Rom. viii, 17): -- secondly, because if men coming to Christ gained
immediate exemption from death and suffering, many men would come rather for these
corporal benefits than for spiritual goods, contrary to the intention of Christ, who came
into the world to draw men from the love of corporal things to spiritual things: -- thirdly,
because this sudden impassibility and immortality would in a manner compel men to
receive the faith of Christ, and so the merit of faith would be lost.
26. Each individual must seek the remedies that make for his own salvation. The death
of Christ is a universal cause of salvation, as the sin of the first man was a universal
cause of damnation. But there is need of a special application to each individual
for the individual to share in the effect of a universal cause. The effect of the sin of
our first parent reaches each individual through his carnal origin. The effect of the death
of Christ reaches each individual by his spiritual regeneration, whereby he is conjoined
and in a manner incorporated with Christ.