the natural movement, the quantity of which is in proportion to the
mover in comparison with the movable, as when one line is added to
another: for the proportion of one total to the other is not the same
as the proportion of the lines to which an addition has been made.
And so there would not be the same proportion between one whole
sensible movement and another, as between the retardations
resulting from the resistance of the medium. This is an error of the
imagination, because each part of a movement has as much speed
as the whole movement: whereas not every part of a line has as
much of the dimensive quantity as the whole line has. Hence any
retardation or acceleration affecting the movement affects each of its
parts, which is not the case with lines: and consequently the
retardation that comes to a movement is not another part of the
movement, whereas in the case of the lines that which is added is a
part of the total line.
Consequently, in order to understand the Philosopher's argument,
as the Commentator explains, we must take the whole as being one,
that is we must take not only the resistance of the movable to the
moving power, but also the resistance of the medium through which
the movement takes place, and again the resistance of anything else,
so that we take the amount of retardation in the whole movement as
being proportionate to the moving power in comparison with the
resisting movable, no matter in what way it resist, whether by itself
or by reason of something extrinsic. For the movable must needs
always resist the mover somewhat, since mover and moved, agent
and patient, as such, are opposed to one another. Now sometimes it
is to be observed that the moved resists the mover by itself, either
because it has a force inclining it to a contrary movement, as
appears in violent movements, or at least because it has a place
contrary to the place which is in the intention of the mover; and such
like resistance even heavenly bodies offer their movers. Sometimes
the movable resists the power of the mover, by reason only of
something else and not by itself. This is seen in the natural
movement of heavy and light things, because by their very form they
are inclined to such a movement: for the form is an impression of
their generator, which is the mover as regards heavy and light
bodies. On the part of matter we find no resistance, neither of a force
inclining to a contrary movement nor of a contrary place, since place
is not due to matter except in so far as the latter, being
circumscribed by its dimensions, is perfected by its natural form.
Hence there can be no resistance save on the part of the medium,
and this resistance is connatural to their movement. Sometimes

again the resistance results from both, as may be seen in the
movements of animals.
Accordingly when in a movement there is no resistance save on the
part of the movable, as in the heavenly bodies, the time of the
movement is measured according to the proportion of the mover to
the movable, and the Philosopher's argument does not apply to
these, since if there be no medium at all their movement is still a
movement in time. on the other hand, in those movements where
there is resistance on the part of the medium only, the measure of
time is taken only according to the obstacle on the part of the
medium, so that if the medium be removed there will be no longer an
obstacle; and so either it will move instantaneously, or it will move in
an equal time through a vacuum and through a plenum, because
granted that it moves in time through a vacuum, that time will bear
some proportion to the time in which it moves through a plenum.
Now it is possible to imagine another body more subtle in the same
proportion than the body which filled the space, and then if this body
fill some other equal space it will move in as little time through that
plenum as it did previously through a vacuum, since by as much as
the subtlety of the medium is increased by so much is the length of
time decreased, and the more subtle the medium the less it resists.
But in those other movements where resistance is offered by both
the movable and the medium, the quantity of time must be
proportionate to the power of the mover as compared with the
resistance of both movable and medium together. Hence granted
that the medium be taken away altogether, or that it cease to hinder,
it does not follow that the movement is instantaneous, but that the
time is measured according only to the resistance of the movable.
Nor will there be any inconsistency if it move in an equal time
through a vacuum, and through a space filled with the most subtle
body imaginable, since the greater the subtlety we ascribe to the
medium the less is it naturally inclined to retard the movement.
Wherefore it is possible to imagine so great a subtlety, as will
naturally retard the movement less than does the resistance of the
movable, so that the resistance of the medium will add no
retardation to the movement.
It is therefore evident that although the medium offer no resistance
to the glorified bodies, in so far as it is possible for them to be in the
same place with another body, nevertheless their movement will not
be instantaneous, because the movable body itself will resist the
motive power from the very fact that it has a determinate place, as