Rome, August 13, 1554

During the late spring of 1554, Ferdinand I, King of the Romans, wrote to Ignatius telling him of the mayhem that Protestant catechisms and epitomes of theology were doing in his lands, and he urged on Ignatius the need of providing a theological manual that could serve for the instruction of theological students, university students, and country priests who needed help in preparing their weekly sermons. As early as 1550 Peter Canisius saw the need for such a compendium, and Claude Jay began to prepare one but his death in August 1552 ended the project. This compendium had been envisaged as a text to replace the Sentences of Peter Lombard, but Canisius felt there was a greater and more immediate need, namely, a catechism to be placed in the hands of the students of college and high-school age, as well as in those of children. Thus he turned his full attention to this task, and by the time the instruction below was sent him, he had already completed the first draft of his catechism. In his instruction, Ignatius lists several ways that the Society could fulfill its obligation to stop the spread of Protestantism in northern Europe. He suggests that the Jesuits prepare a textbook for an abbreviated theology course for the less capable students, a catechism for children, and pamphlets that could easily be distributed among the faithful. Also, their students, if capable, could go into the suburbs and teach Christian doctrine, and finally the Society could open more colleges and schools. By the end of 1554 Canisius' catechism was at the press and it appeared in March 1555 with the title Summary of Christian Doctrine . It was intended for college students and, thus, it was in Latin. Canisius then translated it into German in 1556 and worked on an adaptation for secondary school students, which he called Shorter Catechism , and finally a version for younger children which he called Catholic Catechism . Canisius' catechisms quickly gained general acceptance; they went through countless editions during the author's own lifetime. This instruction was written in Italian [ Ep . 12:259-262].

# JHS

Seeing the progress that the heretics have made in so short a time, spreading the poison of their evil teaching throughout so many countries and peoples, and making use of the verse of the Apostle to describe their progress, and their speech will eat its way like gangrene [2 Tim. 2:17], it would seem that our Society, having been accepted by Divine Providence among the efficacious means to repair such great damage, should not only be solicitous in preparing the proper remedies but should be ready to apply them, exerting itself to the utmost of its powers to preserve what is still sound and to restore what has fallen sick of the plague of heresy, especially in the northern countries. The heretics have made their false theology popular and presented it in a way that is within the capacity of the common people. They preach it to the people and teach it in the schools, and scatter pamphlets that can be bought and understood by many; they influence people by their writings when they cannot reach them by preaching. Their success is largely due to the negligence of those who should have shown some interest, and the bad example and the ignorance of Catholics, especially the clergy, have made such ravages in the vineyard of the Lord. Hence it would seem that our Society should use the following means to end and cure the evils which the Church has suffered through these heretics. In the first place, sound theology, which is taught in the universities and must have its foundation in philosophy and which requires a long time to acquire, is adapted only to alert and agile minds; because the weaker ones, who lack a proper foundation, can become confused and collapse, it would be good to prepare a summary of theology dealing briefly with topics that are essential but not controversial. In matters controversial there could be more detail, but it should be accommodated to the present needs of the people. It should solidly prove dogmas with appropriate arguments from Scripture, tradition, the councils, doctors, and refute the contrary teaching. It would not require too much time to teach such theology since it would not go very deeply into other matters. In this way, many theologians could be prepared in a short time, who could attend to preaching and