on this point see the facts as given by Burgon, in his refutation of the rendering adopted by late revisers, Revision Revised, p.
41. London, Murray, 1883.]

that they should offer a sacrifice, as it is said in the law of the Lord, a pair of turtle-doves, or two
young pigeons:" in his own person most clearly calling Him Lord, who appointed the legal
dispensation. But "Simeon," he also says, "blessed God, and said, Lord, now lettest Thou Thy
servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast prepared before
the face of all people; a light for the revelation of the Gentiles, and the glory of Thy people Israel."
And "Anna" also, "the prophetess," he says, in like manner glorified God when she saw Christ,
"and spake of Him to all them who were looking for the redemption of Jerusalem." Now by all
these one God is shown forth, revealing to men the new dispensation of liberty, the covenant,
through the new advent of His Son.
5. Wherefore also Mark, the interpreter and follower of Peter, does thus commence his Gospel
narrative: "The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; as it is written in the
prophets, Behold, I send My messenger before Thy face, which shall prepare Thy way. The
voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make the paths straight
before our God." Plainly does the commencement of the Gospel quote the words of the holy prophets,
and point out Him at once, whom they confessed as God and Lord; Him, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who had also made promise to Him, that He would send His messenger before His
face, who was John, crying in the wilderness, in "the spirit and power of Elias," "Prepare ye the
way of the Lord, make straight paths before our God." For the prophets did not announce one and
another God, but one and the same; under various aspects, however, and many titles. For varied
and rich in attribute is the Father, as I have already shown in the book preceding this; and I shall
show [the same truth] from the prophets themselves in the further course of this work. Also, towards
the conclusion of his Gospel, Mark says: "So then, after the Lord Jesus had spoken to them, He
was received up into heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God;" confirming what had been
spoken by the prophet: "The Lord said to my Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand, until I make Thy

Luke ii. 29, etc.
to which the text of Irenæus seems to revert, unless indeed his copy of the Gospels contained the reading of the Codex Bezæ.
[See book iii. cap. xii. 3, 14, below; also, xiv. 2 and xxiii. 3. On this Codex, see Burgon, Revision Revised, p. 12, etc., and
references.]

See ii. 35, 3.

foes Thy footstool." Thus God and the Father are truly one and the same; He who was announced
by the prophets, and handed down by the true Gospel; whom we Christians worship and love with
the whole heart, as the Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things therein.