return; he tries by a further consideration to make them forward, showing that if
they did not give of their substance to others, they would not gain anything by
gathering all together within. And he adduces an ancient story, thus saying,

2 Corinthians 8:15
"As it is written, He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that
gathered little had no lack."
Now this happened in the case of the manna. For both they that gathered
more, and they that gathered less, were found to have the same quantity, God in
this way punishing insatiableness. And this he said at once both to alarm them
by what then happened, and to persuade them never to desire to have more nor to
grieve at having less. And this one may see happening now in things of this life
not in the manna only. For if we all fill but one belly, and live the same length of
time, and clothe one body; neither will the rich gain anything by his abundance
nor the poor lose anything by his poverty.
3. Why then do you tremble at poverty? And why do you pursue after
wealth? 'I fear,' says one, 'lest I be compelled to go to other men's doors and to
beg from my neighbor.' And I constantly hear also many praying to this effect,
and saying, 'Allow me not at any time to stand in need of men.' And I laugh
exceedingly when I hear these prayers, for this fear is even childish. For every
day and in every thing, so to speak, do we stand in need of one another. So that
these are the words of an unthinking and puffed up spirit, and that does not
clearly discern the nature of things. Do you see not that all of us are in need one
of another? The soldier of the artisan, the artisan of the merchant, the merchant
of the husbandman, the slave of the free man, the master of the slave, the poor
man of the rich, the rich man of the poor, he that works not of him that gives
alms, he that bestows of him that receives. For he that receives alms supplies a
very great want, a want greater than any. For if there were no poor, the greater
part of our salvation would be overthrown, in that we should not have where to
bestow our wealth. So that even the poor man who appears to be more useless
than any is the most useful of any. But if to be in need of another is disgraceful,

it remains to die; for it is not possible for a man to live who is afraid of this.
'But,' says one, 'I cannot bear blows arched [in scorn.]' Why do you in accusing
another of arrogance, disgrace yourself by this accusation? For to be unable to
endure the inflation of a proud soul is arrogant. And why do you fear these
things, and tremblest at these things, and on account of these things which are
worthy of no account, dreadest poverty also? For if you be rich, thou wilt stand
in need of more, yea of more and meaner. For just in proportion to your wealth
do you subject yourself to this curse. So ignorant are you of what you pray when
you ask for wealth in order to be in need of no man; just as if one having come
to a sea, where there is need both of sailors and a ship and endless stores of
outfit, should pray that he might be in need of nothing at all. For if you are
desirous of being exceedingly independent of every one, pray for poverty; and
[then] if you are dependent on any, you will be so only for bread and raiment;
but in the other case you will have need of others, both for lands, and for houses,
and for imposts, and for wages, and for rank, and for safety, and for honor, and
for magistrates, and those subject to them, both those in the city and those in the
country, and for merchants, and for shopkeepers. Do you see that those words
are words of extreme carelessness? For, in a word, if to be in need one of another
appears to you a dreadful thing, [know that] it is impossible altogether to escape
it; but if you will avoid the tumult, (for you may take refuge in the waveless
haven of poverty,) cut off the great tumult of your affairs, and deem it not
disgraceful to be in need of another; for this is the doing of God's unspeakable
wisdom. For if we stand in need one of another, yet even the compulsion of this
need draws us not together unto love; had we been independent, should we not
have been untamed wild beasts? Perforce and of compulsion God has subjected
us one to another, and every day we are in collision one with another. And had
He removed this curb, who is there who would readily have longed after his
neighbor's love? Let us then neither deem this to be disgraceful, nor pray against
it and say, 'Grant us not to stand in need of any one;' but let us pray and say,
'Suffer us not, when we are in need, to refuse those who are able to help us.' It is