For distinction and adornment belong to the work by which the world
receives its form. But as the giving form to a work of art is by means
of the form of the art in the mind of the artist, which may be called
his intelligible word, so the giving form to every creature is by the
word of God; and for this reason in the works of distinction and
adornment the Word is mentioned. But in creation the Son is
mentioned as the beginning, by the words, "In the beginning God
created," since by creation is understood the production of formless
matter. But according to those who hold that the elements were
created from the first under their proper forms, another explanation
must be given; and therefore Basil says (Hom. ii, iii in Hexaem.) that
the words, "God said," signify a Divine command. Such a command,
however, could not have been given before creatures had been
produced that could obey it.
Reply to Objection 2: According to Augustine (De Civ. Dei ix, 33), by
the heaven is understood the formless spiritual nature, and by the
earth, the formless matter of all corporeal things, and thus no
creature is omitted. But, according to Basil (Hom. i in Hexaem.), the
heaven and the earth, as the two extremes, are alone mentioned, the
intervening things being left to be understood, since all these move
heavenwards, if light, or earthwards, if heavy. And others say that
under the word, "earth," Scripture is accustomed to include all the
four elements as (Ps. 148:7,8) after the words, "Praise the Lord from
the earth," is added, "fire, hail, snow, and ice."
Reply to Objection 3: In the account of the creation there is found
something to correspond to the words, "God saw that it was good,"
used in the work of distinction and adornment, and this appears
from the consideration that the Holy Spirit is Love. Now, "there are
two things," says Augustine (Gen. ad lit. i, 8) which came from God's
love of His creatures, their existence and their permanence. That
they might then exist, and exist permanently, "the Spirit of God," it is
said, "moved over the waters"---that is to say, over that formless
matter, signified by water, even as the love of the artist moves over
the materials of his art, that out of them he may form his work. And
the words, "God saw that it was good," signify that the things that He
had made were to endure, since they express a certain satisfaction
taken by God in His works, as of an artist in his art: not as though He
knew the creature otherwise, or that the creature was pleasing to
Him otherwise, than before He made it. Thus in either work, of
creation and of formation, the Trinity of Persons is implied. In
creation the Person of the Father is indicated by God the Creator, the

Person of the Son by the beginning, in which He created, and the
Person of the Holy Ghost by the Spirit that moved over the waters.
But in the formation, the Person of the Father is indicated by God
that speaks, and the Person of the Son by the Word in which He
speaks, and the Person of the Holy Spirit by the satisfaction with
which God saw that what was made was good. And if the words,
"God saw that it was good," are not said of the work of the second
day, this is because the work of distinguishing the waters was only
begun on that day, but perfected on the third. Hence these words,
that are said of the third day, refer also to the second. Or it may be
that Scripture does not use these words of approval of the second
days' work, because this is concerned with the distinction of things
not evident to the senses of mankind. Or, again, because by the
firmament is simply understood the cloudy region of the air, which is
not one of the permanent parts of the universe, nor of the principal
divisions of the world. The above three reasons are given by Rabbi
Moses [Perplex. ii.], and to these may be added a mystical one
derived from numbers and assigned by some writers, according to
whom the work of the second day is not marked with approval
because the second number is an imperfect number, as receding
from the perfection of unity.
Reply to Objection 4: Rabbi Moses (Perplex. ii) understands by the
"Spirit of the Lord," the air or the wind, as Plato also did, and says
that it is so called according to the custom of Scripture, in which
these things are throughout attributed to God. But according to the
holy writers, the Spirit of the Lord signifies the Holy Ghost, Who is
said to "move over the water"---that is to say, over what Augustine
holds to mean formless matter, lest it should be supposed that God
loved of necessity the works He was to produce, as though He stood
in need of them. For love of that kind is subject to, not superior to,
the object of love. Moreover, it is fittingly implied that the Spirit
moved over that which was incomplete and unfinished, since that
movement is not one of place, but of pre-eminent power, as
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. i, 7). It is the opinion, however, of Basil
(Hom. ii in Hexaem.) that the Spirit moved over the element of water,
"fostering and quickening its nature and impressing vital power, as
the hen broods over her chickens." For water has especially a lifegiving power, since many animals are generated in water, and the
seed of all animals is liquid. Also the life of the soul is given by the
water of baptism, according to Jn. 3:5: "Unless a man be born again
of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
God."