THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.2.

is, in the shedding of My blood, "while I go down," as by various
degrees of evils, "into corruption?" As though He were to answer:
"None. 'For if I do not at once rise again but My body be corrupted, I
shall preach to no one, I shall gain no one,'" as the gloss expounds.
Thirdly, for the raising of our hope, since through seeing Christ, who
is our head, rise again, we hope that we likewise shall rise again.
Hence it is written (1 Cor. 15:12): "Now if Christ be preached that He
rose from the dead, how do some among you say, that there is no
resurrection of the dead?" And (Job 19:25,27): "I know," that is with
certainty of faith, "that my Redeemer," i.e. Christ, "liveth," having
risen from the dead; "and" therefore "in the last day I shall rise out of
the earth . . . this my hope is laid up in my bosom."
Fourthly, to set in order the lives of the faithful: according to Rm. 6:4:
"As Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we
also may walk in newness of life": and further on; "Christ rising from
the dead dieth now no more; so do you also reckon that you are
dead to sin, but alive to God."
Fifthly, in order to complete the work of our salvation: because, just
as for this reason did He endure evil things in dying that He might
deliver us from evil, so was He glorified in rising again in order to
advance us towards good things; according to Rm. 4:25: "He was
delivered up for our sins, and rose again for our justification."
Reply to Objection 1: Although Christ did not fall by sin, yet He fell
by death, because as sin is a fall from righteousness, so death is a
fall from life: hence the words of Micheas 7:8 can be taken as though
spoken by Christ: "Rejoice not thou, my enemy, over me, because I
am fallen: I shall rise again." Likewise, although Christ's body was
not disintegrated by returning to dust, yet the separation of His soul
and body was a kind of disintegration.
Reply to Objection 2: The Godhead was united with Christ's flesh
after death by personal union, but not by natural union; thus the soul
is united with the body as its form, so as to constitute human nature.
Consequently, by the union of the body and soul, the body was
uplifted to a higher condition of nature, but not to a higher personal
state.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's Passion wrought our salvation,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.2.

properly speaking, by removing evils; but the Resurrection did so as
the beginning and exemplar of all good things.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.53, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it was fitting for Christ to rise again on

the third day?
Objection 1: It would seem unfitting that Christ should have risen
again on the third day. For the members ought to be in conformity
with their head. But we who are His members do not rise from death
on the third day, since our rising is put off until the end of the world.
Therefore, it seems that Christ, who is our head, should not have
risen on the third day, but that His Resurrection ought to have been
deferred until the end of the world.
Objection 2: Further, Peter said (Acts 2:24) that "it was impossible
for Christ to be held fast by hell" and death. Therefore it seems that
Christ's rising ought not to have been deferred until the third day,
but that He ought to have risen at once on the same day; especially
since the gloss quoted above (Article 1) says that "there is no profit
in the shedding of Christ's blood, if He did not rise at once."
Objection 3: The day seems to start with the rising of the sun, the
presence of which causes the day. But Christ rose before sunrise:
for it is related (Jn. 20:1) that "Mary Magdalen cometh early, when it
was yet dark, unto the sepulchre": but Christ was already risen, for it
goes on to say: "And she saw the stone taken away from the
sepulchre." Therefore Christ did not rise on the third day.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 20:19): "They shall deliver Him to
the Gentiles to be mocked, and scourged, and crucified, and the
third day He shall rise again."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1) Christ's Resurrection was
necessary for the instruction of our faith. But our faith regards
Christ's Godhead and humanity, for it is not enough to believe the
one without the other, as is evident from what has been said
(Question 36, Article 4; cf. SS, Question 2, Articles 7,8).
Consequently, in order that our faith in the truth of His Godhead
might be confirmed it was necessary that He should rise speedily,
and that His Resurrection should not be deferred until the end of the
world. But to confirm our faith regarding the truth of His humanity
and death, it was needful that there should be some interval between
His death and rising. For if He had risen directly after death, it might
seem that His death was not genuine and consequently neither