[Compare Clement, cap. 49, p. 18, this volume.]

that the Holy Ghost came upon Mary, and the power of the Most High did overshadow her:
wherefore also what was generated is a holy thing, and the Son of the Most High God the Father
of all, who effected the incarnation of this being, and showed forth a new [kind of] generation; that
as by the former generation we inherited death, so by this new generation we might inherit life.
Therefore do these men reject the commixture of the heavenly wine, and wish it to be water of
the world only, not receiving God so as to have union with Him, but they remain in that Adam who
had been conquered and was expelled from Paradise: not considering that as, at the beginning of
our formation in Adam, that breath of life which proceeded from God, having been united to what
had been fashioned, animated the man, and manifested him as a being endowed with reason; so
also, in [the times of] the end, the Word of the Father and the Spirit of God, having become united
with the ancient substance of Adam's formation, rendered man living and perfect, receptive of the
perfect Father, in order that as in the natural [Adam] we all were dead, so in the spiritual we may
all be made alive. For never at any time did Adam escape the hands of God, to whom the
Father speaking, said, "Let Us make man in Our image, after Our likeness." And for this reason in
the last times (fine), not by the will of the flesh, nor by the will of man, but by the good pleasure
of the Father, His hands formed a living man, in order that Adam might be created [again] after
the image and likeness of God.

### Chapter II.—When Christ visited us in His grace, He did not come to what did not belong to
Him: also, by shedding His true blood for us, and exhibiting to us His true flesh in the
Eucharist, He conferred upon our flesh the capacity of salvation.

1. And vain likewise are those who say that God came to those things which did not belong to
Him, as if covetous of another's property; in order that He might deliver up that man who had been
created by another, to that God who had neither made nor formed anything, but who also was
deprived from the beginning of His own proper formation of men. The advent, therefore, of Him
whom these men represent as coming to the things of others, was not righteous; nor did He truly
redeem us by His own blood, if He did not really become man, restoring to His own handiwork
what was said [of it] in the beginning, that man was made after the image and likeness of God; not
snatching away by stratagem the property of another, but taking possession of His own in a righteous
and gracious manner. As far as concerned the apostasy, indeed, He redeems us righteously from it

Viz., the Son and the Spirit.

by His own blood; but as regards us who have been redeemed, [He does this] graciously. For we
have given nothing to Him previously, nor does He desire anything from us, as if He stood in need
of it; but we do stand in need of fellowship with Him. And for this reason it was that He graciously
poured Himself out, that He might gather us into the bosom of the Father.
2. But vain in every respect are they who despise the entire dispensation of God, and disallow
the salvation of the flesh, and treat with contempt its regeneration, maintaining that it is not capable
of incorruption. But if this indeed do not attain salvation, then neither did the Lord redeem us with
His blood, nor is the cup of the Eucharist the communion of His blood, nor the bread which we
break the communion of His body. For blood can only come from veins and flesh, and whatsoever
else makes up the substance of man, such as the Word of God was actually made. By His own
blood he redeemed us, as also His apostle declares, "In whom we have redemption through His
blood, even the remission of sins." And as we are His members, we are also nourished by means
of the creation (and He Himself grants the creation to us, for He causes His sun to rise, and sends
rain when He wills). He has acknowledged the cup (which is a part of the creation) as His own
blood, from which He bedews our blood; and the bread (also a part of the creation) He has established
as His own body, from which He gives increase to our bodies.
3. When, therefore, the mingled cup and the manufactured bread receives the Word of God,
and the Eucharist of the blood and the body of Christ is made, from which things the substance
of our flesh is increased and supported, how can they affirm that the flesh is incapable of receiving
the gift of God, which is life eternal, which [flesh] is nourished from the body and blood of the
Lord, and is a member of Him?—even as the blessed Paul declares in his Epistle to the Ephesians,
that "we are members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones." He does not speak these
words of some spiritual and invisible man, for a spirit has not bones nor flesh; but [he refers to]
that dispensation [by which the Lord became] an actual man, consisting of flesh, and nerves, and
bones,—that [flesh] which is nourished by the cup which is His blood, and receives increase from
the bread which is His body. And just as a cutting from the vine planted in the ground fructifies in
its season, or as a corn of wheat falling into the earth and becoming decomposed, rises with manifold
increase by the Spirit of God, who contains all things, and then, through the wisdom of God, serves
for the use of men, and having received the Word of God, becomes the Eucharist, which is the body