yet, in so far as the deed is done voluntarily by the one who offers
satisfaction, it becomes something gratuitous on the part of the
agent, so that he makes a virtue of necessity. For debt diminishes
merit through being necessary and consequently against the will, so
that if the will consent to the necessity, the element of merit is not
forfeited.
Reply to Objection 2: An act of virtue demands voluntariness not in
the patient but in the agent, for it is his act. Consequently since he
on whom the judge wreaks vengeance is the patient and not the
agent as regards satisfaction, it follows that satisfaction should be
voluntary not in him but in the judge as agent.
Reply to Objection 3: The chief element of virtue can be understood
in two ways. First, as being the chief element of virtue as virtue, and
thus the chief element of virtue denotes whatever belongs to the
nature of virtue or is most akin thereto; thus choice and other
internal acts hold the chief place in virtue. Secondly, the chief
element of virtue may be taken as denoting that which holds the first
place in such and such a virtue; and then the first place belongs to
that which gives its determination. Now the interior act, in certain
virtues, is determined by some external act, since choice, which is
common to all virtues, becomes proper to such and such a virtue
through being directed to such and such an act. Thus it is that
external acts hold the chief place in certain virtues; and this is the
case with satisfaction.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether satisfaction is an act of justice?

Objection 1: It would seem that satisfaction is not an act of justice.
Because the purpose of satisfaction is that one may be reconciled to
the person offended. But reconciliation, being an act of love, belongs
to charity. Therefore satisfaction is an act of charity and not of
justice.
Objection 2: Further, the causes of sin in us are the passions of the
soul, which incline us to evil. But justice, according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. v, 2,3), is not about passions, but about
operations. Since therefore satisfaction aims at removing the causes
of sin, as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D, 15), it seems that it is not an
act of justice.
Objection 3: Further, to be careful about the future is not an act of
justice but of prudence of which caution is a part. But it belongs to
satisfaction, "to give no opening to the suggestions of sin" [XP,
Question 12, Article 3, Objection 1]. Therefore satisfaction is not an
act of justice.
On the contrary, No virtue but justice considers the notion of that
which is due. But satisfaction gives due honor to God, as Anselm
states (Cur Deus Homo i). Therefore satisfaction is an act of justice.
Further, no virtue save justice establishes equality between external
things. But this is done by satisfaction which establishes equality
between amendment and the previous offense. Therefore
satisfaction is an act of justice.
I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 3,4), the mean
of justice is considered with regard to an equation between thing
and thing according to a certain proportion. Wherefore, since the
very name of satisfaction implies an equation of the kind, because
the adverb "satis" [enough] denotes an equality of proportion, it is
evident that satisfaction is formally an act of justice. Now the act of
justice, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 2,4), is either an act
done by one man to another, as when a man pays another what he
owes him, or an act done by one man between two others, as when a
judge does justice between two men. When it is an act of justice of
one man to another, the equality is set up in the agent, while when it