SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.123, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.123, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether death is essential to martyrdom?

Objection 1: It seems that death is not essential to martyrdom. For
Jerome says in a sermon on the Assumption (Epist. ad Paul. et
Eustoch.): "I should say rightly that the Mother of God was both
virgin and martyr, although she ended her days in peace": and
Gregory says (Hom. iii in Evang.): "Although persecution has ceased
to offer the opportunity, yet the peace we enjoy is not without its
martyrdom, since even if we no longer yield the life of the body to
the sword, yet do we slay fleshly desires in the soul with the sword
of the spirit." Therefore there can be martyrdom without suffering
death.
Objection 2: Further, we read of certain women as commended for
despising life for the sake of safeguarding the integrity of the flesh:
wherefore seemingly the integrity of chastity is preferable to the life
of the body. Now sometimes the integrity of the flesh has been
forfeited or has been threatened in confession of the Christian faith,
as in the case of Agnes and Lucy. Therefore it seems that the name
of martyr should be accorded to a woman who forfeits the integrity
of the flesh for the sake of Christ's faith, rather than if she were to
forfeit even the life of the body: wherefore also Lucy said: "If thou
causest me to be violated against my will, my chastity will gain me a
twofold crown."
Objection 3: Further, martyrdom is an act of fortitude. But it belongs
to fortitude to brave not only death but also other hardships, as
Augustine declares (Music. vi). Now there are many other hardships
besides death, which one may suffer for Christ's faith, namely
imprisonment, exile, being stripped of one's goods, as mentioned in
Heb. 10:34, for which reason we celebrate the martyrdom of Pope
Saint Marcellus, notwithstanding that he died in prison. Therefore it
is not essential to martyrdom that one suffer the pain of death.
Objection 4: Further, martyrdom is a meritorious act, as stated above
(Article 2, ad 1; Article 3). Now it cannot be a meritorious act after
death. Therefore it is before death; and consequently death is not
essential to martyrdom.
On the contrary, Maximus says in a sermon on the martyrs that "in
dying for the faith he conquers who would have been vanquished in

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.123, C.5.

living without faith."
I answer that As stated above (Article 2), a martyr is so called as
being a witness to the Christian faith, which teaches us to despise
things visible for the sake of things invisible, as stated in Heb. 11.
Accordingly it belongs to martyrdom that a man bear witness to the
faith in showing by deed that he despises all things present, in order
to obtain invisible goods to come. Now so long as a man retains the
life of the body he does not show by deed that he despises all things
relating to the body. For men are wont to despise both their kindred
and all they possess, and even to suffer bodily pain, rather than lose
life. Hence Satan testified against Job (Job 2:4): "Skin for skin, and
all that a man hath he will give for his soul" i.e. for the life of his
body. Therefore the perfect notion of martyrdom requires that a man
suffer death for Christ's sake.
Reply to Objection 1: The authorities quoted, and the like that one
may meet with, speak of martyrdom by way of similitude.
Reply to Objection 2: When a woman forfeits the integrity of the
flesh, or is condemned to forfeit it under pretext of the Christian
faith, it is not evident to men whether she suffers this for love of the
Christian faith, or rather through contempt of chastity. Wherefore in
the sight of men her testimony is not held to be sufficient, and
consequently this is not martyrdom properly speaking. In the sight
of God, however, Who searcheth the heart, this may be deemed
worthy of a reward, as Lucy said.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 123, Articles 4,5),
fortitude regards danger of death chiefly, and other dangers
consequently; wherefore a person is not called a martyr merely for
suffering imprisonment, or exile, or forfeiture of his wealth, except in
so far as these result in death.
Reply to Objection 4: The merit of martyrdom is not after death, but
in the voluntary endurance of death, namely in the fact that a person
willingly suffers being put to death. It happens sometimes, however,
that a man lives for some time after being mortally wounded for
Christ's sake, or after suffering for the faith of Christ any other kind
of hardship inflicted by persecution and continued until death
ensues. The act of martyrdom is meritorious while a man is in this
state, and at the very time that he is suffering these hardships.