## Homily 42 on Matthew

Matt. XII. 33.
"Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree
corrupt, and his fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by his fruit."
Again in another way He shames them, and is not content with His former
refutations. But this He does, not freeing Himself from accusations, (for what
went before was quite enough), but as wishing to amend them.
Now His meaning is like this: none of you has either found fault about the
persons healed, as not being healed; nor has said, that it is an evil thing to deliver
one from a devil. For though they had been ever so shameless, they could not
have said this.
Since therefore they brought no charge against the works, but were
defaming the Doer of them, He signifies that this accusation is against both the
common modes of reasoning, and the congruity of the circumstances. A thing of
aggravated shamelessness, not only to interpret maliciously, but also to make up
such charges as are contrary to men's common notions.
And see how free He is from contentiousness. For He said not, "Make the
tree good, forasmuch as the fruit also is good;" but, most entirely stopping their
mouths, and exhibiting His own considerateness, and their insolence, He says,
Even if you are minded to find fault with my works, I forbid it not at all, only
bring not inconsistent and contradictory charges. For thus were they sure to be
most clearly detected, persisting against what was too palpable. Wherefore to no
purpose is your maliciousness, says He, and your self-contradictory statements.
Because in truth the distinction of the tree is shown by the fruit, not the fruit by
the tree; but you do the contrary. For what if the tree be the origin of the fruit; yet
it is the fruit that makes the tree to be known. And it were consistent, either in
blaming us to find fault with our works too, or praising these, to set us who do

them free from these charges. But now ye do the contrary; for having no fault to
find with the works, which is the fruit, you pass the opposite judgment upon the
tree, calling me a demoniac; which is utter insanity.
Yea, and what He had said before, [Matthew 7:16-18] this He establishes
now also; that a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor again can the
converse be. So that their charges were against all consistency and nature.
Then since He is arguing not for Himself, but for the Spirit, He has dealt out
His reproof even as a torrent, saying, "O generation of vipers, how can you,
being evil, speak good things?" [Matthew 12:34]
Now this is at once to accuse, and to give demonstration of His own sayings
from their case. For behold, says He, you being evil trees, cannot bring forth
good fruit. I do not then marvel at your talking thus: for you were both ill
nurtured, being of wicked ancestors, and you have acquired a bad mind.
And see how carefully, and without any hold for exception, He has
expressed His accusations: in that He said not, How can you speak good things,
being a generation of vipers? (for this latter is nothing to the former): but, "How
can you, being evil, speak good things?"
But He called them "broods of vipers," because they prided themselves on
their forefathers. To signify therefore that they had no advantage thereby, He
both casts them out from their relationship to Abraham, and assigns them
forefathers of kindred disposition, having stripped them of that ground of
illustriousness.
"For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks." Here again He
indicates His Godhead, which knew their secrets: and that not for words only,
but also for wicked thoughts, they shall suffer punishment; and that He knows it
all, as God. And He says, that it is possible even for men to know these things;
for this is a natural consequence, that when wickedness is overflowing within, its
words should be poured forth through the lips. So that when you hear a man
speak wicked words, do not suppose only so much wickedness to be in him as
the words display, but conjecture the fountain to be much more abundant; for