plain. And I will attempt to prove also that they are not unworthy of Paul. For He
does not say that the absence of Titus impeded the salvation of those who were
about to come over, nor yet that he neglected those that believed on this account,
but that he had no relief, that is, 'I was afflicted, I was distressed for the absence
of my brother;' showing how great a matter a brother's absence is; and therefore
he departed thence. But what means, "when I came to Troas, for the Gospel?" he
says not simply 'I arrived,' but 'so as to preach.' But still, though I had both come
for that and found very much to do, (for "a door was opened unto me in the
Lord,") I had, says he, "no relief," not that for this he impeded the work. How
then says he,
2 Corinthians 2:13. "Taking my leave of them, I went from thence?"
That is, 'I spent no longer time, being straitened and distressed.' And
perhaps the work was even impeded by his absence. And this was no light
consolation to them too. For if when a door was opened there, and for this
purpose he had come; yet because he found not the brother, he quickly started
away; much more, he says, ought ye to make allowance for the compulsion of
those affairs which lead us and lead us about everywhere, and suffer us not
according as we desire either to journey, or to tarry longer among those with
whom we may wish to remain. Whence also he proceeds in this place again to
refer his journeyings to God, as he did above to the Spirit, saying,

2 Corinthians 2:14
"But thanks be to God, which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and
makes manifest through us the savor of His knowledge in every place."
For that he may not seem as though in sorrow to be lamenting these things,
he sends up thanks to God. Now what he says is this: 'Every where is trouble,
every where straitness. I came into Asia, I was burdened beyond strength. I came
to Troas, I found not the brother. I came not to you; this too bred in me no slight,
yea rather, exceeding great dejection, both because many among you had sinned,
and because on this account I see you not. For, "To spare you," he says, "I came
not as yet unto Corinth." That then he may not seem to be complaining in so
speaking, he adds, 'We not only do not grieve in these afflictions, but we even
rejoice; and, what is still greater, not for the sake of the rewards to come only,
but those too even which are present. For even here we are by these things made
glorious and conspicuous. So far then are we from lamenting, that we even call
the thing a triumph ; and glory in what happens.' For which cause also he said,
"Now thanks be unto God, Which always causes us to triumph," that is, 'Who
makes us renowned unto all. For what seems to be matter of disgrace, being
persecuted from every quarter, this appears to us to be matter of very great
honor.' Wherefore he said not, "Which makes us seen of all," but, "Which causes
us to triumph:" showing that these persecutions set up a series of trophies against
the devil in every part of the world. Then having mentioned along with the
author, the subject also of the triumph, he thereby also raises up the hearer. 'For
not only are we made to triumph by God, but also "in Christ;"' that is, on
account of Christ and the Gospel. 'For seeing it behooves to triumph, all need is
that we also who carry the trophy are seen of all, because we bear Him. For this
reason we become observed and conspicuous.'
2. 2 Corinthians 2:14. "And which makes manifest through us the savor of