Reply to 4. As Avicenna says, the distinction between theoretical and practical is not the same
when philosophy is divided into theoretical and practical, when the arts are divided into
theoretical and practical, and when medicine is so divided. For when we distinguish philosophy
or the arts into theoretical and practical we must do so on the basis of their end, calling that
theoretical which is directed solely to knowledge of the truth, and that practical which is directed
to operation. However, there is this difference when we distinguish the whole of philosophy and
the arts on this basis. We divide philosophy with respect to the final end or happiness, to which
the whole of human life is directed. For, as Augustine says, following Varro, "There is no other
reason for a man philosophizing except to be happy." And since the philosophers teach that there
is a twofold happiness, one contemplative and the other active, as is clear in the Ethics, they have
accordingly a]so distinguished between two parts of philosophy, calling moral philosophy
practical and natural and rational philosophy theoretical. But when they call some arts speculative
and some practical, this is on the basis of some special ends of those arts; as when we say that
agriculture is a Practical art but dialectic is theoretical. However, when we divide medicine into
theoretical and practical, the division is not on the basis of the end. For on that basis the whole of
medicine is practical, since it is directed to practice. But the above division is made on the basis
of whether what is studied in medicine is proximate to, or remote from practice. Thus we call that
part of medicine practical which teaches the method of healing; for instance, that these particular
medicines should be given for these abscesses. On the other hand, we call that part theoretical
which teaches the principles directing a man in his practice, although not immediately; for
instance, that there are three virtues, and that there are so many kinds of fever. Consequently, if
we call some part of a practical science theoretical, we should not on that account place that part
under speculative philosophy.

Reply to 5. One science is contained under another in two ways: in one way, as its part, because
its subject is part of the subject of that other science, as plant is part of natural body. So the
science of plants is also contained under natural science as one of its parts. In another way, one
science is contained under another as subalternated to it. This occurs when in a higher science
there is given the reason for what a lower science knows only as a fact. This is how music is

contained under arithmetic. Medicine, therefore, is not contained under physics as a part, for the
subject of medicine is not part of the subject of natural science from the point of view from
which it is the subject of medicine. For although the curable body is a natural body, it is not the
subject of medicine insofar as it is curable by nature, but insofar as it is curable by art. But
because art is nature's handmaid in healing (in which art too plays a part, for health is brought
about through the power of nature with the assistance of art), it follows that the reason for the
practices used in the art must be based on the properties of natural things. So medicine is
subalternated to physics, and for the same reason so too are alchemy, the science of agriculture,
and all sciences of this sort. We conclude, then, that physics in itself and in all its parts is
speculative, although some practical sciences are subalternated to it.