pleased at having those that owe to him, as Christ (6 manuscripts God) is
rejoiced at having those that lend to Him. And such as He owes nothing to, He
flees from; but such as He owes to, He even runs unto. Let us then use all means
to get Him for our Debtor; for this is the season for loans, and He is now in want.
If then you give not unto Him now, He will not ask of you after your departing
hence. For it is here that He thirsts, here that He is an hungered. He thirsts, since
He thirsts after your salvation; and it is for this that He even begs; for this that
He even goes about naked, negotiating immortal life for you. Do not then
neglect Him; since it is not to be nourished that He wishes, but to nourish; it is
not to be clothed, but to clothe and to accoutre you with the golden garment, the
royal robe. Do you not see even the more attached sort of physicians, when they
are washing the sick, wash themselves also, though they need it not? In the same
way He also does all for the sake of you who art sick. For this reason also He
uses no force in demanding, that He may make you great returns: that you may
learn that it is not because He is in need that He asks of you, but that He may set
right that you need. For this reason too He comes to you in a lowly guise, and
with His right hand held forth. And if you give Him a farthing, He turns not
away: and even if you reject Him, He departs not but comes again to you. For He
desires, yea desires exceedingly, our salvation: let us then think scorn of money,
that we may not be thought scorn of by Christ. Let us think scorn of money, even
with a view to obtain the money itself. For if we keep it here, we shall lose it
altogether both here and hereafter. But if we distribute it with abundant
expenditure, we shall enjoy in each life abundant wealthiness. He then that
would become rich, let him become poor, that he may be rich. Let him spend that
he may collect, let him scatter that he may gather. But if this is novel and
paradoxical, look to the sower, and consider, that he cannot in any other way
gather more together, save by scattering what he has and, letting go of what is at
hand. Let us now sow and till the Heaven, that we may reap with great
abundance, and obtain everlasting goods, through the grace and love toward
man, etc.

## Homily 8 on Romans

Romans IV. 1, 2
"What shall we then say that Abraham, our father as pertaining to the flesh,
has found? For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to glory; but
not before God."
He had said (5 manuscripts [εἶπεν]), that the world had become guilty
before God, and that all had sinned, and that boasting was excluded and that it
was impossible to be saved otherwise than by faith. He is now intent upon
showing that this salvation, so far from being matter of shame, was even the
cause of a bright glory, and a greater than that through works. For since the being
saved, yet with shame, had somewhat of dejection in it, he next takes away this
suspicion too. And indeed he has hinted at the same already, by calling it not
barely salvation, but "righteousness. Therein" (he says) "is the righteousness of
God revealed." [Romans 1:17] For he that is saved as a righteous man has a
confidence accompanying his salvation. And he calls it not "righteousness" only,
but also the setting forth of the righteousness of God. But God is set forth in
things which are glorious and shining, and great. However, he nevertheless
draws support for this from what he is at present upon, and carries his discourse
forward by the method of question. And this he is always in the habit of doing
both for clearness sake, and for the sake of confidence in what is said. Above,
for instance, he did it, where he says, "What advantage then has the Jew?"
[Romans 3:1] and, "What then have we more than they?" [Romans 3:9] and
again, "where then is boasting? It is excluded" [Romans 3:27]: and here, "what
then shall we say that Abraham our father?" etc. Now since the Jews kept
turning over and over the fact, that the Patriarch, and friend of God, was the first
to receive circumcision, he wishes to show, that it was by faith that he too was
justified. And this was quite a vantage ground to insist upon ([περιουσία νίκης