chest instead of a shrine, and laying it up in silver vessels. But thou dost not bow
down to it as he to the image? Yet you show all kind of attention to it.
Again, he would rather give up his eyes or his life than his graven image.
So also would those who love gold. "But," says one, "I worship not the gold."
Neither does he, he says, worship the image, but the devil that dwells in it; and
in like manner thou, though thou worship not the gold, yet you worship that
devil who springs on your soul, from the sight of the gold and your lust for it.
For more grievous than an evil spirit is the lust of money-loving, and many obey
it more than others do idols. For these last in many things disobey, but in this
case they yield everything, and whatever it tells them to do, they obey. What
says it? "Be at war with all," it says, "at enmity with all, know not nature,
despise God, sacrifice to me yourself," and in all they obey. To the graven
images they sacrifice oxen and sheep, but avarice says, Sacrifice to me your own
soul, and the man obeys. Do you see what kind of altars it has, what kind of
sacrifices it receives? The covetous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, but
not even so do they fear. [1 Corinthians 6:10] Yet this desire is weaker than all
the others, it is not inborn, nor natural, (for then it would have been placed in us
at the beginning;) but there was no gold at the beginning, and no man desired
gold. But if you will, I will tell you whence the mischief entered. By each man's
envying the one before him, men have increased the disease, and he who has
gotten in advance provokes him who had no desire. For when men see splendid
houses, and extensive lands, and troops of slaves, and silver vessels, and great
heaps of apparel, they use every means to outdo them; so that the first set of men
are causes of the second, and these of those who come after. Now if they would
be sober-minded, they would not be teachers (of evil) to others; yet neither have
these any excuse. For others there are also who despise riches. "And who," says
one, "despises them?" For the terrible thing is, that, because wickedness is so
general, this seems to have become impossible, and it is not even believed that
one can act aright. Shall I then mention many both in cities and in the
mountains? And what would it avail? You will not from their example become

better. Besides, our discourse has not now this purpose, that you should empty
yourselves of your substance: I would that you could do so; however, since the
burden is too heavy for you, I constrain you not; only I advise you that you
desire not what belongs to others, that you impart somewhat of your own. Many
such we shall find, contented with what belongs to them, taking care of their
own, and living on honest labor. Why do we not rival and imitate these? Let us
think of those who have gone before us. Do not their possessions stand,
preserving nothing but their name; such an one's bath, such an one's suburban
seat and lodging? Do we not, when we behold them, straightway groan, when we
consider what toil he endured, what rapine committed? And now he is nowhere
seen, but others luxuriate in his possessions, men whom he never expected
would do so, perhaps even his enemies, while he is suffering extremest
punishment. These things await us also; for we shall certainly die, and shall
certainly have to submit to the same end. How much wrath, tell me, how much
expense, how many enmities these men incurred; and what the gain? Deathless
punishment, and the having no consolation; and the being not only while alive,
but when gone, accused by all? What? When we see the images of the many laid
up in their houses, shall we not weep the more? Of a truth well said the Prophet,
"Verily, every man living disquiets himself in vain" [Psalm 39:11, Septuagint];
for anxiety about such things is indeed disquiet, disquiet and superfluous trouble.
But it is not so in the everlasting mansions, not so in those tabernacles. Here one
has labored, and another enjoys; but there each shall possess his own labors, and
shall receive a manifold reward. Let us press forward to get that possession,
there let us prepare for ourselves houses, that we may rest in Christ Jesus our
Lord, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.