to Christ's yoke, and cast away all worldly things, and was paying universal
obedience to His will, says not, "I live to Christ," but what is far higher, "Christ
lives in me." As sin, when it has the mastery, is itself the vital principle, and
leads the soul whither it will, so, when it is slain and the will of Christ obeyed,
this life is no longer earthly, but Christ lives, that is, works, has mastery within
us. His saying, "I am crucified with Him" "I no longer live," but "am dead,"
seeming incredible to many, he adds,
Ver. 20. "And that life which I now live in the flesh, I live in faith, the faith
which is in the Son of God."
The foregoing, says he, relates to our spiritual life, but this life of sense too,
if considered, will be found owing to my faith in Christ. For as regards the
former Dispensation and Law, I had incurred the severest punishment, and had
long ago perished, "for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God."
[Romans 3:23] And we, who lay under sentence, have been liberated by Christ,
for all of us are dead, if not in fact, at least by sentence; and He has delivered us
from the expected blow. When the Law had accused, and God condemned us,
Christ came, and by giving Himself up to death, rescued us all from death. So
that "the life which I now live in the flesh, I live in faith." Had not this been,
nothing could have averted a destruction as general as that which took place at
the flood, but His advent arrested the wrath of God, and caused us to live by
faith. That such is his meaning appears from what follows. After saying, that
"the life which I now live in the flesh, I live in faith," he adds,
Ver. 20. "In the Son of God, Who loved me, and gave Himself up for me."
How is this, O Paul! Why do you appropriate a general benefit, and make
your own what was done for the whole world's sake? For he says not, "Who
loved us," but, "Who loved me." And besides the Evangelist says, "God so loved
the world;" [John 3:16] and Paul himself, "He that spared not His own Son, but
delivered Him up," not for Paul only, but, "for us all;" [Romans 8:32] and again,
"that He might purify unto himself a people for his own possession," [Titus 2:14]
But considering the desperate condition of human nature, and the ineffably

tender solicitude of Christ, in what He delivered us from, and what He freely
gave us, and kindled by the yearning of affection towards Him, he thus expresses
himself. Thus the Prophets often appropriate to themselves Him who is God of
all, as in the words, "O God, you are my God, early will I seek You." [Psalm
63:1] Moreover, this language teaches that each individual justly owes as a great
debt of gratitude to Christ, as if He had come for his sake alone, for He would
not have grudged this His condescension though but for one, so that the measure
of His love to each is as great as to the whole world. Truly the Sacrifice was
offered for all mankind, and was sufficient to save all, but those who enjoy the
blessing are the believing only. Nevertheless it did not deter Him from His so
great condescension, that not all would come; but He acted after the pattern of
the supper in the Gospel, which He prepared for all, [Luke 14:16] yet when the
guests came not, instead of withdrawing the viands, He called in others. So too
He did not despise that sheep, though one only, which had strayed from the
ninety and nine. [Matthew 18:12] This too in like manner St. Paul intimates,
when he says, speaking about the Jews, "For what if some were without faith,
shall their want of faith make of none effect the faithfulness of God? God forbid:
yea let God be found true, but every man a liar." [Romans 3:3-4] When He so
loved you as to give Himself up to bring you who wast without hope to a life so
great and blessed, can you, thus gifted, have recourse to things gone by? His
reasoning being completed, he concludes with a vehement asseveration, saying,
Ver. 21. "I do not make void the grace of God."
Let those, who even now Judaize and adhere to the Law, listen to this, for it
applies to them.
Ver. 21. "For if righteousness is through the Law, then Christ died for
naught."
What can be more heinous than this sin? what more fit to put one to shame
than these words? Christ's death is a plain proof of the inability of the Law to
justify us; and if it does justify, then is His death superfluous. Yet how could it
be reasonable to say that has been done heedlessly and in vain which is so awful,