To Olympias
Do not be anxious on my behalf, nor rack yourself with solicitude, on
account of the severity of the winter, and the weakness of my digestion, and the
incursions of the Isaurians. For the winter is only what it is wont to be in
Armenia; nothing more need be said about it; and it does not very seriously
injure me. For in anticipation of these things I have devised many plans for
averting the mischief which might arise from them; keeping up a constant fire,
setting screens about the chamber in which I live, using a large number of rugs,
and staying always indoors. This indeed is irksome to me, if it were not for the
benefit to be derived; for as long as I remain indoors I am not severely distressed
by the cold; but if I am compelled to go out a little, and come in contact with the
outer air, I suffer no small damage. Wherefore I beseech you dear lady, and
entreat you as a very great favour to pay great attention to the restoration of your
bodily health. For dejection causes sickness; and when the body is exhausted and
enfeebled, and remains in a neglected condition, deprived of the assistance of
physicians, and of a wholesome climate, and an abundant supply of the
necessaries of life, consider how great an aggravation of distress is occasioned
thereby. Wherefore I beseech you, dear lady, to employ various and skilled
physicians, and to take medicines which avail to correct these conditions. For a
few days ago when I suffered from a tendency to vomiting, owing to the state of
the atmosphere, I had recourse among other remedies to the drug which was sent
me by my most discreet mistress Syncletion, and I found that no more than three
days' application of it cured my infirmity. I beseech you therefore to make use of
this remedy also yourself and to arrange that some more of it may be sent to me.
For having again felt somewhat upset, I again had recourse to it, and completely
cured my disorder; for it allays the deep internal inflammation, draws out
moisture on the skin, causes a moderate degree of warmth, infuses no little vigor,

and excites an appetite for food; and all these effects I experienced in the course
of a few days. Let then my most honoured lord the Count Theophilus be
exhorted to take means to send some of this to me again. And do not be
distressed at my wintering here, for I am in a much more comfortable and
sounder state of health than I was last year; so that if you also would take the
requisite care of yourself, you would be in a far more satisfactory condition.
Now if you say that your ailments have been produced by despondency how is it
that you again ask for letters from me, seeing that you have not derived any
benefit from them in the direction of cheerfulness, but have sunk so deeply under
the tyranny of despondency as even to desire to depart out of this world. Are you
ignorant how great a reward even of sickness awaits one who has a thankful
spirit? Have I not often, both in person, and through letters, discoursed to you
concerning this theme? But since the pressure of business perhaps, or the
peculiar nature of your sickness, and the quick succession of changes in your
condition do not permit you to retain what I have said constantly and clearly in
your mind, listen once more while I try to heal the wounds of your despondency
by repeating the same incantations: "for to write the same things," it is said, "to
me indeed is not grievous, and for you it is safe." [Philippians 3:1]
2. What is it then which I say and write? Nothing, Olympias, redounds so
much to the credit of any one as patient endurance in suffering. For this is indeed
the queen of virtues, and the perfection of crowns; and as it excels all other
forms of righteousness, so this particular species of it is more glorious than the
rest. Perhaps what I have said seems obscure; I will therefore try to make it
clearer. What then is it that I affirm? Not the spoliation of goods, even if one
were to be stripped bare of all one's possessions, not the loss of honours, nor
expulsion from one's country, and transportation to a distant land, nor the strain
of labour and toil, nor imprisonment, and bondage, nor reproaches, and abuse,
and scoffings (not indeed that you are to think the courageous endurance of such
things a slight kind of fortitude, as Jeremiah that great and eminent prophet
proves who was not a little distressed by this kind of trial); [Jeremiah xv] yet not