theory of progress, the reader will find some discussion of it in my Oxford and
Cambridge Conferences, First Series, pp. 135 sq.; also Political and Moral Essays, p.
132, note. On De anima, III, the Commentator (p. 149) specifies three kinds of intellect:
"the potential intellect, the active intellect, the acquired or made intellect: of these three,
two are eternal, the active and the potential: the third is partly producible and
perishable, and partly eternal." By the `acquired intellect' he appears to mean the
`passive intellect' of each individual, inasmuch as it is illumined by continuatio (ittisl) with
the universal potential intellect. Does that mean the mind of the individual in so far as it
comes abreast of the zeitgeist? If so, but I cannot feel sure of the conclusion, then
Arabian mysticism ends in positivism.

## CHAPTER LX--That Man is not a Member the Human Species by possession of
Passive Intellect, but by possession of Potential Intellect
AVERROES endeavours to meet these arguments and to maintain the position
aforesaid. He says accordingly that man differs from dumb animals by what Aristotle
calls the `passive intellect,' which is that `cogitative power' (vis cogitativa) proper to
man, in place whereof other animals have a certain `estimative power' (aestimativa).

forms under a universal aspect. Therefore no faculty, the activity of which can
reach to the universal aspects of all corporeal forms, can be the actualisation of any
corporeal organ. But such a faculty is the will: for of all of the things that we understand
we can have a will, at least of knowing them. And we also find acts of the will in
the general: thus, as Aristotle says (Rhet. II, 4), we hate in general the whole race of
robbers. The will then cannot be the actualisation of any bodily organ. But every portion
of the soul is the actualisation of some bodily organ, except only the intellect properly so
called. The will therefore belongs to the intellectual part, as Aristotle says. Now the
will of man is not extrinsic to man, planted as it were in some separately subsisting
intelligence, but is in the man himself: otherwise he would not be master of his own
acts, but would be worked by the will of a spirit other than himself: those appetitive, or
conative, faculties alone would remain in him, the activity whereof is conjoined with
passion, to wit the irascible and concupiscible in the sentient part of his being, as
in other animals, which are rather acted upon than act. But this is impossible: it would
be the undoing of all moral philosophy and all social and political science.
Therefore there must be in us a potential intellect to differentiate us from dumb animals:
the passive intellect is not enough.
6. A habit and the act proper to that habit both reside in the same faculty. But to view a
thing intellectually, which is the act proper to the habit of knowledge, cannot be an
exercise of the faculty called `passive intellect,' but must properly belong to the potential
intellect: for the condition of any faculty exercising intelligence is that it should not be an
actualisation of any corporeal organ. Therefore the habit of knowledge is not in the
passive intellect, but in the potential intellect.
8. Habitual understanding, as our opponent acknowledges, is an effect of the `active
intellect.' But the effects of the active intellect are actual representations in
understanding, the proper recipient of which is the potential intellect, to which the active
intellect stands related, as Aristotle says, "as art to material." Therefore the
habitual understanding, which is the habit of knowledge, must be in the potential
intellect, not in the passive.