SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.6.

is the principle of all the movements of the soul. Now there are three
principles of action that are moved by the will, namely, the intellect
which is signified by "the mind," the lower appetitive power,
signified by "the soul"; and the exterior executive power signified by
"strength," "force" or "might." Accordingly we are commanded to
direct our whole intention to God, and this is signified by the words
"with thy whole heart"; to submit our intellect to God, and this is
expressed in the words "with thy whole mind"; to regulate our
appetite according to God, in the words "with thy whole soul"; and to
obey God in our external actions, and this is to love God with our
whole "strength," "force" or "might."
Chrysostom (Opus imperf. Hom. xlii, in Matth.), on the other hand,
takes "heart" and "soul" in the contrary sense; and Augustine (De
Doctr. Christ. i, 22) refers "heart" to the thought, "soul" to the
manner of life, and "mind" to the intellect. Again some explain "with
thy whole heart" as denoting the intellect, "with thy whole soul" as
signifying the will, "with thy mind" as pointing to the memory. And
again, according to Gregory of Nyssa (De Hom. Opif. viii), "heart"
signifies the vegetative soul, "soul" the sensitive, and "mind" the
intellective soul, because our nourishment, sensation, and
understanding ought all to be referred by us to God.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether it is possible in this life to fulfil this

precept of the love of God?
Objection 1: It would seem that in this life it is possible to fulfil this
precept of the love of God. For according to Jerome [Pelagius,
Exposit. Cath. Fid.] "accursed is he who says that Cod has
commanded anything impossible." But God gave this
commandment, as is clear from Dt. 6:5. Therefore it is possible to
fulfil this precept in this life.
Objection 2: Further, whoever does not fulfil a precept sins mortally,
since according to Ambrose (De Parad. viii) sin is nothing else than
"a transgression of the Divine Law, and disobedience of the
heavenly commandments." If therefore this precept cannot be
fulfilled by wayfarers, it follows that in this life no man can be
without mortal sin, and this is against the saying of the Apostle (1
Cor. 1:8): "(Who also) will confirm you unto the end without crime,"
and (1 Tim. 3:10): "Let them minister, having no crime."
Objection 3: Further, precepts are given in order to direct man in the
way of salvation, according to Ps. 18:9: "The commandment of the
Lord is lightsome, enlightening the eyes." Now it is useless to direct
anyone to what is impossible. Therefore it is not impossible to fulfill
this precept in this life.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Perfect. Justit. viii): "In the
fulness of heavenly charity this precept will be fulfilled: Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God," etc. For as long as any carnal concupiscence
remains, that can be restrained by continence, man cannot love God
with all his heart.
I answer that, A precept can be fulfilled in two ways; perfectly, and
imperfectly. A precept is fulfilled perfectly, when the end intended by
the author of the precept is reached; yet it is fulfilled, imperfectly
however, when although the end intended by its author is not
reached, nevertheless the order to that end is not departed from.
Thus if the commander of an army order his soldiers to fight, his
command will be perfectly obeyed by those who fight and conquer
the foe, which is the commander's intention; yet it is fulfilled, albeit
imperfectly, by those who fight without gaining the victory, provided
they do nothing contrary to military discipline. Now God intends by