imply this. Then, having exacted a great work, he places its reward close at hand,
and makes mention of a new and wondrous harvest. Among husbandmen, not
only the sower but also the reaper endures much labor, having to struggle with
drought and dust and grievous toil, but in this case none of these exist, as he
shows by the words, "for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not." By this
means he stimulates and draws them on; and he also urges and presses them
forward by another motive, saying, "As we have therefore opportunity, let us do
good." As it is not always in our power to sow, so neither is it to show mercy; for
when we have been carried hence, though we may desire it a thousand times, we
shall be able to effect nothing more. To this argument of ours the Ten Virgins
[Matthew 25:1 ff.] bear witness, who although they wished it a thousand times,
yet were shut out from the bridegroom, because they brought with them no
bountiful charity. And so does the rich man who neglected Lazarus [Luke 16:19]
for he, being destitute of this succor, although he wept and made many
entreaties, won no compassion from the Patriarch, or any one else, but continued
destitute of all forgiveness, and tormented with perpetual fire. Therefore he says,
"as we have opportunity, let us work that which is good toward all men," hereby
especially also setting them free from the narrow-mindedness of the Jews. For
the whole of their benevolence was confined to their own race, but the rule of
life which Grace gives invites both land and sea to the board of charity, only it
shows a greater care for its own household.
Ver. 11, 12. "See with how large letters I have written unto you with my own
hand. As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they compel you to be
circumcised."
Observe what grief possesses his blessed soul. As those who are oppressed
with some sorrow, who have lost one of their own kindred, and suffered an
unexpected calamity, rest neither by night nor day, because their grief besieges
their soul, so the blessed Paul, after a short moral discourse, returns again to that
former subject which chiefly disturbed his mind, saying as follows: "see with
how large letters I have written unto you with my own hand." By this he signifies

that he had written the whole letter himself, which was a proof of great sincerity.
In his other Epistles he himself only dictated, another wrote, as is plain from the
Epistle to the Romans, for at its close it is said, "I Tertius, who write the Epistle,
salute you;" [Romans 16:22] but in this instance he wrote the whole himself.
And this he did by necessity, not from affection merely, but in order to remove
an injurious suspicion. Being charged with acts wherein he had no part, and
being reported to preach Circumcision yet to pretend to preach it not, he was
compelled to write the Epistle with his own hand, thus laying up beforehand a
written testimony. By the expression "what sized," he appears to me to signify,
not the magnitude, but, the misshapen appearance of the letters, as if he had said,
"Although not well skilled in writing, I have been compelled to write with my
own hand to stop the mouth of these traducers."
Ver. 12, 13. "As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they
compel you to be circumcised; only that they may not be persecuted for the cross
of Christ. For not even they who receive circumcision do themselves keep the
Law; but they desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh."
Here he shows that they suffered this, not willingly but of necessity, and
affords them an opportunity of retreat, almost speaking in their defence, and
exhorting them to abandon their teachers with all speed. What is the meaning of
"to make a fair show in the flesh?" it means, to be esteemed by men. As they
were reviled by the Jews for deserting the customs of their fathers, they desire,
says he, to injure you, that they may not have this charged against them, but
vindicate themselves by means of your flesh. His object here is to show that they
did not so act from respect to God; it is as if he said, This procedure is not
founded in piety, all this is done through human ambition; in order that the
unbelievers may be gratified by the mutilation of the faithful, they choose to
offend God that they may please men; for this is the meaning of, "to make a fair
show in the flesh." Then, as a proof that for another reason too they are
unpardonable, he again convinces them that, not only in order to please others,
but for their own vain glory, they had enjoined this. Wherefore he adds, "that