34. Such a wealth of praise, built up by the different forms of the Church's great tradition,
could help us to hasten the day when the Church can begin once more to breathe fully
with her "two lungs," the East and the West. As I have often said, this is more than ever
necessary today. It would be an effective aid in furthering the progress of the dialogue
already taking place between the Catholic Church and the Churches and Ecclesial
Communities of the West. It would also be the way for the pilgrim Church to sing and
to live more perfectly her "Magnificat."

### 3. The "Magnificat" of the pilgrim Church
35. At the present stage of her journey, therefore, the Church seeks to rediscover the unity
of all who profess their faith in Christ, in order to show obedience to her Lord, who
prayed for this unity before his Passion. "Like a pilgrim in a foreign land, the Church
presses forward amid the persecutions of the world and the consolations of God,
announcing the Cross and Death of the Lord until he comes." "Moving forward through
trial and tribulation, the Church is strengthened by the power of God's grace promised to
her by the Lord, so that in the weakness of the flesh she may not waver from perfect
fidelity, but remain a bride worthy of her Lord; that moved by the Holy Spirit she may
never cease to renew herself, until through the Cross she arrives at the light which knows
no setting."

The Virgin Mother is constantly present on this journey of faith of the People of God
towards the light. This is shown in a special way by the canticle of the "Magnificat,"

which, having welled up from the depths of Mary's faith at the Visitation, ceaselessly re-
echoes in the heart of the Church down the centuries. This is proved by its daily recitation
in the liturgy of Vespers and at many other moments of both personal and communal
devotion.
"My soul magnifies the Lord,
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
for he has looked on his servant in her lowliness.
For behold, henceforth all generations
will call me blessed;
for he who is mighty has done great things for me,
and holy is his name:
and his mercy is from age to age
on those who fear him.
He has shown strength with his arm,
he has scattered the proud-hearted,
he has cast down the mighty from their thrones,
and lifted up the lowly;
he has filled the hungry with good things,
sent the rich away empty.
He has helped his servant Israel,
remembering his mercy,
as he spoke to our fathers,
to Abraham and to his posterity for ever." (Lk. 1:46-55)

36. When Elizabeth greeted her young kinswoman coming from Nazareth, Mary replied
with the Magnificat. In her greeting, Elizabeth first called Mary "blessed" because of "the
fruit of her womb," and then she called her "blessed" because of her faith (cf. Lk. 1:,
45). These two blessings referred directly to the Annunciation. Now, at the Visitation,
when Elizabeth's greeting bears witness to that culminating moment, Mary's faith
acquires a new consciousness and a new expression. That which remained hidden in the
depths of the "obedience of faith" at the Annunciation can now be said to spring forth like
a clear and life-giving flame of the spirit. The words used by Mary on the threshold of
Elizabeth's house are an inspired profession of her faith, in which her response to the
revealed word is expressed with the religious and poetical exultation of her whole being
towards God. In these sublime words, which are simultaneously very simple and wholly
inspired by the sacred texts of the people of Israel, Mary's personal experience, the
ecstasy of her heart, shines forth. In them shines a ray of the mystery of God, the glory of
his ineffable holiness, the eternal love which, as an irrevocable gift, enters into human
history.