showing the Heavens opened. For all the angels will be present with Him, He
says, themselves also to bear witness, in how many things they had ministered,
when sent by the Lord for the salvation of men.
And everything will help to render that day fearful. Then, 'shall be gathered
together,' He says, 'all nations,' that is, the whole race of men. 'And He shall
separate them one from another, as the shepherd his sheep.' For now they are not
separated, but all mingled together, but the division then shall be made with all
exactness. And for a while it is by their place that He divides them, and makes
them manifest; afterwards by the names He indicates the dispositions of each,
calling the one kids,the other sheep, that He might indicate the unfruitfulness of
the one, for no fruit will come from kids; and the great profit from the other, for
indeed from sheep great is the profit, as well from the milk, as from the wool,
and from the young, of all which things the kid is destitute.
But while the brutes have from nature their unfruitfulness, and fruitfulness,
these have it from choice, wherefore some are punished, and the others crowned.
And He does not punish them, until He has pleaded with them; wherefore also,
when He has put them in their place, He mentions the charges against them. And
they speak with meekness, but they have no advantage from it now; and very
reasonably, because they passed by a work so much to be desired. For indeed the
prophets are everywhere saying this, "I will have mercy and not sacrifice,"
[Hosea 6:6] and the lawgiver by all means urged them to this, both by words,
and by works; and nature herself taught it.
But mark them, how they are destitute not of one or two things only, but of
all. For not only did they fail to feed the hungry, or clothe the naked; but not
even did they visit the sick, which was an easier thing.
And mark how easy are His injunctions. He said not, "I was in prison, and
you set me free; I was sick, and you raised me up again;" but, "you visited me,"
and, "you came to me." And neither in hunger is the thing commanded grievous.
For no costly table did He seek, but what is needful only, and His necessary
food, and He sought in a suppliant's garb, so that all things were enough to bring

punishment on them; the easiness of the request, for it was bread; the pitiable
character of Him that requests, for He was poor; the sympathy of nature, for He
was a man; the desirableness of the promise, for He promised a kingdom; the
fearfulness of the punishment, for He threatened hell. The dignity of the one
receiving, for it was God, who was receiving by the poor; the surpassing nature
of the honor, that He vouchsafed to condescend so far; His just claim for what
they bestowed, for of His own was He receiving. But against all these things
covetousness once for all blinded them that were seized by it; and this though so
great a threat was set against it.
For further back also He says, that they who receive not such as these shall
suffer more grievous things than Sodom; and here He says, "Inasmuch as you
did it not unto one of the least of these my brethren, you did it not unto me."
What sayest Thou? They are Your brethren; and how dost Thou call them least.
Why, for this reason they are brethren, because they are lowly, because they are
poor, because they are outcast. For such does He most invite to brotherhood, the
unknown, the contemptible, not meaning by these the monks only, and them that
have occupied the mountains, but every believer; though he be a secular person,
yet if he be hungry, and famishing, and naked, and a stranger, His will is he
should have the benefit of all this care. For baptism renders a man a brother, and
the partaking of the divine mysteries.
2. Then, in order that you may see in another way also the justice of the
sentence, He first praises them that have done right, and says, "Come, you
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the foundation
of the world. For I was an hungered, and you gave me meat," and all that
follows. [Matthew 25:34-40] For that they may not say, we had it not, He
condemns them by their fellow-servants; like as the virgins by the virgins, and
the servant that was drunken and gluttonous by the faithful servant, and him that
buried his talent, by them that brought the two, and each one of them that
continue in sin, by them that have done right.
And this comparison is sometimes made in the case of an equal, as here,