THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.65, C.4.

above.
Reply to Objection 3: The sacramental character, as stated above
(Question 63, Article 3), is a kind of participation in Christ's
priesthood. Wherefore the sacrament that unites man to Christ
Himself, is greater than a sacrament that imprints Christ's character.
Reply to Objection 4: This argument proceeds on the ground of
necessity. For thus Baptism, being of the greatest necessity, is the
greatest of the sacraments, just as order and Confirmation have a
certain excellence considered in their administration; and Matrimony
by reason of its signification. For there is no reason why a thing
should not be greater from a certain point of view which is not
greater absolutely speaking.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.65, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether all the sacraments are necessary for

salvation?
Objection 1: It seems that all the sacraments are necessary for
salvation. For what is not necessary seems to be superfluous. But
no sacrament is superfluous, because "God does nothing without a
purpose" (De Coelo et Mundo i). Therefore all the sacraments are
necessary for salvation.
Objection 2: Further, just as it is said of Baptism (Jn. 3:5): "Unless a
man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter in to
the kingdom of God," so of the Eucharist is it said (Jn. 6:54): "Except
you eat of the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink of His blood, you
shall not have life in you." Therefore, just as Baptism is a necessary
sacrament, so is the Eucharist.
Objection 3: Further, a man can be saved without the sacrament of
Baptism, provided that some unavoidable obstacle, and not his
contempt for religion, debar him from the sacrament, as we shall
state further on (Question 68, Article 2). But contempt of religion in
any sacrament is a hindrance to salvation. Therefore, in like manner,
all the sacraments are necessary for salvation.
On the contrary, Children are saved by Baptism alone without the
other sacraments.
I answer that, Necessity of end, of which we speak now, is twofold.
First, a thing may be necessary so that without it the end cannot be
attained; thus food is necessary for human life. And this is simple
necessity of end. Secondly, a thing is said to be necessary, if,
without it, the end cannot be attained so becomingly: thus a horse is
necessary for a journey. But this is not simple necessity of end.
In the first way, three sacraments are necessary for salvation. Two of
them are necessary to the individual; Baptism, simply and
absolutely; Penance, in the case of mortal sin committed after
Baptism; while the sacrament of order is necessary to the Church,
since "where there is no governor the people shall fall" (Prov. 11:14).
But in the second way the other sacraments are necessary. For in a
sense Confirmation perfects Baptism; Extreme Unction perfects