appear in that place rich, when we leave not our riches here, but transport them
to inviolable treasuries by the hands of the poor, when we lend to Christ. Many
are our debts there, not of money, but of sins; let us then lend Him our riches,
that we may receive pardon for our sins; for He it is that judges. Let us not
neglect Him here when He hungers, that He may ever feed us there. Here let us
clothe Him, that He leave us not bare of the safety which is from Him. If here we
give Him drink, we shall not with the rich man say, "Send Lazarus, that with the
tip of his finger he may drop water on my broiling tongue." If here we receive
Him into our house, there He will prepare many mansions for us; if we go to
Him in prison, He too will free us from our bonds; if we take Him in when He is
a stranger, He will not suffer us to be strangers to the Kingdom of heaven, but
will give us a portion in the City which is above; if we visit Him when He is
sick, He also will quickly deliver us from our infirmities.
Let us then, as receiving great things though we give but little, still give the
little that we may gain the great. While it is yet time, let us sow, that we may
reap. When the winter overtakes us, when the sea is no longer navigable, we are
no longer masters of this traffic. But when shall the winter be? When that great
and manifest Day is at hand. Then we shall cease to sail this great and broad sea,
for such the present life resembles. Now is the time of sowing, then of harvest
and of gain. If a man puts not in his seed at seed time and sows in harvest,
besides that he effects nothing, he will be ridiculous. But if the present is seed
time, it follows that it is a time not for gathering together, but for scattering; let
us then scatter, that we may gather in, and not seek to gather in now, lest we lose
our harvest; for, as I said, this season summons us to sow, and spend, and lay
out, not to collect and lay by. Let us not then give up the opportunity, but let us
put in abundant seed, and spare none of our stores, that we may receive them
again with abundant recompense, through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, world
without end. Amen.

Homily 26 on the Gospel of John
John 3:6
"That which is born of the flesh is flesh: and that which is born of the Spirit is
spirit."
1. Great mysteries are they, of which the Only-begotten Son of God has
counted us worthy; great, and such as we were not worthy of, but such as it was
meet for Him to give. For if one reckon our desert, we were not only unworthy
of the gift, but also liable to punishment and vengeance; but He, because He
looked not to this, not only delivered us from punishment, but freely gave us a
life much more bright than the first, introduced us into another world, made us
another creature; "If any man be in Christ," says Paul, "he is a new creature." [2
Corinthians 5:17] What kind of "new creature"? Hear Christ Himself declare;
"Unless a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God." Paradise was entrusted to us, and we were shown unworthy to
dwell even there, yet He has exalted us to heaven. In the first things we were
found unfaithful, and He has committed to us greater; we could not refrain from
a single tree, and He has provided for us the delights above; we kept not our
place in Paradise, and He has opened to us the doors of heaven. Well said Paul,
"O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!" [Romans
11:33] There is no longer a mother, or pangs, or sleep, or coming together, and
embracings of bodies; henceforth all the fabric of our nature is framed above, of
the Holy Ghost and water. The water is employed, being made the Birth to him
who is born; what the womb is to the embryo, the water is to the believer; for in
the water he is fashioned and formed. At first it was said, "Let the waters bring
forth the creeping things that have life" [Genesis 1:20, Septuagint]; but from the
time that the Lord entered the streams of Jordan, the water no longer gives forth