thus, "I fear lest by any means when I come I should not find you such as I
would, and should myself be found of you such as you would not." This however
comes after many accusations ; But in the beginning he speaks not so, but more
gently. And what is it he says? He spoke of his trials and his perils, and that
every where he is conducted as in procession by God in Christ, and that the
whole world knows of these triumphs. Since then he has uttered great things of
himself, he urges this objection against himself, "Are we beginning again to
commend ourselves?" Now what he says is this: Perchance some one will object,
'What is this, O Paul? Do you say these things of yourself, and exaltest yourself?'
To do away then with this suspicion, he says, We desire not this, that is, to boast
and exalt ourselves; yea, so far are we from needing epistles of commendation to
you that you are to us instead of an epistle. "For," says he,

2 Corinthians 3:2
"You are our epistle."
What means this, "you are?" 'Did we need to be commended to others, we
should have produced you before them instead of an epistle.' And this he said in
the former Epistle. "For the seal of mine Apostleship are you." [1 Corinthians
9:2] But he does not here say it in this manner, but in irony so as to make his
question, "Do we need epistles of commendation?" more cutting. And in allusion
to the false apostles, he added, "as do some, [epistles of commendation] to you,
or letters of commendation from you" to others. Then because what he had said
was severe, he softens it by adding, You are our epistle, written in our hearts,
known of all,

2 Corinthians 3:3
"Being made manifest that you are an epistle of Christ."
Here he testifies not only to their love, but also to their good works: since
they are able to show unto all men by their own virtue the high worth of their
teacher, for this is the meaning of, "You are our epistle."
What letters would have done to commend and gain respect for us, that you
do both as seen and heard of; for the virtue of the disciples is wont to adorn and
to commend the teacher more than any letter.
"Written in our hearts."
That is, which all know; we so bear you about every where and have you in
mind. As though he said, You are our commendation to others, for we both have
you continually in our heart and proclaim to all your good works. Because then
that even to others yourselves are our commendation, we need no epistles from
you; but further, because we love you exceedingly, we need no commendation to
you. For to those who are strangers one has need of letters, but you are in our
mind. Yet he said not merely, "you are [in it]," but "written in [it]," that is, you
cannot slide out of it. For just as from letters by reading, so from our heart by
perceiving, all are acquainted with the love we bear you. If then the object of a
letter be to certify, "such an one is my friend and let him have free intercourse
[with you]," your love is sufficient to secure all this. For should we go to you,
we have no need of others to commend us, seeing your love anticipates this; and
should we go to others, again we need no letters, the same love again sufficing
unto us in their stead, for we carry about the epistle in our hearts.
2. Then exalting them still higher, he even calls them the epistle of Christ,
saying,
2 Corinthians 3:3. "Being made manifest that you are an epistle of Christ."
And having said this, he afterwards hence takes ground and occasion for a