rested "from" them, as in fact resting in Himself, as He suffices for
Himself and fulfils His own desire. And even though from all eternity
He rested in Himself, yet the rest in Himself, which He took after He
had finished His works, is that rest which belongs to the seventh
day. And this, says Augustine, is the meaning of God's resting from
His works on that day (Gen. ad lit. iv).
Reply to Objection 1: God indeed "worketh until now" by preserving
and providing for the creatures He has made, but not by the making
of new ones.
Reply to Objection 2: Rest is here not opposed to labor or to
movement, but to the production of new creatures, and to the desire
tending to an external object.
Reply to Objection 3: Even as God rests in Himself alone and is
happy in the enjoyment of Himself, so our own sole happiness lies in
the enjoyment of God. Thus, also, He makes us find rest in Himself,
both from His works and our own. It is not, then, unreasonable to say
that God rested in giving rest to us. Still, this explanation must not
be set down as the only one, and the other is the first and principal
explanation.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether blessing and sanctifying are due to the

seventh day?
Objection 1: It would seem that blessing and sanctifying are not due
to the seventh day. For it is usual to call a time blessed or holy for
that some good thing has happened in it, or some evil been avoided.
But whether God works or ceases from work nothing accrues to Him
or is lost to Him. Therefore no special blessing or sanctifying are due
to the seventh day.
Objection 2: Further, the Latin "benedictio" [blessing] is derived
from "bonitas" [goodness]. But it is the nature of good to spread and
communicate itself, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv). The days,
therefore, in which God produced creatures deserved a blessing
rather than the day on which He ceased producing them.
Objection 3: Further, over each creature a blessing was pronounced,
as upon each work it was said, "God saw that it was good."
Therefore it was not necessary that after all had been produced, the
seventh day should be blessed.
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 2:3), "God blessed the seventh day
and sanctified it, because in it He had rested from all His work."
I answer that, As said above (Article 2), God's rest on the seventh
day is understood in two ways. First, in that He ceased from
producing new works, though He still preserves and provides for the
creatures He has made. Secondly, in that after all His works He
rested in Himself. According to the first meaning, then, a blessing
befits the seventh day, since, as we explained (Question 72, ad 4),
the blessing referred to the increase by multiplication; for which
reason God said to the creatures which He blessed: "Increase and
multiply." Now, this increase is effected through God's Providence
over His creatures, securing the generation of like from like. And
according to the second meaning, it is right that the seventh day
should have been sanctified, since the special sanctification of every
creature consists in resting in God. For this reason things dedicated
to God are said to be sanctified.
Reply to Objection 1: The seventh day is said to be sanctified not
because anything can accrue to God, or be taken from Him, but