slight gain indeed, but yet a gain. If you make it your chief object not to marry a
rich wife, but to have a devout wife, and a religious daughter, you shall gain this
consolation; if you study to have your son not rich but devout, you shall also
gain this consolation. If you make these your objects then wilt yourself be such
as they. This also is part of virtue, to choose such friends, and such a wife and
children. Not in vain are the oblations made for the departed, not in vain the
prayers, not in vain the almsdeeds: all those things has the Spirit ordered,
wishing us to be benefited one by the other. See: he is benefited, you are
benefited: because of him, you have despised wealth, being set on to do some
generous act: both you are the means of salvation to him, and he to you the
occasion of your almsgiving. Doubt not that he shall get some good thereby. It is
not for nothing that the Deacon cries, "For them that are fallen asleep in Christ,
and for them that make the memorials for them." It is not the Deacon that utters
this voice, but the Holy Ghost: I speak of the Gift. What do you say? There is the
Sacrifice in hand, and all things laid out duly ordered: Angels are there present,
Archangels, the Son of God is there: all stand with such awe, and in the general
silence those stand by, crying aloud: and do you think that what is done, is done
in vain? Then is not the rest also all in vain, both the oblations made for the
Church, and those for the priests, and for the whole body? God forbid! But all is
done with faith. What do you think of the oblation made for the martyrs, of the
calling made in that hour, martyrs though they be, yet even "for martyrs?" It is a
great honor to be named in the presence of the Lord, when that memorial is
celebrating, the dread Sacrifice, the unutterable mysteries. For just as, so long as
the Emperor is seated, is the time for the petitioner to effect what he wishes to
effect, but when he is risen, say what he will, it is all in vain, so at that time,
while the celebration of the mysteries is going on, it is for all men the greatest
honor to be held worthy of mention. For look: then is declared the dread
mystery, that God gave Himself for the world: along with that mystery he
seasonably puts Him in mind of them that have sinned. For as when the
celebration of Emperor.' victories is in progress, then, as many as had their part

in the victory receive their meed of praise, while at the same time as many as are
in bonds are set at liberty in honor of the occasion; but when the occasion is past,
he that did not obtain this favor then, no longer gets any: so is it here likewise:
this is the time of celebration of a victory. For, says it, "so often as you eat this
bread, you do show forth the Lord's death." Then let us not approach
indifferently, nor imagine that these things are done in any ordinary sort. But it is
in another sense that we make mention of martyrs, and this, for assurance that
the Lord is not dead: and this, for a sign that death has received its death's blow,
that death itself is dead. Knowing these things, let us devise what consolations
we can for the departed, instead of tears, instead of laments, instead of tombs,
our alms, our prayers, our oblations, that both they and we may attain unto the
promised blessings, by the grace and loving-kindness of His only-begotten Son
our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be
glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.