6. This man then let us also emulate, and forsaking luxury and drunkenness
let us go over unto the life of restraint. For this surely is the time of confession
both for the uninitiated and for the baptized; for the one, that upon their
repentance they may partake of the sacred mysteries; for the others, that having
washed away their stain after baptism, they may approach the table with a clean
conscience. Let us then forsake this soft and effeminate way of living. For it is
not, it is not possible at once both to do penance and to live in luxury. And this
let John teach you by his raiment, by his food, by his abode. What then? Do you
require us, you may say, to practise such self-restraint as this? I do not require it,
but I advise and recommend it. But if this be not possible to you, let us at least,
though in cities, show forth repentance, for the judgment is surely at our doors.
But even if it were further off, we ought not even so to be emboldened, for the
term of each man's life is the end of the world virtually to him that is summoned.
But that it is even at the doors, hear Paul saying, "The night is far spent, the day
is at hand;" [Romans 13:12] and again, "He that comes will come, and will not
tarry." [Hebrews 10:37]
For the signs too are now complete, which announce that day. For "this
Gospel of the Kingdoms," says He, "shall be preached in all the world for a
witness unto all nations; and then shall the end come." Attend with care to what
is said. He said not, "when it has been believed by all men," but "when it has
been preached to all." For this cause he also said, "for a witness to the nations,"
to show, that He does not wait for all men to believe, and then for Him to come.
Since the phrase, "for a witness," has this meaning, "for accusation," "for
reproof," "for condemnation of them that have not believed."
But we, while hearing these things and seeing them, slumber, and see
dreams, sunk in a lethargy, as in some very deepest night. For the things present
are nothing better than dreams, whether they be prosperous, or whether they be
painful. Wherefore I entreat you now at length to be awakened, and to look
another way, unto the Sun of Righteousness. For no man while sleeping can see
the sun, nor delight his eyes with the beauty of its beams; but whatever he may

see, he beholds all as in a dream. For this cause we need much penance, and
many tears; both as being in a state of insensibility while we err, and because our
sins are great, and beyond excuse. And that I lie not, the more part of them that
hear me are witnesses. Nevertheless, although they be beyond excuse, let us
repent, and we shall receive crowns.
7. But by repentance I mean, not only to forsake our former evil deeds, but
also to show forth good deeds greater than those. For, "bring forth," says he,
"fruits meet for repentance." But how shall we bring them forth? If we do the
opposite things: as for instance, have you seized by violence the goods of others?
Henceforth give away even your own. Have you been guilty of fornication for a
long time? abstain even from your wife for certain appointed days; exercise
continence. Have you insulted and stricken such as were passing by? Henceforth
bless them that insult you, and do good to them that smite you. For it suffices not
for our health to have plucked out the dart only, but we must also apply remedies
to the wound. Have you lived in self-indulgence, and been drunken in time past?
Fast, and take care to drink water, in order to destroy the mischief that has so
grown up within you. Have you beheld with unchaste eyes beauty that belonged
to another? Henceforth do not so much as look upon a woman at all, that you
may stand in more safety. For it is said, "Depart from evil, and do good;" and
again, "Make your tongue to cease from evil, and your lips that they speak no
guile." "But tell me the good too." "Seek peace, and pursue it:" I mean not peace
with man only, but also peace with God. And he has well said, "pursue" her: for
she is driven away, and cast out; she has left the earth, and is gone to sojourn in
Heaven. Yet shall we be able to bring her back again, if we will put away pride
and boasting, and whatsoever things stand in her way, and will follow this
temperate and frugal life. For nothing is more grievous than wrath and fierce
anger. This renders men both puffed up and servile, by the former making them
ridiculous, by the other hateful; and bringing in opposite vices, pride and flattery,
at the same time. But if we will cut off the greediness of this passion, we shall be
both lowly with exactness, and exalted with safety. For in our bodies too all