greater.
But these things He says to show, that even before grace had come, these
were not among the principal things, or among those upon which men should
spend their labor, but the matters required were different. But if before the grace
they were so, much more when high commandments had come, were these
things unprofitable, and it was not meet to practise them at all.
In every case then is vice a grievous thing, but especially when it does not
so much as think it needs amendment; and it is yet more grievous, when it thinks
itself sufficient even to amend others; to express which Christ calls them "blind
guides." For if for a blind man not to think he needs a guide be extreme misery
and wretchedness; when he wishes himself to guide others, see to what a gulf it
leads.
But these things He said, by all intimating their mad desire of glory, and
their exceeding frenzy concerning this pest. For this became a cause to them of
all their evils, namely, that they did all things for display. This both led them
away from the faith, and caused them to neglect what really is virtue, and
induced them to busy themselves about bodily purifyings only, neglecting the
purifications of the soul. So therefore to lead them into what really is virtue, and
to the purifyings of the soul, He makes mention of mercy, and judgment, and
faith. For these are the things that comprise our life, these are what purify the
soul, justice, love to man, truth; the one inclining us to pardon and not suffering
us to be excessively severe and unforgiving to them that sin (for then shall we
gain doubly, both becoming kind to man, and hence meeting also ourselves with
much kindness from the God of all), and causing us both to sympathize with
them that are despitefully entreated, and to assist them; the other not suffering
them to be deceitful, and crafty.
But neither when He says, "These ought ye to have done, and not to leave
the others undone," does He say it as introducing a legal observance; away with
the thought; neither with regard to the platter and the cup, when He said,
"Cleanse that which is within the cup and platter, that the outside of them may be

clean also," does He bring us unto the old regard for little things, but on the
contrary indeed, He does all things to show it to be superfluous. For He said not,
Cleanse the outside of them also, but that which is within, and the outside is sure
to follow.
And besides, neither is it concerning a cup and platter he is speaking, but of
soul and body, by the outside meaning the body, by the inside the soul. But if
with regard to the platter there be need of that which is within much more with
regard to you.
But ye do the contrary, says He, observing things trifling and external, you
neglect what are great and inward: whence very great mischief arises, for that
thinking you have duly performed all, you despise the other things; and
despising them, you do not so much as strive or attempt to perform them.
After this, He again derides them for vainglory, calling them "whited
sepulchers," [Matthew 23:27] and unto all adding, "ye hypocrites;" which thing
is the cause of all their evils, and the origin of their ruin. And He did not merely
call them whited sepulchers, but said, that they were full of uncleanness and
hypocrisy. And these things He spoke, indicating the cause wherefore they did
not believe, because they were full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
But these things not Christ only, but the prophets also constantly lay to their
charge, that they spoil, that their rulers judge not according to the rule of justice,
and every where you may find the sacrifices indeed refused, but these things
required. So that there is nothing strange, nothing new, neither in the lawgiving,
nor in the accusation, nay not even in the comparison of the sepulchre. For the
prophet makes mention thereof, neither did he call them merely a sepulchre, "but
their throat an open sepulchre."
Such are many men now also, decking themselves indeed outwardly, but
full of iniquity within. For now too there is many a mode, and many a care for
outward purifications, but of those in the soul not so much as one. But if indeed
any one should tear open each man's conscience, many worms and much
corruption would he find, and an ill savor beyond utterance; unreasonable and