together, and left the cities, in order to see that holy personage, and still none of
these things unnerved him. For he was far above glory, and free from all vanity.
So also Stephen, when he saw the same people again, not honoring him, but mad
upon him, and gnashing their teeth, being lifted above their wrath, said, "You
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart." [Acts 7:51] Thus also Elias, when
those armies were present, and the king, and all the people, said, "How long halt
ye upon both your hips?" [1 Kings 18:21, Septuagint, true sense of "halt."] But
we flatter all, court all, with this servile obsequiousness buying their honor.
Wherefore all things are turned upside down, and for this favor the business of
Christianity is betrayed, and everything neglected for the opinion of the
generality. Let us then banish this passion, and then we shall have a right notion
of liberty, and of the haven, and the calm. For the vain man is ever like persons
in a storm, trembling, and fearing, and serving a thousand masters. But he that is
clear of this thraldom, is like men in havens, enjoying a liberty untainted. Not so
that person, but as many acquaintances as he has, so many masters has he, and
he is forced to be a slave to all of them. How then are we to get free from this
hard bondage? It is by growing enamoured of another glory, which is really
glory. For as with those that are enamoured of persons, the sight of some
handsomer one does by its being seen take them off from the first: so with those
that court the glory which comes from us men, the glory from heaven, if it
gleams on them, has power to lead them off from this. Let us then look to this,
and become thoroughly acquainted with it, that by feeling admiration of its
beauty, we may shun the hideousness of the other, and have the benefit of much
pleasure by enjoying this continually. Which may we all attain to by the grace
and love toward man, etc.

## Homily 18 on Romans

Romans X. 14, 15
"How then shall they call on Him in Whom they have not believed? And
how shall they believe in Him of Whom they have not heard? And how shall they
hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach except they be sent? As it is
written."
Here again he takes from them all excuse. For since he had said, "I bear
them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge," and
that "being ignorant of God's righteousness, they submitted not themselves" to it:
he next shows, that for this ignorance itself they were punishable before God.
This he does not say indeed so, but he makes it good by carrying on his
discourse in the way of question, and so convicting them more clearly, by
framing the whole passage out of objections and answers. But look further back.
The Prophet, says he, said, "Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord
shall be saved." Now somebody might say perhaps, But how could they call
upon Him Whom they had not believed? Then there is a question from him after
the objection; And why did they not believe? Then an objection again. A person
certainly may say, And how could they believe, since they had not heard? Yet
hear they did, he implies. Then another objection again. "And how could they
hear without a preacher?" Then an answer again. Yet preach they did, and there
were many sent forth for this very purpose. And whence does it appear that these
are those persons sent? Then he brings the prophet in next, who says, "How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad
tidings of good things!" [Isaiah 3:7] You see how by the kind of preaching he
points out the preachers. For there was nothing else that these men went about
telling everywhere, but those unspeakable good things, and the peace made by
God with men. And so by disbelieving, it is not we, he implies, whom you