things there is one thing which determines to a special grade, and
that is the form; and another thing which is determined, and this is
the matter; and hence from the latter the "genus" is derived, and
from the former the "difference." Whereas in immaterial things there
is no separate determinator and thing determined; each thing by its
own self holds a determinate grade in being; and therefore in them
"genus" and "difference" are not derived from different things, but
from one and the same. Nevertheless, this differs in our mode of
conception; for, inasmuch as our intellect considers it as
indeterminate, it derives the idea of their "genus"; and inasmuch as
it considers it determinately, it derives the idea of their "difference."
Reply to Objection 2: This reason is given in the book on the Fount
of Life, and it would be cogent, supposing that the receptive mode of
the intellect and of matter were the same. But this is clearly false. For
matter receives the form, that thereby it may be constituted in some
species, either of air, or of fire, or of something else. But the intellect
does not receive the form in the same way; otherwise the opinion of
Empedocles (De Anima i, 5, text 26) would be true, to the effect that
we know earth by earth, and fire by fire. But the intelligible form is in
the intellect according to the very nature of a form; for as such is it
so known by the intellect. Hence such a way of receiving is not that
of matter, but of an immaterial substance.
Reply to Objection 3: Although there is no composition of matter and
form in an angel, yet there is act and potentiality. And this can be
made evident if we consider the nature of material things which
contain a twofold composition. The first is that of form and matter,
whereby the nature is constituted. Such a composite nature is not its
own existence but existence is its act. Hence the nature itself is
related to its own existence as potentiality to act. Therefore if there
be no matter, and supposing that the form itself subsists without
matter, there nevertheless still remains the relation of the form to its
very existence, as of potentiality to act. And such a kind of
composition is understood to be in the angels; and this is what some
say, that an angel is composed of, "whereby he is," and "what is," or
"existence," and "what is," as Boethius says. For "what is," is the
form itself subsisting; and the existence itself is whereby the
substance is; as the running is whereby the runner runs. But in God
"existence" and "what is" are not different as was explained above
(Question 3, Article 4). Hence God alone is pure act.
Reply to Objection 4: Every creature is simply finite, inasmuch as its

existence is not absolutely subsisting, but is limited to some nature
to which it belongs. But there is nothing against a creature being
considered relatively infinite. Material creatures are infinite on the
part of matter, but finite in their form, which is limited by the matter
which receives it. But immaterial created substances are finite in
their being; whereas they are infinite in the sense that their forms are
not received in anything else; as if we were to say, for example, that
whiteness existing separate is infinite as regards the nature of
whiteness, forasmuch as it is not contracted to any one subject;
while its "being" is finite as determined to some one special nature.
Whence it is said (De Causis, prop. 16) that "intelligence is finite
from above," as receiving its being from above itself, and is "infinite
from below," as not received in any matter.