in us also; but we accomplish those things more easily of which the power lies in
ourselves. Therefore, as being the greater, he puts it last. And he said not simply
"were at enmity," but "were alienated," which denotes great enmity, nor yet
"alienated" [only], but without any expectation even of returning. "And enemies
in your mind," he says; then the alienation had not proceeded so far as purpose
only— but what? "in your wicked works" also. You were both enemies, he says,
and you did the works of enemies.
"Yet now has He reconciled in the body of His flesh through death to
present you holy and without blemish and unreprovable before Him." Again he
lays down also the manner of the reconciliation, that it was "in the Body," not by
being merely beaten, nor scourged, nor sold, but even by dying a death the most
shameful. Again he makes mention of the Cross, and again lays down another
benefit. For He did not only "deliver," but, as he says above, "Who made us
meet" [Colossians 1:12], to the same he alludes here also. "Through" His
"death," he says, "to present you holy and without blemish and unreprovable
before Him." For truly, He has not only delivered from sins, but has also placed
among the approved. For, not that He might deliver us from evils only, did He
suffer so great things, but that also we might obtain the first rewards; as if one
should not only free a condemned criminal from his punishment, but also
advance him to honor. And he has ranked you with those who have not sinned,
yea rather not with those who have done no sin only, but even with those who
have wrought the greatest righteousness; and, what is truly a great thing, has
given the holiness which is before Him, and the being unreprovable. Now an
advance upon unblamable is unreprovable, when we have done nothing either to
be condemned for, or charged with. But, since he ascribed the whole to Him,
because through His death He achieved these things; "what then, says one, is it
to us? We need nothing." Therefore he added,
Ver. 23. "If so be that you continue in the faith grounded and steadfast, and
not moved away from the hope of the Gospel."
Here he strikes a blow at their listlessness. And he said not simply

"continue," for it is possible to continue wavering, and vacillating; it is possible
to stand, and continue, though turned this way and that. "If so be that you
continue," he says, "grounded and steadfast, and not moved away." Wonderful!
What a forcible metaphor he uses; he says not only not tossed to and fro, but not
even moved. And observe, he lays down so far nothing burdensome, nor
toilsome, but faith and hope; that is, if you continue believing, that the hope of
the things to come is true. For this indeed is possible; but, as regards virtuous
living, it is not possible to avoid being shaken about, though it be but a little; so
(what he enjoins) is not grievous.
"From the hope," he says, "of the Gospel, which you heard, which was
preached in all creation under heaven." But what is the hope of the Gospel,
except Christ? For He Himself is our peace, that has wrought all these things: so
that he who ascribes them to others is "moved away": for he has lost all, unless
he believe in Christ. "Which ye heard," he says. And again he brings themselves
as witnesses, then the whole world. He says not, "which is being preached," but
has already been believed and preached. As he did also at the outset [Colossians
1:6], being desirous by the witness of the many to establish these also. "Whereof
I Paul was made a minister." This also contributes to make it credible; "I," says
he, "Paul a minister." For great was his authority, as being now everywhere
celebrated, and the teacher of the world.
Ver. 24. "Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and fill up on my
part that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for His Body's
sake, which is the Church."
And what is the connection of this? It seems indeed not to be connected, but
it is even closely so. And "minister," he says, that is, bringing in nothing from
myself, but announcing what is from another. I so believe, that I suffer even for
His sake, and not suffer only, but even rejoice in suffering, looking unto the hope
which is to come, and I suffer not for myself, but for you. "And fill up," he says,
"that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh." It seems indeed to
be a great thing he has said; but it is not of arrogancy, far be it, but even of much