Ps. lxviii. 18; Eph. iv. 8.
seems to us no difficulty in the word, and consequently no necessity for change.

John xvii. 12.

case the Æon is said to have been in danger of dissolution and destruction, and [there are also] her
Enthymesis and passion: for they markedly distinguish Enthymesis from the passion; and they
represent the Æon as being restored, and Enthymesis as acquiring form, but the passion, when
separated from these, as becoming matter. Since, therefore, there are thus these three, the Æon, her
Enthymesis, and her passion, Judas and Matthias, being only two, cannot be the types of them.

### Chapter XXI.—The twelve apostles were not a type of the Æons.
1. If, again, they maintain that the twelve apostles were a type only of that group of twelve
Æons which Anthropos in conjunction with Ecclesia produced, then let them produce ten other
apostles as a type of those ten remaining Æons, who, as they declare, were produced by Logos and
Zoe. For it is unreasonable to suppose that the junior, and for that reason inferior Æons, were set
forth by the Saviour through the election of the apostles, while their seniors, and on this account
their superiors, were not thus foreshown; since the Saviour (if, that is to say, He chose the apostles
with this view, that by means of them He might show forth the Æons who are in the Pleroma) might
have chosen other ten apostles also, and likewise other eight before these, that thus He might set
forth the original and primary Ogdoad. He could not, in regard to the second [Duo] Decad, show
forth [any emblem of it] through the number of the apostles being [already] constituted a type. For
[He made choice of no such other number of disciples; but] after the twelve apostles, our Lord is
found to have sent seventy others before Him. Now seventy cannot possibly be the type either
of an Ogdoad, a Decad, or a Triacontad. What is the reason, then, that the inferior Æons are, as I
have said, represented by means of the apostles; but the superior, from whom, too, the former
derived their being, are not prefigured at all? But if the twelve apostles were chosen with this
object, that the number of the twelve Æons might be indicated by means of them, then the seventy
also ought to have been chosen to be the type of seventy Æons; and in that case, they must affirm
that the Æons are no longer thirty, but eighty-two in number. For He who made choice of the
apostles, that they might be a type of those Æons existing in the Pleroma, would never have
constituted them types of some and not of others; but by means of the apostles He would have tried
to preserve an image and to exhibit a type of those Æons that exist in the Pleroma.
2. Moreover we must not keep silence respecting Paul, but demand from them after the type of
what Æon that apostle has been handed down to us, unless perchance [they affirm that he is a