he calls Him "a Minister of the circumcision," he means this, that by having
come and fulfilled the Law, and been circumcised, and born of the seed of
Abraham, He undid the curse, stayed the anger of God, made also those that
were to receive the promises fit for them, as being once for all freed from their
alienation. To prevent then these accused persons from saying, How then came
Christ to be circumcised and to keep the whole Law? He turns their argument to
the opposite conclusion. For it was not that the Law might continue, but that He
might put an end to it, and free you from the curse thereof, and set you entirely
at liberty from the dominion of that Law. For it was because you had
transgressed the Law, that He fulfilled it, not that you might fulfil it, but that He
might confirm to you the promises made unto the fathers, which the Law had
caused to be suspended, by showing you to have offended, and to be unworthy
of the inheritance. And so thou also art saved by grace, since you were cast off.
Do not thou then bicker, nor perversely cling to the Law at this unsuitable time,
since it would have cast you also out of the promise, unless Christ had suffered
so many things for you. And He did suffer these, not because you were
deserving of salvation, but that God might be true. And then that this might not
puff up him of the Gentiles, he says.
Ver. 9. "And that the Gentiles might glorify God for His mercy."
But what he means is this. Those of the Jews would have had promises,
even though they were unworthy. But you had not this even, but wast saved from
love towards man alone, even if, to put it at the lowest, they too would not have
been the better for the promises, unless Christ had come. But yet that he might
amalgamate (or temper, [κεράσῃ]) them and not allow them to rise up against the
weak, he makes mention of the promises. But of these he says that it was by
mercy alone that they were saved. Hence they are the most bound to glorify God.
And a glory it is to God that they be blended together, be united, praise with one
mind, bear the weaker, neglect not the member that is broken off. Then he adds
testimonies, in which he shows that the man of the Jews ought to blend himself
with those of the Gentiles; and so he says, "As it is written, For this cause I will

confess to You among the Gentiles, O Lord, and will sing unto Your Name."
[Psalm 18:46]
Ver. 10-12. "And, rejoice, you Gentiles, with His people. And, Praise the
Lord, all you Gentiles" [Deuteronomy 32:43]; "and let all people laud Him."
[Psalm 117:1] "And, There shall be a root of Jesse, and He that shall rise to
reign over the Gentiles, in Him shall the Gentiles trust." [Isaiah 11:1, 10]
Now all these quotations he has given to show that we ought to be united,
and to glorify God; and also, to humble the Jew, that he may not lift himself up
over these, since all the prophets called these, as well as to persuade the man of
the Gentiles to be lowly, by showing him that he had a larger grace to answer for.
Then he concludes his argument with a prayer again.
Ver. 13. "Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing,
that you may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost."
That is, that you may get clear of that heartlessness ([ἀ] [θυμίας]) towards
one another, and may never be cast down by temptations. And this will be by
your abounding in hope. Now this is the cause of all good things, and it comes
from the Holy Ghost. But it is not simply from the Spirit, but on condition of our
contributing our part also. This is why he says, "in believing." For this is the way
for you to be filled with joy, if you believe, if you hope. Yet he does not say if
you hope, but, "if you abound in hope," so as not to find comfort in troubles
only, but even to have joy through the abundance of faith and hope. And in this
way, you will also draw the Spirit to you. In this way, when He has come you
will continually keep to all good things. For just as food maintains our life, and
by this rules the body, so if we have good works, we shall have the Spirit; and if
we have the Spirit, we shall also have good works. As also, on the other hand, if
we have no works, the Spirit flies away. But if we be deserted by the Spirit, we
shall also halt in our works. For when this has gone, the unclean one comes: this
is plain from Saul. For what if he does not choke us as he did him, still he
strangles us in some other way by wicked works. We have need then of the harp
of David, that we may charm our souls with the divine songs, both these, and