47. At the Council Paul VI solemnly proclaimed that Mary is the Mother of the Church,
"that is, Mother of the entire Christian people, both faithful and pastors." Later, in
1968, in the Profession of faith known as the "Credo of the People of God." he restated
this truth in an even more forceful way in these words: "We believe that the Most Holy
Mother of God, the new Eve, the Mother of the Church, carries on in heaven her maternal
role with regard to the members of Christ, cooperating in the birth and development of
divine life in the souls of the redeemed."

The Council's teaching emphasized that the truth concerning the Blessed Virgin, Mother
of Christ, is an effective aid in exploring more deeply the truth concerning the Church.
When speaking of the Constitution Lumen Gentium, which had just been approved by the
Council, Paul VI said: "Knowledge of the true Catholic doctrine regarding the Blessed
Virgin Mary will always be a key to the exact understanding of the mystery of Christ and
of the Church." Mary is present in the Church as the Mother of Christ, and at the same
time as that Mother whom Christ, in the mystery of the Redemption, gave to humanity in
the person of the Apostle John. Thus, in her new motherhood in the Spirit, Mary
embraces each and every one in the Church, and embraces each and every one through
the Church. In this sense Mary, Mother of the Church, is also the Church's model. Indeed,
as Paul VI hopes and asks, the Church must draw "from the Virgin Mother of God the
most authentic form of perfect imitation of Christ."

Thanks to this special bond linking the Mother of Christ with the Church, there is further
clarified the mystery of that "woman" who, from the first chapters of the Book of Genesis
until the Book of Revelation, accompanies the revelation of God's salvific plan for
humanity. For Mary, present in the Church as the Mother of the Redeemer, takes part, as
a mother, in that monumental struggle; against the powers of darkness" which
continues throughout human history. And by her ecclesial identification as the "woman
clothed with the sun" (Rev. 12:1), it can be said that "in the Most Holy Virgin the
Church has already reached that perfection whereby she exists without spot or wrinkle."
Hence, as Christians raise their eyes with faith to Mary in the course of their earthly
pilgrimage, they "strive to increase in holiness." Mary, the exalted Daughter of Sion,
helps all her children, wherever they may be and whatever their condition, to find in
Christ the path to the Father's house.

Thus, throughout her life, the Church maintains with the Mother of God a link which
embraces, in the saving mystery, the past, the present and the future, and venerates her as
the spiritual mother of humanity and the advocate of grace.

### 3. The meaning of the Marian Year
48. It is precisely the special bond between humanity and this Mother which has led me
to proclaim a Marian Year in the Church, in this period before the end of the Second
Millennium since Christ's birth, a similar initiative was taken in the past. when Pius XII
proclaimed 1954 as a Marian Year, in order to highlight the exceptional holiness of the
Mother of Christ as expressed in the mysteries of her Immaculate Conception (defined
exactly a century before) and of her Assumption into heaven.