together alone, at a time and place which are open to suspicion, or
"nudas cum nuda."
Reply to Objection 5: A husband may accuse his wife of adultery in
two ways. First, he may seek a separation from bed before a spiritual
judge, and then there is no need for an inscription to be made under
the pain of retaliation, since thus the husband would gain his end, as
the objection proves. Secondly, he may seek for the crime to be
punished in a secular court, and then it is necessary for inscription
to precede, whereby he binds himself under pain of retaliation if he
fail to prove his case.
Reply to Objection 6: According to a Decretal (Extra, De Simonia,
cap. Licet), "there are three modes of procedure in criminal cases.
First, by inquisition, which should be preceded by notoriety;
secondly, by accusation, which should be preceded by inscription;
[SS, Question 33, Article 7] thirdly, by denunciation, which should be
preceded by fraternal correction." Accordingly the saying of our
Lord refers to the case where the process is by way of denunciation,
and not by accusation, because then the end in view is not only the
correction of the guilty party, but also his punishment, for the
safeguarding of the common good, which would be destroyed if
justice were lacking.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether in a case of divorce husband and wife

should be judged on a par with each other?
Objection 1: It would seem that, in a case of divorce, husband and
wife ought not to be judged on a par with each other. For divorce
under the New Law takes the place of the divorce [repudium]
recognized by the Old Law (Mt. 5:31,32). Now in the "repudium"
husband and wife were not judged on a par with each other, since
the husband could put away his wife, but not "vice versa." Therefore
neither in divorce ought they to be judged on a par with each other.
Objection 2: Further, it is more opposed to the natural law that a wife
have several husbands than that a husband have several wives:
wherefore the latter has been sometimes lawful, but the former
never. Therefore the wife sins more grievously in adultery than the
husband, and consequently they ought not to be judged on a par
with each other.
Objection 3: Further, where there is greater injury to one's neighbor,
there is a greater sin. Now the adulterous wife does a greater injury
to her husband, than does the adulterous husband to his wife, since
a wife's adultery involves uncertainty of the offspring, whereas the
husband's adultery does not. Therefore the wife's sin is the greater,
and so they ought not to be judged on a par with each other.
Objection 4: Further, divorce is prescribed in order to punish the
crime of adultery. Now it belongs to the husband who is the head of
the wife (1 Cor. 11:3) to correct his wife, rather than "vice versa."
Therefore they should not be judged on a par with each other for the
purpose of divorce, but the husband ought to have the preference.
Objection 5: On the contrary, It would seem in this matter the wife
ought to have the preference. For the more frail the sinner the more
is his sin deserving of pardon. Now there is greater frailty in women
than in men, for which reason Chrysostom [Hom. xl in Opus
Imperfectum] says that "lust is a passion proper to women," and the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 7) that "properly speaking women are
not said to be continent on account of their being easily inclined to
concupiscence," for neither can dumb animals be continent,
because they have nothing to stand in the way of their desires.
Therefore women are rather to be spared in the punishment of