necessity wrote to those for whom he cared so greatly. For while the reason why
he was not sent to them is plain, yet he was not forbidden to write. And that they
were becoming fainthearted he shows when he says, 'Lift up the hands which
hang down, and the feeble knees, and make straight paths' and again, 'God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and love.' For the soul overtaken by many trials,
was turned aside even from the faith. Therefore he exhorts them to 'Give heed to
the things which they have heard, and that there should not be an evil heart of
unbelief.' On this account also, in this Epistle, especially, he argues at length
concerning faith, and after much [reasoning] shows at the end that to them [of
old] also He promised good things in hand, and yet gave nothing.
And besides these things, he establishes two points that they might not
think themselves forsaken: the one, that they should bear nobly whatever befalls
them; the other, that they should look assuredly for their recompense. For truly
He will not overlook those with Abel and the line of unrewarded righteous
following him.
And he draws comfort in three ways: first, from the things which Christ
suffered: as He Himself says, 'The servant is not greater than his Lord.' Next,
from the good things laid up for the believers. Thirdly, from the evils; and this
point he enforces not only from the things to come (which would be less
persuasive), but also from the past and from what had befallen their fathers.
Christ also does the same, at one time saying, 'The servant is not greater than his
Lord'; and again, 'There are many mansions with the Father'; and He denounces
innumerable woes on the unbelievers.
But he speaks much of both the New and the Old Covenant; for this was
useful to him for the proof of the Resurrection. Lest they should disbelieve that
[Christ] rose on account of the things which He suffered, he confirms it from the
Prophets, and shows that not the Jewish, but ours are the sacred [institutions].
For the temple yet stood and the sacrificial rites; therefore he says, 'Let us go
forth therefore without, bearing His reproach.' But this also was made an
argument against him: 'If these things are a shadow, if these things are an image,

how is it that they have not passed away or given place when the truth was
manifested, but these things still flourish?' This also he quietly intimates shall
happen, and that at a time close at hand.
Moreover, he makes it plain that they had been a long time in the faith and
in afflictions, saying, 'When for the time ye ought to be teachers,' and, 'Lest there
be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief,' and ye became 'Followers of them
who through patience inherit the promises.'

## Homily 1 on Hebrews