2).
Reply to Objection 1: The good and wicked angels have free-will, but
according to the manner and condition of their state, as has been
said.
Reply to Objection 2: God's mercy delivers from sin those who
repent. But such as are not capable of repenting, cling immovably to
sin, and are not delivered by the Divine mercy.
Reply to Objection 3: The devil's first sin still remains in him
according to desire; although not as to his believing that he can
obtain what he desired. Even so, if a man were to believe that he can
commit murder, and wills to commit it, and afterwards the power is
taken from him; nevertheless, the will to murder can stay with him,
so that he would he had done it, or still would do it if he could.
Reply to Objection 4: The fact that man sinned from another's
suggestion, is not the whole cause of man's sin being pardonable.
Consequently the argument does not hold good.
Reply to Objection 5: A demon's act is twofold. One comes of
deliberate will; and this is properly called his own act. Such an act
on the demon's part is always wicked; because, although at times he
does something good, yet he does not do it well; as when he tells the
truth in order to deceive; and when he believes and confesses, yet
not willingly, but compelled by the evidence of things. Another kind
of act is natural to the demon; this can be good and bears witness to
the goodness of nature. Yet he abuses even such good acts to evil
purpose.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there is sorrow in the demons?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no sorrow in the demons.
For since sorrow and joy are opposites, they cannot be together in
the same subject. But there is joy in the demons: for Augustine
writing against the Maniches (De Gen. Contra Manich. ii, 17) says:
"The devil has power over them who despise God's commandments,
and he rejoices over this sinister power." Therefore there is no
sorrow in the demons.
Objection 2: Further, sorrow is the cause of fear, for those things
cause fear while they are future, which cause sorrow when they are
present. But there is no fear in the demons, according to Job 41:24,
"Who was made to fear no one." Therefore there is no grief in the
demons.
Objection 3: Further, it is a good thing to be sorry for evil. But the
demons can do no good action. Therefore they cannot be sorry, at
least for the evil of sin; which applies to the worm of conscience.
On the contrary, The demon's sin is greater than man's sin. But man
is punished with sorrow on account of the pleasure taken in sin,
according to Apoc. 18:7, "As much as she hath glorified herself, and
lived in delicacies, so much torment and sorrow give ye to her."
Consequently much more is the devil punished with the grief of
sorrow, because he especially glorified himself.
I answer that, Fear, sorrow, joy, and the like, so far as they are
passions, cannot exist in the demons; for thus they are proper to the
sensitive appetite, which is a power in a corporeal organ. According,
however, as they denote simple acts of the will, they can be in the
demons. And it must be said that there is sorrow in them; because
sorrow, as denoting a simple act of the will, is nothing else than the
resistance of the will to what is, or to what is not. Now it is evident
that the demons would wish many things not to be, which are, and
others to be, which are not: for, out of envy, they would wish others
to be damned, who are saved. Consequently, sorrow must be said to
exist in them: and especially because it is of the very notion of
punishment for it to be repugnant to the will. Moreover, they are
deprived of happiness, which they desire naturally; and their wicked
will is curbed in many respects.