SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.118, C.3.

covetousness, as when a man is prodigal in going to great expense
in order to curry favor with certain persons from whom he may
receive riches.
Reply to Objection 2: The Apostle bids the rich to be ready to give
and communicate their riches, according as they ought. The prodigal
does not do this: since, as the Philosopher remarks (Ethic. iv, 1), "his
giving is neither good, nor for a good end, nor according as it ought
to be. For sometimes they give much to those who ought to be poor,
namely, to buffoons and flatterers, whereas to the good they give
nothing."
Reply to Objection 3: The excess in prodigality consists chiefly, not
in the total amount given, but in the amount over and above what
ought to be given. Hence sometimes the liberal man gives more than
the prodigal man, if it be necessary. Accordingly we must reply that
those who give all their possessions with the intention of following
Christ, and banish from their minds all solicitude for temporal things,
are not prodigal but perfectly liberal.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.118, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether prodigality is a more grievous sin than

covetousness?
Objection 1: It seems that prodigality is a more grievous sin than
covetousness. For by covetousness a man injures his neighbor by
not communicating his goods to him, whereas by prodigality a man
injures himself, because the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 1) that "the
wasting of riches, which are the means whereby a man lives, is an
undoing of his very being." Now he that injures himself sins more
grievously, according to Ecclus. 14:5, "He that is evil to himself, to
whom will he be good?" Therefore prodigality is a more grievous sin
than covetousness.
Objection 2: Further, a disorder that is accompanied by a laudable
circumstance is less sinful. Now the disorder of covetousness is
sometimes accompanied by a laudable circumstance, as in the case
of those who are unwilling to spend their own, lest they be driven to
accept from others: whereas the disorder of prodigality is
accompanied by a circumstance that calls for blame, inasmuch as
we ascribe prodigality to those who are intemperate, as the
Philosopher observes (Ethic. iv, 1). Therefore prodigality is a more
grievous sin than covetousness.
Objection 3: Further, prudence is chief among the moral virtues, as
stated above (Question 56, Article 1, ad 1; FS, Question 61, Article 2,
ad 1). Now prodigality is more opposed to prudence than
covetousness is: for it is written (Prov. 21:20): "There is a treasure to
be desired, and oil in the dwelling of the just; and the foolish man
shall spend it": and the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 6) that "it is the
mark of a fool to give too much and receive nothing." Therefore
prodigality is a more grievous sin than covetousness.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 6) that "the prodigal
seems to be much better than the illiberal man."
I answer that, Prodigality considered in itself is a less grievous sin
than covetousness, and this for three reasons. First, because
covetousness differs more from the opposite virtue: since giving,
wherein the prodigal exceeds, belongs to liberality more than
receiving or retaining, wherein the covetous man exceeds. Secondly,
because the prodigal man is of use to the many to whom he gives,