And sometimes He heals by words only, sometimes He even stretches forth
His hand, sometimes He does both these things, to bring into sight His way of
healing. For it was not His will always to work miracles in the more surpassing
manner: it being needful for Him to be concealed awhile, and especially as
concerned His disciples; since they out of their great delight would have
proclaimed everything. And this was evident from the fact, that even after
coming to the mount, it was needful to charge them that they should tell no man.
Having therefore touched her body, He not only quenched the fever, but
also gave her back perfect health. Thus, the disease being an ordinary one, He
displayed His power by the manner of healing; a thing which no physician's art
could have wrought. For you know that even after the departing of fevers, the
patients yet need much time to return to their former health. But then all took
place at once.
And not in this case only, but also in that of the sea. For neither there did
He quiet the winds only and the storm, but He also stayed at once the swelling of
the waves; and this also was a strange thing. For even if the tempest should
cease, the waves continue to swell for a long time.
But with Christ it was not so, but all at once was ended: and so it befell this
woman also. Wherefore also the evangelist, to declare this, said, "She arose and
ministered unto Him;" [Matthew 8:15] which was a sign both of Christ's power,
and of the disposition of the woman, which she showed towards Christ.
And another thing together with these we may hence observe, that Christ
grants the healing of some to the faith even of others. Since in this case too,
others besought Him, as also in the instance of the centurion's servant. And this
grant He makes, when there is no unbelief in him that is to be healed, but either
through disease he cannot come unto Him, or through ignorance imagines
nothing great of Him, or because of His immature age.
2. "When the evening had come, they brought unto Him many that were
possessed with devils: and He cast out the spirits from them with a word, and
healed all that were sick: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the

Prophet Esaias, that He took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses."
Do you see the multitude, by this time growing in faith? For not even when
the time pressed could they endure to depart, nor did they account it
unseasonable to bring their sick to Him at eventide.
But mark, I pray you, how great a multitude of persons healed the
evangelists pass quickly over, not mentioning one by one, and giving us an
account of them, but in one word traversing an unspeakable sea of miracles.
Then lest the greatness of the wonder should drive us again to unbelief, that even
so great a people and their various diseases should be delivered and healed by
Him in one moment of time, He brings in the prophet also to bear witness to
what is going on: indicating the abundance of the proof we have, in every case,
out of the Scriptures; such, that from the miracles themselves we have no more;
and He says, that Esaias also spoke of these things; "He took our infirmities, and
bare our sicknesses." He said not, "He did them away," but "He took and bare
them;" which seems to me to be spoken rather of sins, by the prophet, in
harmony with John, where he says, "Behold the Lamb of God, that bears the sin
of the world." [John 1:29]
How then does the evangelist here apply it to diseases? Either as rehearsing
the passage in the historical sense, or to show that most of our diseases arise
from sins of the soul. For if the sum of all, death itself, has its root and
foundation from sin, much more the majority of our diseases also: since our very
capability of suffering did itself originate there.
3. "Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about Him, He gave
commandment to depart unto the other side." [Matthew 8:18]
Do you see again His freedom from ostentation? In that as the others say,
"He charged the devils not to say it was He," so this writer says, He repels the
multitudes from Him. Now in so doing, He was at once both training us to be
moderate, and at the same time allaying the envy of the Jews, and teaching us to
do nothing for display. For He was not, we know, a healer to bodies only, but a
curer also of the soul, and a teacher of self-restraint; by both disclosing Himself,