111. Evangelization is the task of the Church. The Church, as the agent of evangelization, is more
than an organic and hierarchical institution; she is first and foremost a people advancing on its
pilgrim way towards God. She is certainly a mystery rooted in the Trinity, yet she exists concretely
in history as a people of pilgrims and evangelizers, transcending any institutional expression,
however necessary. I would like to dwell briefly on this way of understanding the Church, whose
ultimate foundation is in the free and gracious initiative of God.

A people for everyone

112. The salvation which God offers us is the work of his mercy. No human efforts, however good
they may be, can enable us to merit so great a gift. God, by his sheer grace, draws us to himself
and makes us one with him. He sends his Spirit into our hearts to make us his children,
transforming us and enabling us to respond to his love by our lives. The Church is sent by Jesus
Christ as the sacrament of the salvation offered by God. Through her evangelizing activity, she
cooperates as an instrument of that divine grace which works unceasingly and inscrutably.
Benedict XVI put it nicely at the beginning of the Synod’s reflections: “It is important always to
know that the first word, the true initiative, the true activity comes from God and only by inserting
ourselves into the divine initiative, only begging for this divine initiative, shall we too be able to
become – with him and in him – evangelizers”. This principle of the primacy of grace must be a
beacon which constantly illuminates our reflections on evangelization.

113. The salvation which God has wrought, and the Church joyfully proclaims, is for everyone.
God has found a way to unite himself to every human being in every age. He has chosen to call
them together as a people and not as isolated individuals. No one is saved by himself or
herself, individually, or by his or her own efforts. God attracts us by taking into account the
complex interweaving of personal relationships entailed in the life of a human community. This
people which God has chosen and called is the Church. Jesus did not tell the apostles to form an
exclusive and elite group. He said: “Go and make disciples of all nations” (Mt 28:19). Saint Paul
tells us in the people of God, in the Church, “there is neither Jew or Greek... for you are all one in
Christ Jesus” (Gal 3:28). To those who feel far from God and the Church, to all those who are
fearful or indifferent, I would like to say this: the Lord, with great respect and love, is also calling

you to be a part of his people!

114. Being Church means being God’s people, in accordance with the great plan of his fatherly
love. This means that we are to be God’s leaven in the midst of humanity. It means proclaiming
and bringing God’s salvation into our world, which often goes astray and needs to be encouraged,
given hope and strengthened on the way. The Church must be a place of mercy freely given,
where everyone can feel welcomed, loved, forgiven and encouraged to live the good life of the
Gospel.