victorious, and are crowned! But this adversary, when he had battered the body
of the just man, perforating it with ulcers of every kind, and had reduced him to
great weakness, was then conquered, and drew back. Even when he had pierced
his ribs in every direction, he was no gainer thereby; for he spoiled him not of
his hidden treasure, but he made him more conspicuous to us; and through that
piercing he gave to all the privilege to look into his interior, and to discern
completely the whole of his wealth! When he expected to prevail, then he
withdrew with much ignominy, and never again uttered a syllable! What is the
matter, O devil? For what cause do you withdraw? Was not everything done that
you chose? Have you not taken away his flocks, his herds, his droves of horses
and of mules? Have you not also destroyed his troop of children? And battered
his flesh to pieces. For what reason do you withdraw? "Because," says he, "every
thing I chose has come to pass, and yet that which I most desired should come to
pass, and for which I did all those things, is not come to pass; he has not
blasphemed! For it was in order to this, continues he, that I was doing all those
things; and as this is not come to pass, I am no gainer by having deprived him of
his wealth; or by the destruction of his children; or by the plague inflicted upon
his body; but the reverse of what I purposed has come to pass; I have made my
enemy more illustrious; I have added lustre to his reputation." Perceivest thou, O
beloved, how great was the reward of tribulation? His body was fair and sound
before, but it became more venerable, when pierced through and through by
these wounds! And thus wool, fair as it is before the dyeing, when it becomes
purple, takes an indescribable beauty, and an additional grace. But if he had not
stripped him, we should not have known the good condition of the victor; if he
had not pierced the body with ulcers, the rays within would not have shone forth.
If he had not made him sit down upon a dunghill, we should not have known his
wealth. For a king sitting on a throne is not so illustrious, as this man was
notable and conspicuous, while sitting upon his dunghill! For after the royal
throne, comes death; but after that dunghill, the kingdom of heaven!
4. Collecting then all these reasons, let us raise ourselves from the dejection

which oppresses us. For I have laid these histories before you, not that you may
applaud what is spoken, but that you may imitate the virtue and the patience of
such noble men; that you may learn from the very facts, that there is nothing of
human ills to be dreaded, save sin only; neither poverty, nor disease, nor insult,
nor malicious treatment, nor ignominy, nor death, which is accounted the worst
of all evils. To those who love spiritual wisdom, such things are only the names
of calamities; names which have no substantial reality. But the true calamity
consists in offending God, and in doing anything which is displeasing to Him.
For tell me, what is there in death which is terrible? Is it because it transports
you more quickly to the peaceful haven, and to that life which is free from
tumult? Although man should not put you to death, will not the very law of
nature, at length stealing upon you, separate the body from the soul; and if this
event which we fear does not happen now, it will happen shortly.
5. I speak thus, not anticipating any dread or melancholy event: God forbid!
But because I am ashamed for those who are afraid of death. Tell me, while
expecting such good things as "eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered
the heart of man," do you demur about this enjoyment, and art negligent and
slothful; and not only slothful, but fearful and trembling? And is it not shameful
that you are distressed on account of death, whereas Paul groaned on account of
the present life, and writing to the Romans said, "The creation groans together,
and ourselves also which have the first fruits of the Spirit do groan."
[Romans 8:22-23] And he spoke thus, not as condemning the things present, but
longing for the things to come. "I have tasted," says he, "of the grace, and I do
not willingly put up with the delay. I have the first fruits of the Spirit, and I press
on towards the whole. I have ascended to the third heaven; I have seen that glory
which is unutterable; I have beheld the shining palaces; I have learned what
joys I am deprived of, while I linger here, and therefore do I groan." For suppose
any one had conducted you into princely halls, and shown you the gold
everywhere glittering on the walls, and all the rest of the glorious show; if from
thence he had led you back afterward to a poor man's hut, and promised that in a