you in what is to follow? Say not to me, hopes again! expectations again! faith
again! For it is in this way thou were saved from the beginning, and this dowry
was the only one that you brought in to the Bridegroom. Hold it then fast and
keep it: for if you demand to have everything in this world, you have lost that
well-doing of yours, through which you became bright, and this is why he
proceeds to say, "But hope that is seen is not hope; for what a man sees, why
does he yet hope for?"
Ver. 25.— "But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience
wait for it."
That is, if you are to be looking for everything in this world, what need is
there for hope? What is hope then? It is feeling confidence in things to come.
What great demand then does God make upon you, since He Himself gives you
blessings quite entire from His own stores? One thing only, hope, He asks of
you, that you too may have somewhat of your own to contribute toward your
salvation. And this he intimates in what he proceeds with: "For if we hope for
that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it." As then God crowns him
that undergoes labors, and hardnesses, and countless toils, so does He him that
hopes. For the name of patience belongs to hard work and much endurance. Yet
even this He has granted to the man that hopes, that He might solace the wearied
soul. And then to show that for this light task we enjoy abundant aid, he
proceeds:
Ver. 26. "Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities."
For the one point is your own, that of patience, but the other comes of the
Spirit's furnishings, Who also cherishes (Gr. anoints) you unto this hope, and
through it again lightens your labors. Then that you might know that it is not in
your labors only and dangers that this grace stands by you, but even in things the
most easy seemingly, it works with you, and on all occasions bears its part in the
alliance, he proceeds to say,
"For we know not what we should pray for as we ought."
And this he said to show the Spirit's great concern about us, and also to

instruct them not to think for certainty that those things are desirable which to
man's reasonings appear so. For since it was likely that they, when they were
scourged, and driven out, and suffering grievances without number, should be
seeking a respite, and ask this favor of God, and think it was advantageous to
them, by no means (he says) suppose that what seem blessings to you really are
so. For we need the Spirit's aid even to do this. So feeble is man, and such a
nothing by himself. For this is why he says, "For we know not what we should
pray for as we ought." In order that the learner might not feel any shame at his
ignorance, he does not say, you know not, but, "we know not." And that he did
not say this merely to seem moderate, he plainly shows from other passages. For
he desired in his prayers unceasingly to see Rome. Yet the time when he
obtained it was not at once when he desired it. And for "the thorn" that was
given him "in the flesh" [2 Corinthians 12:8], that is the dangers, he often
besought God, and was entirely unsuccessful. And so was Moses, who in the Old
Testament prays to see Palestine [Deuteronomy 3:26], and Jeremiah when he
made supplication for the Jews [Jeremiah 15:1], and Abraham when he
interceded for the people of Sodom. "But the Spirit Itself makes intercession for
us with groanings which cannot be uttered." This statement is not clear, owing to
the cessation of many of the wonders which then used to take place. Wherefore I
must needs inform you of the state of things at that time, and in this way the rest
of the subject will be cleared. What therefore was the state of things then? God
did in those days give to all that were baptized certain excellent gifts, and the
name that these had was spirits. For "the spirits of the Prophets," it says, "are
subject to the prophets." [1 Corinthians 14:32] And one had the gift of prophecy
and foretold things to come; and another of wisdom, and taught the many; and
another of healings, and cured the sick; and another of miracles, and raised the
dead; another of tongues, and spoke different languages. And with all these there
was also a gift of prayer, which also was called a spirit, and he that had this
prayed for all the people. For since we are ignorant of much that is profitable for
us and ask things that are not profitable, the gift of prayer came into some