The text and punctuation are here in great uncertainty, and very different views of both are taken by the editors.
the river that came forth like that which went out of Eden. Sirach iv. 31.]
night-bound wilderness, till Christ rises and illuminates them, glorying alike hill and dale, and, as this author supposes, every
shrub and flower, also, making the smallest leaf with its dewdrops glitter like the rainbow.]

But [it is also incumbent] to hold in suspicion others who depart from the primitive succession,
and assemble themselves together in any place whatsoever, [looking upon them] either as heretics
of perverse minds, or as schismatics puffed up and self-pleasing, or again as hypocrites, acting thus
for the sake of lucre and vainglory. For all these have fallen from the truth. And the heretics, indeed,
who bring strange fire to the altar of God— namely, strange doctrines—shall be burned up by the
fire from heaven, as were Nadab and Abiud. But such as rise up in opposition to the truth, and
exhort others against the Church of God, [shall] remain among those in hell (apud inferos), being
swallowed up by an earthquake, even as those who were with Chore, Dathan, and Abiron. But
those who cleave asunder, and separate the unity of the Church, [shall] receive from God the same
punishment as Jeroboam did.
3. Those, however, who are believed to be presbyters by many, but serve their own lusts, and,
do not place the fear of God supreme in their hearts, but conduct themselves with contempt towards
others, and are puffed up with the pride of holding the chief seat, and work evil deeds in secret,
saying, "No man sees us," shall be convicted by the Word, who does not judge after outward
appearance (secundum gloriam), nor looks upon the countenance, but the heart; and they shall hear
those words, to be found in Daniel the prophet: "O thou seed of Canaan, and not of Judah, beauty
hath deceived thee, and lust perverted thy heart. Thou that art waxen old in wicked days, now
thy sins which thou hast committed aforetime are come to light; for thou hast pronounced false
judgments, and hast been accustomed to condemn the innocent, and to let the guilty go free, albeit
the Lord saith, The innocent and the righteous shalt thou not slay." Of whom also did the Lord
say: "But if the evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to
smite the man-servants and maidens, and to eat and drink and be drunken; the lord of that servant
shall come in a day that he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut
him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the unbelievers."
4. From all such persons, therefore, it behoves us to keep aloof, but to adhere to those who, as
I have already observed, do hold the doctrine of the apostles, and who, together with the order of
priesthood (presbyterii ordine), display sound speech and blameless conduct for the confirmation
and correction of others. In this way, Moses, to whom such a leadership was entrusted, relying
on a good conscience, cleared himself before God, saying, "I have not in covetousness taken