SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.8.

Reply to Objection 3: Gedeon listened to the recital and
interpretation of a dream, seeing therein an omen, ordered by divine
providence for his instruction. In like manner Eliezer listened to the
damsel's words, having previously prayed to God.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether divination by drawing lots is unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination by drawing lots is not
unlawful, because a gloss of Augustine on Ps. 30:16, "My lots are in
Thy hands," says: "It is not wrong to cast lots, for it is a means of
ascertaining the divine will when a man is in doubt."
Objection 2: There is, seemingly, nothing unlawful in the
observances which the Scriptures relate as being practiced by holy
men. Now both in the Old and in the New Testament we find holy
men practicing the casting of lots. For it is related (Jos. 7:14, sqq.)
that Josue, at the Lord's command, pronounced sentence by lot on
Achan who had stolen of the anathema. Again Saul, by drawing lots,
found that his son Jonathan had eaten honey (1 Kgs. 14:58, sqq.):
Jonas, when fleeing from the face of the Lord, was discovered and
thrown into the sea (Jonas 1:7, sqq.): Zacharias was chosen by lot to
offer incense (Lk. 1:9): and the apostles by drawing lots elected
Matthias to the apostleship (Acts 1:26). Therefore it would seem that
divination by lots is not unlawful.
Objection 3: Further, fighting with the fists, or "monomachy," i.e.
single combat as it is called, and trial by fire and water, which are
called "popular" trials, seem to come under the head of sortilege,
because something unknown is sought by their means. Yet these
practices seem to be lawful, because David is related to have
engaged in single combat with the Philistine (1 Kgs. 17:32, sqq.).
Therefore it would seem that divination by lot is not unlawful.
On the contrary, It is written in the Decretals (XXVI, qu. v, can.
Sortes): "We decree that the casting of lots, by which means you
make up your mind in all your undertakings, and which the Fathers
have condemned, is nothing but divination and witchcraft. For which
reason we wish them to be condemned altogether, and henceforth
not to be mentioned among Christians, and we forbid the practice
thereof under pain of anathema."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), sortilege consists, properly
speaking, in doing something, that by observing the result one may
come to the knowledge of something unknown. If by casting lots one
seeks to know what is to be given to whom, whether it be a
possession, an honor, a dignity, a punishment, or some action or

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.9.

other, it is called "sortilege of allotment"; if one seeks to know what
ought to be done, it is called "sortilege of consultation"; if one seeks
to know what is going to happen, it is called "sortilege of divination."
Now the actions of man that are required for sortilege and their
results are not subject to the dispositions of the stars. Wherefore if
anyone practicing sortilege is so minded as though the human acts
requisite for sortilege depended for their result on the dispositions
of the stars, his opinion is vain and false, and consequently is not
free from the interference of the demons, so that a divination of this
kind is superstitious and unlawful.
Apart from this cause, however, the result of sortilegious acts must
needs be ascribed to chance, or to some directing spiritual cause. If
we ascribe it to chance, and this can only take place in "sortilege of
allotment," it does not seem to imply any vice other than vanity, as in
the case of persons who, being unable to agree upon the division of
something or other, are willing to draw lots for its division, thus
leaving to chance what portion each is to receive.
If, on the other hand, the decision by lot be left to a spiritual cause, it
is sometimes ascribed to demons. Thus we read (Ezech. 21:21) that
"the king of Babylon stood in the highway, at the head of two ways,
seeking divination, shuffling arrows; he inquired of the idols, and
consulted entrails": sortilege of this kind is unlawful, and forbidden
by the canons.
Sometimes, however, the decision is left to God, according to Prov.
16:33, "Lots are cast into the lap, but they are disposed of by the
Lord": sortilege of this kind is not wrong in itself, as Augustine
declares [Enarr. ii in Ps. xxx, serm. 2; cf. Objection 1].
Yet this may happen to be sinful in four ways. First, if one have
recourse to lots without any necessity: for this would seem to
amount to tempting God. Hence Ambrose, commenting on the words
of Lk. 1:8, says: "He that is chosen by lot is not bound by the
judgment of men." Secondly, if even in a case of necessity one were
to have recourse to lots without reverence. Hence, on the Acts of the
Apostles, Bede says (Super Act. Apost. i): "But if anyone, compelled
by necessity, thinks that he ought, after the apostles' example, to
consult God by casting lots, let him take note that the apostles
themselves did not do so, except after calling together the assembly
of the brethren and pouring forth prayer to God." Thirdly, if the
Divine oracles be misapplied to earthly business. Hence Augustine