4. Again, if something is unable to reach the end for which it exists it is to no purpose. But the
inquiry in all the speculative sciences is directed to a knowledge of the separate substances as to
its end, because in any class of things the most perfect is the goal [of all the rest], Therefore if
substances of this sort cannot be understood through the speculative sciences, all of them would
be to no purpose, which is absurd.

5. Again, everything directed by nature to an end has been previously endowed with principles
by which it is able to arrive at that end and by which it also tends toward that end; for the
Principles of natural motions are within a thing. Now the end of man to which he is directed by
nature is to know the immaterial substances, as both the saints and the philosophers teach. So
man is naturally endowed with principles of that knowledge. But everything we can arrive at
from naturally known principles is included in one of the speculative sciences. Therefore the
knowledge of immaterial substances pertains to some speculative sciences.

On the contrary, the Commentator says that there are two possible consequences of this
position. (1) Either the speculative sciences are not yet perfect, because we have not discovered
the sciences by which we can know the separate substances, and this owing to the fact we do not
yet understand these substances because of our ignorance of some principles; or (2) if it happens
because of some defect in our nature that we cannot discover the speculative sciences by which
these substances may be known, it follows that, if some men can discover these sciences, we and
they are men only in an equivocal sense.

The first of these is improbable; the second is impossible. So we cannot understand these
substances through some speculative sciences.

Moreover, in the speculative sciences we search after definitions, by which we understand the
essences of things through the division of a genus into differences and through the examination
of a thing's causes and accidents, which contribute a great deal to our knowledge of the essence.
But we cannot know these in the case of immaterial substances, because, as we have already
said, from the viewpoint of physics they have no (~) genus in common with the sensible
substances known to us. And either they do not have a (~) cause, as in the case of God, or their
cause is deeply hidden from us, as in the case of the angels, Their (~) accidents are also
unknown to us. So there can be no speculative science through which we may come to
understand immaterial substances.

Moreover, in the speculative sciences we know the essences of things through definitions. Now
a definition is a phrase made up of a genus and differences. But the essences of these substances
are simple and there is no composition in their quiddities, as is clear from the Philosopher and the
Commentator. So we cannot understand these substances through the speculative sciences.