unknown; such as casual and chance events.
In another way future events are known in themselves. To know the
future in this way belongs to God alone; and not merely to know
those events which happen of necessity, or in the majority of cases,
but even casual and chance events; for God sees all things in His
eternity, which, being simple, is present to all time, and embraces all
time. And therefore God's one glance is cast over all things which
happen in all time as present before Him; and He beholds all things
as they are in themselves, as was said before when dealing with
God's knowledge (Question 14, Article 13). But the mind of an angel,
and every created intellect, fall far short of God's eternity; hence the
future as it is in itself cannot be known by any created intellect.
Reply to Objection 1: Men cannot know future things except in their
causes, or by God's revelation. The angels know the future in the
same way, but much more distinctly.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the angel's intellect is above that time
according to which corporeal movements are reckoned, yet there is
a time in his mind according to the succession of intelligible
concepts; of which Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. viii) that "God moves
the spiritual creature according to time." And thus, since there is
succession in the angel's intellect, not all things that happen through
all time, are present to the angelic mind.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the species in the intellect of an
angel, in so far as they are species, refer equally to things present,
past, and future; nevertheless the present, past, and future;
nevertheless the present, past, and future do not bear the same
relations to the species. Present things have a nature according to
which they resemble the species in the mind of an angel: and so they
can be known thereby. Things which are yet to come have not yet a
nature whereby they are likened to such species; consequently, they
cannot be known by those species.
Reply to Objection 4: Things distant according to place are already
existing in nature; and share in some species, whose image is in the
angel; whereas this is not true of future things, as has been stated.
Consequently there is no comparison.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether angels know secret thoughts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the angels know secret thoughts. For
Gregory (Moral. xviii), explaining Job 28:17: "Gold or crystal cannot
equal it," says that "then," namely in the bliss of those rising from
the dead, "one shall be as evident to another as he is to himself, and
when once the mind of each is seen, his conscience will at the same
time be penetrated." But those who rise shall be like the angels, as is
stated (Mt. 22:30). Therefore an angel can see what is in another's
conscience.
Objection 2: Further, intelligible species bear the same relation to the
intellect as shapes do to bodies. But when the body is seen its shape
is seen. Therefore, when an intellectual substance is seen, the
intelligible species within it is also seen. Consequently, when one
angel beholds another, or even a soul, it seems that he can see the
thoughts of both.
Objection 3: Further, the ideas of our intellect resemble the angel
more than do the images in our imagination; because the former are
actually understood, while the latter are understood only potentially.
But the images in our imagination can be known by an angel as
corporeal things are known: because the imagination is a corporeal
faculty. Therefore it seems that an angel can know the thoughts of
the intellect.
On the contrary, What is proper to God does not belong to the
angels. But it is proper to God to read the secrets of hearts,
according to Jer. 17:9: "The heart is perverse above all things, and
unsearchable; who can know it? I am the Lord, Who search the
heart." Therefore angels do not know the secrets of hearts.
I answer that, A secret thought can be known in two ways: first, in its
effect. In this way it can be known not only by an angel, but also by
man; and with so much the greater subtlety according as the effect
is the more hidden. For thought is sometimes discovered not merely
by outward act, but also by change of countenance; and doctors can
tell some passions of the soul by the mere pulse. Much more then
can angels, or even demons, the more deeply they penetrate those
occult bodily modifications. Hence Augustine says (De divin.
daemon.) that demons "sometimes with the greatest faculty learn