who yet love Him not, nor act like those who love Him. For how is it when they
prefer everything to Him, money, nativity, fate, augury, divinations, omens?
When we live in defiance of Him, pray, where is our love? Has any one a warm
and affectionate friend? Let him love Christ but equally. So, if no more, let him
love Him who gave His Son for us His enemies, who had no merits of our own.
Merits did I say? Who had committed numberless sins, who had dared Him
beyond all daring, and without cause! Yet He, after numberless instances of
goodness and care, did not even then cast us off. At the very time when we did
Him the greatest wrong, then did He give His Son for us. And still we, after so
great benefits, after being made His friends, and counted worthy through Him of
all blessings, have not loved Him as our friend! What hope then can be ours?
You shudder perhaps at the word, but I would that you shuddered at the fact!
What? How shall it appear that we do not love God even as our friends, you say?
I will endeavor to show you— and would that my words were groundless, and to
no purpose! But I am afraid they are borne out by facts. For consider: friends,
that are truly friends, will often suffer loss for those they love. But for Christ, no
one will suffer loss, or even be content with his present state. For a friend we can
readily submit to insults, and undertake quarrels; but for Christ, no one can
endure enmity: and the saying is, "Be loved for nothing— but be not hated for
nothing."
None of us would fail to relieve a friend who was hungering, but when
Christ comes to us from day to day, and asks no great matter, but only bread, we
do not even regard him, yea though we are nauseously over full, and swollen
with gluttony: though our breath betrays the wine of yesterday, and we live in
luxury, and waste our substance on harlots and parasites and flatterers, and even
on monsters, idiots, and dwarfs; for men convert the natural defects of such into
matter for amusement. Again, friends, that are truly such, we do not envy, nor
are mortified at their success, yet we feel this toward (the minister of) Christ, and
our friendship for men is seen to be more powerful than the fear of God, for the
envious and the insincere plainly respect men more than God. And how is this?

God sees the heart, yet man does not forbear to practice deceit in His sight; yet if
the same man were detected in deceit by men, he thinks himself undone, and
blushes for shame. And why speak of this? If a friend be in distress, we visit
him, and should fear to be condemned, if we deferred it for a little time. But we
do not visit Christ, though He die again and again in prison; nay, if we have
friends among the faithful, we visit them, not because they are Christians, but
because they are our friends. Thus we do nothing from the fear or the love of
God, but some things from friendship, some from custom. When we see a friend
depart on travel, we weep and are troubled, and if we see his death, we bewail
him, though we know that we shall not be long separated, that he will be restored
to us at the Resurrection. But though Christ departs from us, or rather we reject
Him daily, we do not grieve, nor think it strange, to injure, to offend, to provoke
Him by doing what is displeasing to Him; and the fearful thing is not that we do
not treat Him as a friend; for I will show that we even treat Him as an enemy.
How, do you ask? Because "the carnal mind is enmity against God," as Paul has
said, and this we always carry about us. And we persecute Christ, when He
advances toward us, and comes to our very doors. For wicked actions in effect
do this, and every day we subject him to insults by our covetousness and our
rapacity. And does any one by preaching His word, and benefiting His Church,
obtain a good reputation? Then he is the object of envy, because he does the
work of God. And we think that we envy him, but our envy passes on to Christ.
We affect to wish the benefit to come not from others, but from ourselves. But
this cannot be for Christ's sake, but for our own: otherwise, it would be a matter
of indifference, whether the good were done by others or ourselves. If a
physician found himself unable to cure his son, who was threatened with
blindness, would he reject the aid of another, who was able to effect the cure?
Far from it! "Let my son be restored," he would almost say to him, "whether it is
to be by you or by me." And why? Because he would not consider himself, but
what was beneficial to his son. So, were our regard "to Christ," it would lead us
to say, "Let good be done, whether by ourselves or by any other." As Paul said,