SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.3.

detrimental to charity. For when the Holy Ghost moves the human
mind the movement of charity does not proceed from this motion in
such a way that the human mind be merely moved, without being the
principle of this movement, as when a body is moved by some
extrinsic motive power. For this is contrary to the nature of a
voluntary act, whose principle needs to be in itself, as stated above
(FS, Question 6, Article 1): so that it would follow that to love is not a
voluntary act, which involves a contradiction, since love, of its very
nature, implies an act of the will.
Likewise, neither can it be said that the Holy Ghost moves the will in
such a way to the act of loving, as though the will were an
instrument, for an instrument, though it be a principle of action,
nevertheless has not the power to act or not to act, for then again the
act would cease to be voluntary and meritorious, whereas it has
been stated above (FS, Question 114, Article 4) that the love of
charity is the root of merit: and, given that the will is moved by the
Holy Ghost to the act of love, it is necessary that the will also should
be the efficient cause of that act.
Now no act is perfectly produced by an active power, unless it be
connatural to that power of reason of some form which is the
principle of that action. Wherefore God, Who moves all things to
their due ends, bestowed on each thing the form whereby it is
inclined to the end appointed to it by Him; and in this way He
"ordereth all things sweetly" (Wis. 8:1). But it is evident that the act
of charity surpasses the nature of the power of the will, so that,
therefore, unless some form be superadded to the natural power,
inclining it to the act of love, this same act would be less perfect
than the natural acts and the acts of the other powers; nor would it
be easy and pleasurable to perform. And this is evidently untrue,
since no virtue has such a strong inclination to its act as charity has,
nor does any virtue perform its act with so great pleasure. Therefore
it is most necessary that, for us to perform the act of charity, there
should be in us some habitual form superadded to the natural power,
inclining that power to the act of charity, and causing it to act with
ease and pleasure.
Reply to Objection 1: The Divine Essence Itself is charity, even as It
is wisdom and goodness. Wherefore just as we are said to be good
with the goodness which is God, and wise with the wisdom which is
God (since the goodness whereby we are formally good is a
participation of Divine goodness, and the wisdom whereby we are

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.3.

formally wise, is a share of Divine wisdom), so too, the charity
whereby formally we love our neighbor is a participation of Divine
charity. For this manner of speaking is common among the
Platonists, with whose doctrines Augustine was imbued; and the
lack of adverting to this has been to some an occasion of error.
Reply to Objection 2: God is effectively the life both of the soul by
charity, and of the body by the soul: but formally charity is the life of
the soul, even as the soul is the life of the body. Consequently we
may conclude from this that just as the soul is immediately united to
the body, so is charity to the soul.
Reply to Objection 3: Charity works formally. Now the efficacy of a
form depends on the power of the agent, who instills the form,
wherefore it is evident that charity is not vanity. But because it
produces an infinite effect, since, by justifying the soul, it unites it to
God, this proves the infinity of the Divine power, which is the author
of charity.