had done numberless ills to his neighbor, how should he be merciful? What then,
say you? Hath not the Laver saved us, who had committed infinite evils? It has
delivered us from them, not that we should commit them again, but that we may
not commit them. For "how shall we," it is said, "that are dead to sin, live any
longer therein"? [Romans 6:2]
"What then? Shall we sin because we are not under the law? God forbid."
[Romans 6:15] For this cause God has delivered you from those sins that you
might no more run back to that dishonor. Since even physicians relieve their
feverish patients from their heat, not that they may abuse their health to their
injury and disorder, (since it would be better to be sick, if one was about to use
his health only that he might confine himself again to his bed,) but having
learned the evils that arise from sickness, they may no longer fall into the same,
that they may the more securely preserve their health, that they may do
everything that conduces to its preservation.
How then? You say: what is the lovingkindness of God, if He is not about to
save the bad? For oftentimes I hear many talking in this way, that He is the
Friend of man, and will by all means save all. That we may not therefore vainly
deceive ourselves, (for I remember that I made a promise of this kind to you,)
come let us today move this argument. I lately discoursed with you about Hell,
and I deferred my argument upon the lovingkindness of God. It is proper
therefore today to resume it. That there will, then, be a hell, we have, as I think,
sufficiently proved, bringing forward the deluge, and former evils, and arguing
that it is not possible that He who performed these things should leave the men
of the present age unpunished. For if thus He chastised those who sinned before
the Law, He will not let those go unpunished who after grace have committed
greater wickedness. It has been questioned therefore how is He good? How
merciful to man, if at least He punishes? And we have deferred the argument,
that we might not overwhelm your ears with a multitude of words.
Come, today let us discharge the debt, and show how good is God, even in
punishing. For this discourse would be suitable for us in opposition to the

heretics. Let us therefore pay earnest heed to it. God, standing in no need of
anything from us, yet created us. For that He stood in need of us, is manifest
from His having made us after a long time. For He might have made us long ago,
if He had needed us. For if He Himself was, even without us, and we were made
in later times, He made us, not needing us.
He made the Heaven, the earth, the sea, all things that exist, for our sake.
Tell me, are not these marks of goodness? And many things one might mention.
But to cut short the matter, "He makes the sun to rise on the evil and the good,
and sends rain on the just and on the unjust." [Matthew 5:45] Is not this a mark
of goodness? No, you say. For I said once in conversing with a Marcionite, Are
not these things a mark of goodness? And he answered, If He did not call men to
account for their sins, it were a mark of goodness. But if He calls them to
account, it is not goodness. That man, however, is not now present. But come, let
us repeat what was then said, and more beside. For I, out of my superfluity, show
that if He did not call men to account, He would not be good; but because He
does call them to account, therefore He is good.
For, say, if He did not call us to account, would human life then have
endured? Should we not then have fallen into the state of beasts? For if when
there is this fear impending over us, and the giving account, and judgments, we
have gone beyond fishes in devouring one another, we have thrown wolves and
lions into the shade in ravaging one another's possessions; if He did not call us to
account, and we were persuaded of this, with how great tumult and confusion
would life be filled? What would be the fabled labyrinth after this, compared
with the perplexities of the world? Would you not see numberless indecencies
and disorders? For who then would have respected his father any more? Or who
would have spared his mother? Who would have left unattempted any pleasure,
any wickedness? And that the matter is so, I will endeavor to show you from one
house only. How? You who raise these questions and who have servants; if I
could make it manifest to these, that if they should destroy the family of their
masters, if they should insult their persons, if they should plunder everything, if