## CONCLUSION

. At the end of the daily Liturgy of the Hours, among the invocations addressed to
Mary by the Church is the following:

"Loving Mother of the Redeemer, gate of heaven, star of the sea,
assist your people who have fallen yet strive to rise again.
To the wonderment of nature you bore your Creator!"

"To the wonderment of nature"! These words of the antiphon express that wonderment of
faith which accompanies the mystery of Mary's divine motherhood. In a sense, it does so
in the heart of the whole of creation, and, directly, in the heart of the whole People of
God, in the heart of the Church. How wonderfully far God has gone, the Creator and
Lord of all things, in the "revelation of himself" to man! How clearly he has bridged all
the spaces of that infinite "distance" which separates the Creator from the creature! If in
himself he remains ineffable and unsearchable, still more ineffable and unsearchable is he
in the reality of the Incarnation of the Word, who became man through the Virgin of
Nazareth.

If he has eternally willed to call man to share in the divine nature , it can be
said that he has matched the "divinization" of man to humanity's historical conditions, so
that even after sin he is ready to restore at a great price the eternal plan of his love
through the "humanization" of his Son, who is of the same being as himself. The whole
of creation, and more directly man himself, cannot fail to be amazed at this gift in which
he has become a sharer, in the Holy Spirit: "God so loved the world that he gave his only
Son" (Jn. 3:16).

At the center of this mystery, in the midst of this wonderment of faith, stands Mary. As
the loving Mother of the Redeemer, she was the first to experience it: "To the
wonderment of nature you bore your Creator"!

52. The words of this liturgical antiphon also express the truth of the "great
transformation" which the mystery of the Incarnation establishes for man. It is a
transformation which belongs to his entire history, from that beginning which is revealed
to us in the first chapters of Genesis until the final end, in the perspective of the end of
the world, of which Jesus has revealed to us "neither the day nor the hour" (Mt. 25:13). It
is an unending and continuous transformation between falling and rising again, between
the man of sin and the man of grace and justice. The Advent liturgy in particular is at the
very heart of this transformation and captures its unceasing "here and now" when it
exclaims: "Assist your people who have fallen yet strive to rise again"!

These words apply to every individual, every community, to nations and peoples, and to
the generations and epochs of human history, to our own epoch, to these years of the
Millennium which is drawing to a close: "Assist, yes assist, your people who have
fallen"!