towards him, displeased, and as it were repelled, and taken away from an
unworthy man, remains in that form, after which, believing him such as I
did, I had loved him; unless perhaps I have come to love him to this end,
that he may become such, while I have found him not to be such in fact.
And in that man, too, nothing is changed: although it can be changed, so
that he may become that which I had believed him to be already. But in
my mind there certainly is something changed, viz., the estimate I had
formed of him, which was before of one sort, and now is of another: and
the same love, at the bidding from above of unchangeable righteousness,
is turned aside from the purpose of enjoying, to the purpose of taking
counsel. But the form itself of unshaken and stable truth, wherein I
should have enjoyed the fruition of the man, believing him to be good,
and wherein likewise I take counsel that he may be good, sheds in an
immoveable eternity the same light of incorruptible and most sound
reason, both upon the sight of my mind, and upon that cloud of images,
which I discern from above, when I think of the same man whom I had
seen. Again, when I call back to my mind some arch, turned beautifully
and symmetrically, which, let us say, I saw at Carthage; a certain reality
that had been made known to the mind through the eyes, and transferred
to the memory, causes the imaginary view. But I behold in my mind yet
another thing, according to which that work of art pleases me; and
whence also, if it displeased me, I should correct it. We judge therefore of
those particular things according to that , and
discern that form by the intuition of the rational mind. But those things
themselves we either touch if present by the bodily sense, or if absent
remember their images as fixed in our memory, or picture, in the way of
likeness to them, such things as we ourselves also, if we wished and were
able, would laboriously build up: figuring in the mind after one fashion
the images of bodies, or seeing bodies through the body; but after
another, grasping by simple intelligence what is above the eye of the
mind, viz., the reasons and the unspeakably beautiful skill of such forms.

### CHAP. 7.—WE CONCEIVE AND BEGET THE WORD WITHIN, FROM

12. We behold, then, by the sight of the mind, in that eternal truth from
which all things temporal are made, the form according to which we are,
and according to which we do anything by true and right reason, either in
ourselves, or in things corporeal; and we have the true knowledge of
things, thence conceived, as it were as a word within us, and by speaking
we beget it from within; nor by being born does it depart from us. And
when we speak to others, we apply to the word, remaining within us, the
ministry of the voice or of some bodily sign, that by some kind of sensible
remembrance some similar thing may be wrought also in the mind of him
that hears,—similar, I say, to that which does not depart from the mind of
him that speaks. We do nothing, therefore, through the members of the
body in our words and actions, by which the behavior of men is either
approved or blamed, which we do not anticipate by a word uttered within
ourselves. For no one willingly does anything, which he has not first said
in his heart.
13. And this word is conceived by love, either of the creature or of the
Creator, that is, either of changeable nature or of unchangeable truth.