SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.157, C.6.

third degree is when the sin conceived inwardly breaks out into
effect. Now the effect of anger is another's hurt under the aspect of
revenge; and the least of hurts is that which is done by a mere word;
wherefore in reference to this He says: "Whosoever shall say to his
brother Thou fool!" Consequently it is clear that the second adds to
the first, and the third to both the others; so that, if the first is a
mortal sin, in the case referred to by our Lord, as stated above
(Article 3, ad 2), much more so are the others. Wherefore some kind
of condemnation is assigned as corresponding to each one of them.
In the first case "judgment" is assigned, and this is the least severe,
for as Augustine says [Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 9], "where judgment is
to be delivered, there is an opportunity for defense": in the second
case "council" is assigned, "whereby the judges deliberate together
on the punishment to be inflicted": to the third case is assigned "hellfire," i.e. "decisive condemnation."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.157, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether anger should be reckoned among the

capital vices?
Objection 1: It would seem that anger should not be reckoned among
the capital sins. For anger is born of sorrow which is a capital vice
known by the name of sloth. Therefore anger should not be reckoned
a capital vice.
Objection 2: Further, hatred is a graver sin than anger. Therefore it
should be reckoned a capital vice rather than anger.
Objection 3: Further, a gloss on Prov. 29:22, "An angry man
provoketh quarrels," says: "Anger is the door to all vices: if it be
closed, peace is ensured within to all the virtues; if it be opened, the
soul is armed for every crime." Now no capital vice is the origin of all
sins, but only of certain definite ones. Therefore anger should not be
reckoned among the capital vices.
On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) places anger among the
capital vices.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 84, Article 3,4), a capital
vice is defined as one from which many vices arise. Now there are
two reasons for which many vices can arise from anger. The first is
on the part of its object which has much of the aspect of desirability,
in so far as revenge is desired under the aspect of just or honest,
which is attractive by its excellence, as stated above (Article 4). The
second is on the part of its impetuosity, whereby it precipitates the
mind into all kinds of inordinate action. Therefore it is evident that
anger is a capital vice.
Reply to Objection 1: The sorrow whence anger arises is not, for the
most part, the vice of sloth, but the passion of sorrow, which results
from an injury inflicted.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 118, Article 7;
Question 148, Article 5; Question 153, Article 4; FS, Question 84,
Article 4), it belongs to the notion of a capital vice to have a most
desirable end, so that many sins are committed through the desire
thereof. Now anger, which desires evil under the aspect of good, has
a more desirable end than hatred has, since the latter desires evil