THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.6.

stage of secretion by the mother's generative power, so as to be apt
for conception. And therefore of such matter was Christ's body
conceived.
Reply to Objection 1: Since the Blessed Virgin was of the same
nature as other women, it follows that she had flesh and bones of the
same nature as theirs. Now, flesh and bones in other women are
actual parts of the body, the integrity of which results therefrom: and
consequently they cannot be taken from the body without its being
corrupted or diminished. But as Christ came to heal what was
corrupt, it was not fitting that He should bring corruption or
diminution to the integrity of His Mother. Therefore it was becoming
that Christ's body should be formed not from the flesh or bones of
the Virgin, but from her blood, which as yet is not actually a part, but
is potentially the whole, as stated in De Gener. Animal. i. Hence He is
said to have taken flesh from the Virgin, not that the matter from
which His body was formed was actual flesh, but blood, which is
flesh potentially.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated in the FP, Question 92, Article 3, ad 2,
Adam, through being established as a kind of principle of human
nature, had in his body a certain proportion of flesh and bone, which
belonged to him, not as an integral part of his personality, but in
regard to his state as a principle of human nature. And from this was
the woman formed, without detriment to the man. But in the Virgin's
body there was nothing of this sort, from which Christ's body could
be formed without detriment to His Mother's body.
Reply to Objection 3: Woman's semen is not apt for generation, but
is something imperfect in the seminal order, which, on account of
the imperfection of the female power, it has not been possible to
bring to complete seminal perfection. Consequently this semen is
not the necessary matter of conception; as the Philosopher says (De
Gener. Animal. i): wherefore there was none such in Christ's
conception: all the more since, though it is imperfect in the seminal
order, a certain concupiscence accompanies its emission, as also
that of the male semen: whereas in that virginal conception there
could be no concupiscence. Wherefore Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. iii) that Christ's body was not conceived "seminally." But the
menstrual blood, the flow of which is subject to monthly periods, has
a certain natural impurity of corruption: like other superfluities,
which nature does not heed, and therefore expels. Of such menstrual
blood infected with corruption and repudiated by nature, the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.31, C.6.

conception is not formed; but from a certain secretion of the pure
blood which by a process of elimination is prepared for conception,
being, as it were, more pure and more perfect than the rest of the
blood. Nevertheless, it is tainted with the impurity of lust in the
conception of other men: inasmuch as by sexual intercourse this
blood is drawn to a place apt for conception. This, however, did not
take place in Christ's conception: because this blood was brought
together in the Virgin's womb and fashioned into a child by the
operation of the Holy Ghost. Therefore is Christ's body said to be
"formed of the most chaste and purest blood of the Virgin."