And thereupon taking them also apart, he does all, and exhorts and admonishes.
Much can concord do, much can charity. Though it be for a great matter you ask,
though thou be unworthy, you shall be heard for your purpose of heart: fear not.
"He went," it says, "through" the cities "And, behold, there was a disciple,
by name Timothy, who had a good report of the brethren which were in Lystra
and Iconium." (v. 41; 16:1.) Great was the grace of Timothy. When Barnabas
departed ([ἀ] [πέστη]), he finds another, equivalent to him. Of him he says,
"Remembering your tears and your unfeigned faith, which dwelt first in your
grandmother Lois, and in your mother Eunice." [2 Timothy 1:5] His father
continued to be a Gentile, and therefore it was that (Timothy) was not
circumcised. (a) Observe the Law already broken. Or if not so, I suppose he was
born after the preaching of the Gospel but this is perhaps not so. (c) He was
about to make him a bishop, and it was not meet that he should be
uncircumcised. (e) And this was not a small matter, seeing it offended after so
long a time: (b) "for from a child," he says, "you have known the Holy
Scriptures." [2 Timothy 3:15] (d) "And as they went through the cities, they
delivered them the decrees for to keep." [Acts 16:4] For until then, there was no
need for the Gentiles to keep any such. The beginning of the abrogation was the
Gentiles' not keeping these things, and being none the worse for it: nor having
any inferiority in respect of faith: anon, of their own will they abandoned the
Law. (f) Since therefore he was about to preach, that he might not smite the Jews
a double blow, he circumcised Timothy. And yet he was but half (a Jew by
birth), his father being a Greek: but yet, because that was a great point carried in
the cause of the Gentiles, he did not care for this: for the Word must needs be
disseminated: therefore also he with his own hands circumcised him. "And so
were the churches established in the faith." Do you mark here also how from
going counter (to his own object) a great good results? "And increased in
number daily." [Acts 16:5] Do you observe, that the circumcising not only did no
harm, but was even of the greatest service? "And a vision appeared unto Paul in
the night." [Acts 16:9] Not now by Angels, as to Philip, as to Cornellius, but

how? By a vision it is now shown to him: in more human sort, not now as before
(i.e., v. 6, 7) in more divine manner. For where the compliance is more easy, it is
done in more human sort; but where great force was needed, there in more
divine. For since he was but urged to preach, to this end it is shown him in a
dream: but to forbear preaching, he could not readily endure: to this end the
Holy Ghost reveals it to him. Thus also it was then with Peter, "Arise, go down."
[Acts 10:20] For of course the Holy Spirit did not work what was otherwise
easy: but (here) even a dream sufficed him. And to Joseph also, as being readily
moved to compliance, the appearance is in a dream, but to the rest in waking
vision. [Matthew 1:20; 2:13-19] Thus to Cornelius, and to Paul himself. "And lo,
a man of Macedonia," etc. and not simply enjoining, but "beseeching," and from
the very persons in need of (spiritual) cure. [ch. 10:3; 9:3] "Assuredly
gathering," it says, "that the Lord had called us." [Acts 16:10], that is, inferring,
both from the circumstance that Paul saw it and none other, and from the having
been "forbidden by the Spirit," and from their being on the borders; from all
these they gathered. "Therefore loosing from Troas, we came with a straight
course," etc. [Acts 16:11] That is, even the voyage made this manifest: for there
was no tardiness. It became the very root of Macedonia. It was not always in the
way of "sharp contention" that the Holy Spirit wrought: but this so rapid
progress (of the Word) was a token that the thing was more than human. And yet
it is not said that Barnabas was exasperated, but, "Between them there arose a
sharp contention." [Acts 15:39] If the one was not exasperated neither was the
other.
Knowing this, let us not merely pick out ([ἐ] [κλέγωμεν]) these things, but
let us learn and be taught by them: for they were not written without a purpose.
It is a great evil to be ignorant of the Scriptures: from the things we ought to get
good from, we get evil. Thus also medicines of healing virtue, often, from the
ignorance of those who use them, ruin and destroy: and arms which are meant to
protect, are themselves the cause of death unless one know how to put them on.
But the reason is, that we seek everything rather than what is good for ourselves.