"And overthrow," he says, "the faith of some."
"Of some," not of all. For if there is no resurrection, faith is subverted. Our
preaching is vain, nor is Christ risen; and if He is not risen, neither was He born,
nor has He ascended into heaven. Observe how this error, while it seems to
oppose the doctrine of the Resurrection, draws after it many other evils. What
then, says one, ought we to do nothing for those who are subverted?
Ver. 19. "Nevertheless," he says, "the foundation of God stands sure, having
this seal, The Lord knows them that are His. And, Let every one that names the
name of the Lord depart from iniquity."
He shows that even before they were subverted, they were not firm. For
otherwise, they would not have been overthrown at the first attack, as Adam was
firm before the commandment. For those who are fixed not only are not harmed
through deceivers, but are even admired.
And he calls it "sure," and a "foundation"; so ought we to adhere to the
faith; "having this seal, The Lord knows them that are His." What is this? He has
taken it from Deuteronomy; that is, Firm souls stand fixed and immovable. But
whence are they manifest? From having these characters inscribed upon their
actions, from their being known by God, and not perishing with the world, and
from their departing from iniquity.
"Let every one," he says, "that names the name of the Lord depart from
iniquity."
These are the distinguishing marks of the foundation. As a foundation is
shown to be firm, and as letters are inscribed upon a stone that the letters may be
significant. But these letters are shown by works, "Having," he says, "this seal"
fixed thereon, "Let every one that names the name of the Lord depart from
iniquity." Thus if any one is unrighteous, he is not of the foundation. So that this
too is of the seal, not to do iniquity.
Moral. Let us not therefore put off from us the royal seal and token, that we
may not be of those who are not sealed, that we may not be unsound, that we
may be firmly grounded, that we may be of the foundation, and not carried to

and fro. This marks them that are of God, that they depart from iniquity. For how
can any one be of God Who is just, if he does iniquity, if by his works he
opposes Him, if he insults Him by his misdeeds? Again we are speaking against
injustice, and again we have many that are hostile to us. For this affection, like a
tyrant, has seized upon the souls of all, and, what is worse, not by necessity nor
violence, but by persuasion and gentle insinuation, and they are grateful for their
slavery. And this is indeed the misery; for if they were held by constraint and not
by love, they would soon depart. And whence is it, that a thing which is most
bitter, appears to be sweet? Whence is it that righteousness, which is a most
sweet thing, becomes bitter? It is the fault of our senses. Thus some have thought
honey bitter, and have taken with pleasure other things that were noxious. And
the cause is not in the nature of things, but in the perverseness of the sufferers.
The judging faculty of the soul is disordered. Just as a balance, if its beam be
unsteady, moves round, and does not show accurately the weight of things
placed in it; so the soul, if it has not the beam of its own thoughts fixed, and
firmly riveted to the law of God, being carried round and drawn down, will not
be able to judge aright of actions.
For if any one will examine carefully, he will perceive the great bitterness
of injustice, not to those who suffer it, but to those who practice it, and to these
more than to the others. And let us not speak of things future, but for the present
of things here. Hath it not battles, judgments, condemnation, ill will, abuse?
What is more bitter than these? Hath it not enmities, and wars, and accusations?
What is more bitter than these? Hath it not conscience continually scourging and
gnawing us? If it were possible, I could wish to draw out from the body the soul
of the unrighteous man, and you would see it pale and trembling, ashamed,
hiding its head, anxiously fearful, and self-condemned. For should we sink down
into the very depths of wickedness, the judging faculty of the mind is not
destroyed, but remains unbribed. And no one pursues injustice thinking it to be
good, but he invents excuses, and has recourse to every artifice of words to shift
off the accusation. But he cannot get it off his conscience. Here indeed the