why, what is it, if I gaze curiously at a beautiful woman? For if you should
commit the adultery in the heart, soon you will venture on that in flesh. Say not,
why, what is it if I should pass by this poor man? For if you pass this man by,
you will also the next; if him, then the third.
Neither again say, why, what is it, if I should desire my neighbor's goods.
For this, this caused Ahab's ruin; although he would have paid a price, yet he
took it from one unwilling. For a man ought not to buy by force, but on
persuasion. But if he, who would have paid the fair price, was so punished,
because he took from one unwilling, he who does not so much as this, and takes
by violence from the unwilling, and that when living under grace, of what
punishment will he not be worthy?
In order therefore that we be not punished, keeping ourselves quite pure
from all violence and rapine, and guarding against the sources of sins together
with the sins themselves, let us with much diligence give heed to virtue; for thus
shall we also enjoy the good things eternal by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world without end. Amen.

## Homily 87 on Matthew

Matt. XXVII. 27-29.
" Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and
gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers; and they stripped Him, and put on
Him a purple robe; and when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it on
His head, and a reed in His right hand; and they bowed the knee before Him,
and mocked Him, saying, Hail, king of the Jews."
As though on some signal the devil then was entering in triumph into all.
For, be it that Jews pining with envy and jealousy were mad against Him, as to
the soldiers, whence was it, and from what sort of cause? Is it not clear that it
was the devil who was then entering in fury into the hearts of all? For indeed
they made a pleasure of their insults against Him, being a savage and ruthless
set. I mean that, when they ought to have been awestruck, when they ought to
have wept, which even the people did, this they did not, but, on the contrary,
were despiteful, and insolent; perhaps themselves also seeking to please the
Jews, or it may be doing all in conformity to their own evil nature.
And the insults were different, and varied. For that Divine Head at one time
they buffeted, at another they insulted with the crown of thorns, at another they
smote with the reed, men unholy and accursed!
What plea shall we have after this for being moved by injuries, after Christ
suffered these things? For what was done was the utmost limit of insolence. For
not one member, but the whole entire body throughout was made an object of
insolence; the head through the crown, and the reed, and the buffeting; the face,
being spit upon; the cheeks, being smitten with the palms of the hands; the
whole body by the stripes, by being wrapped in the robe, and by the pretended
worship; the hand by the reed, which they gave him to hold instead of a sceptre;
the mouth again by the offering of the vinegar. What could be more grievous