Homily 64 on the Gospel of John
John 11:41-42
"Jesus lifted up His eyes, and said, Father, I thank You that You have heard Me;
and I knew that You hear Me always, but because of the people which stand by, I
said it." And what follows.
1. What I have often said, I will now say, that Christ looks not so much to
His own honor as to our salvation; not how He may utter some sublime saying,
but how something able to draw us to Him. On which account His sublime and
mighty sayings are few, and those also hidden, but the humble and lowly are
many, and abound through His discourses. For since by these men were the
rather brought over, in these He continues; and He does not on the one hand utter
these universally, lest the men that should come after should receive damage,
nor, on the other hand, does He entirely withhold those, lest the men of that time
should be offended. Since they who have passed from lowmindedness unto
perfection, will be able from even a single sublime doctrine to discern the whole,
but those who were ever lowminded, unless they had often heard these lowly
sayings, would not have come to Him at all. In fact, even after so many such
sayings they do not remain firm, but even stone and persecute Him, and try to
kill Him, and call Him blasphemer. And when He makes Himself equal with
God, they say, "This man blasphemes" [Matthew 9:3]; and when He says, "Your
sins be forgiven you" [John 10:20], they moreover call Him a demoniac. So
when He says that the man who hears His words is stronger than death, or, "I am
in the Father and the Father in Me" [John 8:51], they leave Him; and again, they
are offended when He says that He came down from heaven. [c. vi. 33, 60] If
now they could not bear these sayings, though seldom uttered, scarcely, had His
discourse been always sublime, had it been of this texture, would they have
given heed to Him? When therefore He says, "As the Father commanded Me, so

I speak" [John 14:31]; and, "I am not come of Myself" [John 7:28], then they
believe. That they did believe then is clear, from the Evangelist signifying this
besides, and saying, "As He spoke these words, many believed on Him." [John
5:30] If then lowly speaking drew men to faith, and high speaking scared them
away, must it not be a mark of extreme folly not to see at a glance how to reckon
the sole reason of those lowly sayings, namely, that they were uttered because of
the hearers. Since in another place when He had desired to say some high thing,
He withheld it, adding this reason, and saying, "Lest we should offend them, cast
a hook into the sea." [Matthew 17:27] Which also He does here; for after saying,
"I know that You hear Me always," He adds, "but because of the multitude which
stands around I said it, that they might believe." Are these words ours? Is this a
human conjecture? When then a man will not endure to be persuaded by what is
written, that they were offended at sublime things, how, when he hears Christ
saying that He spoke in a lowly manner that they might not be offended, how,
after that, shall he suspect that the mean sayings belonged to His nature, not to
His condescension? So in another place, when a voice came down from heaven,
He said, "This voice came not because of Me, but for your sakes." [John 12:30]
He who is exalted may be allowed to speak lowly things of himself, but it is not
lawful for the humble to utter concerning himself anything grand or sublime.
For the former arises from condescension, and has for its cause the weakness of
the hearers; or rather (it has for its cause) the leading them to
humblemindedness, and His being clothed in flesh, and the teaching the hearers
to say nothing great concerning themselves, and His being deemed an enemy of
God, and not being believed to have come from God, His being suspected of
breaking the Law, and the fact that the hearers looked on Him with an evil eye,
and were ill disposed towards Him, because He said that He was equal to God.
But that a lowly man should say any great thing of Himself, has no cause either
reasonable or unreasonable; it can only be folly, impudence, and unpardonable
boldness. Wherefore then does Christ speak humbly, being of that ineffable and
great Substance? For the reasons mentioned, and that He might not be deemed