Harvey gives the above paraphrase of the very obscure original; others propose to read $% instead of $&'().

the number of twelve letters, and when it found such a one, the number was completed, is manifest
from the very configuration of the letter; for Lambda being engaged, as it were, in the quest of one
similar to itself, and finding such an one, and clasping it to itself, thus filled up the place of the
twelfth, the letter Mu (!) being composed of two Lambdas (""). Wherefore also they, by means
of their "knowledge," avoid the place of ninety-nine, that is, the defection—a type of the left
hand,—but endeavour to secure one more, which, when added to the ninety and nine, has the
effect of changing their reckoning to the right hand.
3. I well know, my dear friend, that when thou hast read through all this, thou wilt indulge in
a hearty laugh over this their inflated wise folly! But those men are really worthy of being mourned
over, who promulgate such a kind of religion, and who so frigidly and perversely pull to pieces the
greatness of the truly unspeakable power, and the dispensations of God in themselves so striking,
by means of Alpha and Beta, and through the aid of numbers. But as many as separate from the
Church, and give heed to such old wives' fables as these, are truly self-condemned; and these men
Paul commands us, "after a first and second admonition, to avoid." And John, the disciple of
the Lord, has intensified their condemnation, when he desires us not even to address to them the
salutation of "good-speed;" for, says he, "He that bids them be of good-speed is a partaker with
their evil deeds;" and that with reason, "for there is no good-speed to the ungodly," saith the
Lord. Impious indeed, beyond all impiety, are these men, who assert that the Maker of heaven and
earth, the only God Almighty, besides whom there is no God, was produced by means of a defect,
which itself sprang from another defect, so that, according to them, He was the product of the third
defect. Such an opinion we should detest and execrate, while we ought everywhere to flee far
apart from those that hold it; and in proportion as they vehemently maintain and rejoice in their
fictitious doctrines, so much the more should we be convinced that they are under the influence of
the wicked spirits of the Ogdoad,—just as those persons who fall into a fit of frenzy, the more they
laugh, and imagine themselves to be well, and do all things as if they were in good health [both of
body and mind], yea, some things better than those who really are so, are only thus shown to be
the more seriously diseased. In like manner do these men, the more they seem to excel others in
wisdom, and waste their strength by drawing the bow too tightly, the greater fools do they show
themselves. For when the unclean spirit of folly has gone forth, and when afterwards he finds them
Massuet explains this and the following reference, by remarking that the ancients used the fingers of the hand in counting;
x. 249.