of their neighbor's goods. For to them this comes by nature, but we who are
honored with reason, and yet are falling away unto that unnatural vileness, what
indulgence shall we receive?
Let us then, considering the measures of that discipline which is set before
us, press on at least to the middle station, that we may both be delivered from the
punishment which is to come, and proceeding regularly, may arrive at the very
summit of all good things; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and dominion for ever
and ever. Amen.

## Homily 22 on Matthew

Matthew 5:28-29.
"Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they
spin. And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these."
Having spoken of our necessary food, and having signified that not even for
this should we take thought, He passes on in what follows to that which is more
easy. For raiment is not so necessary as food.
Why then did He not make use here also of the same example, that of the
birds, neither mention to us the peacock, and the swan, and the sheep? For surely
there were many such examples to take from thence. Because He would point
out how very far the argument may be carried both ways: both from the vileness
of the things that partake of such elegance, and from the munificence vouchsafed
to the lilies, in respect of their adorning. For this cause, when He has decked
them out, He does not so much as call them lilies any more, but "grass of the
field." [Matthew 6:30] And He is not satisfied even with this name, but again
adds another circumstance of vileness, saying, "which today is." And He said
not, "and tomorrow is not," but what is much baser yet, "is cast into the oven."
And He said not, "clothe," but "so clothe."
Do you see everywhere how He abounds in amplifications and intensities?
And this He does, that He may touch them home: and therefore He has also
added, "shall He not much more clothe you?" For this too has much emphasis:
the force of the word, "you," being no other than to indicate covertly the great
value set upon our race, and the concern shown for it; as though He had said,
"you, to whom He gave a soul, for whom He fashioned a body, for whose sake
He made all the things that are seen, for whose sake He sent prophets, and gave
the law, and wrought those innumerable good works; for whose sake He gave up

His only begotten Son."
And not till He has made His proof clear, does He proceed also to rebuke
them, say ing, "O you of little faith." For this is the quality of an adviser: He does
not admonish only, but reproves also, that He may awaken men the more to the
persuasive power of His words.
Hereby He teaches us not only to take no thought, but not even to be
dazzled at the costliness of men's apparel. Why, such comeliness is of grass, such
beauty of the green herb: or rather, the grass is even more precious than such
apparelling. Why then pride yourself on things, whereof the prize rests with the
mere plant, with a great balance in its favor?
And see how from the beginning He signifies the injunction to be easy; by
the contraries again, and by the things of which they were afraid, leading them
away from these cares. Thus, when He had said, "Consider the lilies of the field,"
He added, "they toil not:" so that in desire to set us free from toils, did He give
these commands. In fact, the labor lies, not in taking no thought, but in taking
thought for these things. And as in saying, "they sow not," it was not the sowing
that He did away with, but the anxious thought; so in saying, "they toil not,
neither do they spin," He put an end not to the work, but to the care.
But if Solomon was surpassed by their beauty, and that not once nor twice,
but throughout all his reign:— for neither can one say, that at one time He was
clothed with such apparel, but after that He was so no more; rather not so much
as on one day did He array Himself so beautifully: for this Christ declared by
saying, "in all his reign:" and if it was not that He was surpassed by this flower,
but vied with that, but He gave place to all alike (wherefore He also said, "as one
of these:" for such as between the truth and the counterfeit, so great is the
interval between those robes and these flowers):— if then he acknowledged his
inferiority, who was more glorious than all kings that ever were: when will you
be able to surpass, or rather to approach even faintly to such perfection of form?
After this He instructs us, not to aim at all at such ornament. See at least the
end thereof; after its triumph "it is cast into the oven:" and if of things mean, and