nakedness, then came upon him, who before the cheat was superior to all such
shame; and this very seeing himself to be naked, and the need for the future of
the covering of garments, and many other infirmities, became thenceforth natural
to him. That this be not our case, let us obey God, continue in His
commandments, and not be busy about anything beyond them, that we may not
be cast out from the good things already given us. Thus they have fared (of
whom we speak). For seeking to find a beginning of the Life which has no
beginning, they lost what they might have retained. They found not what they
sought, (this is impossible,) and they fell away from the true faith concerning the
Only-Begotten.
Let us not then remove the eternal bounds which our fathers set, but let us
ever yield to the laws of the Spirit; and when we hear that "That was the true
Light," let us seek to discover nothing more. For it is not possible to pass beyond
this saying. Had His generation been like that of a man, needs must there have
been an interval between the begetter and the begotten; but since it is in a
manner ineffable and becoming God, give up the "before" and the "after," for
these are the names of points in time, but the Son is the Creator even of all ages.
2. "Then," says one, "He is not Father, but brother." What need, pray? If we
had asserted that the Father and the Son were from a different root, you might
have then spoken this well. But, if we flee this impiety, and say the Father,
besides being without beginning, is Unbegotten also, while the Son, though
without beginning, is Begotten of the Father, what kind of need that as a
consequence of this idea, that unholy assertion should be introduced? None at
all. For He is an Effulgence: but an effulgence is included in the idea of the
nature whose effulgence it is. For this reason Paul has called Him so, that you
may imagine no interval between the Father and the Son. [Hebrews 1:3] This
expression therefore is declaratory of the point; but the following part of the
proof quoted, corrects an erroneous opinion which might beset simple men. For,
says the Apostle, do not, because you have heard that he is an Effulgence,
suppose that He is deprived of His proper person; this is impious, and belongs to

the madness of the Sabellians, and of Marcellus' followers. We say not so, but
that He is also in His proper Person. And for this reason, after having called Him
"Effulgence," Paul has added that He is "the express image of His Person"
[Hebrews 1:3], in order to make evident His proper Personality, and that He
belongs to the same Essence of which He is also the express image. For, as I
before said, it is not sufficient by a single expression to set before men the
doctrines concerning God, but it is desirable that we bring many together, and
choose from each what is suitable. So shall we be able to attain to a worthy
telling of His glory, worthy, I mean, as regards our power; for if any should
deem himself able to speak words suitable to His essential worthiness, and be
ambitious to do so, saying, that he knows God as God knows Himself, he it is
who is most ignorant of God.
Knowing therefore this, let us continue steadfastly to hold what "they have
delivered unto us, which from the beginning were eye-witnesses, and ministers of
the word." [Luke 1:2] And let us not be curious beyond: for two evils will attend
those who are sick of this disease, (curiosity,) the wearying themselves in vain
by seeking what it is impossible to find, and the provoking God by their
endeavors to overturn the bounds set by Him. Now what anger this excites, it
needs not that you who know should learn from us. Abstaining therefore from
their madness, let us tremble at His words, that He may continually build us up.
For, "upon whom shall I look" [Isaiah 66:2, Septuagint], says He, "but upon the
lowly, and quiet, and who fears my words?" Let us then leave this pernicious
curiosity, and bruise our hearts, let us mourn for our sins as Christ commanded,
let us be pricked at heart for our transgressions, let us reckon up exactly all the
wicked deeds, which in time past we have dared, and let us earnestly strive to
wipe them off in all kinds of ways.
Now to this end God has opened to us many ways. For, "Tell you first," says
He, "your sins, that you may be justified" [Isaiah 43:26] ; and again, "I said, I
have declared mine iniquity unto You, and You have taken away the
unrighteousness of my heart" [Psalm 32:5, Septuagint]; since a continual