ears through the multitude of cares: but "the foolish things of the world God
chose:" which thing is the greatest sign of victory, that they were uneducated by
whom He conquers. For the Greeks feel not so much shame when they are
defeated by means of the "wise," but are then confounded, when they see the
artisan and the sort of person one meets in the market more of a philosopher than
themselves. Wherefore also he said himself, "That He might put to shame the
wise." And not in this instance alone has he done this, also in the case of the
other advantages of life. For, to proceed, "the weak things of the world He chose
that He might put to shame the strong." For not unlearned persons only, but
needy also, and contemptible and obscure He called, that He might humble those
who were in high places.

1 Corinthians 1:28
"And the base things of the world, and the things that are despised, and the
things that are not, that he might bring to naught the things that are." Now what
does He call things "that are not?" Those persons who are considered to be
nothing because of their great insignificance. Thus has He shown forth His great
power, casting down the great by those who seem to be nothing. The same
elsewhere he thus expresses, [2 Corinthians 12:9] "For my strength is made
perfect in weakness." For a great power it is, to teach outcasts and such as never
applied themselves to any branch of learning, how all at once to discourse wisely
on the things which are above the heavens. For suppose a physician, an orator, or
any one else: we then most admire him, when he convinces and instructs those
completely uneducated. Now, if to instil into an uneducated man the rules of art
be a very wonderful thing, much more things which pertain to so high
philosophy.
3. But not for the wonders sake only, neither to show His own power, has
He done this, but to check also the arrogant. And therefore he both said before,
"That he might confound the wise and the strong, that He might bring to nought
the things which are," and here again,

1 Corinthians 1:29
"That no flesh should glory in the presence of God." For God does all things
to this end, to repress vainglory and pride, to pull down boasting. "Do you, too,"
says he, "employ yourselves in that work." He does all, that we may put nothing
to our own account; that we may ascribe all unto God. And have you given
yourselves over unto this person or to that? And what pardon will you obtain?
For God Himself has shown that it is not possible we should be saved only
by ourselves: and this He did from the beginning. For neither then could men be
saved by themselves; but it required their compassing the beauty of the heaven,
and the extent of the earth, and the mass of creation besides; if so they might be
led by the hand to the great artificer of all the works. And He did this, repressing
beforehand the self-conceit which was after to arise. Just as if a master who had
given his scholar charge to follow wheresoever he might lead, when he sees him
forestalling, and desiring to learn all things of himself, should permit him to go
quite astray; and when he has proved him incompetent to acquire the knowledge,
should thereupon at length introduce to him what himself has to teach: so God
also commanded in the beginning to trace Him by the idea which the creation
gives; but since they would not, He, after showing by the experiment that they
are not sufficient for themselves, conducts them again unto Him by another way.
He gave for a tablet, the world; but the philosophers studied not in those things,
neither were willing to obey Him, nor to approach unto Him by that way which
Himself commanded. He introduces another way more evident than the former;
one that might bring conviction that man is not of himself alone sufficient unto
himself. For then scruples of reasoning might be started, and the Gentile wisdom
employed, on their part whom He through the creation was leading by the hand;
but now, unless a man become a fool, that is, unless he dismiss all reasoning and
all wisdom, and deliver up himself unto the faith, it is impossible to be saved.