Yet surely, if you are willing to believe what is evident, the things invisible
ought to be believed by you, rather than those which are seen. Even though what
I say be a paradox, nevertheless it is true, and among men of understanding is
fully acknowledged. For whereas the eyes are often deceived, not in the things
unseen only (for of those they do not so much as take cognizance), but even in
those which men think they actually see, distance and atmosphere, and absence
of mind, and anger, and care, and ten thousand other things impeding their
accuracy; the reasoning power of the soul on the other hand, if it receive the light
of the divine Scriptures, will prove a more accurate, an unerring standard of
realities.
Let us not then vainly deceive ourselves, neither in addition to the
carelessness of our life, which is the offspring of such doctrines as these, heap up
to ourselves, for the very doctrines themselves, a more grievous fire. For if there
be no judgment, and we are not to give account of our deeds, neither shall we
receive rewards for our labors. Observe which way your blasphemies tend, when
you say, that God, who is righteous, and loving, and mild, overlooks so great
labors and toils. And how can this be reasonable? Why, if by nothing else, at any
rate by the circumstances of your own house, I bid you weigh these things, and
then you will see the absurdity. For though you were yourself savage and
inhuman beyond measure, and wilder than the very wild beasts, you would not
choose at your death to leave unhonored the servant that had been affectionate to
you, but requitest him both with freedom, and with a gift of money; and
forasmuch as in your own person hereafter, having departed, you will be able to
do him no good, you give charge concerning him to the future inheritors of your
substance, beseeching, exhorting, doing everything, so that he may not remain
unrewarded.
So then you, who are evil, are so kind and loving towards your servant; and
will the Infinite Goodness, that is, God, the Unspeakable Love to man, the
kindness so vast: will He overlook and leave uncrowned His own servants, Peter
and Paul, and James, and John, those who every day for His sake suffered

hunger, were bound, were scourged, were drowned in the sea, were given up to
wild beasts, were dying, were suffering so great things as we cannot so much as
reckon up? And whereas the Olympic judge proclaims and crowns the victor,
and the master rewards the servant, and the king the soldier, and each in general
him that has done him service, with what good things he can; shall God alone,
after those so great toils and labors, repay them with no good thing great or
small? Shall those just and pious men, who have walked in every virtue, lie in
the same state with adulterers, and parricides, and manslayers, and violators of
tombs? And in what way can this be reasonable? Since, if there be nothing after
our departure hence, and our interests reach no further than things present, those
are in the same case with these, or rather not so much as in the same. For what
though hereafter, as you say, they fare alike? Yet here, the whole of their time,
the wicked have been at ease, the righteous in chastisement. And this what sort
of tyrant, what savage and relentless man did ever so devise, touching his own
servants and subjects?
Did you mark the exceeding greatness of the absurdity, and in what this
argument issues? Therefore if you will not any other way, yet by these
reasonings be instructed to rid yourself of this wicked thought, and to flee from
vice, and cleave to the toils which end in virtue: and then shall you know
certainly that our concerns are not bounded by the present life. And if any one
ask you, "Who has come from thence and brought word what is there?" say unto
him, of men not one; for surely he would have been often disbelieved, as
vaunting, and exaggerating the thing; but the Lord of the angels has brought
word with exactness of all those things. What need then have we of any man,
seeing He, that will demand account of us, cries aloud every day, that He has
both made ready a hell, and prepared a kingdom; and affords us clear
demonstrations of these things? For if He were not hereafter to judge, neither
would he have exacted any penalty here.
9. "Well, but as to this very point how can it be reasonable? That of the
wicked some should be punished, others not? I mean, if God be no respecter of