confirmation, but also of purification. For inasmuch as death was thought to be
an odious thing, and especially that of the cross, he says that it purified, even a
precious purification, and in regard to greater things. Therefore the sacrifices
preceded, because of this blood. Therefore the lambs; everything was for this
cause.

Hebrews 9:23
"It was therefore necessary that the Patterns" (he says) "of the things in the
heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things themselves with
better sacrifices than these."
And how are they "patterns of things in the heavens"? And what does he
mean now by "the things in the heavens"? Is it Heaven? Or is it the Angels?
None of these, but what is ours. It follows then that our things are in Heaven,
and heavenly things are ours, even though they be accomplished on earth; since
although angels are on earth, yet they are called Heavenly. And the Cherubim
appeared on earth, but yet are heavenly. And why do I say "appeared"? Nay
rather they dwell on earth, as indeed in Paradise: but this is nothing; for they are
heavenly. And, "Our conversation is in Heaven" [Philippians 3:20], and yet we
live here.
"But these are the heavenly things," that is, the philosophy which exists
among us; those who have been called thereto.
"With better sacrifices than these." What is "better" is better than something
[else] that is good. Therefore "the patterns also of things in the heavens" have
become good; for not even the patterns were evil: else the things whereof they
are patterns would also have been evil.
7. If then we are heavenly, and have obtained such a sacrifice, let us fear.
Let us no longer continue on the earth; for even now it is possible for him that
wishes it, not to be on the earth. For to be and not to be on the earth is the effect
of moral disposition and choice. For instance; God is said to be in Heaven.
Wherefore? Not because He is confined by space, far from it, nor as having left
the earth destitute of His presence, but by His relation to and intimacy with the
Angels. If then we also are near to God, we are in Heaven. For what care I about
Heaven when I see the Lord of Heaven, when I myself have become a Heaven?

"For," He says, "We will come," I and the Father, "and will make our abode with
him." [John 14:23]
Let us then make our soul a Heaven. The heaven is naturally bright; for not
even in a storm does it become black, for it does not itself change its appearance,
but the clouds run together and cover it. Heaven has the Sun; we also have the
Sun of Righteousness. I said it is possible to become a Heaven; and I see that it
is possible to become even better than Heaven. How? When we have the Lord of
the Sun. Heaven is throughout pure and without spot; it changes not either in a
storm or in the night. Neither let us then be so influenced either by tribulations or
by "the wiles of the devil" [Ephesians 6:11], but let us continue spotless and
pure. Heaven is high and far from the earth. Let us also effect this [as regards
ourselves]; let us withdraw ourselves from the earth, and exalt ourselves to that
height, and remove ourselves far from the earth. Heaven is higher than the rains
and the storms, and is reached by none of them. This we also can do, if we will.
It does appear to be, but is not really so affected. Neither then let us be
affected, even if we appear to be so. For as in a storm, most men know not the
beauty of [heaven,] but think that it is changed, while philosophers know that it
is not affected at all, so with regard to ourselves also in afflictions; most men
think that we are changed with them, and that affliction has touched our very
heart, but philosophers know that it has not touched us.
8. Let us then become heaven, let us mount up to that height, and so we
shall see men differing nothing from ants. I do not speak of the poor only, nor
the many, but even if there be a general there, even if the emperor be there, we
shall not distinguish the emperor, nor the private person. We shall not know what
is gold, or what is silver, or what is silken or purple raiment: we shall see all
things as if they were flies, if we be seated in that height. There is no tumult
there, no disturbance, nor clamor.
And how is it possible (one says) for him who walks on the earth, to be
raised up to that height? I do not tell it you in words, but I show you in fact those
who have attained to that height. Who then are they?