and bewail the dead, but let us weep for those who are in their sins, whether they
be dead or alive. And on the other hand, let us call those happy in whatsoever
condition they be, who are in a state of righteousness. You, forsooth, fearest and
lamentest "one" death; but Paul, who was dying daily, [1 Corinthians 15:31] was
so far from shedding a tear on that account, that he rejoiced and exulted!
9. "O that I did endure the peril for God," says some one, "then I should
have no anxiety!" But do not even now sink into despondency; for not only
indeed is he well approved, who suffers in the cause of God: but he who is
suffering any thing unjustly: and bearing it nobly, and giving thanks to God who
permits it, is not inferior to him who sustains these trials for God's sake. The
blessed Job is a proof of this, who received so many intolerable wounds through
the devil's plotting against him uselessly, vainly, and without cause. Yet,
nevertheless, because he bore them courageously, and gave thanks to God who
permitted them, he was invested with a perfect crown. Be not sad then on
account of death; for it is natural to die: but grieve for sin; because it is a fault of
the will. But if you grieve for the dead, mourn also for those who are born into
the world; for as the one thing is of nature, so is the other too of nature. Should
any one, therefore, threaten you with death, say to him, "I am instructed by
Christ not to 'fear them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul.'"
[Matthew 10:28] Or should he threaten you with the confiscation of your goods,
say to him, "Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return
there. We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing
out." "And though thou take me not, death will come and take me; and though
thou slay me not, yet the law of nature will presently interfere and bring the
end." Therefore we should fear none of these things which are brought on us by
the order of nature, but those which are engendered by our own evil will; for
these bring forth our penalty. But let us continually consider this, that as regards
the events which come upon us unexpectedly we shall not mend them by
grieving, and so we shall cease to grieve.
10. And moreover we should think of this again, that if we suffer any evil

unjustly, during the present life, we discharge a multitude of sins. Therefore it is
a great advantage to have out the chastisement of our sins here, and not there; for
the rich man received no evil here, and therefore he was scorched in the flames
there; and that this was the reason why he did not enjoy any consolation, hear in
proof what Abraham says, "Son, you have received your good things; therefore
you are tormented." But that to the good things bestowed on Lazarus, not only
his virtue, but his having here suffered a thousand ills, contributed, learn also
from the patriarch's words. For having said to the rich man, "You have received
your good things," he goes on to say, "and Lazarus evil things, and for this
reason he is comforted." [Luke 16:25] For as they who live virtuously, and are
afflicted, receive a double reward from God, so he who lives in wickedness, and
fares sumptuously, shall have a double punishment. Again, I declare this not for
the purpose of accusing those who have taken flight, for it is said, "Add not more
trouble to a heart that is vexed;" [Sirach 4:3] nor do I say it because I wish to
rebuke; (for the sick man stands in need of consolation); but for the purpose of
endeavouring to promote an amendment. Let us not entrust our safety to flight,
but flee from sins, and depart from our evil way. If we escape from these things,
although we be in the midst of ten thousand soldiers; not one of them will be
able to smite us; but not flying from these, though we ascend to the very summit
of the mountains, we shall there find innumerable enemies! Let us again call to
mind those three children, who were in the midst of the furnace, yet suffered no
evil, and those who cast them into it, how they that sat around were all
consumed. What is more wonderful than this? The fire freed those it held
possession of, and violently seized those whom it did not hold, to teach you, that
not the habitation, but the habit of life, brings safety or punishment. Those
within the furnace escaped, but those without were consumed. To each alike
were the same bodies, but not the same dispositions. For this reason neither were
the effects on them the same; for hay, although it lie without the flame, is quickly
kindled; but gold, although it remain within, becomes the more resplendent!
11. Where now are those who said, "Let the Emperor take all, and grant us