sacrifice and perform their services, elsewhere, but assembling from all parts of
the world in one place, they were bound to perform all their worship in the
temple. In opposition to this he introduces his precept, and freeing them from
this necessity, he says in effect, Our ways are not like the Jewish; for as Christ
commanded us to pray for all men because He died for all men, and I preach
these things for all men, so it is good to "pray everywhere." Henceforth the
consideration is not of the place but of the manner of the prayer; "pray
everywhere," but "everywhere lift up holy hands." That is the thing required. And
what is "holy"? Pure. And what is pure? Not washed with water, but free from
covetousness, murder, rapacity, violence, "without wrath and doubting." What
means this? Who is angry when he prays? It means, without bearing malice. Let
the mind of him that prays be pure, freed from all passion. Let no one approach
God in enmity, or in an unamiable temper, or with "doubting." What is "without
doubting"? Let us hear. It implies that we should have no misgiving but that we
shall be heard. For it is said, "whatever you ask believing you shall receive."
[Matthew 21:22] And again, "when you stand praying forgive, if you have
anything against any one." [Mark 11:25] This is to pray without wrath and
doubting. But how can I believe that I shall obtain my request? By asking
nothing opposed to that which He is ready to grant, nothing unworthy of the
great King, nothing worldly, but all spiritual blessings; if you approach Him
"without wrath," having pure hands, "holy hands": hands employed in
almsgiving are holy. Approach Him thus, and you will certainly obtain your
request. "For if you being evil know how to give good gifts to your children, how
much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good things to them that
ask Him?" [Matthew 7:11] By doubting he means misgiving. In like manner he
says, I will that women approach God without wrath and doubting, lifting up
holy hands: that they should not follow their own desires, nor be covetous or
rapacious. For what if a woman does not rob or steal herself, but does it through
means of her husband? Paul however requires something more of women, that
they adorn themselves "in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety;

not with broidered hair or gold or pearls or costly array; But (which becomes
women professing godliness) with good works." But what is this "modest
apparel"? Such attire as covers them completely, and decently, not with
superfluous ornaments, for the one is becoming, the other is not.
Moral. What? Do you approach God to pray, with broidered hair and
ornaments of gold? Are you come to a dance? To a marriage? To a gay
procession? There such a broidery, such costly garments, had been seasonable,
here not one of them is wanted. You have come to pray, to supplicate for pardon
of your sins, to plead for your offenses, beseeching the Lord, and hoping to
render Him propitious to you. Why do you adorn yourself? This is not the dress
of a suppliant. How can you groan? How can you weep? How pray with
fervency, when thus attired? Should thou weep, your tears will be the ridicule of
the beholders. She that weeps ought not to be wearing gold. It were but acting,
and hypocrisy. For is it not acting to pour forth tears from a soul so overgrown
with extravagance and ambition? Away with such hypocrisy! God is not
mocked! This is the attire of actors and dancers, that live upon the stage. Nothing
of this sort becomes a modest woman, who should be adorned "with
shamefacedness and sobriety."
Imitate not therefore the courtesans. For by such a dress they allure their
many lovers; and hence many have incurred a disgraceful suspicion, and, instead
of gaining any advantage from their ornaments, have injured many by bearing
this character. For as the adulteress, though she may have a character for
modesty, derives no benefit from that character, in the Day, when He who judges
the secrets of men shall make all things manifest; so the modest woman, if she
contrive by this dress to pass for an adulteress, will lose the advantage of her
chastity. For many have suffered harm by this opinion. "What can I do," you say,
"if another suspects me?" But you give the occasion by your dress, your looks,
your gestures. It is for this reason that Paul discourses much of dress and much
of modesty. And if he would remove those things which are only the indications
of wealth, as gold, and pearls, and costly array; how much more those things