wrath." Then, which is the chief thing of all, he shows how they will be led to
obedience, referring the whole source of it to the head and chief authority. And
in the same way as he has shown the husband to be the cause of the wife's
obedience, (which is the reason also why he addresses the greater part of his
arguments to him, advising him to attach her to himself by the power of love,)
so, I say, here also, he refers the efficiency to him, by saying, "But bring them up
in the chastening and admonition of the Lord." You see that where there are
spiritual ties, the natural ties will follow. Do you wish your son to be obedient?
From the very first "Bring him up in the chastening and admonition of the Lord."
Never deem it an unnecessary thing that he should be a diligent hearer of the
divine Scriptures. For there the first thing he hears will be this, "Honor your
father and your mother"; so that this makes for you. Never say, this is the
business of monks. Am I making a monk of him? No. There is no need he should
become a monk. Why be so afraid of a thing so replete with so much advantage?
Make him a Christian. For it is of all things necessary for laymen to be
acquainted with the lessons derived from this source; but especially for children.
For theirs is an age full of folly; and to this folly are superadded the bad
examples derived from the heathen tales, where they are made acquainted with
those heroes so admired among them, slaves of their passions, and cowards with
regard to death; as, for example, Achilles, when he relents, when he dies for his
concubine, when another gets drunk, and many other things of the sort. He
requires therefore the remedies against these things. How is it not absurd to send
children out to trades, and to school, and to do all you can for these objects, and
yet, not to "bring them up in the chastening and admonition of the Lord"? And
for this reason truly we are the first to reap the fruits, because we bring up our
children to be insolent and profligate, disobedient, and mere vulgar fellows. Let
us not then do this; no, let us listen to this blessed Apostle's admonition. "Let us
bring them up in the chastening and admonition of the Lord." Let us give them a
pattern. Let us make them from the earliest age apply themselves to the reading
of the Scriptures. Alas, that so constantly as I repeat this, I am looked upon as

trifling! Still, I shall not cease to do my duty. Why, tell me, do ye not imitate
them of old? You women, especially, emulate those admirable women. Has a
child been born to any one? Imitate Hannah's example [1 Samuel 1:24]; look at
what she did. She brought him up at once to the temple. Who among you would
not rather that his son should become a Samuel than that he should be king of the
whole world ten thousand times over? "And how," you will say, "is it possible he
should become such a one?" Why is it not possible? It is because thou dost not
choose it yourself, nor committest him to the care of those who are able to make
him such a one. "And who," it will be said, "is such a one as this?" God. Since
she put him into the hands of God. For not even Eli himself was one of those in
any great degree qualified to form him; (how could he be, he who was not able
to form even his own children?) No, it was the faith of the mother and her
earnest zeal that wrought the whole. He was her first child, and her only one, and
she knew not whether she should ever have others besides. Yet she did not say, "I
will wait till the child is grown up, that he may have a taste of the things of this
life, I will allow him to have his pastime in them a little in his childish years."
No, all these thoughts the woman repudiated, she was absorbed in one object,
how from the very beginning she might dedicate the spiritual image to God. Well
may we men be put to the blush at the wisdom of this woman. She offered him
up to God, and there she left him. And therefore was her married state more
glorious, in that she had made spiritual objects her first care, in that she
dedicated the first-fruits to God. Therefore was her womb fruitful, and she
obtained other children besides. And therefore she saw him honorable even in
the world. For if men when they are honored, render honor in return, will not
God much more, He who does this, even without being honored? How long are
we to be mere lumps of flesh? How long are we to be stooping to the earth? Let
everything be secondary with us to the provident care we should take of our
children, and to our "bringing them up in the chastening and admonition of the
Lord." If from the very first he is taught to be a lover of true wisdom, then
wealth greater than all wealth has he acquired and a more imposing name. You