and of rejoicing; and for this, they do all, say all, and undertake all things.
Therefore it is, that the merchant goes on a voyage, in order that he may amass
wealth; and he amasses wealth, to the end that he may rejoice over what he has
treasured up. The soldier also for this reason exercises his warfare, and the
husbandman his husbandry; for this each man plies his art. Those also who love
dominion, love it for this end, that they may obtain glory; and they desire to
obtain glory, that they may rejoice; and any one may perceive that each of our
undertakings is directed to this point, and that every man looking to this makes
haste to go towards it through a variety of means.
4. For as I said, all love gladness, but all are not able to attain it, since they
know not the way which leads to it; but many suppose that the source of it is in
being rich. But if this were its source, no one possessed of wealth would ever be
sad. But in fact many of the rich think life not worth living, and would infinitely
prefer death when they experience any hardship; and of all men these are the
most liable to excessive sadness. For you should not look to their tables, or their
flatterers, and parasites, but to the trouble that comes of such things, the insults,
the calumnies, the dangers, and the distresses, and what is far worse, that they
meet these reverses unpractised, and know not how to take them philosophically,
or to bear with fortitude what befalls them; whence it happens that calamities do
not appear to them such as they are in their own nature, but even things which
are really light come to seem intolerable; whereas, with regard to the poor, the
contrary takes place; things that are irremediable seem easy to be borne, since
they are familiar with many such. For it is not so much the nature of the events
as the disposition of the sufferers, that makes the evils which come upon us seem
great or small. And that I may not go a long way off for examples of both these
facts, I will speak to you of what has lately befallen ourselves. Behold then how
all the poor escaped, and the populace are delivered from the danger, and enjoy
an entire freedom! But those who manage the affairs of the city, the men who
keep their studs of horses, and preside over the public games, and such as have
borne other public charges, they are now the inmates of the prison, and fear the

worst; and they alone pay the penalty of the deeds that have been perpetrated by
all, and are in a state of constant terror; and they are now the most wretched of
men, not because of the greatness of the danger, but on account of the luxury in
which hitherto they have lived! Many, at least when exhorted by us, and
counselled to sustain these adverse affairs with fortitude, said this, "We never
practised any thing of the kind, and do not know how to exercise such
philosophy; this is why we need so much consolation."
5. Others again suppose, that to enjoy good health is the source of pleasure.
But it is not so. For many of those who enjoy good health have a thousand times
wished themselves dead, not being able to bear the insults inflicted on them.
Others again affirm, that to enjoy glory, and to have attained to power, and to
administer the highest offices, and to be flattered by multitudes, is productive of
continual gladness. But neither is this the case. And why do I speak of other
offices of power? For although we were to mount up in thought to royalty itself,
and to him who lives in that station, we should find it encompassed with a
diversity of troubles, and having so many necessary causes the more of sadness,
in proportion as it is surrounded with a greater weight of affairs. And what need
is there to speak of wars, and battles, and the insurrections of barbarians?
Oftentimes he has reason to fear those by whom he is surrounded at home. For
many of those monarchs who have escaped from the hands of their enemies,
have not escaped the conspiracies of their own body-guards. And kings have of
necessity as many causes of sadness as there are waves on the ocean. But if
monarchy is unable to render life devoid of grief, then what else can possibly
achieve this? Nothing, indeed, of this life; but this saying of Paul alone, brief and
simple as it is, will of itself open to us this treasure.
6. For many words are not needed, nor a long round of argument, but if we
only consider his expression, we shall find the way that leads to it. He does not
simply say, "Rejoice always;" but he adds the cause of the continual pleasure,
saying, "Rejoice in the Lord always." He who rejoices "in the Lord," can not be
deprived of the pleasure by any thing that may happen. For all other things in