yoked together in me, Love is the charioteer; and while I myself confess
that I have by writing learned many things which I did not know: if this
be so, then this my labor ought not to seem superfluous to any idle, or to
any very learned reader; while it is needful in no small part, to many who
are busy, and to many who are unlearned, and among these last to
myself. Supported, then, very greatly, and aided by the writings we have
already read of others on this subject, I have undertaken to inquire into
and to discuss, whatever it seems to my judgment can be reverently
inquired into and discussed, concerning the Trinity, the one supreme and
supremely good God; He himself exhorting me to the inquiry, and
helping me in the discussion of it; in order that, if there are no other
writings of the kind, there may be something for those to have and read
who are willing and capable; but if any exist already, then it may be so
much the easier to find some such writings, the more there are of the kind
in existence.
2. Assuredly, as in all my writings I desire not only a pious reader, but
also a free corrector, so I especially desire this in the present inquiry,
which is so important that I would there were as many inquirers as there
are objectors. But as I do not wish my reader to be bound down to me, so
I do not wish my corrector to be bound down to himself. Let not the
former love me more than the catholic faith, let not the latter love himself
more than the catholic verity. As I say to the former, Do not be willing to
yield to my writings as to the canonical Scriptures; but in these, when
thou hast discovered even what thou didst not previously believe, believe
it unhesitatingly; while in those, unless thou hast understood with
certainty what thou didst not before hold as certain, be unwilling to hold
it fast: so I say to the latter, Do not be willing to amend my writings by
thine own opinion or disputation, but from the divine text, or by
unanswerable reason. If thou apprehendest anything of truth in them, its
being there does not make it mine, but by understanding and loving it, let
it be both thine and mine; but if thou convictest anything of falsehood,
though it have once been mine, in that I was guilty of the error, yet now
by avoiding it let it be neither thine nor mine.
3. Let this third book, then, take its beginning at the point to which the
second had reached. For after we had arrived at this, that we desired to

show that the Son was not therefore less than the Father, because the
Father sent and the Son was sent; nor the Holy Spirit therefore less than
both, because we read in the Gospel that He was sent both by the one and
by the other; we undertook then to inquire, since the Son was sent
thither, where He already was, for He came into the world, and "was in
the world;" since also the Holy Spirit was sent thither, where He already
was, for "the Spirit of the Lord filleth the world, and that which
containeth all things hath knowledge of the voice;" whether the Lord
was therefore "sent" because He was born in the flesh so as to be no
longer hidden, and, as it were, came forth from the bosom of the Father,
and appeared to the eyes of men in the form of a servant; and the Holy
Spirit also was therefore "sent," because He too was seen as a dove in a
corporeal form, and in cloven tongues, like as of fire;4 so that, to be sent,
when spoken of them, means to go forth to the sight of mortals in some
corporeal form from a spiritual hiding-place; which, because the Father
did not, He is said only to have sent, not also to be sent. Our next inquiry
was, Why the Father also is not sometimes said to be sent, if He Himself
was manifested through those corporeal forms which appeared to the
eyes of the ancients. But if the Son was manifested at these times, why
should He be said to be "sent" so long after, when the fullness of time was
come that He should be born of a woman; since, indeed, He was sent
before also, viz., when He appeared corporeally in those forms? Or if He
were not rightly said to be "sent," except when the Word was made flesh;
why should the Holy Spirit be read of as "sent," of whom such an
incarnation never took place? But if neither the Father, nor the Son, but
the Holy Spirit was manifested through these ancient appearances; why
should He too be said to be "sent" now, when He was also sent before in
these various manners? Next we subdivided the subject, that it might be
handled most carefully, and we made the question threefold, of which one
part was explained in the second book, and two remain, which I shall next
proceed to discuss. For we have already inquired and determined, that
not only the Father, nor only the Son, nor only the Holy Spirit appeared
in those ancient corporeal forms and visions. but either indifferently the
Lord God, who is understood to be the Trinity itself, or some one person
of the Trinity, whichever the text of the narrative might signify, through
intimations supplied by the context.