teach, in the name of Jesus." [Acts 4:16-18] See what effrontery is shown by
these, and what greatness of mind by the Apostles. "But Peter and John
answered and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken
unto you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak the things
which we have seen and heard. So when they had further threatened them, they
let them go, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people."
[Acts 4:19-21] The miracles shut their mouths: they would not so much as let
them finish their speech, but cut them short in the middle, most insolently. "For
all men glorified God for that which was done. For the man was above forty
years old, on whom this miracle of healing was showed." [Acts 4:22] But let us
look over what has been said from the beginning.
"And as they spoke unto the people, etc. Being grieved that they taught the
people, and preached through Jesus the resurrection of the dead."
(Recapitulation, v. 1, 2.) So then at first they did all for the sake of man's opinion
(or glory): but now another motive was added: that they should not be thought
guilty of murder, as they said subsequently, "Do ye wish to bring this man's
blood on us?" [Acts 5:28] O the folly! Persuaded that He was risen, and having
received this proof of it, they expected that He Whom death could not hold,
could be cast into the shade by their machinations! What can match the folly of
this! Such is the nature of wickedness: it has no eyes for anything, but on all
occasions it is thrown into perturbation. Finding themselves overborne, they felt
like persons who have been outwitted: as is the case with people who have been
forestalled and made a sport of in some matter. And yet they everywhere
affirmed that it was God that raised Him: but it was "in the Name of Jesus" that
they spoke; showing that Jesus was risen. "Through Jesus, the resurrection of the
dead": for they themselves also held a resurrection: a cold and puerile doctrine,
indeed, but still they held it. Why this alone, was it not sufficient to induce them
to do nothing to them— I mean, that the disciples with such boldness bore
themselves in the way they did? Say, wherefore, O Jew, do you disbelieve? You
ought to have attended to the sign done, and to the words, not to the evil

disposition of the many. "By their teaching the people." For already they were in
ill repute with them by reason of what they had done to Christ; so that they were
rather increasing their own obloquy. "And they laid hands on them, and put them
in hold until the morrow; for it was now eventide." [Acts 4:3] In the case of
Christ, however, they did not so; but having taken Him at midnight, they
immediately led him away, and made no delay, being exceedingly in fear of the
multitude: whereas in the case of the Apostles here, they were bold. And they no
more take them to Pilate, being ashamed and blushing at the thought of the
former affair, lest they should also be taken to task for that.
"And it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders, and
scribes were gathered together at Jerusalem." [Acts 4:5] Again in Jerusalem:
and there it is that men's blood is poured out; no reverence for their city either;
"And Annas, and Caiaphas," etc. [Acts 4:6] "And Annas," it says, "and
Caiaphas." His maid-servant it was that questioned Peter, and he could not bear
it: in his house it was that Peter denied, when Another was in bonds there: but
now, when he has come into the midst of them all, see how he speaks! "By what
name have ye done this?" Why do you not speak it, what it is, but keepest that
out of sight? "By what name have ye done this?" [Acts 4:7] And yet he affirmed,
It was not we that did it. "You rulers of the people," etc. [Acts 4:8] Observe his
wisdom: he does not say outright, "In the Name of Jesus we did it," but how? "In
His Name this man"— He does not say, "was made whole by us;" but— "does
stand here before you whole." And again, "If we be examined concerning the
good deed done to the impotent man." [Acts 4:9] He hits them hard, that they are
always making a crime of such acts, finding fault with works of beneficence
done to men: and he reminds them of their former doings, that they run to do
murder, and not only so, but make a crime of doing good deeds. Do you observe
too (in point of rhetoric) with what dignity they express themselves? Even in the
use of words they were becoming expert by practice, and henceforth they were
not to be beaten down. "Be it known unto you all," etc. [Acts 4:10] Whereby he
shows them that they rather do, in spite of themselves, preach Christ; themselves