THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.2.

whole perfection of this sacrament is expressed by all those words:
and it was in this way that Eusebius understood that the sacrament
was accomplished by those words, as to its first and second
perfection.
Reply to Objection 3: In the sacrament of Baptism the minister
exercises an act regarding the use of the matter, which is of the
essence of the sacrament: such is not the case in this sacrament;
hence there is no parallel.
Reply to Objection 4: Some have contended that this sacrament
cannot be accomplished by uttering the aforesaid words, while
leaving out the rest, especially the words in the Canon of the Mass.
But that this is false can be seen both from Ambrose's words quoted
above, as well as from the fact that the Canon of the Mass is not the
same in all places or times, but various portions have been
introduced by various people.
Accordingly it must be held that if the priest were to pronounce only
the aforesaid words with the intention of consecrating this
sacrament, this sacrament would be valid because the intention
would cause these words to be understood as spoken in the person
of Christ, even though the words were pronounced without those
that precede. The priest, however, would sin gravely in consecrating
the sacrament thus, as he would not be observing the rite of the
Church. Nor does the comparison with Baptism prove anything; for it
is a sacrament of necessity: whereas the lack of this sacrament can
be supplied by the spiritual partaking thereof, as Augustine says (cf.
Question 73, Article 3, ad 1).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.78, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether this is the proper form for the

consecration of the bread: "This is My body"?
Objection 1: It seems that this is not the proper form of this
sacrament: "This is My body." For the effect of a sacrament ought to
be expressed in its form. But the effect of the consecration of the
bread is the change of the substance of the bread into the body of
Christ, and this is better expressed by the word "becomes" than by
"is." Therefore, in the form of the consecration we ought to say:
"This becomes My body."
Objection 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv), "Christ's words
consecrate this sacrament. What word of Christ? This word, whereby
all things are made. The Lord commanded, and the heavens and
earth were made. " Therefore, it would be a more proper form of this
sacrament if the imperative mood were employed, so as to say: "Be
this My body."
Objection 3: Further, that which is changed is implied in the subject
of this phrase, just as the term of the change is implied in the
predicate. But just as that into which the change is made is
something determinate, for the change is into nothing else but the
body of Christ, so also that which is converted is determinate, since
only bread is converted into the body of Christ. Therefore, as a noun
is inserted on the part of the predicate, so also should a noun be
inserted in the subject, so that it be said: "This bread is My body."
Objection 4: Further, just as the term of the change is determinate in
nature, because it is a body, so also is it determinate in person.
Consequently, in order to determine the person, it ought to be said:
"This is the body of Christ."
Objection 5: Further, nothing ought to be inserted in the form except
what is substantial to it. Consequently, the conjunction "for" is
improperly added in some books, since it does not belong to the
substance of the form.
On the contrary, our Lord used this form in consecrating, as is
evident from Mt. 26:26.
I answer that, This is the proper form for the consecration of the