SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.3.

dignity it is unbecoming that they should demand minute things with
careful exactitude, for this is reckoned sinful according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 2). Hence the Old Law did not order the
payment of tithes on such like minute things, but left it to the
judgment of those who are willing to pay, because minute things are
counted as nothing. Wherefore the Pharisees who claimed for
themselves the perfect justice of the Law, paid tithes even on these
minute things: nor are they reproved by our Lord on that account,
but only because they despised greater, i.e. spiritual, precepts; and
rather did He show them to be deserving of praise in this particular,
when He said (Mt. 23:23): "These things you ought to have done," i.e.
during the time of the Law, according to Chrysostom's [Hom. xliv in
the Opus Imperfectum] commentary. This also seems to denote
fittingness rather than obligation. Therefore now too men are not
bound to pay tithes on such minute things, except perhaps by
reason of the custom of one's country.
Reply to Objection 4: A man is not bound to pay tithes on what he
has lost by theft or robbery, before he recovers his property: unless
he has incurred the loss through his own fault or neglect, because
the Church ought not to be the loser on that account. If he sell wheat
that has not been tithed, the Church can command the tithes due to
her, both from the buyer who has a thing due to the Church, and
from the seller, because so far as he is concerned he has defrauded
the Church: yet if one pays, the other is not bound. Tithes are due on
the fruits of the earth, in so far as these fruits are the gift of God.
Wherefore tithes do not come under a tax, nor are they subject to
workmen's wages. Hence it is not right to deduct one's taxes and the
wages paid to workmen, before paying tithes: but tithes must be paid
before anything else on one's entire produce.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.86, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether tithes should be paid to the clergy?

Objection 1: It would seem that tithes should not be paid to the
clergy. Tithes were paid to the Levites in the Old Testament, because
they had no portion in the people's possessions, according to Num.
18:23,24. But in the New Testament the clergy have possessions not
only ecclesiastical, but sometimes also patrimonial: moreover they
receive first-fruits, and oblations for the living and the dead.
Therefore it is unnecessary to pay tithes to them.
Objection 2: Further, it sometimes happens that a man dwells in one
parish, and farms in another; or a shepherd may take his flock within
the bounds of one parish during one part of the year, and within the
bounds of one parish during one part of the year, and within the
bounds of another parish during the other part of the year; or he may
have his sheepfold in one parish, and graze the sheep in another.
Now in all these and similar cases it seems impossible to decide to
which clergy the tithes ought to be paid. Therefore it would seem
that no fixed tithe ought to be paid to the clergy.
Objection 3: Further, it is the general custom in certain countries for
the soldiers to hold the tithes from the Church in fee; and certain
religious receive tithes. Therefore seemingly tithes are not due only
to those of the clergy who have care of souls.
On the contrary, It is written (Num. 18:21): "I have given to the sons
of Levi all the tithes of Israel for a possession, for the ministry
wherewith they serve Me in the Tabernacle." Now the clergy are the
successors of the sons of Levi in the New Testament. Therefore
tithes are due to the clergy alone.
I answer that, Two things have to be considered with regard to
tithes: namely, the right to receive tithes, and the things given in the
name of tithes. The right to receive tithes is a spiritual thing, for it
arises from the debt in virtue of which the ministers of the altar have
a right to the expenses of their ministry, and temporal things are due
to those who sow spiritual things. This debt concerns none but the
clergy who have care of souls, and so they alone are competent to
have this right.
On the other hand the things given in the name of tithes are material,