## Homily 83 on Matthew

Matt. XXVI. 36-38.
"Then comes Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and says
unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. And He took with Him
Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy:
and He says unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; tarry
ye here, and watch with me."
Because they clung to Him inseparably, therefore He says, "Tarry ye here,
while I go away and pray." For it was usual with Him to pray apart from them.
And this He did teaching us in our prayers, to prepare silence for ourselves and
great retirement.
And He takes with Him the three, and says unto them, "my soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death." Wherefore does He not take all with
Him? That they might not be cast down; but these He takes that had been
spectators of His glory. However, even these He dismisses: "And He went on a
little farther, and prays, saying, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me; nevertheless not as I will, but as You will. And He comes unto them, and
finds them sleeping, and says unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one
hour? Watch and pray, that you enter not into temptation; the spirit indeed is
willing, but the flesh is weak."
Not without reason does He inveigh against Peter most, although the others
also had slept; but to make him feel by this also, for the cause which I mentioned
before. Then because the others also said the same thing (for when Peter had
said (these are the words), "Though I must die with You, I will not deny You;
likewise also," it is added, "said all the disciples"); [Matthew 26:36] He
addresses Himself to all, convicting their weakness. For they who are desiring to
die with Him, were not then able so much as to sorrow with Him wakefully, but

sleep overcame them.
And He prays with earnestness, in order that the thing might not seem to be
acting. And sweats flow over him for the same cause again, even that the
heretics might not say this, that He acts the agony. Therefore there is a sweat like
drops of blood, and an angel appeared strengthening Him, and a thousand sure
signs of fear, lest any one should affirm the words to be feigned. For this cause
also was this prayer. By saying then, "If it be possible, let it pass from me," He
showed His humanity; but by saying, "Nevertheless not as I will, but as You
will," He showed His virtue and self-command, teaching us even when nature
pulls us back, to follow God. For since it was not enough for the foolish to show
His face only, He uses words also. Again, words sufficed not alone, but deeds
likewise were needed; these also He joins with the words, that even they who are
in a high degree contentious may believe, that He both became man and died.
For if, even when these things are so, this be still disbelieved by some, much
more, if these had not been. See by how many things He shows the reality of the
incarnation: by what He speaks, by what He suffers. After that He comes and
says to Peter, as it is said, "What, couldest thou not watch one hour with me?"
[Mark 14:37] All were sleeping, and He re bukes Peter, hinting at him, in what
He spoke. And the words, "with me," are not employed without reason; it is as
though He had said, You could not watch with me one hour, and will you lay
down your life for me? And what follows also, intimates this self-same thing.
For "Watch," says He, "and pray not to enter into temptation." See how He is
again instructing them not to be self-confident, but contrite in mind, and to be
humble, and to refer all to God.
And at one time He addresses Himself to Peter, at another to all in common.
And to him He says, "Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to have you, that he may
sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for you;" and to all in common, "Pray that
you enter not into temptation;" every way plucking up their self-will, and
making them earnest-minded. Then, that He might not seem to make His
language altogether condemnatory, He says, "The spirit indeed is ready, but the