penetrative power of the soul, that is, the faculty of imagination,
informed by the species; and thirdly, we find the intention of the will
joining both together. But each of these trinities falls short of the
Divine image. For the species of the external body is extrinsic to the
essence of the soul; while the species in the memory, though not
extrinsic to the soul, is adventitious to it; and thus in both cases the
species falls short of representing the connaturality and co-eternity
of the Divine Persons. The corporeal vision, too, does not proceed
only from the species of the external body, but from this, and at the
same time from the sense of the seer; in like manner imaginary
vision is not from the species only which is preserved in the
memory, but also from the imagination. For these reasons the
procession of the Son from the Father alone is not suitably
represented. Lastly the intention of the will joining the two together,
does not proceed from them either in corporeal or spiritual vision.
Wherefore the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the
Son is not thus properly represented.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the image of God is to be found in the

acts of the soul?
Objection 1: It would seem that the image of God is not found in the
acts of the soul. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xi, 26), that "man
was made to God's image, inasmuch as we exist and know that we
exist, and love this existence and knowledge." But to exist does not
signify an act. Therefore the image of God is not to be found in the
soul's acts.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine (De Trin. ix, 4) assigns God's image
in the soul to these three things---mind, knowledge, and love. But
mind does not signify an act, but rather the power or the essence of
the intellectual soul. Therefore the image of God does not extend to
the acts of the soul.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine (De Trin. x, 11) assigns the image of
the Trinity in the soul to "memory, understanding, and will." But
these three are "natural powers of the soul," as the Master of the
Sentences says (1 Sent. D iii). Therefore the image of God is in the
powers, and does not extend to the acts of the soul.
Objection 4: Further, the image of the Trinity always remains in the
soul. But an act does not always remain. Therefore the image of God
does not extend to the acts.
On the contrary, Augustine (De Trin. xi, 2 seqq.) assigns the trinity in
the lower part of the soul, in relation to the actual vision, whether
sensible or imaginative. Therefore, also, the trinity in the mind, by
reason of which man is like to God's image, must be referred to
actual vision.
I answer that, As above explained (Article 2), a certain representation
of the species belongs to the nature of an image. Hence, if the image
of the Divine Trinity is to be found in the soul, we must look for it
where the soul approaches the nearest to a representation of the
species of the Divine Persons. Now the Divine Persons are distinct
from each other by reason of the procession of the Word from the
Speaker, and the procession of Love connecting Both. But in our
soul word "cannot exist without actual thought," as Augustine says
(De Trin. xiv, 7). Therefore, first and chiefly, the image of the Trinity