Hereby is excluded the error of sundry philosophers, who have laid it down that God
can do nothing except according to the course of nature. On such it is said: As though
the Almighty had no power, they reckoned of him (Job xxii, 17).

## CHAPTER XXIII--That God's Action in Creation is not of Physical Necessity, but of Free
Choice of Will
THE power of every necessary agent is determined and limited to one effect. That is the
reason why all physical effects always come out in the same way, unless there be some
interference: but acts of the will not so. But the divine power is not directed to one effect
only (Chap.XXII). God then does not act by physical necessity, but by will.
2. Whatever does not involve a contradiction, is within the range of the divine power.
But many things that do not exist in creation would still involve no contradiction if they
did exist. This is most evidently the case in regard of the number and size and distances
of the stars and other bodies. They would present no contradiction, no intrinsic
absurdity, if they were arranged on another plan. Many things therefore lie within the
range of divine power, that are not found in nature. But whoever does some and leaves
out others of the things that he can do, acts by choice of will and not by physical
necessity.
4. Since God's action is His substance (B. I, Chap.LXXIII), the divine action cannot
come under the category of those acts that are `transient' and not in the agent, but must
be an act `immanent' in the agent, such as are acts of knowing and desiring, and none
other. God therefore acts and operates by knowing and willing.
6. A self-determined agent is prior to an agent determined from without: for all that is
determined from without is reducible to what is self-determined, or we should have
process to infinity. But he who is not master of his own action is not self-determined: for
he acts as led by another, not as his own leader. The prime agent then must act in such
a way as to remain master of his own action. But no one is master of his own action
except he be a voluntary agent.
7. Will-action is naturally prior to physical action: for that is naturally prior which is more
perfect, albeit in the individual it be posterior in time. But will-action is the more perfect,
as within our experience voluntary agents are more perfect than physical. Therefore
will-action must be assigned to God, the prime agent.
8. Where will-action and physical action go together, will-action represents the higher
power and uses the other as an instrument. But the divine power is supreme, and
therefore must act by will-action, not under physical necessity.
This truth also divine Scripture teaches us. All things, whatsoever he hath willed, the
Lord hath done (Ps. cxxxiv, 6): Who worketh all things according to the counsel of his
will (Eph. i, 11).