greater? What then, does one object? Are there not Jews even now, and Greeks
who are in a very imperfect condition? This, however, is an excess of
listlessness. For after so long a time, after such great instructions, still to
continue imperfect, is a proof of great stupidity.
When then the Greeks say, why did Christ come at this time? Let us not
allow them so to speak, but let us ask them, whether He did not succeed? For as,
if He had come at the very first, and had not succeeded, the time would not have
been for us a sufficient excusation, so, seeing He has succeeded, we cannot with
justice be brought to account on the score of "the time." For neither does any one
demand of a physician, who has removed the disease, and restored one to health,
to give an account of his treatment, nor yet does any examine closely a general
who has gained a victory, why at this time, and why in this place. For these
things it were in place to ask, had he not been successful; but when he has been
successful, they must even be taken for granted. For, tell me, whether is more
worthy of credit, your reasoning and calumny, or the perfection of the thing?
Conquered He, or conquered He not? Show this. Prevailed He, or prevailed He
not? Accomplished He what He said, or no? These are the articles of enquiry.
Tell me, I pray. Thou fully grantest that God is, even though not Christ? I ask
you then; Is God without beginning? You will say, Certainly. Tell me then, why
made He not men myriads of years before? For they would have lived through a
longer time. They were now losers by that time during which they were not. Nay,
they were not losers; but how, He who made them alone knows. Again, I ask
you, why did He not make all men at once? But his soul, whoever was first
made, has so many years of existence, of which that one is deprived which is not
yet created. Wherefore made He the one to be brought first into this world, and
the other afterwards?
Although these things are really fit subjects for enquiry: yet not for a
meddling curiosity: for this is not for enquiry at all. For I will tell you the reason
I spoke of. For suppose human nature as being some one continued life, and that
in the first times our race was in the position of boyhood; in those that

succeeded, of manhood; and in these that are near extreme age, of an old man.
Now when the soul is at its perfection, when the limbs of the body are unstrung,
and our war is over, we are then brought to philosophy. On the contrary, one may
say, we teach boys while young. Yes, but not the great doctrines, but rhetoric,
and expertness with language; and the other when they have come to ripeness of
age. See God also doing the same with the Jews. For just as though the Jews had
been little children, he placed Moses over them as a schoolmaster, and like little
children he managed these things for them through shadowy representations, as
we teach letters. "For the law had a shadow of the good things to come, and not
the very image of the things." [Hebrews 10:1] As we both buy cakes for children
and give them pieces of money, requiring of them one thing only, that for the
present they would go to school; so also God at that time gave them both wealth
and luxury, purchasing from them by this His great indulgence one only thing,
that they would listen to Moses. Therefore He delivered them over to a
schoolmaster, that they might not despise Himself as a tender, loving Father. See
then that they feared him only; for they said not, Where is God? But, Where is
Moses? And his very presence was fearful. So when they did amiss, observe
how he punished them. For God indeed was desirous of casting them off; but he
would not permit Him. Or rather the whole was of God; just as when a Father
threatens while a schoolmaster entreats Him, and says, "Forgive them, I pray, on
my account, and henceforward I undertake for them." In this way was the
wilderness a school. And as children who have been a long while at school are
desirous of quitting it, so also were they at that time continually desiring Egypt,
and weeping, saying, "We are lost, we are wholly consumed, we are utterly
undone." [Exodus 16:3] And Moses broke their tablet, having written for them,
as it were, certain words [Exodus 32:19]; just as a schoolmaster would do, who
having taken up the writing tablet, and found it badly written, throws away the
tablet itself, desiring to show great anger; and if he have broken it, the father is
not angry. For he indeed was busy writing, but they not attending to him, but
turning themselves other ways, were committing disorder. And as in school, they