wished to be loved still more, for he who loves the object of his love, is willing
to stay at no point of love, for it is impossible there should be a measure of so
noble a thing. Paul desires that the debt of love should always be owing; "Owe
no man any thing, save to love one another." [Romans 13:8] The measure of love
is, to stop nowhere; "that your love," says he, "may abound yet more and more."
Consider the character of the expression, "that it may abound yet more and
more," he says, "in knowledge and all discernment." He does not extol
friendship merely, nor love merely, but such as comes of knowledge; that is, You
should not apply the same love to all: for this comes not of love, but from want
of feeling. What means he by "in knowledge"? He means, with judgment, with
reason, with discrimination. There are who love without reason, simply and any
how, whence it comes that such friendships are weak. He says, "in knowledge
and all discernment, that you may approve the things that are excellent," that is,
the things that are profitable. This I say not for my own sake, says he, but for
yours, for there is danger lest any one be spoiled by the love of the heretics; for
all this he hints at, and see how he brings it in. Not for my own sake, says he, do
I say this, but that you may be sincere, that is, that you receive no spurious
doctrine under the pretence of love. How then, says he, "If it be possible, live
peaceably with all men"? "Live peaceably" [Romans 12:18], he says, not, Love
so as to be harmed by that friendship; for he says, "if your right eye causes you
to stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from you; that you may be sincere" [Matthew
5:29], that is, before God, "and without offense," that is, before men, for many
men's friendships are often a hurt to them. Even though it hurts you not, says he,
still another may stumble thereat. "Unto the day of Christ"; i.e. that you may
then be found pure, having caused no one to stumble.
Ver. 11. "Being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are through
Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God;" i.e. holding, together with true
doctrine, an upright life.
And not merely upright, but "filled with the fruits of righteousness." For
there is indeed a righteousness not according to Christ, as, for example, a moral

life. "Which are through Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God." Do you
see that I speak not of my own glory, but the righteousness of God; and
oftentimes he calls mercy itself too righteousness; let not your love, he says,
indirectly injure you, by hindering your perception of things profitable, and take
heed lest you fall through your love to any one. For I would indeed that your
love should be increased, but not so that you should be injured by it. And I
would not that it should be simply of prejudice, but upon proof whether I speak
well or no. He says not, that you may take up my opinion, but that you may
"prove" it. He does not say outright, join not yourself to this or that man, but, I
would that your love should have respect to what is profitable, not that you
should be void of understanding. For it is a foolish thing if you work not
righteousness for Christ's sake and through Him. Mark the words, "through
Him." Does he then use God as a mere assistant? Away with the thought. Not
that I may receive praise, says he, but that God may be glorified.
Ver. 12, 13. "Now I would have you know, brethren, that the things which
happened unto me have fallen out rather unto the progress of the Gospel, so that
my bonds became manifest in Christ throughout the whole prætorian guard, and
to all the rest."
It was likely they would grieve when they heard he was in bonds, and
imagine that the preaching was at a stand. What then? He straightway destroys
this suspicion. And this also shows his affection, that he declares the things
which had happened to him, because they were anxious. What say you? You are
in bonds! You are hindered! How then does the Gospel advance? He answers,
"so that my bonds in Christ became manifest in all the prætorium." This thing
not only did not silence the rest, nor affright them, but contrariwise rather
encouraged them. If then they who were near the dangers were not only nothing
hurt, but even received greater confidence, much more should you. Had he when
in bonds taken it hardly, and held his peace, it were probable that they would be
affected in like sort. But as he spoke more boldly when in bonds, he gave them
more confidence than if he had not been bound. And how have his bonds "turned