## Homily 5 on Galatians

Verse 1
" With freedom did Christ set us free; stand fast therefore ."
Have you wrought your own deliverance, that you run back again to the
dominion you were under before? It is Another who has redeemed you, it is
Another who has paid the ransom for you. Observe in how many ways he leads
them away from the error of Judaism; by showing, first, that it was the extreme
of folly for those, who had become free instead of slaves, to desire to become
slaves instead of free; secondly, that they would be convicted of neglect and
ingratitude to their Benefactor, in despising Him who had delivered, and loving
him who had enslaved them; thirdly, that it was impossible. For Another having
once for all redeemed all of us from it, the Law ceases to have any sway. By the
word, "stand fast," he indicates their vacillation.
Ver. 1. "And be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage."
By the word "yoke" he signifies to them the burdensomeness of such a
course, and by the word "again" he points out their utter senselessness. Had you
never experienced this burden, you would not have deserved so severe a censure,
but for you who by trial have learned how irksome this yoke is, again to subject
yourself to it, is justly unpardonable.
Ver. 2. "Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if you receive circumcision, Christ
will profit you nothing."
Lo, what a threat! reasonably then did he anathematize even angels. How
then shall Christ profit them nothing? For he has not supported this by argument,
but only declared it, the credence due to his authority, compensating, as it were,
for all subsequent proof. Wherefore he sets out by saying, "Behold, I Paul say
unto you," which is the expression of one who has confidence in what he asserts.
We will subjoin what we can ourselves as to how Christ shall profit nothing

them who are circumcised.
He that is circumcised is circumcised for fear of the Law, and he who fears
the Law, distrusts the power of grace, and he who distrusts can receive no benefit
from that which is distrusted. Or again thus, he that is circumcised makes the
Law of force; but thus considering it to be of force and yet transgressing it in the
greater part while keeping it in the lesser, he puts himself again under the curse.
But how can he be saved who submits himself to the curse, and repels the liberty
which is of Faith? If one may say what seems a paradox, such an one believes
neither Christ nor the Law, but stands between them, desiring to benefit both by
one and the other, whereas he will reap fruit from neither. Having said that Christ
shall profit them nothing, he lays down the proof of it shortly and sententiously,
thus:
Ver. 3. "Yea, I testify again to every man that receives circumcision that he
is a debtor to do the whole Law."
That you may not suppose that this is spoken from ill-will , I say not to you
alone, he says, but to every one who receives circumcision, that he is a debtor to
do the whole Law. The parts of the Law are linked one to the other. As he who
from being free has enrolled himself as a slave, no longer does what he pleases,
but is bound by all the laws of slavery, so in the case of the Law, if you take
upon you a small portion of it, and submit to the yoke, you draw down upon
yourself its whole domination. And so it is in a worldly inheritance: he who
touches no part of it, is free from all matters which are consequent on the
heirship to the deceased, but if he takes a small portion, though not the whole,
yet by that part he has rendered himself liable for every thing. And this occurs in
the Law, not only in the way I have mentioned, but in another also, for Legal
observances are linked together. For example; Circumcision has sacrifice
connected with it, and the observance of days; sacrifice again has the observance
both of day and of place; place has the details of endless purifications;
purifications involve a perfect swarm of manifold observances. For it is unlawful
for the unclean to sacrifice, to enter the holy shrines, to do any other such act.