wickedness.
And this is manifest too by what comes after; He adds at least, "You
serpents, you generation of vipers." [Matthew 23:33] For as those beasts are like
their parents, in the destructiveness of their venom, so also are you like your
fathers in murderousness.
Then, because He was searching their temper of mind, which is to the more
part obscure, He does, from those things also which they were about to
perpetrate, which would be manifest to all, establish His words. For, because He
had said, "Wherefore ye be witnesses unto yourselves that you are the children of
them which killed the prophets," making it evident, that of their affinity in
wickedness He is speaking, and that it was a pretense to say, "We should not
have been partakers with them," He added, "Fill ye up therefore the measure of
your fathers," [Matthew 23:32] not commanding, but declaring beforehand, what
was to be, that is, His own murder.
Therefore, having brought in their refutation, and having shown that they
were pretenses which they said in their own defense, as, for instance, "We would
not have been partakers with them," (for they who refrain not from the Lord,
how should they have refrained from the servants), He makes after this His
language more condemnatory, calling them "serpents, and generation of vipers,"
and saying, "How shall you escape the damnation of hell," at once perpetrating
such things, and denying them, and dissembling your purpose?
Then rebuking them more exceedingly from another cause also, He says, "I
will send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes, and some of them shall
you kill and crucify, and some of them shall you scourge in your synagogues."
For that they should not say, "Though we crucified the Lord, yet from the
servants we should have refrained, if we had been then;" "Behold," He says, "I
send servants also to you, prophets likewise themselves, and neither will you
spare them." But these things He says, showing that it was nothing strange, that
He should be murdered by those sons, being both murderous and deceitful, and
having much guile, and surpassing their fathers in their outrages.

And besides what has been said, He shows them to be also exceedingly
vainglorious. For when they say, "If we had been in the days of our fathers, we
should not have been partakers with them," they spoke out of vainglory, and
were practising virtue in words only, but in their works doing the contrary.
You serpents, you generation of vipers, that is, wicked sons of wicked men,
and more wicked than those who begot them. For He shows that they are
committing greater crimes, both by their committing them after those others, and
by their doing much more grievous things than they, and this, while positively
affirming that they never would have fallen into the same. For they add that
which is both the end and the crown of their evil deeds. For the others slew them
that came to the vineyard, but these, both the son, and them that were bidding
them to the wedding.
But these things He says, to separate them off from the affinity to Abraham,
and to show that they had no advantage from thence, unless they followed his
works; wherefore also He adds, "How can you flee from the damnation of hell,"
when following them that have committed such acts?
And here He recalls to their remembrance John's accusation, for he too
called them by this name, and reminded them of the judgment to come. Then,
because they are nothing alarmed by judgment and hell, by reason of their not
believing them, and because the thing is future, He awes them by the things
present, and says, "Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets and scribes: and
some of them shall you kill and crucify, and scourge; that upon you may come all
the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto
the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom you slew between the temple
and the altar. Verily I say unto you, that all these things shall come upon this
generation." [Matthew 23:34-36]
2. See by how many things He has warned them. He said, You condemn
your fathers, in that you say, "We would not have been partakers with them;" and
this is no little thing to shame them. He said, While ye condemn them, you do
worse things, even ye yourselves; and this is sufficient to cover them with