teacher. But to stop their mouths, he writes thus to them; "Say to Archippus," he
says, "Take heed." This word is everywhere used to alarm; as when he says,
"Take heed of dogs." [Philippians 3:2] "Take heed lest there shall be any one that
makes spoil of you." [Colossians 2:8] "Take heed lest by any means this liberty of
yours become a stumblingblock to the weak." [1 Corinthians 8:9] And he always
so expresses himself when he would terrify. "Take heed," he says, "to the
ministry which you have received in the Lord, that you fulfill it." He does not
even allow him the power of choosing, as he says himself, "For if I do this of my
own will, I have a reward: but if not of my own will, I have a stewardship
entrusted to me." [1 Corinthians 9:17] "That thou fulfill it," continually using
diligence. "Which you have received in the Lord, that you fulfill it." Again, the
word "in" means "through the Lord." He gave it you, says he, not we. He
subjects them also to him, when he shows that they had been committed to his
hands by God.
"Remember my bonds. Grace be with you. Amen." He has released their
terror. For although their teacher be in bonds, yet "grace" releases him. This too
is of grace, the granting him to be put in bonds. For hear Luke saying, The
Apostles returned "from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the Name." [Acts 5:41] For both to suffer
shame, and to be put in bonds, is indeed to be "counted worthy." For, if he that
has one whom he loves, deems it gain to suffer anything for his sake, much
rather then is it so to suffer for the sake of Christ. Repine we not then at our
tribulations for Christ's sake, but let us also remember Paul's bonds, and be this
our incitement. For instance: do you exhort any to give to the poor for Christ's
sake? Remind them of Paul's bonds, and bemoan your misery and theirs, seeing
that he indeed gave up even his body to bonds for His sake, but you will not give
a portion even of your food. Are you lifted up because of your good deeds?
Remember Paul's bonds, that you have suffered nought of that kind, and you will
be lifted up no more. Covetest thou any of the things that are your neighbor's?
Remember Paul's bonds, and you will see how unreasonable it is, that while he

was in perils, you should be in delights. Again, is your heart set upon selfindulgence? Picture to your mind Paul's prison-house; you are his disciple, his
fellow-soldier. How is it reasonable, that your fellow-soldier should be in bonds,
and thou in luxury? Are you in affliction? Do you deem yourself forsaken? Hear
Paul's bonds, and you will see, that to be in affliction is no proof of being
forsaken. Would you wear silken robes? Remember Paul's bonds; and these
things will appear to you more worthless than the filth-bespattered rags of her
that sits apart. Would you array you with golden trinkets? Picture to your mind
Paul's bonds, and these things will seem to you no better than a withered bulrush.
Would you tire your hair, and be beautiful to see? Think of Paul's squalidness
within that prison-house, and you will burn for that beauty, and deem this the
extreme of ugliness, and wilt groan bitterly through longing for those bonds.
Would you daub you with pastes and pigments, and such like things? Think of
his tears: a three-years space, night and day, he ceased not to weep. [Acts 20:31]
With this adorning deck your cheek; these tears do make it bright. I say not, that
you weep for others, (I wish indeed it could be even so, but this is too high for
you,) but for your own sins I advise you to do this. Have you ordered your slave
to be put in bonds, and were you angry, and exasperated? Remember Paul's
bonds, and you will straightway stay your anger; remember that we are of the
bound, not the binders, of the bruised in heart, not the bruisers. Have you lost
self-control, and shouted loud in laughter? Think of his lamentations, and you
will groan; such tears will show you brighter far. Do you see any persons rioting
and dancing? Remember his tears. What fountain has gushed forth so great
streams as those eyes did tears? "Remember my tears" [Acts 20:31], he says, as
here "bonds." And with reason he spoke thus to them, when he sent for them
from Ephesus to Miletus. For he was then speaking to teachers. He demands of
those therefore, that they should sympathize also, but of these that they should
only encounter dangers.
What fountain will you compare to these tears? That in Paradise, which
waters the whole earth? But you will have mentioned nothing like it. For this