SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.134, C.2.

magnificent work, "for the trifle" that he is unwilling to spend.
Therefore it is evident that the mean man fails to observe the
proportion that reason demands between expenditure and work.
Now the essence of vice is that it consists in failing to do what is in
accordance with reason. Hence it is manifest that meanness is a
vice.
Reply to Objection 1: Virtue moderates little things, according to the
rule of reason: from which rule the mean man declines, as stated in
the Article. For he is called mean, not for moderating little things, but
for declining from the rule of reason in moderating great or little
things: hence meanness is a vice.
Reply to Objection 2: As the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 5), "fear
makes us take counsel": wherefore a mean man is careful in his
reckonings, because he has an inordinate fear of spending his
goods, even in things of the least account. Hence this is not
praiseworthy, but sinful and reprehensible, because then a man does
not regulate his affections according to reason, but, on the contrary,
makes use of his reason in pursuance of his inordinate affections.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as the magnificent man has this in
common with the liberal man, that he spends his money readily and
with pleasure, so too the mean man in common with the illiberal or
covetous man is loth and slow to spend. Yet they differ in this, that
illiberality regards ordinary expenditure, while meanness regards
great expenditure, which is a more difficult accomplishment:
wherefore meanness is less sinful than illiberality. Hence the
Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 2) that "although meanness and its
contrary vice are sinful, they do not bring shame on a man, since
neither do they harm one's neighbor, nor are they very disgraceful."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.134, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there is a vice opposed to meanness?

Objection 1: It seems that there is no vice opposed to meanness. For
great is opposed to little. Now, magnificence is not a vice, but a
virtue. Therefore no vice is opposed to meanness.
Objection 2: Further, since meanness is a vice by deficiency, as
stated above (Article 1), it seems that if any vice is opposed to
meanness, it would merely consist in excessive spending. But those
who spend much, where they ought to spend little, spend little where
they ought to spend much, according to Ethic. iv, 2, and thus they
have something of meanness. Therefore there is not a vice opposed
to meanness.
Objection 3: Further, moral acts take their species from their end, as
stated above (Article 1). Now those who spend excessively, do so in
order to make a show of their wealth, as stated in Ethic. iv, 2. But this
belongs to vainglory, which is opposed to magnanimity, as stated
above (Question 131, Article 2). Therefore no vice is opposed to
meanness.
On the contrary, stands the authority of the Philosopher who (Ethic.
ii, 8; iv, 2) places magnificence as a mean between two opposite
vices.
I answer that, Great is opposed to little. Also little and great are
relative terms, as stated above (Article 1). Now just as expenditure
may be little in comparison with the work, so may it be great in
comparison with the work in that it exceeds the proportion which
reason requires to exist between expenditure and work. Hence it is
manifest that the vice of meanness, whereby a man intends to spend
less than his work is worth, and thus fails to observe due proportion
between his expenditure and his work, has a vice opposed to it,
whereby a man exceeds this same proportion, by spending more
than is proportionate to his work. This vice is called in Greek
banausia, so called from the Greek baunos, because, like the fire in
the furnace, it consumes everything. It is also called apyrokalia, i.e.
lacking good fire, since like fire it consumes all, but not for a good
purpose. Hence in Latin it may be called "consumptio" [waste].
Reply to Objection 1: Magnificence is so called from the great work