(evangelized) those that were not yet such. "And some days after," etc. [Acts
15:36] For because there were offenses without number, their presence was
needed. (d) "How they do," he says. And this he did not know: naturally. See him
ever alert, solicitous, not bearing to sit idle, though he underwent dangers
without end. Do you mark, it was not of cowardice that he came to Antioch? He
acts just as a physician does in the case of the sick. And the need of visiting them
he showed by saying, "In which we preached the word. And Barnabas
determined," etc. [Acts 15:37-40] (So) Barnabas "departed, and went not with
(him)." (b) The point to be considered, is not that they differed in their opinions,
but that they accommodated themselves the one to the other (seeing), that thus it
was a greater good their being parted: and the matter took a pretext from this.
What then? Did they withdraw in enmity? God forbid! In fact you see after this
Barnabas receiving many encomiums from Paul in the Epistles. There was
"sharp contention," it says, not enmity nor quarrelling. The contention availed so
far as to part them. "And Barnabas took Mark," etc. And with reason: for what
each supposed to be profitable, he did not forego thereafter, because of the
fellowship with the other. Nay, it seems to me that the parting took place
advisedly ([κατὰ σύνεσιν]), and that they said one to another, "As I wish not, and
you wish, therefore that we may not fight, let us distribute the places." So that in
fact they did this, altogether yielding each to the other: for Barnabas wished
Paul's plan to stand, therefore withdrew; on the other hand, Paul wished the
other's plan to stand, therefore he withdrew. Would to God we too made such
separations, as to go forth for preaching. A wonderful man this is; and
exceedingly great! To Mark this contest was exceedingly beneficial. For the awe
inspired by Paul converted him, while the kindness of Barnabas caused that he
was not left behind: so that they contend indeed, but the gain comes to one and
the same end. For indeed, seeing Paul choosing to leave him, he would be
exceedingly awed, and would condemn himself, and seeing Barnabas so taking
his part, he would love him exceedingly: and so the disciple was corrected by the
contention of the teachers: so far was he from being offended thereby. For if

indeed they did this with a view to their own honor, he might well be offended:
but if for his salvation, and they contend for one and the same object, to show
that he who honored him * * * had well determined, what is there amiss ([ἄ]
[τοπον]) in it?
(e) "But Paul," it says, "departed, having chosen Silas, and being
commended to the grace of God." What is this? They prayed it says: they
besought God. See on all occasions how the prayer of the brethren can do great
things. And now he journeyed by land, wishing even by his journeying to benefit
those who saw ([τοὺς ὁρὥντας]) him. For when indeed they were in haste they
sailed, but now not so. (c) "And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming
the Churches. Then came he to Derbe and Lystra." [Acts 15:41] Mark the
wisdom of Paul: he does not go to other cities before he has visited them which
had received the Word. For it is folly to run at random. This let us also do: let us
teach the first in the first place, that these may not become an hindrance to them
that are to come after.
"And, behold a certain disciple was there, named Timotheus, the son of a
certain woman, which was a Jewess, and believed; but his father was a Greek:
which was well reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium. Him
would Paul have to go forth with him; and took and circumcised him because of
the Jews which were in those quarters; for they knew all that his father was a
Greek." [Acts 16:1-3] It is indeed amazing, the wisdom of Paul! He that has had
so many battles about circumcision, he that moved all things to this end, and did
not give over until he had carried his point, now that the decree is made sure,
circumcises the disciple. He not only does not forbid others, but himself does
this thing. (b) "Him," it says, "he would have to go forth with him." And the
wonder is this, that he even took him unto him. "Because of the Jews," it says,
"which were in those parts:" for they would not endure to hear the word from
one uncircumcised. (a) Nothing could be wiser. So that in all things he looked to
what was profitable: he did nothing upon his own preference ([προλήψει]). (c)
And what (then)? Mark the success: he circumcised, that he might take away