greater. This is the door of the kingdom. Let us not then go the opposite way,
neither let us war against ourselves. For if we desire to appear great, we shall not
be great, but even the most dishonored of all.
Do you see how everywhere He urges them by the opposite things, giving
them what they desire? For in the preceding parts also we have shown this in
many instances, and in the cases of the covetous, and of the vain-glorious, He
did thus. For wherefore, He says, do you give alms before men? That you may
enjoy glory? You must then not do so, and you shall surely enjoy it. Wherefore
do you lay up treasures? That you may be rich? You must then not lay up
treasures, and you shall be rich. Even so here too, wherefore do you set your
heart on the first places? That you may be before others? Choose then the last
place, and then you will enjoy the first. So that if it be your will to become great,
seek not to become great, and then you will be great. For the other is to be little.
5. Do you see how He drew them off from the disease, by showing them
both from thence failing of their object, and from hence gaining, that they might
flee the one, and follow after the other.
And of the Gentiles, too, He for this cause reminded them, that in this way
again He might show the thing to be disgraceful and to be abhorred.
For the arrogant is of necessity base, and, on the contrary, the lowly-minded
is high. For this is the height that is true and genuine, and exists not in name
only, nor in manner of address. And that which is from without is of necessity
and fear, but this is like to God's. Such a one, though he be admired by no one,
continues high; even as again the other, though he be courted by all, is of all men
the basest. And the one is an honor rendered of necessity, whence also it easily
passes away; but the other is of principle, whence also it continues steadfast.
Since for this we admire the saints also, that being greater than all, they humbled
themselves more than all. Wherefore even to this day they continue to be high,
and not even death has brought down that height.
And if you be minded, let us by reasonings also inquire into this very thing.
Any one is said to be high, either when he is so by greatness of stature, or when

he has chanced to be set on a high place, and low in like manner, from the
opposite things.
Let us see then who is like this, the boaster, or he that keeps within
measure, that you may perceive that nothing is higher than lowliness of mind,
and nothing lower than boastfulness.
The boaster then desires to be greater than all, and affirms no one to be
equal in worth with him; and how much soever honor he may obtain, he sets his
heart on more and claims it, and accounts himself to have obtained none, and
treats men with utter contempt, and yet seeks after the honor that comes from
them; than which what can be more unreasonable? For this surely is like an
enigma. By those, whom he holds in no esteem, he desires to be glorified.
Do you see how he who desires to be exalted falls down and is set on the
ground? For that he accounts all men to be nothing compared with himself, he
himself declares, for this is boasting. Why then dost cast yourself upon him who
is nothing? Why do you seek honor of him? Why do you lead about with you
such great multitudes?
Do you see one low, and set on a low place. Come then, let us inquire about
the high man. This one knows what man is, and that man is a great thing, and
that he himself is last of all, and therefore whatever honor he may enjoy, he
reckons this great, so that this one is consistent with himself and is high, and
shifts not his judgment; for whom he accounts great, the honors that come from
them he esteems great also, though they should chance to be small, because he
accounts those who bestow them to be great. But the boastful man accounts them
that give the honors to be nothing, yet the honors bestowed by them he reckons
to be great.
Again, the lowly man is seized by no passion, no anger can much trouble
this man, no love of glory, no envy, no jealousy: and what can be higher than the
soul that is delivered from these things? But the boastful man is held in
subjection by all these things, like any worm crawling in the mire, for jealousy
and envy and anger are forever troubling his soul.