If through faith Mary became the bearer of the Son given to her by the Father through the
power of the Holy Spirit, while preserving her virginity intact, in that same faith she
discovered and accepted the other dimension of motherhood revealed by Jesus during his
messianic mission. One can say that this dimension of motherhood belonged to Mary
from the beginning, that is to say from the moment of the conception and birth of her
Son. From that time she was "the one who believed." But as the messianic mission of her
Son grew clearer to her eyes and spirit, she herself as a mother became ever more open to
that new dimension of motherhood which was to constitute her "part" beside her Son.
Had she not said from the very beginning: "Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord; let it
be to me according to your word" (Lk. 1:38)? Through faith Mary continued to hear and
to ponder that word, in which there became ever clearer, in a way "which surpasses
knowledge" (Eph. 3:19), the self-revelation of the living God. Thus in a sense Mary as
Mother became the first "disciple" of her Son, the first to whom he seemed to say:
"Follow me," even before he addressed this call to the Apostles or to anyone else (cf. Jn.
1:43).

. From this point of view, particularly eloquent is the passage in the Gospel of John
which presents Mary at the wedding feast of Cana. She appears there as the Mother of
Jesus at the beginning of his public life: "There was a marriage at Cana in Galilee, and
the mother of Jesus was there; Jesus also was invited to the marriage, with his disciples"
(Jn. 2:1-2). From the text it appears that Jesus and his disciples were invited together with
Mary, as if by reason of her presence at the celebration: the Son seems to have been
invited because of his mother. We are familiar with the sequence of events which resulted
from that invitation, that "beginning of the signs" wrought by Jesus-the water changed
into wine-which prompts the Evangelist to say that Jesus "manifested his glory; and his
disciples believed in him" (Jn. 2:11).

Mary is present at Cana in Galilee as the Mother of Jesus, and in a significant way she
contributes to that "beginning of the signs" which reveal the messianic power of her Son.
We read: "When the wine gave out, the mother of Jesus said to him, 'They have no wine.'
And Jesus said to her, 'O woman, what have you to do with me? My hour has not yet
come'" (Jn. 2:3-4). In John's Gospel that "hour" means the time appointed by the Father
when the Son accomplishes his task and is to be glorified (cf. Jn. 7:30; 8:20; 12:, 27;
13:1; 17:1; 19:27). Even though Jesus' reply to his mother sounds like a refusal
(especially if we consider the blunt statement "My hour has not yet come" rather than the
question), Mary nevertheless turns to the servants and says to them: "Do whatever he tells
you" (Jn. 2:5). Then Jesus orders the servants to fill the stone jars with water, and the
water becomes wine, better than the wine which has previously been served to the
wedding guests.