of nature, how are the one this, the others that? For if by nature all were bad, it
were not possible for any one to be good, but if good by nature, then no one bad.
For if there were one nature of all men, they must needs in this respect be all
one, whether they were to be this, or whether they were to be that.
But if we should say that by nature the one are good, the other bad, which
would not be reasonable (as we have shown), these things must be
unchangeable, for the things of nature are unchangeable. Nay, mark. All mortals
are also liable to suffering; and no one is free from suffering, though he strive
without end. But now we see of good many becoming worthless, and of
worthless good, the one through remissness, the other by earnestness; which
thing most of all indicates that these things do not come of nature.
For the things of nature are neither changed, nor do they need diligence for
their acquisition. For like as for seeing and hearing we do not need labor, so
neither should we need toils in virtue, if it had been apportioned by nature.
"But wherefore did He at all make worthless men, when He might have
made all men good? Whence then are the evil things?" says he. Ask yourself; for
it is my part to show they are not of nature, nor from God.
"Come they then of themselves?" he says. By no means. "But are they
unoriginated?" Speak reverently, O man, and start back from this madness,
honoring with one honor God and the evil things, and that honor the highest. For
if they be unoriginate they are mighty, and cannot so much as be plucked up, nor
pass into annihilation. For that what is unoriginate is imperishable, is surely
manifest to all.
3. And whence also are there so many good, when evil has such great
power? How are they that have an origin stronger than that which is unoriginate?
"But God destroys these things," he says. When? And how will He destroy
what are of equal honor, and of equal strength, and of the same age, as one might
say, with Himself?
Oh malice of the devil! How great an evil has he invented! With what
blasphemy has he persuaded men to surround God! With what cloak of godliness

has he devised another profane account? For desiring to show, that not of Him
was the evil, they brought in another evil doctrine, saying, that these things are
unoriginate.
"Whence then are evils?" one may say. From willing and not willing. "But
the very thing of our willing and not willing, whence is it?" From ourselves. But
thou dost the same in asking, as if when you had asked, whence is seeing and not
seeing? Then when I said, from closing the eyes or not closing the eyes, thou
were to ask again; the very closing the eyes or not, whence is it? Then having
heard that it was of ourselves, and our will, thou were to seek again another
cause.
For evil is nothing else than disobedience to God. "Whence then," one may
say, "did man find this?" "Why, was it a task to find this? I pray you." "Nay,
neither do I say this, that this thing is difficult; but whence became he desirous
to disobey." "From remissness. For having power for either, he inclined rather to
this."
But if you are perplexed yet and dizzy at hearing this, I will ask you nothing
difficult nor involved, but a simple and plain question. Have you become some
time bad? And have you become some time also good? What I mean, is like this.
Did you prevail some time over passion, and were you taken again by passion?
Have you been overtaken by drunkenness, and have you prevailed over
drunkenness? Were you once moved to wrath, and again not moved to wrath?
Did you overlook a poor man, and not overlook him? Did you commit
whoredom once? And did you become chaste again? Whence then are all these
things? Tell me, whence? Nay if you yourself do not tell, I will say. Because at
one time you restrained yourself and strove, but after that you became remiss
and careless. For to those that are desperate, and are continually in wickedness,
and are in a state of senselessness, and are mad, and who are not willing so much
as to hear what will amend them, I will not even discourse of self restraint; but to
them that have been sometimes in the one, and sometimes in the other, I will
gladly speak. Did you once take by violence the things that belonged not to you;