FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.7.

indirectly, it does not cause the act to be involuntary. And I call that
ignorance "directly" voluntary, to which the act of the will tends: and
that, "indirectly" voluntary, which is due to negligence, by reason of
a man not wishing to know what he ought to know, as stated above
(Question 6, Article 8).
If then reason or conscience err with an error that is involuntary,
either directly, or through negligence, so that one errs about what
one ought to know; then such an error of reason or conscience does
not excuse the will, that abides by that erring reason or conscience,
from being evil. But if the error arise from ignorance of some
circumstance, and without any negligence, so that it cause the act to
be involuntary, then that error of reason or conscience excuses the
will, that abides by that erring reason, from being evil. For instance,
if erring reason tell a man that he should go to another man's wife,
the will that abides by that erring reason is evil; since this error
arises from ignorance of the Divine Law, which he is bound to know.
But if a man's reason, errs in mistaking another for his wife, and if he
wish to give her her right when she asks for it, his will is excused
from being evil: because this error arises from ignorance of a
circumstance, which ignorance excuses, and causes the act to be
involuntary.
Reply to Objection 1: As Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv), "good results
from the entire cause, evil from each particular defect."
Consequently in order that the thing to which the will tends be called
evil, it suffices, either that it be evil in itself, or that it be apprehended
as evil. But in order for it to be good, it must be good in both ways.
Reply to Objection 2: The eternal law cannot err, but human reason
can. Consequently the will that abides by human reason, is not
always right, nor is it always in accord with the eternal law.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as in syllogistic arguments, granted one
absurdity, others must needs follow; so in moral matters, given one
absurdity, others must follow too. Thus suppose a man to seek
vainglory, he will sin, whether he does his duty for vainglory or
whether he omit to do it. Nor is he in a dilemma about the matter:
because he can put aside his evil intention. In like manner, suppose
a man's reason or conscience to err through inexcusable ignorance,
then evil must needs result in the will. Nor is this man in a dilemma:
because he can lay aside his error, since his ignorance is vincible
and voluntary.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.7.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the goodness of the will, as regards the

means, depends on the intention of the end?
Objection 1: It would seem that the goodness of the will does not
depend on the intention of the end. For it has been stated above
(Article 2) that the goodness of the will depends on the object alone.
But as regards the means, the object of the will is one thing, and the
end intended is another. Therefore in such matters the goodness of
the will does not depend on the intention of the end.
Objection 2: Further, to wish to keep God's commandment, belongs
to a good will. But this can be referred to an evil end, for instance, to
vainglory or covetousness, by willing to obey God for the sake of
temporal gain. Therefore the goodness of the will does not depend
on the intention of the end.
Objection 3: Further, just as good and evil diversify the will, so do
they diversify the end. But malice of the will does not depend on the
malice of the end intended; since a man who wills to steal in order to
give alms, has an evil will, although he intends a good end.
Therefore neither does the goodness of the will depend on the
goodness of the end intended.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Confess. ix, 3) that God rewards
the intention. But God rewards a thing because it is good. Therefore
the goodness of the will depends on the intention of the end.
I answer that, The intention may stand in a twofold relation to the act
of the will; first, as preceding it, secondly as following it. The
intention precedes the act of the will causally, when we will
something because we intend a certain end. And then the order to
the end is considered as the reason of the goodness of the thing
willed: for instance, when a man wills to fast for God's sake; because
the act of fasting is specifically good from the very fact that it is
done for God's sake. Wherefore, since the goodness of the will
depends on the goodness of the thing willed, as stated above
(Articles 1,2), it must, of necessity, depend on the intention of the
end.
On the other hand, intention follows the act of the will, when it is
added to a preceding act of the will; for instance, a man may will to