John 6:49
"Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead."
He then establishes a thing most likely to persuade them, that they were
deemed worthy of greater things than their fathers, (meaning those marvelous
men who lived in the time of Moses,) and so, after saying that they were dead
who ate the manna, He adds,
Ver. 51 . "He that eats of this bread, shall live for ever."
Nor has He put "in the wilderness" without a cause, but to point out that the
supply of manna was not extended to a long time, nor entered with them into the
land of promise. But this "bread" was not of the same kind.
"And the bread that I will give is My flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world."
Here one might reasonably enquire, how this was a fit season for these
words, which neither edified nor profited, but rather did mischief to those who
had been edified; for "from that time," says the Evangelist, "many of His
disciples went back," saying, "This is a hard saying; who can hear it?" [John
6:60]; since these things might have been entrusted to the disciples only, as
Matthew has told us that He discoursed with them apart. [Mark 4:34; see
Matthew 13:36] What then shall we say? What is the profit of the words? Great
is the profit and necessity of them. Because they pressed upon Him, asking for
bodily food, reminding Him of the food provided in the days of their forefathers,
and speaking of the manna as a great thing, to show them that all those things
were but type and shadow, but that the very reality of the matter was now present
with them, He mentions spiritual food. "But," says some one, "he ought to have
said, Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, but I have given you bread."
But the interval between the two miracles was great, and the latter of them
would have appeared inferior to the former, because the manna came down from
heaven, but this, the miracle of the loaves, was wrought on earth. When

therefore they sought food "coming down from heaven," He continually told
them, "I came down from heaven." And if any one enquire why He introduced
the discourse on the Mysteries, we will reply, that this was a very fitting time for
such discourses; for indistinctness in what is said always rouses the hearer, and
renders him more attentive. They ought not then to have been offended, but
rather to have asked and enquired. But now they went back. If they believed Him
to be a Prophet, they ought to have believed His words, so that the offense was
caused by their own folly, not by any difficulty in the words. And observe how
little by little He led them up to Himself. Here He says that Himself gives, not
the Father; "The bread that I will give is My flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world."
"But," says some one, "this doctrine was strange to them and unusual."
And yet John at an earlier period alluded to it by calling Him "Lamb." [John
1:29] "But for all that, they knew it not." I know they did not; nay, neither did the
disciples understand. For if as yet they had no clear knowledge of the
Resurrection, and so knew not what, "Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up" [John 2:19], might mean, much more would they be ignorant of
what is said here. For these words were less clear than those. Since that prophets
had raised men from the dead, they knew, even if the Scriptures have not spoken
so clearly on the subject, but not one of them ever asserted that any man had
eaten flesh. Still they obeyed, and followed Him, and confessed that He had the
words of eternal life. For this is a disciple's part, not to be over-curious about the
assertions of his teacher, but to hear and obey him, and to wait the proper time
for the solution of any difficulties. "How then," says some one, "was it that the
contrary came to pass, and that these men 'went back'?" It was by reason of their
folly. For when questioning concerning the "how" comes in, there comes in with
it unbelief. So Nicodemus was perplexed, saying, "How can a man enter into his
mother's womb?" So also these are confounded, saying,
Ver. 52 . "How can this man give us his flesh to eat?"
If you seek to know the "how," why asked not you this in the matter of the