virtue, that it is admired even by those who do not emulate it. For even the
fornicator will praise chastity, and the covetous will condemn injustice, and the
passionate will admire patience, and blame quarrelsomeness, and the wanton
[will blame] wantonness.
How then (you say) does he pursue these things? From excessive indolence,
not because he judges it good; otherwise he would not have been ashamed of the
thing itself, nor would he have denied it when another accused him. Nay many
when caught, not enduring the shame, have even hanged themselves. So strong
is the witness within us in behalf of what is good and becoming. Thus what is
good is brighter than the sun, and the contrary more unsightly than anything.
4. The saints were "strangers and sojourners." How and in what way? And
where does Abraham confess himself "a stranger and a sojourner"? Probably
indeed he even himself confessed it: but David both confessed "I am a stranger"
and what? "As all my fathers were." [Psalm 39:12] For they who dwell in tents,
they who purchase even burial places for money, evidently were in some sense
strangers, as they had not even where to bury their dead.
What then? Did they mean that they were "strangers" from the land that is
in Palestine? By no means: but in respect of the whole world: and with reason;
for they saw therein none of the things which they wished for, but everything
foreign and strange. They indeed wished to practice virtue: but here there was
much wickedness, and things were quite foreign to them. They had no friend, no
familiar acquaintance, save only some few.
But how were they "strangers"? They had no care for things here. And this
they showed not by words, but by their deeds. In what way?
He said to Abraham, "Leave that which seems your country and come to
one that is foreign": And he did not cleave to his kindred, but gave it up as
unconcernedly as if he were about to leave a foreign land. He said to him, "Offer
up your son," and he offered him up as if he had no son; as if he had divested
himself of his nature, so he offered him up. The wealth which he had acquired
was common to all passers-by, and this he accounted as nothing. He yielded the

first places to others: he threw himself into dangers; he suffered troubles
innumerable. He built no splendid houses, he enjoyed no luxuries, he had no care
about dress, which all are things of this world; but lived in all respects as
belonging to the City yonder; he showed hospitality, brotherly love,
mercifulness, forbearance, contempt for wealth and for present glory, and for all
else.
And his son too was such as himself: when he was driven away, when war
was made on him, he yielded and gave way, as being in a foreign land. For
foreigners, whatever they suffer, endure it, as not being in their own country.
Even when his wife was taken from him, he endured this also as being in a
strange land: and lived in all respects as one whose home was above, showing
sobermindedness and a well-ordered life. For after he had begotten a son, he had
no more commerce with his wife, and it was when the flower of his youth had
passed that he married her, showing that he did it not from passion, but in
subservience to the promise of God.
And what did Jacob? Did he not seek bread only and raiment, which are
asked for by those who are truly strangers; by those that have come to great
poverty? When he was driven out, did he not as a stranger give place? Did he not
serve for hire? Did he not suffer afflictions innumerable, everywhere, as a
stranger?
5. And these things (he says) they said, "seeking" their "own country." Ah!
How great is the difference! They indeed were in travail-pains each day, wishing
to be released from this world, and to return to their country. But we, on the
contrary, if a fever attack us, neglecting everything, weeping like little children,
are frightened at death.
Not without reason we are thus affected. For since we do not live here like
strangers, nor as if hastening to our country, but are like persons that are going
away to punishment, therefore we grieve, because we have not used
circumstances as we ought, but have turned order upside down. Hence we grieve
when we ought to rejoice: hence we shudder, like murderers or robber chiefs,