that part receives injury, but all the rest remain unhurt; the continuity of the
stroke being intercepted by the division of the bones, and being unable to extend
itself to the adjacent parts. By reason of this God has constructed a covering for
the brain of many bones; and just as when one builds a house, he lays on a roof,
and tiles upon the upper part, so God has placed these bones above upon the
head, and has provided that the hairs should shoot forth, and serve as a kind of
cap for it.
9. The very same thing also He has done with regard to the heart. For
inasmuch as the heart has preeminence over all the members in our body, and
that the supreme power over our whole life is entrusted to it, and death happens
when it receives but a slight blow; He has fenced it about on every side with stiff
and hard bones, surrounding it by the protection of the breast-bone before, and
the blade-bones behind. And what He did with respect to the membranes of the
brain, He has done in this instance also. For in order that it might not be rubbed
and pained in striking against the hard bones which encompass it, in the
throbbing and quick pulsation to which it is subject in anger and similar
affections, He both interposed many membranes there, and placed the lungs by
the side of it to act the part of a soft bed to these pulsations, so that the heart may
break its force on these without sustaining injury or distress.
But why do I speak of the heart, and of the brain, when if any one will
investigate even the very nails, he will see the manifold wisdom of God
displayed in these; as well by their form, as by their substance and position. I
might also have mentioned why our fingers are not all equal, and many other
particulars besides; but to those who are inclined to attend, the wisdom of God
Who created us, will be sufficiently clear from what has been said. Wherefore,
leaving this department to be investigated with diligence by those who are
desirous of the task, I shall turn myself to another objection.
10. There are many forsooth, who, besides what has been already referred
to, bring forward this objection. If man be the king of the brutes, why have many
animals an advantage over him in strength, agility, and fleetness? For the horse is

swifter, the ox is more enduring, the eagle is lighter, and the lion stronger, than
man. What then have we to reply to this argument? Thus much; that from that
circumstance we may especially discern the wisdom of God and the honour
which He has put upon us. A horse, it is true, is swifter than man, but for making
dispatch on a journey, the man is better fitted than the horse. For a horse, though
the very swiftest and strongest that may be, can scarcely travel two hundred
stadia in a day; but a man, harnessing a number of horses in succession, will be
able to accomplish a distance of two thousand stadia. Thus, the advantage which
swiftness affords to the horse, intelligence and art afford to the man in a much
greater excess. The man, it is true, has not feet so strong as the other, but then he
has those of the other which serve him as well as his own. For not one of the
brutes has ever been able to subjugate another to his own use; but man has the
range of them all; and by that variety of skill which is given him of God, makes
each of the animals subservient to the employment best suited to him. For if the
feet of men had been as strong as those of horses, they would have been useless
for other purposes, for difficult ground, for the summits of mountains, for
climbing trees; for the hoof is usually an impediment to treading in such places.
So that although the feet of men are softer than theirs, they are still adapted to
more various uses, and are not the worse for their want of strength, while they
have the power of the horse ministering to their aid, and at the same time they
have the advantage over him in variety of tread. Again, the eagle has his light
pinion; but I have reason and art, by which I am enabled to bring down and
master all the winged animals. But if you would see my pinion too, I have one
much lighter than he; one which can soar, not merely ten or twenty stadia, or
even as high as heaven, but above heaven itself, and above the heaven of
heavens; even to "where Christ sits at the right hand of God!"
11. Again, the irrational animals have their weapons in their own body;
thus, the ox has his horns; the wild boar his tusks; the lion his claws. But God
has not furnished the nature of my body with weapons, but has made these to be
extraneous to it, for the purpose of showing that man is a gentle animal; and that