For as when sinners go unpunished, many commit crimes; so when they are
punished, many are made better. God Himself acted in this manner. He brought
forth Pharaoh, and punished him openly. And Nebuchadnezzar too, and many
others, both cities and individuals, we see visited with punishment. Paul
therefore would have all stand in awe of their Bishop, and sets him over all.
And because many judgments are formed upon suspicion, there ought, he
says, to be witnesses, and men to convict the offender according to the ancient
law. "At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established.
Against an elder receive not an accusation." [Deuteronomy 19:15] He does not
say, "do not condemn," but "receive not an accusation," bring him not to
judgment at all. But what if the two witnesses are false? This rarely happens, and
it may be discovered upon examination on the trial. For since offenses are
committed in secret, we ought to be satisfied with two witnesses, and this is
sufficient proof of investigation.
But what if the offenses be notorious, and yet there are no witnesses, only a
strong suspicion? It has been said above that he ought "to have a good report of
them which are without." [1 Timothy 3:7]
Let us therefore love God with fear. The law indeed is not made for a
righteous man; but since the greater part are virtuous from constraint rather than
from choice, the principle of fear is of great advantage to them in eradicating
their desires. Let us therefore listen to the threatenings of hell fire, that we may
be benefited by the wholesome fear of it. For if God, intending to cast sinners
into it, had not previously threatened them with it, many would have plunged
into it. For, if with this terror agitating our souls, some sin as readily as if there
were no such thing in existence, what enormities should we not have committed,
if it had not been declared and threatened? So that, as I have ever said, the
threatenings of hell show the care of God for us no less than the promises of
heaven. For the threat coöperates with the promise, and drives men into the
kingdom by means of terror. Let us not think it a matter of cruelty, but of pity
and mercy; of God's concern and love for us. If in the days of Jonah the

destruction of Nineveh had not been threatened, that destruction had not been
averted. Nineveh would not have stood but for the threat, "Nineveh shall be
overthrown." [Jonah 3:4] And if hell had not been threatened, we should all have
fallen into hell. If the fire had not been denounced, no one would have escaped
the fire. God declares that He will do that which He desires not to do, that He
may do that which He desires to do. He wills not the death of a sinner, and
therefore He threatens the sinner with death, that He may not have to inflict
death. And not only has He spoken the word, but He has exhibited the thing
itself, that we may escape it. And lest it should be supposed to be a mere threat,
He has manifested the reality of it by what He has already done on earth. Do you
not see in the flood a symbol of hell, in that rain of all-destroying water an image
of the all-devouring fire? "For as it was in the days of Noah," He says, "they
were marrying and giving in marriage" [Matthew 24:38], so is it even now. It
was then predicted long before it took place, and it is now predicted four
hundred years or more beforehand: but no one heeds it. It is looked upon as a
mere fable, as a matter of derision; no one fears it, no one weeps or beats his
breast at the thought of it. The stream of fire is boiling up, the flame is kindled,
and we are laughing, taking our pleasure, and sinning without fear. No one even
bears in mind That Day. No one considers that present things are passing away,
and that they are but temporal, though events are every day crying out and
uttering a fearful voice. The untimely deaths, the changes that take place in our
lives, our own infirmities and diseases, fail to instruct us. And not only in our
own bodies are these changes visible, but in the elements themselves. Every day
in our different ages we experience a kind of death, and in every case instability
is the characteristic of things we see. Neither winter, nor summer, nor spring, nor
autumn, is permanent; all are running, flying, and flowing past. Why should I
speak of fading flowers, of dignities, of kings that are today, and tomorrow cease
to be, of rich men, of magnificent houses, of night and day, of the sun and the
moon? For the moon wanes, and the sun is sometimes eclipsed, and often
darkened with clouds? Of things visible, in short, is there anything that endures