come: and the prophet again said, "What house will you build Me?" and again,
"Did ye offer to Me slain beasts and sacrifices" those "forty years?"
[Deuteronomy 18:18]
Such is the boldness of speech of a man bearing the Cross. Let us then also
imitate this: though it be not a time of war, yet it is always the time for boldness
of speech. For, "I spoke," says one, "in Your testimonies before kings, and was
not ashamed." [Psalm 119:46] If we chance to be among heathens, let us thus
stop their mouths. without wrath, without harshness. (Comp. Hom. in 1 Cor. iv.
§6; xxxiii. §4, 5; Col. xi. §2.) For if we do it with wrath, it no longer seems to be
the boldness (of one who is confident of his cause,) but passion: but if with
gentleness, this is boldness indeed. For in one and the same thing success and
failure cannot possibly go together. The boldness is a success: the anger is a
failure. Therefore, if we are to have boldness, we must be clean from wrath that
none may impute our words to that. No matter how just your words may be,
when you speak with anger, you ruin all: no matter how boldly you speak, how
fairly reprove, or what not. See this man, how free from passion as he discourses
to them! For he did not abuse them: he did but remind them of the words of the
Prophets. For, to show you that it was not anger, at the very moment he was
suffering evil at their hands, he prayed, saying, "Lay not to their charge this sin."
So far was he from speaking these words in anger; no, he spoke in grief and
sorrow for their sakes. As indeed this is why it speaks of his appearance, that
"they saw his face as it had been the face of an angel," on purpose that they
might believe. Let us then be clean from wrath. The Holy Spirit dwells not
where wrath is: cursed is the wrathful. It cannot be that anything wholesome
should approach, where wrath goes forth. For as in a storm at sea, great is the
tumult, loud the clamor, and then would be no time for lessons of wisdom
([φιλοσοφεἵν]): so neither in wrath. If the soul is to be in a condition either to
say, or to be disciplined to, anything of philosophy, it must first be in the haven.
Do you see not how, when we wish to converse on matters of serious import, we
look out for places free from noise, where all is stillness, all calm, that we may

not be put out and discomposed? But if noise from without discomposes, much
more disturbance from within. Whether one pray, to no purpose does he pray
"with wrath and disputings:" [1 Timothy 2:8] whether he speak, he will only
make himself ridiculous: whether he hold his peace, so again it will be even
then: whether he eat, he is hurt even then: whether he drink, or whether he drink
not; whether he sit, or stand, or walk; whether he sleep: for even in their dreams
such fancies haunt them. For what is there in such men that is not disagreeable?
Eyes unsightly, mouth distorted, limbs agitated and swollen, tongue foul and
sparing no man, mind distraught, gestures uncomely: much to disgust. Mark the
eyes of demoniacs, and those of drunkards and madmen; in what do they differ
from each other? Is not the whole madness? For what though it be but for the
moment? The madman too is possessed for the moment: but what is worse than
this? And they are not ashamed at that excuse; "I knew not (says one) what I
said." And how came it that thou did not know this, thou the rational man, you
that hast the gift of reason, on purpose that you may not act the part of the
creatures without reason, just like a wild horse, hurried away by rage and
passion? In truth, the very excuse is criminal. For you ought to have known what
you said. "It was the passion," say you, "that spoke the words, not I." How
should it be that? For passion has no power, except it get it from you. You might
as well say, "It was my hand that inflicted the wounds, not I." What occasion,
think you, most needs wrath? Would you not say, war and battle? But even then,
if anything is done with wrath, the whole is spoiled and undone. For of all men,
those who fight had best not be enraged: of all men, those had best not be
enraged, who want to hurt ([τοὺς ὑβρίζοντας]). And how is it possible to fight
then? You will ask. With reason, with self-command ([ἐ] [πιεικεί& 139law, and
order, and times? For wrath is nothing but an irrational impulse: and an irrational
creature cannot possibly perform anything rational. For instance, the man here
spoke such words, and did it without passion. And Elias said, How long will you
halt on both your knees? 1 Kings 18:21] and spoke it not in passion. And
Phinees slew, and did it without passion. For passion suffers not a man to see,