Lamb of God, Who takes away the sin of the world:" [John 1:29] and Paul
saying, "For Him Who knew no sin, He made to be sin on our behalf, that we
might become the righteousness of God in Him:" [2 Corinthians 5:21] and again,
"Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us:"
[Galatians 3:13] and again, "having put off from himself principalities and
powers, He made a show of them openly, triumphing over them;" [Colossians
2:15] and ten thousand other sayings to show what happened at His death in the
body, and because of our sins. Yea, and Christ Himself says, "for your sakes I
sanctify Myself " and, "now the prince of this world has been condemned ;"
showing that having no sin he was slain.

1 Corinthians 15:4
4. "And that he was buried."
And this also confirms the former topics, for that which is buried is
doubtless a body. And here he no longer adds, "according to the Scriptures." He
had wherewithal, nevertheless he adds it not. For what cause? Either because the
burial was evident unto all, both then and now, or because the expression,
"according to the Scriptures," is set down of both in common. Wherefore then
does he add, "according to the Scriptures," in this place, "and that He rose on
the third day according to the Scriptures," and is not content with the former
clause, so spoken in common? Because this also was to most men obscure:
wherefore here again he brings in "the Scriptures" by inspiration, having so
conceived this thought so wise and divine.
How is it then that he does the same in regard of His death ? Because in that
case too, although the cross was evident unto all and in the sight of all He was
stretched upon it; yet the cause was no longer equally so. The fact indeed of his
death all knew, but that He suffered this for the sins of the world was no longer
equally known to the multitude. Wherefore he brings in the testimony from the
Scriptures.
This however has been sufficiently proved by what we have said. But where
have the Scriptures said that He was buried, and on the third day shall rise again?
By the type of Jonah which also Himself alleges, saying, "As Jonah was three
days and three nights in the whale's belly, so shall also the Son of Man be three
days and three nights in the heart of the earth." [Matthew 12:40] By the bush in
the desert. For even as that burned, yet was not consumed, [Exodus 3:2] so also
that body died indeed, but was not holden of death continually. And the dragon
also in Daniel shadows out this. For as the dragon having taken the food which
the prophet gave, burst asunder in the midst; even so Hades having swallowed

down that Body, was rent asunder, the Body of itself cutting asunder its womb
and rising again.
Now if you desire to hear also in words those things which you have seen in
types, listen to Isaiah, saying, "His life is taken from the earth," [Isaiah 53:8-11]
and, it pleases the Lord to cleanse Him from His wound...to show unto Him
light: and David before him, "You will not leave My soul to Hades, nor will You
suffer Your Holy One to see corruption." [Psalm 16:10]
Therefore Paul also sends you on to the Scriptures, that you may learn that
not without cause nor at random were these things done. For how could they,
when so many prophets are describing and proclaiming them beforehand? And
no where does the Scripture mean the death of sin, when it makes mention of our
Lord's death, but that of the body, and a burial and resurrection of the same kind.