worse thing come unto you;" [John 5:14] but to these, "Will you be made whole?
Arise, take up your bed, and go unto your house." For a dreadful, dreadful palsy
is sin, or rather it is not palsy only, but also somewhat else more grievous. For
such a one is not only in inactivity as to good works, but also in the active doing
of evil works. But nevertheless, though thou be so disposed, and be willing to
rouse yourself a little, all the terrors are at an end.
Though you have been so "thirty and eight years," and art earnest to
become whole, there is no one to hinder you. Christ is present now also, and
says, "Take up your bed," only be willing to rouse yourself, despair not. Have
you no man? But you have God. Have you no one to put you into the pool? But
you have Him who suffers you not to need the pool. Have you had no one to cast
you in there? But you have Him that commands you to take up your bed.
You may not say, "While I am coming, another steps down before me."
[John 5:7] For if it be your will to go down into the fountain, there is none to
hinder you. Grace is not consumed, is not spent, it is a kind of fountain springing
up constantly; by His fullness are we all healed both soul and body. Let us come
unto it then even now. For Rahab also was a harlot, yet was she saved; and the
thief was a murderer, yet he became a citizen of paradise; and while Judas being
with his Master perished, the thief being on a cross became a disciple. Such are
the wonderful works of God. Thus the magi approved themselves, thus the
publican became an evangelist, thus the blasphemer an apostle.
5. Look at these things, and never despair, but be ever confident, and rouse
yourself. Lay hold only on the way that leads there, and you will advance
quickly. Shut not up the doors, close not up the entrance. Short is the present life,
small the labor. But though it were great, not even so ought one to decline it. For
if you toil not at this most glorious toil that is spent upon repentance and virtue,
in the world you will assuredly toil and weary yourself in other ways. But if both
in the one and the other there be labor, why do we not choose that which has its
fruit abundant, and its recompense greater.
Yet neither is this labor and that the same. For in worldly pursuits are

continual perils, and losses one upon another, and the hope uncertain; great is the
servility, and the expenditure alike of wealth, and of bodies, and of souls; and
then the return of the fruits is far below our expectation, if perchance it should
grow up.
For neither does toil upon worldly matters everywhere bear fruit; nay but
even, when it has not failed, but has brought forth its produce even abundantly,
short is the time wherein it continues.
For when you are grown old, and hast no longer after that the feeling of
enjoyment in perfection, then and not till then does the labor bear you its
recompense. And whereas the labor was with the body in its vigor, the fruit and
the enjoyment is with one grown old and languid, when time has dulled even the
feeling, although if it had not dulled it, the expectation of the end suffers us not
to find pleasure.
But in the other case not so, but the labor is in corruption and a dying body,
but the crown in one incorruptible, and immortal, and having no end. And the
labor is both first and short-lived; but the reward both subsequent and endless,
that with security you may take your rest after that, looking for nothing
unpleasant.
For neither may thou fear change any more or loss as here. What sort of
good things, then, are these, which are both insecure, and short-lived, and
earthly, and vanishing before they have appeared, and acquired with many toils?
And what good things are equal to those, that are immovable, that grow not old,
that have no toil, that even at the time of the conflicts bring you crowns?
For he that despises money even here already receives his reward, being
freed from anxiety, from rivalry, from false accusation, from plotting from envy.
He that is temperate, and lives orderly, even before his departure, is crowned and
lives in pleasure, being delivered from unseemliness, ridicule, dangers of
accusation, and the other things that are to be feared. All the remaining parts of
virtue likewise make us a return here already.
In order therefore that we may attain unto both the present and the future