them in Solomon's porch," [Acts 5:12] no longer in a house, but having occupied
the very Temple, they there passed their time! No longer they guarded
themselves against touching the unclean; nay, without scruple they handled the
dead. And observe how, while to their own people they are severe, against the
aliens they do not exercise their power. "But the people," he says, "magnified
them." [Acts 5:13] And as he had mentioned their being "in Solomon's porch,"
that you may not wonder how the multitude allowed this, he tells us that they did
not dare even to approach them: for "no man," he says, "dared join himself unto
them." "But believers were the more added unto the Lord, multitudes both of men
and women: insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and laid
them on beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might
overshadow some of them." (v. 14, 15.) Great faith, surpassing what had been
shown in the case of Christ. How comes this? Because Christ declared: "And
greater works than these shall he do, because I go unto My Father." [John 14:12]
And these things the people do, while the Apostles remain there, and are not
moving about from place to place: also from other places they were all bringing
[their sick] on beds and couches: and from all quarters accrued to them fresh
tribute of wonder; from them that believed, from them that were healed, from
him that was punished; from their boldness of speech towards those (their
adversaries), from the virtuous behavior of the believers: for certainly the effect
produced was not owing to the miracles only. For though the Apostles
themselves modestly ascribe it all to this cause, declaring that they did these
things in the name of Christ, yet at the same time the life and noble conduct of
the men helped to produce this effect. "And believers were more added unto the
Lord, multitudes both of men and women." Observe, how he now no longer tells
the number of them that believe; at such a rate was the faith making way even to
an immense multitude, and so widely was the Resurrection proclaimed. So then
"the people magnified them:" but they were now no longer lightly to be despised
as once they were: for in a little moment, at a single turn of the scale, such have
been the effects produced by the fisherman and by the publican! Earth was

become a heaven, for manner of life, for boldness of speech, for wonders, for all
besides; like Angels were they looked upon with wonder: all unconcerued for
ridicule, for threats, for perils: compassionate were they, and beneficent; some of
them they succoured with money, and some with words, and some with healing
of their bodies and of their souls; no kind of healing ([πἅν εἶδος ἰατρείας]) but
they accomplished.
Peter all but pleads for himself, when at the point to inflict the punishment,
and at the same time gives a lesson to the rest. For because the act would seem
exceeding stern, therefore it is that he does so much in the case. In respect of the
woman also the process of judgment was terrible. But see how many evils grow
out of the sacrilege: covetousness, contempt of God, impiety; and upon these too
he pleaded for himself before the assembly, in that he did not immediately
proceed to punishment, but first exposed the sin. None groaned, none lamented,
all were terrified. For as their faith increased, the signs also were multiplied, and
great was the fear among their own company: for the things which are from
without do not so militate ([πολεμεἵ]) against our peace, as do the acts of our
own people. If we be firmly joined together, no warfare will be hard: but the
mischief would be the being divided and broken up. Now they went about in the
public place: with boldness they attacked even the market, and in the midst of
enemies they prevailed, and that saying was fulfilled, "Be Thou Ruler in the
midst among Your enemies." [Psalm 110:2] This was a greater miracle, that they,
arrested, cast into prison, should do such acts as these!
If those for lying suffered such things, what shall not the perjured suffer?
Because she simply affirmed, "Yea, for so much," ye see what she suffered.
Bethink you then; they that swear and forswear themselves, of what should they
be worthy? It comes in opportunely today even from the Old Testament to show
you the heinousness of perjury. "There was," it says, "a flying sickle, ten cubits
in breadth." [Zechariah 5:2] The "flying" betokens the swift advent of the
vengeance which pursues oaths; that it is many cubits in length and breadth,
signifies the force and magnitude of the woes; that it comes flying "from