your deposits for you; and not to keep only, but also to augment them, and to pay
them back with much interest. Out of His hand no man can forcibly take them
away. And He not only keeps the deposit, but for this very thing He also frees
you from your perils. For among men, they who receive treasures in trust think
that they have done us a favour, in keeping that of which they took charge; but
with Christ it is the contrary; for He does not say that He has conferred, but that
He has received a favour, when He receives your deposited treasures; and for the
guardianship which He exercises over your wealth, He does not demand a
recompense of you, but gives you a recompense!
17. What defence then can we claim, or what excuse, when we pass by Him
who is able to keep, and who is thankful for the trust giving in return great and
unspeakable rewards, and in place of this guardianship commit our treasures to
men who have not the power to keep them, and who think they grant us a favour,
and pay us back at last only that which was given them. You are a stranger and a
pilgrim with respect to the things here! You have a country which is your own in
the heavens! There transfer all—that before the actual enjoyment, you may enjoy
the recompense here. He who is nourished with good hopes, and is confident
respecting things to come, has here already tasted of the kingdom! For nothing
ordinarily so repairs the soul, and makes a man better, as a good hope of things
to come; so that if you transfer your wealth there, you may then provide for your
soul with suitable leisure. For they who spend all their endeavours upon the
decoration of their dwelling, rich as they are in outward things, are careless of
that which is within, letting their soul abide desolate and squalid, and full of
cobwebs. But if they would be indifferent to exterior things, and earnestly
expend all their attention upon the mind, adorning this at all points; then the soul
of such men would be a resting place for Christ. And having Christ for its
inhabitant, what could ever be more blessed? Would you be rich? Have God for
your friend, and you shall be richer than all men!— Would you be rich? Be not
high-minded!— This rule is suitable not only to things future, but to things
present. For there is no such object of envy, as a man of wealth; but when pride

is super-added, a two-fold precipice is formed; the war becomes fiercer on all
sides. But if you know how to exercise moderation, you undermine the tyranny
of envy by your humility; and you possess whatever you do possess with safety.
For such is the nature of virtue, that it not only profits us, as it respects futurity,
but it also here bestows a present reward.
18. Let us not then be high-minded in reference to riches, or indeed to any
other thing; for if even in spiritual things the man who is high-minded is fallen,
and undone, much more so as to carnal things. Let us be mindful of our nature.
Let us recollect our sins. Let us understand what we are; and this will provide a
sufficient groundwork for complete humility. Tell me not, "I have laid up the
revenues of this or that number of years; myriads of talents of gold; gains that
are increasing every day." Say as much as you will, you say all in vain, and to no
purpose. Very often in one hour, yea, in one short moment, just as the light dust,
when the wind rushes down upon it from above, are all these things swept out of
the house by a blast. Our life is full of such examples, and the Scriptures abound
with lessons of this sort. He who is rich today, is poor tomorrow. Wherefore, I
have often smiled, when reading wills that said, let such a man have the
ownership of these fields, or of this house, and another the use thereof. For we
all have the use, but no man has the ownership. For although riches may remain
with us all our lifetime, undergoing no change, we must transfer them in the end,
whether we will or no, into the hands of others; having enjoyed only the use of
them, and departing to another life naked and destitute of this ownership!
Whence it is plain, that they only have the ownership of property, who have
despised its use, and derided its enjoyment. For the man that has cast his
substance away from him, and bestowed it on the poor, he uses it as he ought;
and takes with him the ownership of these things when he departs, not being
stripped of the possession even in death, but at that time receiving all back again;
yea, and much more than these things, at that day of judgment, when he most
needs their protection, and when we shall all have to render up an account of the
deeds we have done. So that if any one wishes to have the possession of his