healthful, than a soul nurtured by this food: it is set high above all disease, all
pestilence, all indigestion and distemper: none shall be able to overcome it, ([ἑ]
[λεἵν]) but just as, if one's body were made of adamant, no iron, nor anything
else, would have power to hurt it, even so when the soul is firmly compact by
almsgiving, nothing at all shall be able to overcome it. For say, what shall spoil
this? Shall poverty? It cannot be, for it is laid up in the royal treasuries. But shall
robber and housebreaker? Nay, those are walls which none shall be able to break
through. But shall the worm? Nay, this treasure is set far above the reach of this
mischief also. But shall envy and the evil eye? Nay, neither by these can it be
overcome. But shall false accusations and plottings of evil? No, neither shall this
be, for safe as in an asylum is this treasure. But it were a shame should I make it
appear as if the advantages which belong to almsgiving were only these (the
absence of these evils), and not (the presence of) their opposites. For in truth it is
not merely that it is secure from ill-will; it also gets abundant blessing from
those whom it benefits. For as the cruel and unmerciful not only have for
enemies those whom they have injured, but those also who are not themselves
hurt, partake the grief and join in the accusation: so those that have done great
good have not only those who are benefited, but those also who are not
themselves affected, to speak their praises. Again (that), it is secure from the
attacks of the evil-disposed, and robbers, and housebreakers— what, is this all
the good, or is it this— that besides the not suffering diminution, it grows also
and increases into multitude? What more shameful than Nebuchadnezzar, what
more foul, what more iniquitous? The man was impious; after tokens and signs
without number he refused to come to his senses ([ανενεγκεἵν]), but cast the
servants of God into a furnace: and (yet) after these doings, he worshipped.
What then said the Prophet? "Wherefore," says he, "O king let my counsel be
acceptable unto you, ransom ([λύτρωσαι]) your sins by alms, and your iniquities
by mercies to the poor: perhaps there shall be pardon for your transgressions."
[Daniel 3:27] In so speaking, he said it not doubting, nay, with entire confidence,
but wishing to put him in greater fear, and to make a stronger necessity of doing

these things. For if he had spoken it as a thing unquestionable, the king would
have been more supine: just as it is with us, we then most urge some person
(whom we wish to persuade), when they say to us, "Exhort such an one," and do
not add, "he will be sure to hear," but only, "perhaps he will hear:" for by
leaving it doubtful, the fear is made greater, and urges him the more. This is the
reason why the Prophet did not make the thing certain to him. What do you say?
For so great impieties shall there be pardon? Yes. There is no sin, which alms
cannot cleanse, none, which alms cannot quench: all sin is beneath this: it is a
medicine adapted for every wound. What worse than a publican? The very
matter ([ὑ] [πόθεσις]) (of his occupation) is altogether one of injustice: and yet
Zaccheus washed away all these (sins). Mark how even Christ shows this, by the
care taken to have a purse, and to bear the contributions put into it. And Paul
also says, "Only that we remember the poor" [Galatians 2:10]: and everywhere
the Scripture has much discourse concerning this matter. "The ransom," it says,
"of a man's soul is his own wealth" [Proverbs 13:8]: and with reason: for, says
(Christ), "if you would be perfect, sell what you have, and give to the poor, and
come, follow Me." [Matthew 19:21] This may well be part of perfection. But
alms may be done not only by money, but by acts. For example: one may kindly
stand ([προστἥναι]) by a person (to succor and defend him), one may reach to
him a helping hand: the service rendered ([προστασία]) by acts has often done
more good even than money. Let us set to work all the different kinds of
almsgiving. Can you do alms by money? Be not slack. Can you by good offices?
Say not, Because I have no money, this is nothing. This is a very great point:
look upon it as if you had given gold. Can you do it by kind attentions
([θεραπείας])? Do this also. For instance, if you be a physician, (give) your skill:
for this also is a great matter. Can you by counsel? This (service) is much greater
than all: this (alms) is better than all, or it is also more, by how much the gain it
has is greater. For in so doing you put away not starvation, but a grievous death.
[ch. 3:6; 6:4] With such alms the Apostles above measure abounded: therefore it
was that the distribution of money they put into the hands of those after them,