He says, "He that takes forth the precious from the vile shall be as My mouth."
And though thou persuade not today, tomorrow you shall persuade. And though
thou never persuade, you shall have your own reward in full. And though thou
persuade not all, a few out of many persuade all men; but still they discoursed
with all, and for all they have their reward. For not according to the result of the
things that are well done, but according to the intention of the doers, is God wont
to assign the crowns; though thou pay down but two farthings, He receives them;
and what He did in the case of the widow, the same will He do also in the case of
those who teach. Do not thou then, because you can not save the world, despise
the few; nor through longing after great things, withdraw yourself from the
lesser. If you can not an hundred, take thou charge of ten; if you can not ten,
despise not even five; if you can not five, do not overlook one; and if you can
not one, neither so despair, nor keep back what may be done by you. Do you see
not how, in matters of trade, they who are so employed make their profit not only
of gold but of silver also? For if we do not slight the little things, we shall keep
hold also of the great. But if we despise the small, neither shall we easily lay
hand upon the other. Thus individuals become rich, gathering both small things
and great. And so let us act; that in all things enriched, we may obtain the
kingdom of heaven; through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, through Whom and with Whom unto the Father together with the Holy
Spirit be glory, power, honor, now and henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

## Homily 4 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 1:18-20
For the word of the cross is to them that perish foolishness; but to us which
are saved it is the power of God. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of
the wise, and the prudence of the prudent will I reject. Where is the Wise?
Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of the World?
To the sick and gasping even wholesome meats are unpleasant, friends and
relations burdensome; who are often times not even recognized, but are rather
accounted intruders. Much like this often is the case of those who are perishing
in their souls. For the things which tend to salvation they know not; and those
who are careful about them they consider to be troublesome. Now this ensues
not from the nature of the thing, but from their disease. And just what the insane
do, hating those who take care of them, and besides reviling them, the same is
the case with unbelievers also. But as in the case of the former, they who are
insulted then more than ever compassionate them, and weep, taking this as the
worst symptom of the disease in its intense form, when they know not their best
friends; so also in the case of the Gentiles let us act; yea more than for our wives
let us wail over them, because they know not the common salvation. For not so
dearly ought a man to love his wife as we should love all men, and draw them
over unto salvation; be a man a Gentile, or be he what he may. For these then let
us weep; for "the word of the Cross is to them foolishness," being itself Wisdom
and Power. For, says he, "the word of the Cross to them that perish is
foolishness."
For since it was likely that they, the Cross being derided by the Greeks,
would resist and contend by aid of that wisdom, which came (forsooth) of
themselves, as being disturbed by the expression of the Greeks; Paul comforting