We here read "non pusillum" for "num pusillum," as in some texts. Cyprian and Tertullian confirm the former reading.

only, nor, on the other hand, from the name Emmanuel, should suspect Him to be God without
flesh.
5. And when He says, "Hear, O house of David," He performed the part of one indicating
that He whom God promised David that He would raise up from the fruit of his belly (ventris) an
eternal King, is the same who was born of the Virgin, herself of the lineage of David. For on this
account also, He promised that the King should be "of the fruit of his belly," which was the
appropriate [term to use with respect] to a virgin conceiving, and not "of the fruit of his loins," nor
"of the fruit of his reins," which expression is appropriate to a generating man, and a woman
conceiving by a man. In this promise, therefore, the Scripture excluded all virile influence; yet it
certainly is not mentioned that He who was born was not from the will of man. But it has fixed and
established "the fruit of the belly," that it might declare the generation of Him who should be [born]
from the Virgin, as Elisabeth testified when filled with the Holy Ghost, saying to Mary, "Blessed
art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy belly;" the Holy Ghost pointing out to
those willing to hear, that the promise which God had made, of raising up a King from the fruit of
[David's] belly, was fulfilled in the birth from the Virgin, that is, from Mary. Let those, therefore,
who alter the passage of Isaiah thus, "Behold, a young woman shall conceive," and who will have
Him to be Joseph's son, also alter the form of the promise which was given to David, when God
promised him to raise up, from the fruit of his belly, the horn of Christ the King. But they did not
understand, otherwise they would have presumed to alter even this passage also.
6. But what Isaiah said, "From the height above, or from the depth beneath," was meant to
indicate, that "He who descended was the same also who ascended." But in this that he said,
"The Lord Himself shall give you a sign," he declared an unlooked-for thing with regard to His
generation, which could have been accomplished in no other way than by God the Lord of all, God
Himself giving a sign in the house of David. For what great thing or what sign should have been
in this, that a young woman conceiving by a man should bring forth,—a thing which happens to
all women that produce offspring? But since an unlooked-for salvation was to be provided for men
through the help of God, so also was the unlooked-for birth from a virgin accomplished; God giving
this sign, but man not working it out.
7. On this account also, Daniel, foreseeing His advent, said that a stone, cut out without
hands, came into this world. For this is what "without hands" means, that His coming into this
world was not by the operation of human hands, that is, of those men who are accustomed to
stone-cutting; that is, Joseph taking no part with regard to it, but Mary alone co-operating with the
pre-arranged plan. For this stone from the earth derives existence from both the power and the