incorruption," and all the unclean shall be without the city of glory
(Apoc. 22:15)---and again, the elements require to be cleansed from
the contrary dispositions, ere they be brought to the newness of
glory, proportionately to what we have said with regard to man. Now
although, properly speaking, a corporeal thing cannot be the subject
of the stain of sin, nevertheless, on account of sin corporeal things
contract a certain unfittingness for being appointed to spiritual
purposes; and for this reason we find that places where crimes have
been committed are reckoned unfit for the performance of sacred
actions therein, unless they be cleansed beforehand. Accordingly
that part of the world which is given to our use contracts from men's
sins a certain unfitness for being glorified, wherefore in this respect
it needs to be cleansed. In like manner with regard to the intervening
space, on account of the contact of the elements, there are many
corruptions, generations and alterations of the elements, which
diminish their purity: wherefore the elements need to be cleansed
from these also, so that they be fit to receive the newness of glory.
Reply to Objection 1: When it is asserted that every creature of God
is clean we are to understand this as meaning that its substance
contains no alloy of evil, as the Manichees maintained, saying that
evil and good are two substances in some places severed from one
another, in others mingled together. But it does not exclude a
creature from having an admixture of a foreign nature, which in itself
is also good, but is inconsistent with the perfection of that creature.
Nor does this prevent evil from being accidental to a creature,
although not mingled with it as part of its substance.
Reply to Objection 2: Although corporeal elements cannot be the
subject of sin, nevertheless, from the sin that is committed in them
they contract a certain unfitness for receiving the perfection of glory.
Reply to Objection 3: The form of a mixed body and the form of an
element may be considered in two ways: either as regards the
perfection of the species, and thus a mixed body is more perfect---or
as regards their continual endurance; and thus the simple body is
more noble, because it has not in itself the cause of corruption,
unless it be corrupted by something extrinsic: whereas a mixed body
has in itself the cause of its corruption, namely the composition of
contraries. Wherefore a simple body, although it be corruptible in
part is incorruptible as a whole, which cannot be said of a mixed
body. And since incorruption belongs to the perfection of glory, it
follows that the perfection of a simple is more in keeping with the

perfection of glory, than the perfection of a mixed body, unless the
mixed body has also in itself some principle of incorruption, as the
human body has, the form of which is incorruptible. Nevertheless,
although a mixed body is somewhat more noble than a simple body,
a simple body that exists by itself has a more noble being than if it
exist in a mixed body, because in a mixed body simple bodies are
somewhat in potentiality, whereas, existing by themselves, they are
in their ultimate perfection.