heavenly bodies been formed, which is the fourth difference; which
are not consistent with Augustine's explanation. In order, therefore,
to be impartial, we must meet the arguments of either side.
Reply to Objection 1: On the day on which God created the heaven
and the earth, He created also every plant of the field, not, indeed,
actually, but "before it sprung up in the earth," that is, potentially.
And this work Augustine ascribes to the third day, but other writers
to the first instituting of the world.
Reply to Objection 2: God created all things together so far as
regards their substance in some measure formless. But He did not
create all things together, so far as regards that formation of things
which lies in distinction and adornment. Hence the word "creation"
is significant.
Reply to Objection 3: On the seventh day God ceased from making
new things, but not from providing for their increase, and to this
latter work it belongs that the first day is succeeded by other days.
Reply to Objection 4: All things were not distinguished and adorned
together, not from a want of power on God's part, as requiring time
in which to work, but that due order might be observed in the
instituting of the world. Hence it was fitting that different days should
be assigned to the different states of the world, as each succeeding
work added to the world a fresh state of perfection.
Reply to Objection 5: According to Augustine, the order of days
refers to the natural order of the works attributed to the days.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Scripture uses suitable words to express

the work of the six days?
Objection 1: It would seem the Scripture does not use suitable words
to express the works of the six days. For as light, the firmament, and
other similar works were made by the Word of God, so were the
heaven and the earth. For "all things were made by Him" (Jn. 1:3).
Therefore in the creation of heaven and earth, as in the other works,
mention should have been made of the Word of God.
Objection 2: Further, the water was created by God, yet its creation
is not mentioned. Therefore the creation of the world is not
sufficiently described.
Objection 3: Further, it is said (Gn. 1:31): "God saw all the things that
He had made, and they were very good." It ought, then, to have been
said of each work, "God saw that it was good." The omission,
therefore, of these words in the work of creation and in that of the
second day, is not fitting.
Objection 4: Further, the Spirit of God is God Himself. But it does not
befit God to move and to occupy place. Therefore the words, "The
Spirit of God moved over the waters," are unbecoming.
Objection 5: Further, what is already made is not made over again.
Therefore to the words, "God said: Let the firmament be made . . .
and it was so," it is superfluous to add, "God made the firmament."
And the like is to be said of other works.
Objection 6: Further, evening and morning do not sufficiently divide
the day, since the day has many parts. Therefore the words, "The
evening and morning were the second day" or, "the third day," are
not suitable.
Objection 7: Further, "first," not "one," corresponds to "second" and
"third." It should therefore have been said that, "The evening and the
morning were the first day," rather than "one day."
Reply to Objection 1: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. i, 4), the
person of the Son is mentioned both in the first creation of the world,
and in its distinction and adornment, but differently in either place.