the form of a dove, that Being who had formerly ascended on high, and completed the twelfth
number, in whom there existed the seed of those who were produced contemporaneously with
Himself, and who descended and ascended along with Him. Moreover, he maintains that power
which descended was the seed of the Father, which had in itself both the Father and the Son, as
well as that power of Sige which is known by means of them, but cannot be expressed in language,
and also all the Æons. And this was that Spirit who spoke by the mouth of Jesus, and who confessed
that He was the son of Man as well as revealed the Father, and who, having descended into Jesus,
was made one with Him. And he says that the Saviour formed by special dispensation did indeed
destroy death, but that Christ made known the Father. He maintains, therefore, that Jesus is the
name of that man formed by a special dispensation, and that He was formed after the likeness and
form of that [heavenly] Anthropos, who was about to descend upon Him. After He had received
that Æon, He possessed Anthropos himself, and Logos himself, and Pater, and Arrhetus, and Sige,
and Aletheia, and Ecclesia, and Zoe.
4. Such ravings, we may now well say, go beyond Iu, Iu, Pheu, Pheu, and every kind of tragic
exclamation or utterance of misery. For who would not detest one who is the wretched contriver
of such audacious falsehoods, when he perceives the truth turned by Marcus into a mere image,
and that punctured all over with the letters of the alphabet? The Greeks confess that they first
received sixteen letters from Cadmus, and that but recently, as compared with the beginning, [the
vast antiquity of which is implied] in the common proverb: "Yesterday and before;" and
afterwards, in the course of time, they themselves invented at one period the aspirates, and at another
the double letters, while, last of all, they say Palamedes added the long letters to the former. Was
it so, then, that until these things took place among the Greeks, truth had no existence? For, according
to thee, Marcus, the body of truth is posterior to Cadmus and those who preceded him— posterior
also to those who added the rest of the letters— posterior even to thyself! For thou alone hast formed
that which is called by thee the truth into an [outward, visible] image.
5. But who will tolerate thy nonsensical Sige, who names Him that cannot be named, and
expounds the nature of Him that is unspeakable, and searches out Him that is unsearchable, and
declares that He whom thou maintainest to be destitute of body and form, opened His mouth and
sent forth the Word, as if He were included among organized beings; and that His Word, while like
to His Author, and bearing the image of the invisible, nevertheless consisted of thirty elements and
four syllables? It will follow, then, according to thy theory, that the Father of all, in accordance
with the likeness of the Word, consists of thirty elements and four syllables! Or, again, who will
tolerate thee in thy juggling with forms and numbers,—at one time thirty, at another twenty-four,
and at another, again, only six,—whilst thou shuttest up [in these] the Word of God, the Founder,