THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.47, C.6.

verily the Son of God, in that they had evident signs thereof: yet out
of hatred and envy, they refused credence to these signs, by which
they might have known that He was the Son of God.
Reply to Objection 2: The words quoted are preceded by the
following: "If I had not done among them the works that no other
man hath done, they would not have sin"; and then follow the words:
"But now they have both seen and hated both Me and My Father."
Now all this shows that while they beheld Christ's marvelous works,
it was owing to their hatred that they did not know Him to be the Son
of God.
Reply to Objection 3: Affected ignorance does not excuse from guilt,
but seems, rather, to aggravate it: for it shows that a man is so
strongly attached to sin that he wishes to incur ignorance lest he
avoid sinning. The Jews therefore sinned, as crucifiers not only of
the Man-Christ, but also as of God.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.47, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the sin of those who crucified Christ was

most grievous?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sin of Christ's crucifiers was not
the most grievous. Because the sin which has some excuse cannot
be most grievous. But our Lord Himself excused the sin of His
crucifiers when He said: "Father, forgive them: for they know not
what they do" (Lk. 23:34). Therefore theirs was not the most grievous
sin.
Objection 2: Further, our Lord said to Pilate (Jn. 19:11): "He that hath
delivered Me to thee hath the greater sin." But it was Pilate who
caused Christ to be crucified by his minions. Therefore the sin of
Judas the traitor seems to be greater than that of those who
crucified Him.
Objection 3: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v): "No one
suffers injustice willingly"; and in the same place he adds: "Where
no one suffers injustice, nobody works injustice." Consequently
nobody wreaks injustice upon a willing subject. But Christ suffered
willingly, as was shown above (Articles 1,2). Therefore those who
crucified Christ did Him no injustice; and hence their sin was not the
most grievous.
On the contrary, Chrysostom, commenting on the words, "Fill ye up,
then, the measure of your fathers" (Mt. 23:32), says: "In very truth
they exceeded the measure of their fathers; for these latter slew
men, but they crucified God."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 5), the rulers of the Jews knew
that He was the Christ: and if there was any ignorance in them, it was
affected ignorance, which could not excuse them. Therefore their sin
was the most grievous, both on account of the kind of sin, as well as
from the malice of their will. The Jews also of the common order
sinned most grievously as to the kind of their sin: yet in one respect
their crime was lessened by reason of their ignorance. Hence Bede,
commenting on Lk. 23:34, "Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do," says: "He prays for them who know not what they are
doing, as having the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge."
But the sin of the Gentiles, by whose hands He was crucified, was
much more excusable, since they had no knowledge of the Law.