THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.4.

washing, as water. Neither do they wash so efficiently: for whatever
is washed with them, contracts a certain smell therefrom; which is
not the case if water be used. Moreover, they are not so universal or
so abundant as water.
Reply to Objection 3: Water flowed from Christ's side to wash us;
blood, to redeem us. Wherefore blood belongs to the sacrament of
the Eucharist, while water belongs to the sacrament of Baptism. Yet
this latter sacrament derives its cleansing virtue from the power of
Christ's blood.
Reply to Objection 4: Christ's power flowed into all waters, by reason
of, not connection of place, but likeness of species, as Augustine
says in a sermon on the Epiphany (Append. Serm. cxxxv): "The
blessing that flowed from the Saviour's Baptism, like a mystic river,
swelled the course of every stream, and filled the channels of every
spring."
Reply to Objection 5: The blessing of the water is not essential to
Baptism, but belongs to a certain solemnity, whereby the devotion of
the faithful is aroused, and the cunning of the devil hindered from
impeding the baptismal effect.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether plain water is necessary for Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that plain water is not necessary for Baptism.
For the water which we have is not plain water; as appears especially
in sea-water, in which there is a considerable proportion of the
earthly element, as the Philosopher shows (Meteor. ii). Yet this water
may be used for Baptism. Therefore plain and pure water is not
necessary for Baptism.
Objection 2: Further, in the solemn celebration of Baptism, chrism is
poured into the water. But this seems to take away the purity and
plainness of the water. Therefore pure and plain water is not
necessary for Baptism.
Objection 3: Further, the water that flowed from the side of Christ
hanging on the cross was a figure of Baptism, as stated above
(Article 3, ad 3). But that water, seemingly, was not pure, because the
elements do not exist actually in a mixed body, such as Christ's.
Therefore it seems that pure or plain water is not necessary for
Baptism.
Objection 4: Further, lye does not seem to be pure water, for it has
the properties of heating and drying, which are contrary to those of
water. Nevertheless it seems that lye can be used for Baptism; for
the water of the Baths can be so used, which has filtered through a
sulphurous vein, just as lye percolates through ashes. Therefore it
seems that plain water is not necessary for Baptism.
Objection 5: Further, rose-water is distilled from roses, just as
chemical waters are distilled from certain bodies. But seemingly,
such like waters may be used in Baptism; just as rain-water, which is
distilled from vapors. Since, therefore, such waters are not pure and
plain water, it seems that pure and plain water is not necessary for
Baptism.
On the contrary, The proper matter of Baptism is water, as stated
above (Article 3). But plain water alone has the nature of water.
Therefore pure plain water is necessary for Baptism.
I answer that, Water may cease to be pure or plain water in two ways:
first, by being mixed with another body; secondly, by alteration. And