SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.5.

worries and other things that one anticipates under these
circumstances. For after the burial the will had to be read, the estate
had to be divided, and so forth: but chiefly, because there were
others who could see to the funeral." Or, according to Cyril's
commentary on Lk. 9, "this disciple's request was, not that he might
bury a dead father, but that he might support a yet living father in the
latter's old age, until at length he should bury him. This is what Our
Lord did not grant, because there were others, bound by the duties
of kindred, to take care of him."
Reply to Objection 3: Whatever we give our parents out of piety is
referred by us to God; just as other works of mercy which we
perform with regard to any of our neighbors are offered to God,
according to Mt. 25:40: "As long as you did it to one of . . . My
least . . . you did it to Me." Accordingly, if our carnal parents stand in
need of our assistance, so that they have no other means of support,
provided they incite us to nothing against God, we must not abandon
them for the sake of religion. But if we cannot devote ourselves to
their service without sin, or if they can be supported without our
assistance, it is lawful to forego their service, so as to give more
time to religion.
Reply to Objection 4: We must speak differently of one who is yet in
the world, and of one who has made his profession in religion. For
he that is in the world, if he has parents unable to find support
without him, he must not leave them and enter religion, because he
would be breaking the commandment prescribing the honoring of
parents. Some say, however, that even then he might abandon them,
and leave them in God's care. But this, considered aright, would be
to tempt God: since, while having human means at hand, he would
be exposing his parents to danger, in the hope of God's assistance.
on the other hand, if the parents can find means of livelihood without
him, it is lawful for him to abandon them and enter religion, because
children are not bound to support their parents except in cases of
necessity, as stated above. He that has already made his profession
in religion is deemed to be already dead to the world: wherefore he
ought not, under pretext of supporting his parents, to leave the
cloister where he is buried with Christ, and busy himself once more
with worldly affairs. Nevertheless he is bound, saving his obedience
to his superiors, and his religious state withal, to make points efforts
for his parents' support.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.5.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.101, C.1.

## QUESTION 102 — OF OBSERVANCE, CONSIDERED IN ITSELF, AND OF

ITS PARTS

Prologue
We must now consider observance and its parts, the considerations
of which will manifest the contrary vices.
Under the head of observance there are three points of inquiry:
(1) Whether observance is a special virtue, distinct from other
virtues?
(2) What does observance offer?
(3) Of its comparison with piety.