1 Corinthians 10:12
"Wherefore let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall."
Again, he casts down their pride who thought highly of their knowledge.
For if they who had so great privileges suffered such things; and some for
murmuring alone were visited with such punishment, and others for tempting,
and neither their multitude moved God to repent , nor their having attained to
such things; much more shall it be so in our case, except we be sober. And well
said he, "he that thinks he stands:" for this is not even standing as one ought to
stand, to rely on yourself: for quickly will such an one fall: since they too, had
they not been high-minded and self-confident, but of a subdued frame of mind,
would not have suffered these things. Whence it is evident, that chiefly pride,
and carelessness from which comes gluttony also, are the sources of these evils.
Wherefore even though thou stand, yet take heed lest you fall. For our standing
here is not secure standing, no not until we be delivered out of the waves of this
present life and have sailed into the tranquil haven. Be not therefore highminded at your standing, but guard against your falling; for if Paul feared who
was firmer than all, much more ought we to fear.
6. Now the Apostle's word, as we have seen, was, "Wherefore let him that
thinks he stands take heed lest he fall;" but we cannot say even this; all of us, so
to speak, having fallen, and lying prostrate on the ground. For to whom am I to
say this? To him that commits extortion every day? Nay, he lies prostrate with a
mighty fall. To the fornicator? He too is cast down to the ground. To the
drunkard? He also is fallen, and knows not even that he is fallen. So that it is not
the season for this word, but for that saying of the prophet which he spoke even
to the Jews, [Jeremiah 8:4]— "He that falls, does he not rise again?" For all are
fallen, and to rise again they have no mind. So that our exhortation is not
concerning the not falling, but concerning the ability of them that are fallen to

arise. Let us rise again then, late though it be, beloved, let us rise again, and let
us stand nobly. How long do we lie prostrate? How long are we drunken,
besotted with the excessive desire of the things of this life? It is a meet
opportunity now to say, [Jeremiah 6:10] "To whom shall I speak and testify?" So
deaf are all men become even to the very instruction of virtue, and thence filled
with abundance of evils. And were it possible to discern their souls naked; as in
armies when the battle is ended one may behold some dead, and some wounded,
so also in the Church we might see. Wherefore I beseech and implore you, let us
stretch out a hand to each other and thoroughly raise ourselves up. For I myself
am of them that are smitten, and require one to apply some remedies.
Do not however despair on this account. For what if the wounds be severe?
Yet are they not incurable; such is our physician: only let us feel our wounds.
Although we be arrived at the very extreme of wickedness, many are the ways of
safety which He strikes out for us. Thus, if you forbear to be angry with your
neighbor, your own sins shall be forgiven. "For if you forgive men," says He,
"your heavenly Father will also forgive you." [Matthew 6:14] And if you give
alms, He will remit you your sins; for, "break off your sins," says He, "by alms."
[Daniel 4:24] And if you pray earnestly, you shall enjoy forgiveness: and this the
widow signifies who prevailed upon that cruel judge by the importunity of her
prayer. And if you accuse your own sins, you have relief: for "declare thou your
iniquities first, that you may be justified:" [Isaiah 47:26] and if you are sorrowful
on account of these things, this too will be to you a powerful remedy: "for I
saw," says He, "that he was grieved and went sorrowful, and I healed his ways."
[Isaiah 57:17] And if, when you suffer any evil, thou bear it nobly, you have put
away the whole. For this also did Abraham say to the rich man, that "Lazarus
received his evil things, and here he is comforted." And if you have pity on the
widow, your sins are washed away. For, "Judge," says He, "the orphan, and
plead for the widow, and come and let us reason together, says the Lord. And if
your sins be as scarlet, I will make them white as snow; and if they be as
crimson, I will make them white as wool." [Isaiah 1:17] For not even a single