147. First of all, we need to be sure that we understand the meaning of the words we read. I want
to insist here on something which may seem obvious, but which is not always taken into account:
the biblical text which we study is two or three thousand years old; its language is very different
from that which we speak today. Even if we think we understand the words translated into our own
language, this does not mean that we correctly understand what the sacred author wished to say.
The different tools provided by literary analysis are well known: attention to words which are
repeated or emphasized, recognition of the structure and specific movement of a text,
consideration of the role played by the different characters, and so forth. But our own aim is not to
understand every little detail of a text; our most important goal is to discover its principal message,
the message which gives structure and unity to the text. If the preacher does not make this effort,

his preaching will quite likely have neither unity nor order; what he has to say will be a mere
accumulation of various disjointed ideas incapable of inspiring others. The central message is
what the author primarily wanted to communicate; this calls for recognizing not only the author’s
ideas but the effect which he wanted to produce. If a text was written to console, it should not be
used to correct errors; if it was written as an exhortation, it should not be employed to teach
doctrine; if it was written to teach something about God, it should not be used to expound various
theological opinions; if it was written as a summons to praise or missionary outreach, let us not
use it to talk about the latest news.

148. Certainly, to understand properly the meaning of the central message of a text we need to
relate it to the teaching of the entire Bible as handed on by the Church. This is an important
principle of biblical interpretation which recognizes that the Holy Spirit has inspired not just a part
of the Bible, but the Bible as a whole, and that in some areas people have grown in their
understanding of God’s will on the basis of their personal experience. It also prevents erroneous or
partial interpretations which would contradict other teachings of the same Scriptures. But it does
not mean that we can weaken the distinct and specific emphasis of a text which we are called to
preach. One of the defects of a tedious and ineffectual preaching is precisely its inability to
transmit the intrinsic power of the text which has been proclaimed.

Personalizing the word

149. The preacher “ought first of all to develop a great personal familiarity with the word of God.
Knowledge of its linguistic or exegetical aspects, though certainly necessary, is not enough. He
needs to approach the word with a docile and prayerful heart so that it may deeply penetrate his
thoughts and feelings and bring about a new outlook in him”. It is good for us to renew our
fervour each day and every Sunday as we prepare the homily, examining ourselves to see if we
have grown in love for the word which we preach. Nor should we forget that “the greater or lesser
degree of the holiness of the minister has a real effect on the proclamation of the word”. As
Saint Paul says, “we speak, not to please men, but to please God who tests our hearts” (1 Th 2:4).
If we have a lively desire to be the first to hear the word which we must preach, this will surely be
communicated to God’s faithful people, for “out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks”
(Mt 12:34). The Sunday readings will resonate in all their brilliance in the hearts of the faithful if
they have first done so in the heart of their pastor.