doing none, as also the not being ill-used in not using others ill; though this
assertion may seem a riddle to the many, and to those who will not learn true
wisdom. Knowing this, let us not call wretched or lament for those who suffer
injury or insult, but for such who inflict these things; these are they who have
been most injured, who have made God to be at war with them, and have opened
the mouths of ten thousand accusers, who are getting an evil reputation in the
present life, and drawing down on themselves severe punishment in the life to
come. While those who have been wronged by them, and have nobly borne it all,
have God favorable to them, and all to condone with, and praise, and entertain
them. Such as these in the present life, shall enjoy an exceeding good report, as
affording the strongest example of true wisdom, and in the life to come shall
share the good things everlasting; to which may we all attain through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 42 on the Gospel of John
John 6:1-4
"After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, into the parts of Tiberias.
And a great multitude followed Him, because they saw the miracles which He
did on them that were diseased. And Jesus departed into a mountain, and there
sat with His disciples. And the Passover of the Jews was near."
1. Beloved, let us not contend with violent men, but learn when the doing
so brings no hurt to our virtue to give place to their evil counsels; for so all their
hardihood is checked. As darts when they fall upon a firm, hard, and resisting
substance, rebound with great violence on those who throw them, but when the
violence of the cast has nothing to oppose it, it soon becomes weaker and ceases,
so is it with insolent men; when we contend with them they become the fiercer,
but when we yield and give ground, we easily abate all their madness.
Wherefore the Lord when He knew that the Pharisees had heard "that Jesus
made and baptized more disciples than John," went into Galilee, to quench their
envy, and to soften by His retirement the wrath which was likely to be
engendered by these reports. And when He departed for the second time into
Galilee, He comes not to the same places as before; for He went not to Cana, but
to "the other side of the sea," and great multitudes followed Him, beholding "the
miracles which He did." What miracles? Why does he not mention them
specifically? Because this Evangelist most of all was desirous of employing the
greater part of his book on the discourses and sermons [of Christ]. Observe, for
instance, how for a whole year, or rather how even now at the feast of the
Passover, he has given us no more information on the head of miracles, than
merely that He healed the paralytic and the nobleman's son. Because he was not
anxious to enumerate them all, (that would have been impossible,) but of many
and great to record a few.