John 19:24
"These things the soldiers did."
But He on the Cross, commits His mother to the disciple, teaching us even
to our last breath to show every care for our parents. When indeed she
unseasonably troubled Him, He said, "Woman, what have I to do with you?"
[John 2:4] And, "Who is My mother?" [Matthew 12:48] But here He shows
much loving affection, and commits her to the disciple whom He loved. Again
John conceals himself, in modesty; for had he desired to boast, he would have
also put in the cause for which he was loved, since probably it was some great
and wonderful one. But wherefore does He converse on nothing else with John,
nor comfort him when desponding? Because it was no time for comforting by
words; besides, it was no little thing for him to be honored with such honor, and
to receive the reward of steadfastness. But do thou consider, I pray, how even on
the cross He did everything without being troubled, speaking with the disciple
concerning His mother, fulfilling prophecies, holding forth good hopes to the
thief. Yet before He was crucified He appears sweating, agonized, fearing. What
then can this mean? Nothing difficult, nothing doubtful. There indeed the
weakness of nature had been shown, here was being shown the excess of Power.
Besides, by these two things He teaches us, even if before things terrible we be
troubled, not on that account to shrink from things terrible, but when we have
embarked in the contest to deem all things possible and easy. Let us then not
tremble at death. Our soul has by nature the love of life, but it lies with us either
to loose the bands of nature, and make this desire weak; or else to tighten them,
and make the desire more tyrannous. For as we have the desire of sexual
intercourse, but when we practice true wisdom we render the desire weak, so
also it falls out in the case of life; and as God has annexed carnal desire to the
generation of children, to maintain a succession among us, without however
forbidding us from traveling the higher road of continence; so also He has

implanted in us the love of life, forbidding us from destroying ourselves, but not
hindering our despising the present life. And it behooves us, knowing this, to
observe due measure, and neither to go at any time to death of our own accord,
even though ten thousand terrible things possess us; nor yet when dragged to it,
for the sake of what is pleasing to God, to shrink back from and fear it, but
boldly to strip for it, preferring the future to the present life.
But the women stood by the Cross, and the weaker sex then appeared the
manlier [John 19:25]; so entirely henceforth were all things transformed.

John 19:26-7
"Behold your son . . . behold your mother."
3. And He, having committed His mother to John, said, "Behold your Son."
[John 19:26] O the honor! With what honor did He honor the disciple! When He
Himself was now departing, He committed her to the disciple to take care of. For
since it was likely that, being His mother, she would grieve, and require
protection, He with reason entrusted her to the beloved. To him He says, "Behold
your mother." [John 19:27] This He said, knitting them together in charity;
which the disciple understanding, took her to his own home. "But why made He
no mention of any other woman, although another stood there?" To teach us to
pay more than ordinary respect to our mothers. For as when parents oppose us
on spiritual matters, we must not even own them, so when they do not hinder us,
we ought to pay them all becoming respect, and to prefer them before others,
because they begot us, because they bred us up, because they bare for us ten
thousand terrible things. And by these words He silences the shamelessness of
Marcion; for if He were not born according to the flesh, nor had a mother,
wherefore takes He such forethought for her alone?