John 12:31
"Now is the judgment of this world, now shall the prince of this world be cast
down."
What connection has this with, "I have glorified, and will glorify"? Much,
and closely harmonizing. For when God says, "I will glorify," He shows the
manner of the glorifying. What is it? That one should be cast down. But what is,
"the judgment of this world"? It is as though He said, "there shall be a tribunal
and a retribution." How and in what way? "He slew the first man, having found
him guilty of sin, (for 'by sin death entered' [Romans 5:12]) but in Me this he
found not. Why then did he spring upon Me and give Me over to death? Why did
he put into the mind of Judas to destroy Me?" (Tell me not that it was God's
dispensation, for this belongs not to the devil, but His wisdom; for the present let
the disposition of that evil one be enquired into.) "How then is the world judged
in Me?" It shall be said, as if a court of justice were sitting, to Satan, "Well, you
have slain all men, because you found them guilty of sin. But why did you slay
Christ? Is it not clear that you did it wrongfully?" Therefore in Him the whole
world shall be avenged. But, that this may be still more clear, I will make it plain
by an exam ple. Suppose there is some cruel tyrant, bringing ten thousand evils
on all those who fall into his hands. If such a one engaging with a king, or a
king's son, slay him unjustly, his death will have power to get revenge for the
others also. Suppose there is one who demands payment of his debtors, that he
beats them and casts them into prison; then from the same recklessness that he
leads to the same dungeon one who owes him nothing: such a man shall suffer
punishment for what he has done to the others. For that one shall destroy him.
3. So also it is in the case of the Son; for of those things which the devil has
done against us, of these shall the penalty be required by means of what he has
dared against Christ. And to show that He implies this, hear what He says; "Now
shall the prince of this world be cast down," "by My Death."

John 12:32
"And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto Me."
That is, "even those of the Gentiles." And that no one may ask, "How shall
he be cast down, if he is stronger even than You are?" He says, "He is not
stronger; how can he be stronger than One who draws others to Him?" And He
speaks not of the Resurrection, but of what is more than the Resurrection, "I will
draw all men to Myself." For had He said, "I shall rise again," it was not yet
clear that they would believe; but by His saying, "they shall believe," both are
proved at once, both this, and also that He must rise again. For had He continued
dead, and been a mere man, no one would have believed. "I will draw all men to
Myself." [John 6:44] How then said He that the Father draws? Because when the
Son draws, the Father draws also. He says, "I will draw them," as though they
were detained by a tyrant, and unable of themselves alone to approach Him, and
to escape the hands of him who keeps hold of them. In another place He calls
this "spoiling; no man can spoil a strong man's goods, except he first bind the
strong man, and then spoil his goods." [Matthew 12:29] This He said to prove
His strength, and what there He calls "spoiling," He has here called "drawing."
Knowing then these things, let us rouse ourselves, let us glorify God, not by
our faith alone, but also by our life, since otherwise it would not be glory, but
blasphemy. For God is not so much blasphemed by an impure heathen, as by a
corrupt Christian. Wherefore I entreat you to do all that God may be glorified;
for, "Woe," it says, "to that servant by whom the Name of God is blasphemed,"
(and wherever there is a "woe," every punishment and vengeance straightway
follows,) "but blessed is he by whom that Name is glorified." Let us then not be
as in darkness, but avoid all sins, and especially those which tend to the hurt of
others, since by these God is most blasphemed. What pardon shall we have,
when, being commanded to give to others, we plunder the property of others?
What shall be our hope of salvation? You are punished if you have not fed the