"Jesus, or Soter, was also called the Paraclete in the sense of Advocate, or one acting as the representative of
others."—Harvey.
corporeal.

forth new beings, partly after her own image, and partly a spiritual progeny after the image of the
Saviour's attendants.

### Chapter V.—Formation of the Demiurge; description of him. He is the creator of everything
outside of the Pleroma.
1. These three kinds of existence, then, having, according to them, been now formed,—one
from the passion, which was matter; a second from the conversion, which was animal; and the
third, that which she (Achamoth) herself brought forth, which was spiritual,—she next addressed
herself to the task of giving these form. But she could not succeed in doing this as respected the
spiritual existence, because it was of the same nature with herself. She therefore applied herself to
give form to the animal substance which had proceeded from her own conversion, and to bring
forth to light the instructions of the Saviour. And they say she first formed out of animal substance
him who is Father and King of all things, both of these which are of the same nature with himself,
that is, animal substances, which they also call right-handed, and those which sprang from the
passion, and from matter, which they call left-handed. For they affirm that he formed all the things
which came into existence after him, being secretly impelled thereto by his mother. From this
circumstance they style him Metropator, Apator, Demiurge, and Father, saying that he is Father
of the substances on the right hand, that is, of the animal, but Demiurge of those on the left, that
is, of the material, while he is at the same time the king of all. For they say that this Enthymesis,
desirous of making all things to the honour of the Æons, formed images of them, or rather that the
Saviour did so through her instrumentality. And she, in the image of the invisible Father, kept
herself concealed from the Demiurge. But he was in the image of the only-begotten Son, and the
angels and archangels created by him were in the image of the rest of the Æons.
2. They affirm, therefore, that he was constituted the Father and God of everything outside of
the Pleroma, being the creator of all animal and material substances. For he it was that discriminated
these two kinds of existence hitherto confused, and made corporeal from incorporeal substances,
fashioned things heavenly and earthly, and became the Framer (Demiurge) of things material and

"In order that," says Grabe, "this formation might not be merely according to essence, but also according to knowledge,
as the formation of the mother Achamoth was characterized above."
successive development is the reflex of a more divine antecedent."
the Pleroma as the image of Propator, the Demiurge was as Nous, and the mundane angels which he formed corresponded to
the other Æons of the Pleroma.