why he says not, "boast not," but, "boast not against" do not boast against them
so as to sunder them. For it is into their place that you have been set, and their
goods that you enjoy. Do you observe how he seems to be rebuking the one,
while he is sharp upon the other?
"But if you boast," he says, "you bear not the root, but the root you."
Now what is this to the branches that are cut off? Nothing. For, as I said
before, while seeming to devise a sort of weak shadow of consolation, and in the
very midst of his aiming at the Gentile, he gives them a mortal blow; for by
saying, "boast not against them," and, "if you boast, you bear not the root," he
has shown the Jew that the things done deserved boasting of, even if it was not
right to boast, thus at once rousing him and provoking him to faith, and smiting
at him, in the attitude of an advocate, and pointing out to him the punishment he
was undergoing, and that other men had possession of what were their goods.
Ver. 19. "You will say then," he goes on, "The branches were broken off that
I might be grafted in."
Again he establishes, by way of objection, the opposite to the former
position, to show that what he said before, he had not said as directly belonging
to the subject, but to draw them to him. For it was no longer by their fall that
salvation came to the Gentiles, nor was it their fall that was the riches of the
world. Nor was it by this that we were saved, because they had fallen, but the
reverse. And he shows that the providence in regard to the Gentiles was a main
object, even though he seems to put what he says into another form. And the
whole passage is a tissue of objections, in which he clears himself of the
suspicion of hatred, and makes his language such as will be acceptable.
Ver. 20. "Well," he praises what they said, then he alarms them again by
saying, "Because of unbelief they were broken off, and you are grafted in by
faith."
So here another encomium, and for the other party an accusation. But he
again lays their pride low by proceeding to say, "be not high-minded, but fear."
For the thing is not matter of nature, but of belief and unbelief. And he seems to

be again bridling the Gentile, but he is teaching the Jew that it is not right to
cling to a natural kinsmanship. Hence he goes on with, "Be not high-minded,"
and he does not say, but be humble, but, fear. For haughtiness genders a
contempt and listlessness. Then as he is going into all the sorrows of their
calamity, in order to make the statement less offensive, he states it in the way of
a rebuke given to the other as follows:
Ver. 21. "For if God spared not the natural branches," and then he does not
say, neither will He spare you, but "take heed, lest He also spare not you." So
paring ([ὑ] [ποτεμνόμενος]) away the distasteful from his statement, representing
the believer as in the struggle, he at once draws the others to him, and humbles
these also.
Ver. 22. "Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them which
fell, severity; but toward you, goodness, if you continue in His goodness:
otherwise thou also shall be cut off."
And he does not say, Behold your well doing, behold your labors, but,
"Behold the goodness of God" toward man, to show that the whole comes of
grace from above, and to make us tremble. For this reason for boasting should
make you to fear: since the Lord ([δεσπότης]) has been good unto you, do thou
therefore fear. For the blessings do not abide by you unmovable if you turn
listless, as neither do the evils with them, if they alter; "For thou also," he says,
"unless thou continue in the faith, will be cut off."
Ver. 23. "And they also, if they abide not in unbelief, shall be grafted in."
For it was not God that cut them off, but they have broken themselves off
and fallen, and he did well to say have broken themselves off. For He has never
yet so (Sav. conj. manuscript corr. [οὗτος]) cast them off, though they have
sinned so much and so often. You see what a great thing a man's free choice is,
how great the efficacy of the mind is. For none of these things is immutable,
neither your good nor his evil. You see too how he raises up even him in his
despondency, and humbles the other in his confidence; and do not thou be faint
at hearing of severity, nor thou be confident at hearing of goodness. The reason