Moreover, that they may not say, "He is an adversary of God, and therefore
we do not come," hear what they say who are bidding them; that it is the father
who is making the marriage, and that it is He who is bidding them.
What then did He after these things? Since they were not willing to come,
yea and also slew those that came unto them; He burns up their cities, and sent
His armies and slew them.
And these things He says, declaring beforehand the things that took place
under Vespasian and Titus, and that they provoked the father also, by not
believing in Him; it is the father at any rate who was avenging.
And for this reason let me add, not straightway after Christ was slain did
the capture take place, but after forty years, that He might show His long
suffering, when they had slain Stephen, when they had put James to death, when
they had spitefully entreated the apostles.
Do you see the truth of the event, and its quickness? For while John was yet
living, and many other of them that were with Christ, these things came to pass,
and they that had heard these words were witnesses of the events.
See then care utterable. He had planted a vineyard; He had done all things,
and finished; when His servants had been put to death, He sent other servants;
when those had been slain, He sent the son; and when He was put to death, He
bids them to the marriage. They would not come. After this He sends other
servants, and they slew these also.
Then upon this He slays them, as being incurably diseased. For that they
were incurably diseased, was proved not by their acts only, but by the fact, that
even when harlots and publicans had believed, they did these things. So that, not
by their own crimes alone, but also from what others were able to do aright,
these men are condemned,
But if any one should say, that not then were they out of the Gentiles called,
I mean, when the apostles had been beaten and had suffered ten thousand things,
but straightway after the resurrection (for then He said to them, "Go ye and make
disciples of all nations." [Matthew 28:19]) We would say, that both before the

crucifixion, and after the crucifixion, they addressed themselves to them first.
For both before the crucifixion, He says to them, "Go to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel;" [Matthew 10:6] and after the crucifixion, so far from
forbidding, He even commanded them to address themselves to the Jews. For
though He said, "Make disciples of all nations," yet when on the point of
ascending into Heaven, He declared that unto those first they were to address
themselves; For, "you shall receive power," says He, "after that the Holy Ghost
has come upon you, and you shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and
in all Judæa, and unto the uttermost part of the earth;" [Acts 1:8] and Paul
again, "He that wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship of the
circumcision, was mighty in me also toward the Gentiles." Therefore the apostles
also went first unto the Jews, and when they had tarried a long time in
Jerusalem, and then had been driven away by them, in this way they were
scattered abroad unto the Gentiles.
2. And see thou even herein His bounty; "As many as you shall find," says
He, "bid to the marriage." For before this, as I said, they addressed themselves
both to Jews and Greeks, tarrying for the most part in Judæa; but since they
continued to lay plots against them, hear Paul interpreting this parable, and
saying thus, "It was necessary that the word of God should first have been
spoken to you, but since you judge yourselves unworthy, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles."
Therefore Christ also says, "The wedding is ready, but they which were
bidden were not worthy."
He knew this indeed even before, but that He might leave them no pretext
of a shameless sort of contradiction, although He knew it, to them first He both
came and sent, both stopping their mouths, and teaching us to fulfill all our parts,
though no one should derive any profit.
Since then they were not worthy, go ye, says He, into the highways, and as
many as you shall find, bid; both the common sort, and the outcasts. For because
He had said in every way, "The harlots and publicans shall inherit heaven;" and,