John 3:3
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, Unless a man be born again, he cannot see the
Kingdom of God."
That is, "Unless you are born again and receive the right doctrines, you are
wandering somewhere outside, and are far from the Kingdom of heaven." But He
does not speak so plainly as this. In order to make the saying less hard to bear,
He does not plainly direct it at him, but speaks indefinitely, "Unless a man be
born again": all but saying, "both you and any other, who may have such
opinions concerning Me, are somewhere outside the Kingdom." Had He not
spoken from a desire to establish this, His answer would have been suitable to
what had been said. Now the Jews, if these words had been addressed to them,
would have derided Him and departed; but Nicodemus shows here also his
desire of instruction. And this is why in many places Christ speaks obscurely,
because He wishes to rouse His hearers to ask questions, and to render them
more attentive. For that which is said plainly often escapes the hearer, but what
is obscure renders him more active and zealous. Now what He says, is
something like this: "If you are not born again, if you partake not of the Spirit
which is by the washing of Regeneration, you can not have a right opinion of
Me, for the opinion which you have is not spiritual, but carnal." [Titus 3:5] But
He did not speak thus, as refusing to confound one who had brought such as he
had, and who had spoken to the best of his ability; and He leads him
unsuspectedly up to greater knowledge, saying, "Unless a man be born again."
The word "again," in this place, some understand to mean "from heaven," others,
"from the beginning." "It is impossible," says Christ, "for one not so born to see
the Kingdom of God"; in this pointing to Himself, and declaring that there is
another beside the natural sight, and that we have need of other eyes to behold
Christ. Having heard this . . .

John 3:4
"Nicodemus says, How can a man be born when he is old?"
Callest thou Him "Master," do you say that He is "come from God," and yet
do you not receive His words, but usest to your Teacher a manner of speaking
which expresses much perplexity? For the "How," is the doubting question of
those who have no strong belief, but who are yet of the earth. Therefore Sarah
laughed when she had said, "How?" And many others having asked this
question, have fallen from the faith.
3. And thus heretics continue in their heresy, because they frequently make
this enquiry, saying, some of them, "How was He begotten?" others, "How was
He made flesh?" and subjecting that Infinite Essence to the weakness of their
own reasonings. Knowing which, we ought to avoid this unseasonable curiosity,
for they who search into these matters shall, without learning the "How," fall
away from the right faith. On this account Nicodemus, being in doubt, enquires
the manner in which this can be, (for he understood that the words spoken
referred to himself,) is confused, and dizzy, and in perplexity, having come as to
a man, and hearing more than man's words, and such as no one ever yet had
heard; and for a while he rouses himself at the sublimity of the sayings, but yet is
in darkness, and unstable, borne about in every direction, and continually falling
away from the faith. And therefore he perseveres in proving the impossibility, so
as to provoke Him to clearer teaching.
"Can a man," he says, "enter into his mother's womb, and be born?"
Do you see how when one commits spiritual things to his own reasonings,
he speaks ridiculously, seems to be trifling, or to be drunken, when he pries into
what has been said beyond what seems good to God, and admits not the
submission of faith? Nicodemus heard of the spiritual Birth, yet perceived it not
as spiritual, but dragged down the words to the lowness of the flesh, and made a
doctrine so great and high depend upon physical consequence. And so he invents