THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.6.

Question 7, Article 9) grace was received by the soul of Christ in the
highest way; and therefore from this pre-eminence of grace which He
received, it is from Him that this grace is bestowed on others---and
this belongs to the nature of head. Hence the personal grace,
whereby the soul of Christ is justified, is essentially the same as His
grace, as He is the Head of the Church, and justifies others; but there
is a distinction of reason between them.
Reply to Objection 1: Original sin in Adam, which is a sin of the
nature, is derived from his actual sin, which is a personal sin,
because in him the person corrupted the nature; and by means of
this corruption the sin of the first man is transmitted to posterity,
inasmuch as the corrupt nature corrupts the person. Now grace is
not vouchsafed us by means of human nature, but solely by the
personal action of Christ Himself. Hence we must not distinguish a
twofold grace in Christ, one corresponding to the nature, the other to
the person as in Adam we distinguish the sin of the nature and of the
person.
Reply to Objection 2: Different acts, one of which is the reason and
the cause of the other, do not diversify a habit. Now the act of the
personal grace which is formally to sanctify its subject, is the reason
of the justification of others, which pertains to capital grace. Hence it
is that the essence of the habit is not diversified by this difference.
Reply to Objection 3: Personal and capital grace are ordained to an
act; but the grace of union is not ordained to an act, but to the
personal being. Hence the personal and the capital grace agree in
the essence of the habit; but the grace of union does not, although
the personal grace can be called in a manner the grace of union,
inasmuch as it brings about a fitness for the union; and thus the
grace of union, the capital, and the personal grace are one in
essence, though there is a distinction of reason between them.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether it is proper to Christ to be Head of the

Church?
Objection 1: It seems that it is not proper to Christ to be Head of the
Church. For it is written (1 Kgs. 15:17): "When thou wast a little one
in thy own eyes, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of
Israel?" Now there is but one Church in the New and the Old
Testament. Therefore it seems that with equal reason any other man
than Christ might be head of the Church.
Objection 2: Further, Christ is called Head of the Church from His
bestowing grace on the Church's members. But it belongs to others
also to grant grace to others, according to Eph. 4:29: "Let no evil
speech proceed from your mouth; but that which is good to the
edification of faith, that it may administer grace to the hearers."
Therefore it seems to belong also to others than Christ to be head of
the Church.
Objection 3: Further, Christ by His ruling over the Church is not only
called "Head," but also "Shepherd" and "Foundation." Now Christ
did not retain for Himself alone the name of Shepherd, according to 1
Pt. 5:4, "And when the prince of pastors shall appear, you shall
receive a never-fading crown of glory"; nor the name of Foundation,
according to Apoc. 21:14: "And the wall of the city had twelve
foundations." Therefore it seems that He did not retain the name of
Head for Himself alone.
On the contrary, It is written (Col. 2:19): "The head" of the Church is
that "from which the whole body, by joints and bands being supplied
with nourishment and compacted groweth unto the increase of God."
But this belongs only to Christ. Therefore Christ alone is Head of the
Church.
I answer that, The head influences the other members in two ways.
First, by a certain intrinsic influence, inasmuch as motive and
sensitive force flow from the head to the other members; secondly,
by a certain exterior guidance, inasmuch as by sight and the senses,
which are rooted in the head, man is guided in his exterior acts. Now
the interior influx of grace is from no one save Christ, Whose
manhood, through its union with the Godhead, has the power of
justifying; but the influence over the members of the Church, as