1 Corinthians 6:17
"But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit."
For the conjunction suffers the two no longer to be two, but makes them
both one.
2. Now mark again, how he proceeds by means of the bare terms,
conducting his accusation in the names of the harlot and of Christ.

1 Corinthians 6:18
"Flee fornication."
He said not, "abstain from fornication," but "Flee:" that is, with all zeal
make to yourselves deliverance from that evil. "Every sin that a man does is
without the body; but he that commits fornication sins against his own body."
This is less than what went before; but since he had to speak of fornicators, he
amplifies that guilt by topics drawn from all quarters, from greater things and
smaller alike, making the charge heinous. And, in fact, that former topic was
addressed to the more religious, but this to the weaker sort. For this also is
characteristic of the wisdom of Paul, not only to allege the great things
wherewith to abash men, but the lesser also, and the consideration of what is
disgraceful and unseemly.
"What then," say you, "does not the murderer stain his hand? What, of the
covetous person and the extortioner?" I suppose it is plain to every one. But
since it was not possible to mention anything worse than the fornicator, he
amplifies the crime in another way, by saying that in the fornicator the entire
body becomes defiled. For it is as polluted as if it had fallen into a vessel of filth,
and been immersed in defilement. And this too is our way. For from
covetousness and extortion no one would make haste to go into a bath, but as if
nothing had happened returns to his house. Whereas from intercourse with a
harlot, as having become altogether unclean, he goes to a bath. To such a degree
does the conscience retain from this sin a kind of sense of unusual shame. Both
however are bad, both covetousness and fornication; and both cast into hell. But
as Paul does every thing with good management, so by whatever topics he had
he magnified the sin of fornication.

1 Corinthians 6:19-20
3. "Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Ghost which is
in you?" He did not merely say, "of the Spirit," but, "which is in you;" which was
the part of one who also was soothing. And again, explaining himself still
further, he added, "which you have from God." He mentioned Him that gave
also, both exalting the hearer and putting him in fear, both by the magnitude of
the deposit, and by the munificence of Him that made it.
"And you are not your own." This is not only to abash, but even to force
men towards virtue. "For why," says he; "doest thou what you will? You are not
your own master." But these things he said, not to take away free-will. For so in
saying, "All things are lawful for me, but not all things are expedient," he does
not take away our liberty. And here again, writing, "You are not your own;" he
makes no infringement upon freedom of choice, but he leads away from vice and
indicates the guardian care of the Lord. And therefore he added, "For you were
bought with a price."
But if I am not my own, upon what ground do you demand of me duties to
be done? And why do you go on to say again, "Glorify God therefore in your
body and in your spirit, which are God's?" What then is the meaning of, "you
are not your own?" And what does he wish to prove thereby? To settle them in a
state of security against sin, and against following the improper desires of the
mind. For indeed we have many improper wishes: but we must repress them, for
we can. And if we could not, exhortation would be in vain. Mark, accordingly,
how he secures his ground. For having said, "You are not your own," he adds
not, "But are under compulsion;" but, "You were bought with a price." Why do
you say this? Surely on another ground, one might say perhaps, you should have
persuaded men, pointing out that we have a Master. But this is common to the
Greeks also together with us: whereas the expression, "You were bought with a