Yet how strange! For how then is it, that it is said elsewhere, "If one bid not
farewell both to wife and to husband, he cannot follow me"? [Luke 14:26] For if
it is their duty to be in subjection "as unto the Lord," how says He that they must
depart from them for the Lord's sake? Yet their duty indeed it is, their bounden
duty. But the word "as" is not necessarily and universally expressive of exact
equality. He either means this, "'as' knowing that you are servants to the Lord";
(which, by the way, is what he says elsewhere, that, even though they do it not
for the husband's sake, yet must they primarily for the Lord's sake;) or else he
means, "when you obey your husband, do so as serving the Lord." For if he who
resists these external authorities, those of governments, I mean, "withstands the
ordinance of God" [Romans 13:2], much more does she who submits not herself
to her husband. Such was God's will from the beginning.
Let us take as our fundamental position then that the husband occupies the
place of the "head," and the wife the place of the "body."
Ver. 23, 24. Then, he proceeds with arguments and says that "the husband is
the head of the wife, as Christ also is the head of the Church, being Himself the
Saviour of the body. But as the Church is subject to Christ, so let the wives be to
their husbands in everything."
Then after saying, "The husband is the head of the wife, as Christ also is of
the Church," he further adds, "and He is the Saviour of the body." For indeed the
head is the saving health of the body. He had already laid down beforehand for
man and wife, the ground and provision of their love, assigning to each their
proper place, to the one that of authority and forethought, to the other that of
submission. As then "the Church," that is, both husbands and wives, "is subject
unto Christ, so also ye wives submit yourselves to your husbands, as unto God."
Ver. 25. "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church."
You have heard how great the submission; you have extolled and marvelled
at Paul, how, like an admirable and spiritual man, he welds together our whole
life. Thou did well. But now hear what he also requires at your hands; for again
he employs the same example.

"Husbands," says he, "love your wives, even as Christ also loved the
Church."
You have seen the measure of obedience, hear also the measure of love.
Would you have your wife obedient unto you, as the Church is to Christ? Take
then yourself the same provident care for her, as Christ takes for the Church.
Yea, even if it shall be needful for you to give your life for her, yea, and to be cut
into pieces ten thousand times, yea, and to endure and undergo any suffering
whatever—refuse it not. Though you should undergo all this, yet will you not,
no, not even then, have done anything like Christ. For thou indeed art doing it
for one to whom you are already knit; but He for one who turned her back on
Him and hated Him. In the same way then as He laid at His feet her who turned
her back on Him, who hated, and spurned, and disdained Him, not by menaces,
nor by violence, nor by terror, nor by anything else of the kind, but by his
unwearied affection; so also do thou behave yourself toward your wife. Yea,
though thou see her looking down upon you, and disdaining, and scorning you,
yet by your great thoughtfulness for her, by affection, by kindness, you will be
able to lay her at your feet. For there is nothing more powerful to sway than
these bonds, and especially for husband and wife. A servant, indeed, one will be
able, perhaps, to bind down by fear; nay not even him, for he will soon start
away and be gone. But the partner of one's life, the mother of one's children, the
foundation of one's every joy, one ought never to chain down by fear and
menaces, but with love and good temper. For what sort of union is that, where
the wife trembles at her husband? And what sort of pleasure will the husband
himself enjoy, if he dwells with his wife as with a slave, and not as with a freewoman? Yea, though you should suffer anything on her account, do not upbraid
her; for neither did Christ do this.
Ver. 26. "And gave Himself up," he says, "for it, that He might sanctify and
cleanse it."
So then she was unclean! So then she had blemishes, so then she was
unsightly, so then she was worthless! Whatsoever kind of wife you shall take,