This passage is hopelessly corrupt. The editors have twisted it in every direction, but with no satisfactory result. Our
version is quite as far from being certainly trustworthy as any other that has been proposed, but it seems something like the
meaning of the words as they stand. Both the text and punctuation of the Latin are in utter confusion.

representative] of the Saviour compounded of them [all], who derived his being from the collected
gifts of the whole, and whom they term All Things, as having been formed out of them all. Respecting
this being the poet Hesiod has strikingly expressed himself, styling him Pandora —that is, "The
gift of all"—for this reason, that the best gift in the possession of all was centred in him. In describing
these gifts the following account is given: Hermes (so he is called in the Greek language),

!"#$%&'$(3113 )* %+,'$( -./ 01&-%'1'2 34'( .5)'6( 78)4*)' (or to express this in the English
language), "implanted words of fraud and deceit in their minds, and thievish habits," for the purpose
of leading foolish men astray, that such should believe their falsehoods. For their Mother—that is,
Leto—secretly stirred them up (whence also she is called Leto, according to the meaning of
the Greek word, because she secretly stirred up men), without the knowledge of the Demiurge, to
give forth profound and unspeakable mysteries to itching ears. And not only did their Mother
bring it about that this mystery should be declared by Hesiod; but very skilfully also by means of
the lyric poet Pindar, when he describes to the Demiurge the case of Pelops, whose flesh was
cut in pieces by the Father, and then collected and brought together, and compacted anew by all
the gods, did she in this way indicate Pandora and these men having their consciences seared
by her, declaring, as they maintain, the very same things, are [proved] of the same family and spirit
as the others.

### Chapter XXII.—The thirty Æons are not typified by the fact that Christ was baptized in His
thirtieth year: He did not suffer in the twelfth month after His baptism, but was more than
fifty years old when He died.
1. I have shown that the number thirty fails them in every respect; too few Æons, as they
represent them, being at one time found within the Pleroma, and then again too many [to correspond

The words are loosely quoted memoriter, as is the custom with Irenæus. See Hesiod, Works and Days, i. 77, etc.

2 Tim. iv. 3.
but the change which he suggests, besides being without authority, does not clear away the obscurity which hangs upon the
sentence.

"Compuncti" supposed to correspond to -*-.$):=>.?#@2'>: see 1 Tim. iv. 2. The whole passage is difficult and obscure.

with that number]. There are not, therefore, thirty Æons, nor did the Saviour come to be baptized
when He was thirty years old, for this reason, that He might show forth the thirty silent Æons
of their system, otherwise they must first of all separate and eject [the Saviour] Himself from the
Pleroma of all. Moreover, they affirm that He suffered in the twelfth month, so that He continued
to preach for one year after His baptism; and they endeavour to establish this point out of the prophet
(for it is written, "To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of retribution"), being
truly blind, inasmuch as they affirm they have found out the mysteries of Bythus, yet not
understanding that which is called by Isaiah the acceptable year of the Lord, nor the day of
retribution. For the prophet neither speaks concerning a day which includes the space of twelve
hours, nor of a year the length of which is twelve months. For even they themselves acknowledge
that the prophets have very often expressed themselves in parables and allegories, and [are] not [to
be understood] according to the mere sound of the words.
2. That, then, was called the day of retribution on which the Lord will render to every one
according to his works—that is, the judgment. The acceptable year of the Lord, again, is this present
time, in which those who believe Him are called by Him, and become acceptable to God—that is,
the whole time from His advent onwards to the consummation [of all things], during which He
acquires to Himself as fruits [of the scheme of mercy] those who are saved. For, according to the
phraseology of the prophet, the day of retribution follows the [acceptable] year; and the prophet
will be proved guilty of falsehood if the Lord preached only for a year, and if he speaks of it. For
where is the day of retribution? For the year has passed, and the day of retribution has not yet come;
but He still "makes His sun to rise upon the good and upon the evil, and sends rain upon the just
and unjust." And the righteous suffer persecution, are afflicted, and are slain, while sinners are
possessed of abundance, and "drink with the sound of the harp and psaltery, but do not regard the
works of the Lord." But, according to the language [used by the prophet], they ought to be
combined, and the day of retribution to follow the [acceptable] year. For the words are, "to proclaim
the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of retribution." This present time, therefore, in which
men are called and saved by the Lord, is properly understood to be denoted by "the acceptable year
of the Lord;" and there follows on this "the day of retribution," that is, the judgment. And the time
thus referred to is not called "a year" only, but is also named "a day" both by the prophet and by
Paul, of whom the apostle, calling to mind the Scripture, says in the Epistle addressed to the Romans,
"As it is written, for thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the
is here playing upon the word, according to a practice in which he delights, and quietly scoffs at the Sige (Silence) of the heretics
by styling those Æons silent who were derived from her.