kind? This also lovers do. When they see those whom they love desiring what
belongs to strangers and despising their own, they give what belongs to
themselves, and so persuade them to withdraw themselves from the gifts of those
others. Lovers, however, display this liberality in goods and money and
garments, but in blood none ever did so. Whereas Christ even herein exhibited
His care and fervent love for us. And in the old covenant, because they were in
an imperfect state, the blood which they used to offer to idols He Himself
submitted to receive, that He might separate them from those idols; which very
thing again was a proof of His unspeakable affection: but here He transferred the
service to that which is far more awful and glorious, changing the very sacrifice
itself, and instead of the slaughter of irrational creatures, commanding to offer
up Himself.
4. "The bread which we break, is it not a communion of the Body of
Christ?" Wherefore said he not, the participation? Because he intended to
express something more and to point out how close was the union: in that we
communicate not only by participating and partaking, but also by being united.
For as that body is united to Christ, so also are we united to him by this bread.
But why adds he also, "which we break?" For although in the Eucharist one
may see this done, yet on the cross not so, but the very contrary. For, "A bone of
Him," says one, "shall not be broken." But that which He suffered not on the
cross, this He suffers in the oblation for your sake, and submits to be broken, that
he may fill all men.
Further, because he said, "a communion of the Body," and that which
communicates is another thing from that whereof it communicates; even this
which seems to be but a small difference, he took away. For having said, "a
communion of the Body," he sought again to express something nearer.
Wherefore also he added,

1 Corinthians 10:17
"For we, who are many, are one bread, one body." "For why speak I of
communion?" says he, "we are that self-same body." For what is the bread? The
Body of Christ. And what do they become who partake of it? The Body of
Christ: not many bodies, but one body. For as the bread consisting of many
grains is made one, so that the grains no where appear; they exist indeed, but
their difference is not seen by reason of their conjunction; so are we conjoined
both with each other and with Christ: there not being one body for you, and
another for your neighbor to be nourished by, but the very same for all.
Wherefore also he adds,
"For we all partake of the one bread." Now if we are all nourished of the
same and all become the same, why do we not also show forth the same love,
and become also in this respect one? For this was the old way too in the time of
our forefathers: "for the multitude of them that believed," says the text, "were of
one heart and soul." [Acts 4:32] Not so, however, now, but altogether the
reverse. Many and various are the contests between all, and worse than wild
beasts are we affected towards each other's members. And Christ indeed made
you so far remote, one with himself: but thou dost not deign to be united even to
your brother with due exactness, but separatest yourself, having had the privilege
of so great love and life from the Lord. For he gave not simply even His own
body; but because the former nature of the flesh which was framed out of earth,
had first become deadened by sin and destitute of life; He brought in, as one may
say, another sort of dough and leaven, His own flesh, by nature indeed the same,
but free from sin and full of life; and gave to all to partake thereof, that being
nourished by this and laying aside the old dead material, we might be blended
together unto that which is living and eternal, by means of this table.