Him, and says, "Declare unto us this parable," [Matthew 15:15] discovering the
trouble in his soul, and not indeed venturing to say openly, "I am offended," but
requiring that by His interpretation he should be freed from his perplexity;
wherefore also he was reproved.
What then says Christ? "Every plant which my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted up."
This, they that are diseased with the Manichæan pest affirm to be spoken of
the law; but their months are stopped by what had been said before. For if He
was speaking of the law, how does He further back defend it, and fight for it,
saying, "Why do ye transgress the commandments of God for your tradition?"
And how does He bring for ward the prophet? But of themselves and of their
traditions He so speaks. For if God said, "Honor your father and your mother,"
how is not that of God's planting, which was spoken by God?
And what follows also indicates, that of themselves it was said, and of their
traditions. Thus He added, "They are blind leaders of the blind." Whereas, had
He spoken it of the law, He would have said, "It is a blind leader of the blind."
But not so did He speak, but, "They are blind leaders of the blind:" freeing it
from the blame, and bringing it all round upon them.
Then to sever the people also from them, as being on the point of falling
into a pit by their means, He says, "If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into
the ditch."
It is a great evil merely to be blind, but to be in such a case and have none
to lead him, nay, to occupy the place of a guide, is a double and triple ground of
censure. For if it be a dangerous thing for the blind man not to have a guide,
much more so that he should even desire to be guide to another.
What then says Peter? He says not, "What can this be which You have
said?" but as though it were full of obscurity, he puts his question. And he says
not, "Why have you spoken contrary to the law?" for he was afraid, lest he
should be thought to have taken offense, but asserts it to be obscure. However,
that it was not obscure, but that he was offended, is manifest, for it had nothing

of obscurity.
Wherefore also He rebukes him, saying, "Are ye also yet without
understanding?" [Matthew 15:16] For as to the multitude, they did not perhaps
so much as understand the saying; but themselves were the persons offended.
Wherefore, whereas at first, as though asking in behalf of the Pharisees, they
were desirous to be told; when they heard Him denouncing a great threat, and
saying, "Every plant, which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted
up," and, "They are blind leaders of the blind," they were silenced. But he,
always ardent, not even so endures to hold his peace, but says, "Declare unto us
this parable." [Matthew 15:15]
What then says Christ? With a sharp rebuke He answers, "Are ye also yet
without understanding? Do ye not yet understand?"
But these things He said, and reproved them, in order to cast out their
prejudice; He stopped not however at this, but adds other things also, saying,
"That whatsoever enters in at the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast out into
the draught; but those things which proceed out of the mouth come forth from
the heart, and they defile the man. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, blasphemies, false-witnessings: and
these are the things that defile the man: but to eat with unwashen hands defiles
not the man." [Matthew 15:17-20]
Do you see how sharply He deals with them, and in the way of rebuke?
Then He establishes His saying by our common nature, and with a view to
their cure. For when He says, "It goes into the belly, and is cast out into the
draught," he is still answering according to the low views of the Jews. For He
says, "it abides not, but goes out:" and what if it abode? It would not make one
unclean. But not yet were they able to hear this.
And one may remark, that because of this the lawgiver allows just so much
time, as it may be remaining within one, but when it is gone forth, no longer. For
instance, at evening He bids you wash yourself, and so be clean; measuring the
time of the digestion, and of the excretion. [Leviticus 11:24-25] But the things of