though not with bonds upon him: and they drew him, who had expected to draw
the others. "And he eat not, neither drank:" he condemned himself for the past,
he confessed, prayed, besought God. But should any say, This was the effect of
compulsion: (we answer) The same thing happened to Elymas: then how came it
that he was not changed? (ch. xiii. de Laud. Pauli Hom. iv. §1, t. ii. p. 491.)
What (evidence) could be more compulsory than the earthquake at the
Resurrection, the report of the soldiers, the other miracles, the seeing Himself
risen? But these things do not compel (belief) they are calculated to teach (it)
([οὐκ ἀναγκαστικὰ ἀλλὰ διδακτικά]). Why did not the Jews believe when they
were told of these things? That he spoke truth was manifest: for he would not
have been changed, had this not happened; so that all were bound to believe. He
was not inferior to them that preached the Resurrection, and was more credible,
by being all at once converted. He had no intercourse with any of the believers;
it was at Damascus that he was converted, or rather before he came to Damascus
that this happened to him. I ask the Jew: Say, by what was Paul converted? He
saw so many signs, and was not converted: his teacher (Gamaliel, supra, p. 87,
note 1) was converted, and he remained unconverted. Who convinced him— and
not only convinced, but all at once inspired him with such ardent zeal?
Wherefore was it, that he wished even to go into hell itself for Christ's sake? The
truth of the facts is manifest.
But, as I said, for the present let us take shame to ourselves (when we think
of) the eunuch, both in his baptism and his reading. Do ye mark how he was in a
station of great authority, how he was in possession of wealth, and even on his
journey allowed himself no rest? What must he have been at home, in his leisure
hours, this man who rested not even on his travels? What must he have been at
night? You that are in stations of dignity, hear: imitate his freedom from pride,
(de Lazaro, Conc. iii. §3, t. i. p. 748. c) his piety. Though about to return home,
he did not say to himself: "I am going back to my country, there let me receive
baptism;" those cold words which most men use! No need had he of signs, no
need of miracles: from the Prophet merely, he believed. (b) But why is it (so

ordered) that he sees (Philip) not before he goes to Jerusalem, but after he has
been there? It was not meet that he should see the Apostles under persecution.
Because he was yet weak, the Prophet was not easy; (but yet the Prophet)
catechized him. For even now, if any of you would apply himself to the study of
the Prophets, he would need no miracles. And, if you please, let us take in hand
the prophecy itself. He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb
before his shearer, so opened He not His mouth: in His humiliation His judgment
was taken away: and who shall declare His generation? For His life is taken from
the earth. (v. 22, 23.) It is likely he had heard that He was crucified, [and now he
learns], that "His life is taken away from the earth," and the rest that "He did no
sin, nor deceit in His mouth:" that He prevailed to save others also: [and] who
He is, Whose generation is unutterable. It is likely he had seen the riven rocks
there (on the spot), and (had heard) how the veil was rent, and how there was
darkness, and so forth: and all these things Philip mentioned, merely taking his
text from the Prophet. It is a great thing, this reading of the Scriptures! That was
fulfilled which was spoken by Moses, "Sitting, lying down, rising up, and
walking, remember the Lord your God." [Deuteronomy 6:7] For the roads,
especially when they are lonely, give us opportunity for reflection, there being
none to disturb us. Both this man is on the road and Paul on the road: howbeit
the latter no man draws, but Christ alone. This was too great a work for the
Apostles: and, greater still, in that, the Apostles being at Jerusalem, and no
person of authority at Damascus, he nevertheless returned thence converted: yet
those at Damascus knew that he did not come from Jerusalem converted, for he
brought letters, that he might put the believers in bonds. Like a consummate
Physician, when the fever was at its height, Christ brought help to him: for it was
needful that he should be quelled in the midst of his frenzy. For then most of all
would he be brought down, and condemn himself as one guilty of dreadful
audacity. (a) For these things Paul deplores himself, saying, "Howbeit for this
cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show all His long
suffering." [1 Timothy 1:13-16] Verily one has reason to admire this eunuch. He