He not brought me back to my former honor, but even forty years am I passing in
a foreign land. Truly, handsomely have I received my wages, have I not!" But
nothing of the kind did he say or think. So also do thou: be it that thou suffer any
evil for doing good, be it that (thou have to wait) a long time, be not thou
offended, be not discomposed: God will of a surety give you your reward. The
more the recompense is delayed, the more is the interest of it increased. Let us
have a soul apt to sympathize, let us have a heart that knows how to feel with
others in their sorrows: no unmerciful temper ([ὠ] [μόν]), no inhumanity.
Though thou be able to confer no relief, yet weep thou, groan, grieve over
what has happened: even this is not to no purpose. If it behooves us to feel for
those who are justly punished by God, much more for those who suffer unjustly
at the hands of men. (They of) "Ænan," it says, "came not forth to mourn for the
house which was near her" [Micah 1:11]: they shall receive pain, "in return for
that they built for derision." And again, Ezekiel makes this an accusation against
them, that they did not grieve for (the afflicted). [Ezekiel 16:2] What do you say,
O Prophet? God punishes, and shall I grieve for those that He is punishing? Yea
verily: for God Himself that punishes wishes this: since neither does He Himself
wish to punish, nay, even Himself grieves when punishing. Then be not thou
glad at it. You will say, "If they are justly punished, we ought not to grieve."
Why, the thing we ought to grieve for is this— that they were found worthy of
punishment. Say, when you see your son undergoing cautery or the knife, do you
not grieve? And do you not say to yourself, "What is this? It is for health this
cutting, to quicken his recovery; it is for his deliverance, this burning?" but for
all that, when you hear him crying out, and not able to bear the pain, you grieve,
and the hope of health being restored is not enough to carry off the shock to
nature. So also in the case of these, though it be in order to their health that they
are punished, nevertheless let us show a brotherly feeling, a fatherly disposition.
They are cuttings and cauteries, the punishments sent by God: but it is for this
we ought to weep, that they were sick, that they needed such a mode of cure. If it
be for crowns that any suffer these things, then grieve not; for instance, as Paul,

as Peter suffered: but when it is for punishment that one suffers justice, then
weep, then groan. Such was the part the prophets acted; thus one of them said,
"Ah! Lord, do you destroy the residue of Israel?" [Ezekiel 9:8] We see menslayers, wicked men, suffering punishment, and we are distressed, and grieve for
them. Let us not be philosophical beyond measure: let us show ourselves pitiful,
that we may be pitied; there is nothing equal to this beautiful trait: nothing so
marks to us the stamp of human nature as the showing pity, as the being kind to
our fellow-men. In fact, therefore do the laws consign to public executioners the
whole business of punishment: having compelled the judge to punish so far as to
pronounce the sentence, thereafter they call forth those to perform the act itself.
So true is it, that though it be justly done, it is not the part of a generous
([φιλοσόφου]) soul to inflict punishment, but it requires another sort of person
for this: since even God punishes not by His own hand, but by means of the
angels. Are they then executioners, the angels? God forbid: I say not this, but
they are avenging powers. When Sodom was destroyed, the whole was done by
them as the instruments: when the judgments in Egypt were inflicted, it was
through them. For, "He sent," it says, "evil angels among them." [Psalm 78:50]
But when there is need of saying, God does this by Himself: thus, He sent the
Son:— (b) but, "He that receives you, receives Me, and he that receives Me,
receives Him that sent Me." [Matthew 10:40] (a) And again He says, "Then will
I say unto the angels, Gather together them that do iniquity, and cast them into
the furnace." [Matthew 13:30-42] But concerning the just, not so. (c) And again,
"Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness." [Matthew 22:13]
Observe how in that case His servants minister: but when the point is to do good,
see Himself doing the good, Himself calling: "Come, you blessed of My Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you." [Matthew 25:34] When the matter is, to
converse with Abraham, then Himself comes to him: when it is, to depart to
Sodom, He sends His servants, like a judge raising up those who are to punish.
"You have been faithful over a few things, I will make you ruler over many
things" [Matthew 25:21]; I (will make you): but that other, not Himself, but His