sober-minded even in a time of delights.
As if then we were banquetting with Christ Himself, and partaking of His
table, let us do nothing at random, but let us pass our time in fastings, and
prayers, and much sobriety of mind. For if a man who is destined to enter upon
some temporal government, prepares himself all his life long, and that he may
obtain some dignity, lays out his money, spends his time, and submits to endless
troubles; what shall we deserve, who draw near to the kingdom of heaven with
such negligence, and both show no earnestness before we have received, and
after having received are again negligent? Nay, this is the very reason why we
are negligent after having received, that we did not watch before we had
received. Therefore many, after they have received, immediately have returned
to their former vomit, and have become more wicked, and drawn upon
themselves a more severe punishment; when having been delivered from their
former sins, herein they have more grievously provoked the Judge, that having
been delivered from so great a disease, still they did not learn sobriety, but that
has happened unto them, which Christ threatened to the paralytic man, saying,
"Behold you are made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto you"
[John 5:14]: and which He also predicted of the Jews, that "the last state shall be
worse than the first." [Matthew 12:45] For if, says He, showing that by their
ingratitude they should bring upon them the worst of evils, "if I had not come,
and spoken unto them, they had not had sin" [John 15:22]; so that the guilt of
sins committed after these benefits is doubled and quadrupled, in that, after the
honour put upon us, we show ourselves ungrateful and wicked. And the Laver of
Baptism helps not a whit to procure for us a milder punishment. And consider: a
man has gotten grievous sins by committing murder or adultery, or some other
crime: these were remitted through Baptism. For there is no sin, no impiety,
which does not yield and give place to this gift; for the Grace is Divine. A man
has again committed adultery and murder; the former adultery is indeed done
away, the murder forgiven, and not brought up again to his charge, "for the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance" [Romans 11:29]; but for those

committed after Baptism he suffers a punishment as great as he would if both the
former sins were brought up again, and many worse than these. For the guilt is
no longer simply equal, but doubled and tripled. Look: in proof that the penalty
of these sins is greater, hear what St. Paul says: "He that despised Moses' law
died without mercy, under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot
the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant an unholy thing, and
has done despite unto the Spirit of grace?" [Hebrews 10:28-29]
Perhaps we have now deterred many from receiving baptism. Not however
with this intention have we so spoken, but on purpose that having received it,
they may continue in temperance and much moderation. 'But I am afraid,' says
one. If you were afraid, you would have received and guarded it. 'Nay,' says he,
'but this is the very reason why I do not receive it—that I am frightened.' And are
you not afraid to depart thus? 'God is merciful,' says he. Receive baptism then,
because He is merciful and ready to help. But you, where to be in earnest is the
thing required, dost not allege this mercifulness; you think of this only where
you have a mind to do so. And yet that was the time to resort to God's mercy,
and we shall then be surest of obtaining it, when we do our part. For he that has
cast the whole matter upon God, and, after his baptism, sins, as being man it is
likely, he may, and repents, shall obtain mercy; whereas he that prevaricates with
God's mercy, and departs this life with no portion in that grace, shall have his
punishment without a word to be said for him. 'But how if he depart,' say you,
'after having had the grace vouchsafed to him?' He will depart empty again of all
good works. For it is impossible, yes, it is in my opinion impossible, that the
man who upon such hopes dallied with baptism should have effected ought
generous and good. And why do you harbor such fear, and presume upon the
uncertain chance of the future? Why not convert this fear into labor and
earnestness, and you shall be great and admirable? Which is best, to fear or to
labor? Suppose some one to have placed you, having nothing to do, in a tottering
house, saying, Look for the decaying roof to fall upon your head: for perhaps it