SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the prophecy which is accompanied by

intellective and imaginative vision is more excellent than that
which is accompanied by intellective vision alone?
Objection 1: It would seem that the prophecy which has intellective
and imaginative vision is more excellent than that which is
accompanied by intellective vision alone. For Augustine says (Gen.
ad lit. xii, 9): "He is less a prophet, who sees in spirit nothing but the
signs representative of things, by means of the images of things
corporeal: he is more a prophet, who is merely endowed with the
understanding of these signs; but most of all is he a prophet, who
excels in both ways," and this refers to the prophet who has
intellective together with imaginative vision. Therefore this kind of
prophecy is more excellent.
Objection 2: Further, the greater a thing's power is, the greater the
distance to which it extends. Now the prophetic light pertains chiefly
to the mind, as stated above (Question 173, Article 2). Therefore
apparently the prophecy that extends to the imagination is greater
than that which is confined to the intellect.
Objection 3: Further, Jerome (Prol. in Lib. Reg.) distinguishes the
"prophets" from the "sacred writers." Now all those whom he calls
prophets (such as Isaias, Jeremias, and the like) had intellective
together with imaginative vision: but not those whom he calls sacred
writers, as writing by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost (such as Job,
David, Solomon, and the like). Therefore it would seem more proper
to call prophets those who had intellective together with imaginative
vision, than those who had intellective vision alone.
Objection 4: Further, Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. i) that "it is
impossible for the Divine ray to shine on us, except as screened
round about by the many-colored sacred veils." Now the prophetic
revelation is conveyed by the infusion of the divine ray. Therefore it
seems that it cannot be without the veils of phantasms.
On the contrary, A gloss says at the beginning of the Psalter that
"the most excellent manner of prophecy is when a man prophesies
by the mere inspiration of the Holy Ghost, apart from any outward
assistance of deed, word, vision, or dream."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.3.

I answer that, The excellence of the means is measured chiefly by
the end. Now the end of prophecy is the manifestation of a truth that
surpasses the faculty of man. Wherefore the more effective this
manifestation is, the more excellent the prophecy. But it is evident
that the manifestation of divine truth by means of the bare
contemplation of the truth itself, is more effective than that which is
conveyed under the similitude of corporeal things, for it approaches
nearer to the heavenly vision whereby the truth is seen in God's
essence. Hence it follows that the prophecy whereby a supernatural
truth is seen by intellectual vision, is more excellent than that in
which a supernatural truth is manifested by means of the similitudes
of corporeal things in the vision of the imagination.
Moreover the prophet's mind is shown thereby to be more lofty: even
as in human teaching the hearer, who is able to grasp the bare
intelligible truth the master propounds, is shown to have a better
understanding than one who needs to be taken by the hand and
helped by means of examples taken from objects of sense. Hence it
is said in commendation of David's prophecy (2 Kgs. 23:3): "The
strong one of Israel spoke to me," and further on (2 Kgs. 23:4): "As
the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, shineth in the morning
without clouds."
Reply to Objection 1: When a particular supernatural truth has to be
revealed by means of corporeal images, he that has both, namely the
intellectual light and the imaginary vision, is more a prophet than he
that has only one, because his prophecy is more perfect; and it is in
this sense that Augustine speaks as quoted above. Nevertheless the
prophecy in which the bare intelligible truth is revealed is greater
than all.
Reply to Objection 2: The same judgment does not apply to things
that are sought for their own sake, as to things sought for the sake
of something else. For in things sought for their own sake, the
agent's power is the more effective according as it extends to more
numerous and more remote objects; even so a physician is thought
more of, if he is able to heal more people, and those who are further
removed from health. on the other hand, in things sought only for the
sake of something else, that agent would seem to have greater
power, who is able to achieve his purpose with fewer means and
those nearest to hand: thus more praise is awarded the physician
who is able to heal a sick person by means of fewer and more gentle
remedies. Now, in the prophetic knowledge, imaginary vision is