the region," [Acts 13:49] [διεφέρετο], instead of [διεκομίζετο], "was carried or
conveyed through (it)." (d) "But the Jews stirred up the devout and honorable
women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution against Paul and
Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts." [Acts 13:50] "The devout
women," (b) instead of the proselyte-women. They did not stop at "envy," but
added deeds also. (e) Do you see what they effected by their opposing the
preaching? To what dishonor they brought these ("honorable women")? "But
they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came unto Iconium." [Acts
13:51] Here now they used that terrible sign which Christ enjoined, "If any
receive you not, shake off the dust from your feet" [Matthew 10:14; Mark 6:11];
but these did it upon no light ground, but because they were driven away by
them. This was no hurt to the disciples; on the contrary, they the more continued
in the word: "And the disciples were filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost"
[Acts 13:52] for the suffering of the teacher does not check his boldness, but
makes the disciple more courageous.
"And it came to pass in Iconium, that they went both together into the
synagogue of the Jews." [Acts 14:1] Again they entered into the synagogues. See
how far they were from becoming more timid! Having said, "We turn unto the
Gentiles," nevertheless (by going into the synagogues) they superabundantly
fortify their own justification (with their Jewish brethren). "So that," it says, "a
great multitude both of Jews and Greeks believed." For it is likely they
discoursed as to Greeks also. "But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles,
and made their minds evil affected against the brethren." [Acts 14:2] Together
(with themselves) now they took to stirring up the Gentiles too, as not being
themselves sufficient. Then why did the Apostles not go forth thence? Why, they
were not driven away, only attacked. "Long time therefore abode they speaking
boldly in the Lord, which gave testimony unto the word of His grace, and
granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands." [Acts 14:3] This caused
their boldness; or rather, of their boldness indeed their own hearty good-will was
the cause— therefore it is that for a long while they work no signs— while the

conversion of the hearers was (the effect) of the signs, though their boldness also
contributed somewhat. "But the multitude of the city was divided: and part held
with the Jews, and part with the Apostles." [Acts 14:4] No small matter this
dividing. And this was what the Lord said, "I am not come to bring peace, but a
sword." [Matthew 10:34] "And when there was an assault made both of the
Gentiles, and also of the Jews with their rulers, to use them despitefully, and to
stone them, they were aware of it, and fled unto Lystra and Derbe, cities of
Lycaonia, and unto the region that lies round about: and there they preached the
Gospel." [Acts 14:5-7] Again, as if they purposely wished to extend the
preaching after it was increased, they once more sent them out. See on all
occasions the persecutions working great good, and defeating the persecutors,
and making the persecuted illustrious. For having come to Lystra, he works a
great miracle, by raising the lame man. "And there sat a certain man at Lystra,
impotent in his feet, being a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had
walked: the same heard Paul speak: who steadfastly beholding him, and
perceiving that he had faith to be healed, said with a loud voice"— why with a
loud voice? That the multitude should believe— "Stand upright on your feet." (v.
8, 9.) But observe, he gave heed, it says, to the things spoken by Paul. Do you
mark the elevation of the man's mind ([φιλοσοφίαν])? He was nothing defeated
([παρεβλάβη]) by his lameness for earnestness of hearing. "Who fixing his eyes
upon him, and perceiving," it says, "that he had faith to be made whole." He was
already predisposed in purpose of mind. And yet in the case of the others, it was
the reverse: for first receiving healing in their bodies, they were then taken in
hand for cure of their souls, but this man not so. It seems to me, that Paul saw
into his soul. "And he leaped," it says, "and walked." [Acts 14:10] It was a proof
of his perfect cure, the leaping. "And when the people saw what Paul had done,
they lifted up their voices, saying in the speech of Lycaonia, The gods have come
down to us in the likeness of men. And they called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul,
Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker. Then the priest of Jupiter, which
was before their city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have