contrite heart; on this account they could say, "Nevertheless in a contrite heart
and a humble spirit let us be accepted." Thus even after they had fallen into the
furnace they were exceedingly humbled, even more so than they were before.
For when they saw the miracle that was wrought, thinking themselves unworthy
of that deliverance, they were brought lower in humility. For when we are
persuaded that we have received great benefits beyond our desert, then we are
particularly grieved. And yet what benefit had they received beyond their desert?
They had given themselves up to the furnace; they had been taken captive for the
sins of others; for they were still young; and they murmured not, nor were
indignant, nor did they say, What good is it to us that we serve God, or what
advantage have we in worshiping Him? This man is impious, and has become
our lord. We are punished with the idolatrous by an idolatrous king. We have
been led into captivity. We are deprived of our country, our freedom, all our
paternal goods, we have become prisoners and slaves, we are enslaved to a
barbarous king. None of these things did they say. But what? "We have sinned
and committed iniquity." And not for themselves but for others they offer
prayers. Because, say they, "You have delivered us to a hateful and a wicked
king." Again, Daniel, being a second time cast into the pit, said, "For God has
remembered me." Wherefore should He not remember you, O Daniel, when you
glorified Him before the king, saying, "Not for any wisdom that I have"? [Daniel
2:30] But when you were cast into the den of lions, because thou did not obey
that most wicked decree, wherefore should He not remember you? For this very
reason surely should He. Were you not cast into it on His account? "Yea truly,"
he says, "but I am a debtor for many things." And if he said such things after
having displayed so great virtue, what should we say after this? But hear what
David says, "If He thus say, I have no delight in you, behold here am I, let Him
do to me as seems good unto Him." [2 Samuel 15:26] And yet he had an infinite
number of good things to speak of. And Eli also says, "It is the Lord: let Him do
what seems Him good." [1 Samuel 3:18]
This is the part of well-disposed servants, not only in His mercies, but in

His corrections, and in punishments wholly to submit to Him. For how is it not
absurd, if we bear with masters beating their servants, knowing that they will
spare them, because they are their own; and yet suppose that God in punishing
will not spare? This also Paul has intimated, saying, "Whether we live or die, we
are the Lord's." [Romans 14:8] A man, we say, wishes not his property to be
diminished, he knows how he punishes, he is punishing his own servants. But
surely no one of us spares more than He Who brought us into being out of
nothing, Who makes the sun to rise, Who causes rain; Who breathed our life into
us, Who gave His own Son for us.
But as I said before, and on which account I have said all that I have said,
let us be humble-minded as we ought, let us be moderate as we ought. Let it not
be to us an occasion of being puffed up. Are you humble, and humbler than all
men? Be not high-minded on that account, neither reproach others, lest you lose
your boast. For this very cause you are humble, that you may be delivered from
the madness of pride; if therefore through your humility you fall into that
madness, it were better for you not to be humble. For hear Paul saying, "Sin
works death in me by that which is good, that sin by the commandment might
become exceeding sinful." [Romans 7:13] When it enters into your thought to
admire yourself because you are humble, consider your Master, to what He
descended, and you will no longer admire yourself, nor praise yourself, but wilt
deride yourself as having done nothing. Consider yourself altogether to be a
debtor. Whatever you have done, remember that parable, "Which of you having a
servant...will say unto him, when he has come in, Sit down to meat?...I say unto
you, Nay...but stay and serve me." [From Luke 17:7-8] Do we return thanks to
our servants, for waiting upon us? By no means. Yet God is thankful to us, who
serve not Him, but do that which is expedient for ourselves.
But let not us be so affected, as if He owed us thanks, that He may owe us
the more, but as if we were discharging a debt. For the matter truly is a debt, and
all that we do is of debt. For if when we purchase slaves with our money, we
wish them to live altogether for us, and whatever they have to have it for