Mary is the first to share in this new revelation of God and, within the same, in this new
"self-giving" of God. Therefore she proclaims: "For he who is mighty has done great
things for me, and holy is his name." Her words reflect a joy of spirit which is difficult to
express: "My spirit rejoices in God my Savior." Indeed, "the deepest truth about God and
the salvation of man is made clear to us in Christ, who is at the same time the mediator
and the fullness of all revelation." In her exultation Mary confesses that she finds

herself in the very heart of this fullness of Christ. She is conscious that the promise made
to the fathers, first of all "to Abraham and to his posterity for ever," is being fulfilled in
herself. She is thus aware that concentrated within herself as the mother of Christ is the
whole salvific economy, in which "from age to age" is manifested he who as the God of
the Covenant, "remembers his mercy."

37. The Church, which from the beginning has modeled her earthly journey on that of the
Mother of God, constantly repeats after her the words of the Magnificat. From the depths
of the Virgin's faith at the Annunciation and the Visitation, the Church derives the truth
about the God of the Covenant: the God who is Almighty and does "great things" for
man: "holy is his name." In the Magnificat the Church sees uprooted that sin which is
found at the outset of the earthly history of man and woman, the sin of disbelief and of
"little faith" in God. In contrast with the "suspicion" which the "father of lies" sowed in
the heart of Eve the first woman, Mary, whom tradition is wont to call the "new Eve"
and the true "Mother of the living," boldly proclaims the undimmed truth about God:
the holy and almighty God, who from the beginning is the source of all gifts, he who "has
done great things" in her, as well as in the whole universe. In the act of creation God
gives existence to all that is. In creating man, God gives him the dignity of the image and
likeness of himself in a special way as compared with all earthly creatures. Moreover, in
his desire to give God gives himself in the Son, notwithstanding man's sin: "He so loved
the world that he gave his only Son" (Jn. 3:16). Mary is the first witness of this marvelous
truth, which will be fully accomplished through "the works and words" (cf. Acts 1:1) of
her Son and definitively through his Cross and Resurrection.
The Church, which even "amid trials and tribulations" does not cease repeating with
Mary the words of the Magnificat, is sustained by the power of God's truth, proclaimed
on that occasion with such extraordinary simplicity. At the same time, by means of this
truth about God, the Church desires to shed light upon the difficult and sometimes
tangled paths of man's earthly existence. The Church's journey, therefore, near the end of
the second Christian Millennium, involves a renewed commitment to her mission.
Following him who said of himself: "(God) has anointed me to preach good news to the
poor" (cf. Lk. 4:18), the Church has sought from generation to generation and still seeks
today to accomplish that same mission.