worse mischief, when one who teaches well in words, impugns the teaching by
his deeds. This has been the cause of many evils in the Churches. Wherefore
pardon me, I beseech you, that my discourse dwells long on this evil affection
([πάθει]). Many take a deal of pains to be able to stand up in public, and make a
long speech: and if they get applause from the multitude, it is to them as if they
gained the very kingdom (of heaven): but if silence follows the close of their
speech, it is worse than hell itself, the dejection that falls upon their spirits from
the silence! This has turned the Churches upside down, because both you desire
not to hear a discourse calculated to lead you to compunction, but one that may
delight you from the sound and composition of the words, as though you were
listening to singers and minstrels ([κιθαρῳδὥν καὶ κιθαριστὣν], supra p. 68):
and we too act a preposterous and pitiable part in being led by your lusts, when
we ought to root them out. And so it is just as if the father of a poor coldblooded child (already, more delicate than it ought to be), should, although it is
so feeble, give it cake and cold (drink) and whatever only pleases the child, and
take no account of what might do it good; and then, being reproved by the
physicians, should excuse himself by saying, "What can I do? I cannot bear to
see the child crying." Thou poor, wretched creature, thou betrayer! For I cannot
call such a one a father: how much better were it for you, by paining him for a
short time, to restore him to health forever, than to make this short-lived pleasure
the foundation of a lasting sorrow? Just such is our case, when we idly busy
ourselves about beautiful expressions, and the composition and harmony of our
sentences, in order that we may please, not profit: (when) we make it our aim to
be admired, not to instruct; to delight, not prick to the heart; to be applauded and
depart with praise, not to correct men's manners! Believe me, I speak not other
than I feel— when as I discourse I hear myself applauded, at the moment indeed
I feel it as a man (for why should I not own the truth?): I am delighted, and give
way to the pleasurable feeling: but when I get home, and bethink me that those
who applauded received no benefit from my discourse, but that whatever benefit
they ought to have got, they lost it while applauding and praising, I am in pain,

and groan, and weep, and feel as if I had spoken all in vain. I say to myself:
"What profit comes to me from my labors, while the hearers do not choose to
benefit by what they hear from us?" Nay, often have I thought to make a rule
which should prevent all applauding, and persuade you to listen with silence and
becoming orderliness. But bear with me, I beseech you, and be persuaded by me,
and, if it seem good to you, let us even now establish this rule, that no hearer be
permitted to applaud in the midst of any person's discourse, but if he will needs
admire, let him admire in silence: there is none to prevent him: and let all his
study and eager desire be set upon the receiving the things spoken.— What
means that noise again? I am laying down a rule against this very thing, and you
have not the forbearance even to hear me!— Many will be the good effects of
this regulation: it will be a discipline of philosophy. Even the heathen
philosophers— we hear of their discoursing, and nowhere do we find that noisy
applause accompanied their words: we hear of the Apostles, making public
speeches, and yet nowhere do the accounts add, that in the midst of their
speeches the hearers interrupted the speakers with loud expressions of
approbation. A great gain will this be to us. But let us establish this rule: in quiet
let us all hear, and speak the whole (of what we have to say). For if indeed it
were the case that we departed retaining what we had heard, what I insist upon
is, that even so the praise is not beneficial — but not to go too much into
particulars (on this point); let none tax me with rudeness — but since nothing is
gained by it, nay, it is even mischievous, let us loose the hindrance, let us put a
stop to the boundings, let us retrench the gambollings of the soul. Christ spoke
publicly on the Mount: yet no one said anything, until He had finished His
discourse. I do not rob those who wish to be applauded: on the contrary, I make
them to be more admired. It is far better that one's hearer, having listened in
silence, should by his memory throughout all time applaud, both at home and
abroad, than that having lost all he should return home empty, not possessed of
that which was the subject of his applauses. For how shall the hearer be
otherwise than ridiculous? Nay, he will be deemed a flatterer, and his praises no