whatever is seen is seen at an angle. But this does not apply to the
glorified bodies. Therefore they will not have actual sense of sight.
The minor is proved thus. Whenever a thing is seen at an angle, the
angle must be proportionate to the distance of the object seen:
because what is seen from a greater distance is less seen and at a
lesser angle, so that the angle may be so small that nothing is seen
of the object. Therefore if the glorified eye sees at an angle, it follows
that it sees things within a certain distance, and that consequently it
does not see a thing from a greater distance than we see now: and
this would seem very absurd. And thus it would seem that the sense
of sight will not be actual in glorified bodies.
On the contrary, A power conjoined to its act is more perfect than
one not so conjoined. Now human nature in the blessed will be in its
greatest perfection. Therefore all the senses will be actual there.
Further, the sensitive powers are nearer to the soul than the body is.
But the body will be rewarded or punished on account of the merits
or demerits of the soul. Therefore all the senses in the blessed will
also be rewarded and in the wicked will be punished, with regard to
pleasure and pain or sorrow which consist in the operation of the
senses.
I answer that, There are two opinions on this question. For some say
that in the glorified bodies there will be all the sensitive powers, but
that only two senses will be in act, namely touch and sight; nor will
this be owing to defective senses, but from lack of medium and
object; and that the senses will not be useless, because they will
conduce to the integrity of human nature and will show forth the
wisdom of their Creator. But this is seemingly untrue, because the
medium in these senses is the same as in the others. For in the sight
the medium is the air, and this is also the medium in hearing and
smelling (De Anima ii, 7). Again, the taste, like the touch, has the
medium in contact, since taste is a kind of touch (De Anima ii, 9).
Smell also which is the object of the sense of smell will be there,
since the Church sings that the bodies of the saints will be a most
sweet smell. There will also be vocal praise in heaven; hence a gloss
says on Ps. 149:6, "The high praises of God shall be in their mouth"
that "hearts and tongues shall not cease to praise God." The same is
had on the authority of a gloss on 2 Esdra 12:27, "With singing and
with cymbals." Wherefore, according to others we may say that
smelling and hearing will be in act there, but taste will not be in act,
in the sense of being affected by the taking of food or drink, as

appears from what we have said (Question 81, Article 4): unless
perchance we say that there will be taste in act through the tongue
being affected by some neighboring humor.
Reply to Objection 1: The qualities perceived by the touch are those
which constitute the animal body. Wherefore the body of an animal
has, through its tangible qualities according to the present state of
life, a natural aptitude to be affected with a natural and spiritual
alteration by the object of touch. For this reason the touch is said to
be the most material of the senses, since it has a greater measure of
material alteration connected with it. Yet material alteration is only
accidentally related to the act of sensation which is effected by a
spiritual alteration. Consequently the glorified bodies, which by
reason of their impassibility are immune from natural alteration, will
be subject only to spiritual alteration by tangible qualities. Thus it
was with the body of Adam, which could neither be burned by fire,
nor pierced by sword, although he had the sense of such things.
Reply to Objection 2: Taste, in so far as it is the perception of food,
will not be in act; but perhaps it will be possible in so far as it is
cognizant of flavors in the way mentioned above.
Reply to Objection 3: Some have considered smell to be merely a
volatile evaporation. But this opinion cannot be true; which is
evident from the fact that vultures hasten to a corpse on perceiving
the odor from a very great distance, whereas it would be impossible
for an evaporation to travel from the corpse to a place so remote,
even though the whole corpse were to be dissolved into vapor. This
is confirmed by the fact that sensible objects at an equal distance
exercise their influence in all directions: so that smell affects the
medium sometimes, and the instrument of sensation with a spiritual
alteration, without any evaporation reaching the organ. That some
evaporation should be necessary is due to the fact that smell in
bodies is mixed with humidity; wherefore it is necessary for
dissolution to take place in order for the smell to be perceived. But in
the glorified bodies odor will be in its ultimate perfection, being
nowise hampered by humidity: wherefore it will affect the organ with
a spiritual alteration, like the odor of a volatile evaporation. Such will
be the sense of smell in the saints, because it will not be hindered by
any humidity: and it will take cognizance not only of the excellences
of odors, as happens with us now on account of the very great
humidity of the brain, but also of the minutest differences of odors.