For this cause even the awful mysteries, so full of that great salvation,
which are celebrated at every communion, are called a sacrifice of thanksgiving,
because they are the commemoration of many benefits, and they signify the very
sum of God's care for us, and by all means they work upon us to be thankful. For
if His being born of a virgin was a great miracle, and the evangelist said in
amaze, "now all this was done;" His being also slain, what place shall we find
for that? Tell me. I mean, if to be born is called "all this;" to be crucified, and to
pour forth His blood, and to give Himself to us for a spiritual feast and banquet
—what can that be called? Let us therefore give Him thanks continually, and let
this precede both our words and our works.
But let us be thankful not for our own blessings alone, but also for those of
others; for in this way we shall be able both to destroy our envy, and to rivet our
charity, and make it more genuine. Since it will not even be possible for you to
go on envying them, in behalf of whom you give thanks to the Lord.
Wherefore, as you know, the priest also enjoins to give thanks for the
world, for the former things, for the things that are now, for what has been done
to us before, for what shall befall us hereafter, when that sacrifice is set forth.
For this is the thing both to free us from earth, and to remove us into
heaven, and to make us angels instead of men. Because they too form a choir,
and give thanks to God for His good things bestowed on us, saying, "Glory to
God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will towards men." "And what is
this to us, that are not upon earth, nor are men?" "Nay, it is very much to us, for
we have been taught so to love our fellow serv ants, as even to account their
blessings ours."
Wherefore Paul also, everywhere in his epistles, gives thanks for God's
gracious acts to the world.
Let us too therefore continually give thanks, for our own blessings, and for
those of others, alike for the small and for the great. For though the gift be small,
it is made great by being God's gift, or rather, there is nothing small that comes
from Him, not only because it is bestowed by Him, but also in its very nature.

And to pass over all the rest, which exceed the sand in multitude; what is
equal to the dispensation that has taken place for our sake? In that what was
more precious to Him than all, even His only-begotten Son, Him He gave for us
His enemies; and not only gave, but after giving, did even set Him before us as
food; Himself doing all things that were for our good, both in giving Him, and in
making us thankful for all this. For because man is for the most part unthankful,
He does Himself everywhere take in hand and bring about what is for our good.
And what He did with respect to the Jews, by places, and times, and feasts,
reminding them of His benefits, that He did in this case also, by the manner of
the sacrifice bringing us to a perpetual remembrance of His bounty in these
things.
No one has so labored that we should be approved, and great, and in all
things right-minded, as the God who made us. Wherefore both against our will
He befriends us often, and without our knowledge oftener than not. And if you
marvel at what I have said, I point to this as having occurred not to any ordinary
person, but to the blessed Paul. For even that blessed man, when in much danger
and affliction, often besought God that the temptations might depart from him:
nevertheless God regarded not his request, but his profit, and to signify this He
said, "My grace is sufficient for you, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:9] So that before He has told him the reason, He
benefits him against his will, and without his knowing it.
5. Now what great thing does He ask, in requiring us to be thankful in
return for such tender care? Let us then obey, and everywhere keep up this. Since
neither were the Jews by anything ruined so much, as by being unthankful; those
many stripes, one after another, were brought upon them by nothing else than
this; or rather even before those stripes this had ruined and corrupted their soul.
"For the hope of the unthankful," says one, "is like the winter's hoar frost;"
[Wisdom 16:29] it benumbs and deadens the soul, as that does our bodies.
And this springs from pride, and from thinking one's self worthy of
something. But the contrite will acknowledge grounds of thanksgiving to God,