will obtain some pardon from God. But if you remain longer at enmity, that
enmity is no longer the result of your being suddenly carried away by anger and
resentment, but of wickedness, and of a foul spirit, and one which makes a
practice of malice! And this is not the only terrible thing, that you deprive
yourself of pardon, but that the right course becomes still more difficult. For
when one day is past, the shame becomes greater; and when the second has
arrived, it is still further increased; and if it reach a third, and a fourth day, it will
add a fifth. Thus the five become ten; the ten, twenty; the twenty an hundred;
and thenceforth the wound will become incurable; for as time goes on, the
breach becomes wider. But do thou, O man, give way to none of these irrational
passions; nor be ashamed, nor blush, nor say within yourself, "A short time ago
we called each other such names, and said a vast number of things fit or not fit
to be spoken; and shall I now hurry at once to a reconciliation? Who then will
not blame my excessive easiness?" I answer, no one who has sense will blame
your easiness; but when you remain implacable, then, all persons will deride
you. Then you will give to the devil the advantage of this wide breach. For the
enmity becomes then more difficult to be got rid of, not by mere lapse of time,
but from the circumstances too that take place in the meanwhile. For as "charity
covers a multitude of sins," [1 Peter 4:8] so enmity gives a being to sins that do
not exist, and all persons henceforth, are deemed worthy of credit who turn
accusers; who rejoice in the ills of others, and blaze abroad what is disgraceful in
their conduct.
14. Knowing all these things then, make the first advance to a brother; lay
hold of him before he has entirely shrunk away from you; and should it be
necessary, to run through all the city on the same day; should it be necessary to
go beyond the walls, or to take a long journey; still leaving all other things that
may be in hand, attend only to this one work of reconciling your brother. For if
the work be laborious, reflect that it is for God's sake you undergo all this, and
you shall receive sufficient consolation. Stir up your soul also when it is
shrinking, and backward, and bashful, and ashamed, by perpetually harping on

this theme and saying, Why are you delaying? Why are you shrinking and
holding back? Our concern is not for money, nor for any other of these fleeting
things, but for our salvation. God bids us do all these things, and all things
should be secondary to His commands. This matter is a sort of spiritual
merchandise. Let us not neglect it, let us not be slothful. Let our enemy too
understand that we have taken much pains, in order to do what is well-pleasing
unto God. And though he may again insult, or strike us, or do any other such
thing of a still more grievous kind, let us sustain all things courageously, since
we are not so much benefitting him thereby, as ourselves. Of all good works, this
shall most especially befriend us on That Day. We have sinned and offended in
many and great matters, and have provoked our Lord. Through His
lovingkindness He has given us this way of reconciliation. Let us, then, not
betray this good treasure. For had He not power to charge us simply to make
reconciliation, and not have any reward assigned to it? For whom has He to
gainsay or rectify His appointment? Nevertheless, through His great
lovingkindness, He has promised us a large and unspeakable reward, and one
which we must be especially desirous to obtain, the pardon of our sins; thus also
making this our obedience more easy of performance.
15. What allowance then can be made for us, if even when we might
receive so great a reward we still do not obey the Lawgiver, but persist in our
contempt; for that this is a contempt is plain from hence. If the Emperor had laid
down a law, that all those who were enemies should be reconciled to one
another, or have their heads cut off, should we not every one make haste to a
reconciliation with his neighbour? Yes! truly, I think so! What excuse then have
we, in not ascribing the same honour to the Lord, that we should do to those who
are our fellow-servants? For this reason we are commanded to say, "Forgive us
our debts, as we forgive our debtors." [Matthew 6:12] What can be more mild,
what more merciful, than this precept! He has made you a judge of the pardon of
your own offenses! If you forgive few things, He forgives you few! If you
forgive many things, He forgives you many! If you pardon from the heart, and