reproofs, (which [shame] the sound of the prophet's tongue with mighty and
transparent clearness exposed more evidently,) cast John into the prison: like one
who was naked and attempting to put out the light, that he might be in the dark
again; or rather he himself dared not put it out, but, as it were, placed it in the
house under a bushel; and that wretched and miserable woman compelled it to
be done. But not even so could they cover the reproof, nay, they lit it up the
more. For both they that asked, Wherefore does John dwell in prison? Learned
the reason, and all they that since have dwelt on land or sea, who then lived, or
now live, and who shall be hereafter, both have known and shall know clearly
these wicked tragedies, both that of their lewdness and that of their
bloodguiltiness, and no time shall be able to wipe out the remembrance of them.
So great a thing is virtue: so immortal is its memory, so completely even by
words only does it strike down its adversaries. For wherefore did he cast him
into the prison? Wherefore did he not despise him? Was he going to drag him
before the judgment-seat? Did he demand vengeance upon him for his adultery?
Was not what he said then simply a reproof? Why then does he fear and tremble?
Was it not words and talk merely? But they stung him more than deeds. He led
him not to any judgment-seat, but he dragged him before that other tribunal of
conscience; and he sets as judges upon him all who freely gave their verdicts in
their thought. Therefore the tyrant trembled, unable to endure the lustre of virtue.
Do you see how great a thing is philosophy? It made a prisoner more lustrous
than a king, and the latter is afraid and trembles before him. He indeed only put
him in bonds; but that polluted woman rushed on to his slaughter also, although
the rebuke was leveled rather against him, [than herself.] For he did not then
meet "her" and say, Why do you cohabit with the king? Not that she was
guiltless, (how should she be so?) but he wished by that other means to put all to
rights. Wherefore he blamed the king, and yet not him with violence of manner.
For he did not say, O polluted and all-polluted and lawless and profane one, you
have trodden under foot the law of God, you have despised the commandments,
you have made your might law. None of these things; but even in his rebukings

great was the gentleness of the man, great his meekness. For, "It is not lawful for
you," he says, "to have your brother Philip's wife." The words are those of one
who teaches rather than reproves, instructs rather than chastens, who composes
to order rather than exposes, who amends rather than tramples on him. But, as I
said, the light is hateful to the thief, and the mere sight of the just man is odious
to sinners; "for he is grievous unto us even to behold." [Wisdom 2:15] For they
cannot bear his radiance, even as diseased eyes cannot bear the sun's. But to
many of the wicked he is grievous not to behold only, but even to hear of. And
therefore that polluted and all-polluted woman, the procuress of her girl, yea
rather her murderess, although she had never seen him nor heard his voice,
rushed on to his slaughter; and prepares her whom she brought up in
lasciviousnss to proceed also to murder, so extravagantly did she fear him.
4. And what says she? "Give me here in a charger the head of John the
Baptist." [Matthew 14:8] Whither do you rush over precipices, wretched and
miserable one? What? Is the accuser before you? Is he in sight and troubles you?
Others said, "He is grievous unto us even to behold;" but to her, as I said, he was
grievous to even hear of. Wherefore she says, "Give me here in a charger the
head of John." And yet because of you he inhabits a prison, and is laden with
chains, and you are free to wanton over your love and to say, 'So completely
have I subdued the king, that though publicly reproached he yielded not, nor
desisted from his passion, nor tore asunder his adulterous connection with me,
but even put him that reproached him in bonds.' Why are you mad and rabid,
when even after that reproof of his sin you retain your paramour? Why do you
seek a table of furies, and preparest a banquet of avenging demons? Do you see
how nothing-worth, how cowardly, how unmanly, is vice; how when it shall
most succeed, it then becomes more feeble? For this woman was not so much
disturbed before she had cast John into prison, as she is troubled after he is
bound, and she is urgent, saying, "Give me here in a charger the head of John."
And wherefore so? 'I fear,' she says, 'lest there be any hushing up of his murder,
lest any should rescue him from his peril.' And wherefore do you not require the