SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.5.

On the contrary, The authority of Gregory suffices.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 1,2,3), pride denotes
immoderate desire of one's own excellence, a desire, to wit, that is
not in accord with right reason. Now it must be observed that all
excellence results from a good possessed. Such a good may be
considered in three ways. First, in itself. For it is evident that the
greater the good that one has, the greater the excellence that one
derives from it. Hence when a man ascribes to himself a good
greater than what he has, it follows that his appetite tends to his own
excellence in a measure exceeding his competency: and thus we
have the third species of pride, namely "boasting of having what one
has not."
Secondly, it may be considered with regard to its cause, in so far as
to have a thing of oneself is more excellent than to have it of
another. Hence when a man esteems the good he has received of
another as though he had it of himself, the result is that his appetite
is borne towards his own excellence immoderately. Now one is
cause of one's own good in two ways, efficiently and meritoriously:
and thus we have the first two species of pride, namely "when a man
thinks he has from himself that which he has from God," or "when he
believes that which he has received from above to be due to his own
merits."
Thirdly, it may be considered with regard to the manner of having it,
in so far as a man obtains greater excellence through possessing
some good more excellently than other men; the result again being
that his appetite is borne inordinately towards his own excellence:
and thus we have the fourth species of pride, which is "when a man
despises others and wishes to be singularly conspicuous."
Reply to Objection 1: A true judgment may be destroyed in two ways.
First, universally: and thus in matters of faith, a true judgment is
destroyed by unbelief. Secondly, in some particular matter of choice,
and unbelief does not do this. Thus a man who commits fornication,
judges that for the time being it is good for him to commit
fornication; yet he is not an unbeliever, as he would be, were he to
say that universally fornication is good. It is thus in the question in
point: for it pertains to unbelief to assert universally that there is a
good which is not from God, or that grace is given to men for their
merits, whereas, properly speaking, it belongs to pride and not to
unbelief, through inordinate desire of one's own excellence, to boast

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.5.

of one's goods as though one had them of oneself, or of one's own
merits.
Reply to Objection 2: Boasting is reckoned a species of lying, as
regards the outward act whereby a man falsely ascribes to himself
what he has not: but as regards the inward arrogance of the heart it
is reckoned by Gregory to be a species of pride.
Reply to Objection 3: The ungrateful man ascribes to himself what he
has from another: wherefore the first two species of pride pertain to
ingratitude. To excuse oneself of a sin one has committed, belongs
to the third species, since by so doing a man ascribes to himself the
good of innocence which he has not. To aim presumptuously at what
is above one, would seem to belong chiefly to the fourth species,
which consists in wishing to be preferred to others.
Reply to Objection 4: The three mentioned by Anselm correspond to
the progress of any particular sin: for it begins by being conceived in
thought, then is uttered in word, and thirdly is accomplished in deed.
The twelve degrees mentioned by Bernard are reckoned by way of
opposition to the twelve degrees of humility, of which we have
spoken above (Question 161, Article 6). For the first degree of
humility is to "be humble in heart, and to show it in one's very
person, one's eyes fixed on the ground": and to this is opposed
"curiosity," which consists in looking around in all directions
curiously and inordinately. The second degree of humility is "to
speak few and sensible words, and not to be loud of voice": to this is
opposed "frivolity of mind," by which a man is proud of speech. The
third degree of humility is "not to be easily moved and disposed to
laughter," to which is opposed "senseless mirth." The fourth degree
of humility is "to maintain silence until one is asked," to which is
opposed "boasting". The fifth degree of humility is "to do nothing
but to what one is exhorted by the common rule of the monastery,"
to which is opposed "singularity," whereby a man wishes to seem
more holy than others. The sixth degree of humility is "to believe and
acknowledge oneself viler than all," to which is opposed
"arrogance," whereby a man sets himself above others. The seventh
degree of humility is "to think oneself worthless and unprofitable for
all purposes," to which is opposed "presumption," whereby a man
thinks himself capable of things that are above him. The eighth
degree of humility is "to confess one's sins," to which is opposed
"defense of one's sins." The ninth degree is "to embrace patience by