SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether nocturnal pollution is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that nocturnal pollution is a sin. For the
same things are the matter of merit and demerit. Now a man may
merit while he sleeps, as was the case with Solomon, who while
asleep obtained the gift of wisdom from the Lord (3 Kgs. 3:2, Par. 1).
Therefore a man may demerit while asleep; and thus nocturnal
pollution would seem to be a sin.
Objection 2: Further, whoever has the use of reason can sin. Now a
man has the use of reason while asleep, since in our sleep we
frequently discuss matters, choose this rather than that, consenting
to one thing, or dissenting to another. Therefore one may sin while
asleep, so that nocturnal pollution is not prevented by sleep from
being a sin, seeing that it is a sin according to its genus.
Objection 3: Further, it is useless to reprove and instruct one who
cannot act according to or against reason. Now man, while asleep, is
instructed and reproved by God, according to Job 33:15,16, "By a
dream in a vision by night, when deep sleep is wont to lay hold of
men] . . . Then He openeth the ears of men, and teaching instructeth
them in what they are to learn." Therefore a man, while asleep, can
act according to or against his reason, and this is to do good or
sinful actions, and thus it seems that nocturnal pollution is a sin.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 15): "When the same
image that comes into the mind of a speaker presents itself to the
mind of the sleeper, so that the latter is unable to distinguish the
imaginary from the real union of bodies, the flesh is at once moved,
with the result that usually follows such motions; and yet there is as
little sin in this as there is in speaking and therefore thinking about
such things while one is awake."
I answer that, Nocturnal pollution may be considered in two ways.
First, in itself; and thus it has not the character of a sin. For every sin
depends on the judgment of reason, since even the first movement
of the sensuality has nothing sinful in it, except in so far as it can be
suppressed by reason; wherefore in the absence of reason's
judgment, there is no sin in it. Now during sleep reason has not a
free judgment. For there is no one who while sleeping does not
regard some of the images formed by his imagination as though they

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.6.

were real, as stated above in the FP, Question 84, Article 8, ad 2.
Wherefore what a man does while he sleeps and is deprived of
reason's judgment, is not imputed to him as a sin, as neither are the
actions of a maniac or an imbecile.
Secondly, nocturnal pollution may be considered with reference to
its cause. This may be threefold. One is a bodily cause. For when
there is excess of seminal humor in the body, or when the humor is
disintegrated either through overheating of the body or some other
disturbance, the sleeper dreams things that are connected with the
discharge of this excessive or disintegrated humor: the same thing
happens when nature is cumbered with other superfluities, so that
phantasms relating to the discharge of those superfluities are
formed in the imagination. Accordingly if this excess of humor be
due to a sinful cause (for instance excessive eating or drinking),
nocturnal pollution has the character of sin from its cause: whereas
if the excess or disintegration of these superfluities be not due to a
sinful cause, nocturnal pollution is not sinful, neither in itself nor in
its cause.
A second cause of nocturnal pollution is on the part of the soul and
the inner man: for instance when it happens to the sleeper on
account of some previous thought. For the thought which preceded
while he was awake, is sometimes purely speculative, for instance
when one thinks about the sins of the flesh for the purpose of
discussion; while sometimes it is accompanied by a certain emotion
either of concupiscence or of abhorrence. Now nocturnal pollution is
more apt to arise from thinking about carnal sins with
concupiscence for such pleasures, because this leaves its trace and
inclination in the soul, so that the sleeper is more easily led in his
imagination to consent to acts productive of pollution. In this sense
the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 13) that "in so far as certain
movements in some degree pass" from the waking state to the state
of sleep, "the dreams of good men are better than those of any other
people": and Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 15) that "even during
sleep, the soul may have conspicuous merit on account of its good
disposition." Thus it is evident that nocturnal pollution may be sinful
on the part of its cause. on the other hand, it may happen that
nocturnal pollution ensues after thoughts about carnal acts, though
they were speculative, or accompanied by abhorrence, and then it is
not sinful, neither in itself nor in its cause.
The third cause is spiritual and external; for instance when by the