Lord has first bidden the servant unto His own table; and do you not bid Him, no
not even after this? He first has introduced you under His own roof; do you not
take Him in, so much as in the second place? He clad you, being naked; and do
you not even after this receive Him being a stranger? He first gave you to drink
out of His own cup, and do you not impart to Him so much as cold water? He
has made you drink of the Holy Spirit, and do you not even soothe His bodily
thirst? He has made you drink of the Spirit, when you were deserving of
punishment; and do you neglect Him even when thirsty, and this when it is out of
His own, that you are to do all these things? Do you not then esteem it a great
thing, to hold the cup out of which Christ is to drink, and to put it to His lips? Do
you see not that for the priest alone is it lawful to give the cup of His blood? But
I am by no means strict about this, says He; but though yourself should give, I
receive; though thou be a layman, I refuse it not. And I do not require such as I
have given: for not blood do I seek, but cold water. Consider to whom you are
giving drink, and tremble. Consider, you have become a priest of Christ, giv ing
with your own hand, not flesh but bread, not blood, but a cup of cold water. He
clothed you with a garment of salvation, and clothed you by Himself; do thou at
least by your servant clothe Him. He made you glorious in Heaven, do thou
deliver Him from shivering, and nakedness, and shame. He made you a fellowcitizen of angels, do thou impart to Him at least of the covering of your roof,
give house-room to Him at least as to your own servant. "I refuse not this
lodging and that, having opened to you the whole Heaven. I have delivered you
from a most grievous prison; this I do not require again, nor do I say, deliver
me; but if you would look upon me only, when I am bound, this suffices me for
refreshment. When thou were dead, I raised you; I require not this again of you,
but I say, visit me only when sick."
Now when His gifts are so great, and His demands exceeding easy, and we
do not supply even these; what deep of hell must we not deserve? Justly shall we
depart into the fire that is prepared for the devil and his angels, being more
insensible than any rock. For how great insensibility is it, tell me, for us, who

have received, and are to receive so much, to be slaves of money, from which we
shall a little while hence be separated even against our will? And others indeed
have given up even their life, and shed their blood; and do you not even give up
your superfluities for Heaven's sake, for the sake of so great crowns?
And of what favor can you be worthy? Of what justification? Who in your
sowing of the earth, gladly pourest forth all, and in lending to men at usury
sparest nothing; but in feeding your Lord through His poor art cruel and
inhuman?
Having then considered all these things, and calculated what we have
received, what we are to receive, what is required of us, let us show forth all our
diligence on the things spiritual. Let us become at length mild and humane, that
we may not draw down on ourselves the intolerable punishment. For what is
there that has not power to condemn us? Our having enjoyed so many and such
great benefits; our having no great thing required of us; our having such things
required, as we shall leave here even against our will; our exhibiting so much
liberality in our worldly matters. Why each one of these, even by itself, were
enough to condemn us; but when they all meet together, what hope will there be
of salvation?
In order then that we may escape all this condemnation, let us show forth
some bounty towards those who are in need. For thus shall we enjoy all the good
things, both here, and there; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and
ever. Amen.