are the sons of God, the makers of disturbance are sons of the devil.
What do you say? Do you excite contentions and fightings? And does any
ask who is so unhappy? Many there are who rejoice at evil, and who do rather
rend in pieces the Body of Christ, than did the soldiers pierce it with the spear, or
the Jews who struck it through with the nails. A less evil was that than this; those
Members, so cut through, again united, but these when torn off, if they be not
united here, will never be united, but remain apart from the Fullness. When you
are minded to war against your brother, bethink you that you war against the
members of Christ, and cease from your madness. For what if he be an outcast?
What if he be vile? What if he be open to contempt? So says He, "It is not the
will of My Father that one of these little ones should perish." [Matthew 18:14]
And again, "Their Angels do always behold the face of My Father which is in
heaven." [Matthew 18:10] God for his sake and yours even became a servant,
and was slain; and do you consider him to be nothing? Surely in this respect also
you fight against God, in that you deliver a judgment contrary to His. When he
that is over the Church comes in, he straightway says, "Peace unto all"; when he
preaches, "Peace unto all"; when he blesses, "Peace unto all"; when he bids to
salute, "Peace unto all"; when the Sacrifice is finished, "Peace unto all": and
again, in the middle, "Grace to you and peace." How then is it not monstrous, if,
while hearing so many times that we are to have peace, we are in a state of feud
with each other; and receiving peace, and giving it back, are at war with him that
gives it to us? You say, "And to your spirit." And do you traduce him abroad?
Woe is me! That the majestic usages of the Church have become forms of things
merely, not a truth. Woe is me! That the watchwords of this army proceed no
farther than to be only words. Whence also you are ignorant wherefore is said,
"Peace unto all." But hear what follows, what Christ says; "And into whatsoever
city or village you shall enter...as you enter into the house, salute it; and if the
house be worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it be not worthy, let your
peace return to you." [Matthew 10:11-13] We are therefore ignorant; because we
look upon this merely as a figure of words; and we assent not to them in our

minds. For do I give the Peace? It is Christ who deigns to speak by us. Even if at
all other times we are void of grace, yet are we not now, for your sakes. For if
the Grace of God wrought in an ass and a diviner, for the sake of an economy,
and the advantage of the Israelites [Numbers 22], it is quite clear that it will not
refuse to operate even in us, but for your sakes will endure even this.
Let none say then that I am mean, and low, and worthy of no consideration,
and in such a frame of mind attend to me. For such I am; but God's way always
is, to be present even with such for the sake of the many. And, that you may
know this, with Cain He vouchsafed to talk for Abel's sake [Genesis 4], with the
devil for Job's [Job 1], with Pharaoh for Joseph's [Genesis 41], with
Nebuchadnezzar for Daniel's [Daniel 2 and Daniel 4], with Belshazzar, for the
same [Daniel 5]. And Magi moreover obtained a revelation [Matthew 2]; and
Caiaphas prophesied, though a slayer of Christ, and an unworthy man, because
of the worthiness of the priesthood. [John 11:49] And it is said to have been for
this reason that Aaron was not smitten with leprosy. For why, tell me, when both
had spoken against Moses did she alone suffer the punishment? [Numbers 12]
Marvel not: for if in worldly dignities, even though ten thousand charges be laid
against a man, yet is he not brought to trial before he has laid down his office, in
order that it may not be dishonored along with him; much more in the case of
spiritual office, be he whosoever he may, the grace of God works in him, for
otherwise everything is lost: but when he has laid it down, either after he is
departed or even here, then indeed, then he will suffer a sorer punishment.
Do not, I pray you, think that these things are spoken from us; it is the
Grace of God which works in the unworthy, not for our sakes, but for yours.
Hear ye then what Christ says. "If the house be worthy, let your peace come upon
it." [Matthew 10:13-15] And how becomes it worthy? If "they receive you"
[Luke 10:8], He says. "But if they receive you not, nor hear your words,...verily I
say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in
the day of judgment, than for that city." What boots it then, that you receive us,
and hear not the things we say? What gain is it that you wait upon us, and give