245. In this perspective, ecumenism can be seen as a contribution to the unity of the human
family. At the Synod, the presence of the Patriarch of Constantinople, His Holiness Bartholomaios
I, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, His Grace Rowan Williams, was a true gift from God and a
precious Christian witness.

246. Given the seriousness of the counter-witness of division among Christians, particularly in
Asia and Africa, the search for paths to unity becomes all the more urgent. Missionaries on those
continents often mention the criticisms, complaints and ridicule to which the scandal of divided
Christians gives rise. If we concentrate on the convictions we share, and if we keep in mind the
principle of the hierarchy of truths, we will be able to progress decidedly towards common
expressions of proclamation, service and witness. The immense numbers of people who have not
received the Gospel of Jesus Christ cannot leave us indifferent. Consequently, commitment to a
unity which helps them to accept Jesus Christ can no longer be a matter of mere diplomacy or
forced compliance, but rather an indispensable path to evangelization. Signs of division between
Christians in countries ravaged by violence add further causes of conflict on the part of those who
should instead be a leaven of peace. How many important things unite us! If we really believe in
the abundantly free working of the Holy Spirit, we can learn so much from one another! It is not
just about being better informed about others, but rather about reaping what the Spirit has sown in
them, which is also meant to be a gift for us. To give but one example, in the dialogue with our
Orthodox brothers and sisters, we Catholics have the opportunity to learn more about the meaning
of episcopal collegiality and their experience of synodality. Through an exchange of gifts, the Spirit
can lead us ever more fully into truth and goodness.

Relations with Judaism

247. We hold the Jewish people in special regard because their covenant with God has never

been revoked, for “the gifts and the call of God are irrevocable” (Rom 11:29). The Church, which
shares with Jews an important part of the sacred Scriptures, looks upon the people of the
covenant and their faith as one of the sacred roots of her own Christian identity (cf. Rom 11:16-
18). As Christians, we cannot consider Judaism as a foreign religion; nor do we include the Jews
among those called to turn from idols and to serve the true God . With them, we
believe in the one God who acts in history, and with them we accept his revealed word.

248. Dialogue and friendship with the children of Israel are part of the life of Jesus’ disciples. The
friendship which has grown between us makes us bitterly and sincerely regret the terrible
persecutions which they have endured, and continue to endure, especially those that have
involved Christians.