THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.5.

Reply to Objection 1: Just as a woman is not suffered to teach in
public, but is allowed to instruct and admonish privately; so she is
not permitted to baptize publicly and solemnly, and yet she can
baptize in a case of urgency.
Reply to Objection 2: When Baptism is celebrated solemnly and with
due form, it should be conferred by a priest having charge of souls,
or by one representing him. But this is not required in cases of
urgency, when a woman may baptize.
Reply to Objection 3: In carnal generation male and female cooperate according to the power of their proper nature; wherefore the
female cannot be the active, but only the passive, principle of
generation. But in spiritual generation they do not act, either of them,
by their proper power, but only instrumentally by the power of
Christ. Consequently, on the same grounds either man or woman
can baptize in a case of urgency.
If, however, a woman were to baptize without any urgency for so
doing. there would be no need of rebaptism: as we have said in
regard to laymen (Article 3, ad 1). But the baptizer herself would sin,
as also those who took part with her therein, either by receiving
Baptism from her, or by bringing someone to her to be baptized.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether one that is not baptized can confer the

sacrament of Baptism?
Objection 1: It seems that one that is not baptized cannot confer the
sacrament of Baptism. For "none gives what he has not." But a nonbaptized person has not the sacrament of Baptism. Therefore he
cannot give it.
Objection 2: Further, a man confers the sacrament of Baptism
inasmuch as he is a minister of the Church. But one that is not
baptized, belongs nowise to the Church, i.e. neither really nor
sacramentally. Therefore he cannot confer the sacrament of
Baptism.
Objection 3: Further, it is more to confer a sacrament than to receive
it. But one that is not baptized, cannot receive the other sacraments.
Much less, therefore, can he confer any sacrament.
On the contrary, Isidore says: "The Roman Pontiff does not consider
it to be the man who baptizes, but that the Holy Ghost confers the
grace of Baptism, though he that baptizes be a pagan." But he who is
baptized, is not called a pagan. Therefore he who is not baptized can
confer the sacrament of Baptism.
I answer that, Augustine left this question without deciding it. For he
says (Contra Ep. Parmen. ii): "This is indeed another question,
whether even those can baptize who were never Christians; nor
should anything be rashly asserted hereupon, without the authority
of a sacred council such as suffices for so great a matter." But
afterwards it was decided by the Church that the unbaptized,
whether Jews or pagans, can confer the sacrament of Baptism,
provided they baptize in the form of the Church. Wherefore Pope
Nicolas I replies to the questions propounded by the Bulgars: "You
say that many in your country have been baptized by someone,
whether Christian or pagan you know not. If these were baptized in
the name of the Trinity, they must not be rebaptized." But if the form
of the Church be not observed, the sacrament of Baptism is not
conferred. And thus is to be explained what Gregory II [Gregory III]
writes to Bishop Boniface: "Those whom you assert to have been
baptized by pagans," namely, with a form not recognized by the
Church, "we command you to rebaptize in the name of the Trinity."