278. Faith also means believing in God, believing that he truly loves us, that he is alive, that he is
mysteriously capable of intervening, that he does not abandon us and that he brings good out of
evil by his power and his infinite creativity. It means believing that he marches triumphantly in
history with those who “are called and chosen and faithful” (Rev 17:14). Let us believe the Gospel

when it tells us that the kingdom of God is already present in this world and is growing, here and
there, and in different ways: like the small seed which grows into a great tree (cf. Mt 13:31-32), like
the measure of leaven that makes the dough rise (cf. Mt 13:33) and like the good seed that grows
amid the weeds (cf. Mt 13, 24-30) and can always pleasantly surprise us. The kingdom is here, it
returns, it struggles to flourish anew. Christ’s resurrection everywhere calls forth seeds of that new
world; even if they are cut back, they grow again, for the resurrection is already secretly woven
into the fabric of this history, for Jesus did not rise in vain. May we never remain on the sidelines of
this march of living hope!

279. Because we do not always see these seeds growing, we need an interior certainty, a
conviction that God is able to act in every situation, even amid apparent setbacks: “We have this
treasure in earthen vessels” (2 Cor 4:7). This certainty is often called “a sense of mystery”. It
involves knowing with certitude that all those who entrust themselves to God in love will bear good
fruit (cf. Jn 15:5). This fruitfulness is often invisible, elusive and unquantifiable. We can know quite
well that our lives will be fruitful, without claiming to know how, or where, or when. We may be
sure that none of our acts of love will be lost, nor any of our acts of sincere concern for others. No
single act of love for God will be lost, no generous effort is meaningless, no painful endurance is
wasted. All of these encircle our world like a vital force. Sometimes it seems that our work is
fruitless, but mission is not like a business transaction or investment, or even a humanitarian
activity. It is not a show where we count how many people come as a result of our publicity; it is
something much deeper, which escapes all measurement. It may be that the Lord uses our
sacrifices to shower blessings in another part of the world which we will never visit. The Holy Spirit
works as he wills, when he wills and where he wills; we entrust ourselves without pretending to
see striking results. We know only that our commitment is necessary. Let us learn to rest in the
tenderness of the arms of the Father amid our creative and generous commitment. Let us keep
marching forward; let us give him everything, allowing him to make our efforts bear fruit in his good
time.

280. Keeping our missionary fervour alive calls for firm trust in the Holy Spirit, for it is he who
“helps us in our weakness” (Rom 8:26). But this generous trust has to be nourished, and so we
need to invoke the Spirit constantly. He can heal whatever causes us to flag in the missionary
endeavour. It is true that this trust in the unseen can cause us to feel disoriented: it is like being
plunged into the deep and not knowing what we will find. I myself have frequently experienced
this. Yet there is no greater freedom than that of allowing oneself to be guided by the Holy Spirit,
renouncing the attempt to plan and control everything to the last detail, and instead letting him
enlighten, guide and direct us, leading us wherever he wills. The Holy Spirit knows well what is
needed in every time and place. This is what it means to be mysteriously fruitful!