FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.5.

and thy mother"; the second, "Thou shalt not kill"; the third, "Thou
shalt not commit adultery"; the fourth, "Thou shalt not steal"; the
fifth, "Thou shalt not bear false witness"; the sixth, "Thou shalt not
covet."
But, in the first place, it seems unbecoming for the precept of the
Sabbath-day observance to be put among the precepts of the
decalogue, if it nowise belonged to the decalogue. Secondly,
because, since it is written (Mt. 6:24), "No man can serve two
masters," the two statements, "I am the Lord thy God," and, "Thou
shalt not have strange gods before Me" seem to be of the same
nature and to form one precept. Hence Origen (Hom. viii in Exod.)
who also distinguishes four precepts as referring to God, unites
these two under one precept; and reckons in the second place,
"Thou shalt not make . . . any graven thing"; as third, "Thou shalt not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain"; and as fourth,
"Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath-day." The other six he
reckons in the same way as Hesychius.
Since, however, the making of graven things or the likeness of
anything is not forbidden except as to the point of their being
worshipped as gods---for God commanded an image of the Seraphim
to be made and placed in the tabernacle, as related in Ex. 25:18--Augustine more fittingly unites these two, "Thou shalt not have
strange gods before Me," and, "Thou shalt not make . . . any graven
thing," into one precept. Likewise to covet another's wife, for the
purpose of carnal knowledge, belongs to the concupiscence of the
flesh; whereas, to covet other things, which are desired for the
purpose of possession, belongs to the concupiscence of the eyes;
wherefore Augustine reckons as distinct precepts, that which forbids
the coveting of another's goods, and that which prohibits the
coveting of another's wife. Thus he distinguishes three precepts as
referring to God, and seven as referring to our neighbor. And this is
better.
Reply to Objection 1: Worship is merely a declaration of faith:
wherefore the precepts about worship should not be reckoned as
distinct from those about faith. Nevertheless precepts should be
given about worship rather than about faith, because the precept
about faith is presupposed to the precepts of the decalogue, as is
also the precept of charity. For just as the first general principles of
the natural law are self-evident to a subject having natural reason,
and need no promulgation; so also to believe in God is a first and

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.5.

self-evident principle to a subject possessed of faith: "for he that
cometh to God, must believe that He is" (Heb. 11:6). Hence it needs
no other promulgation that the infusion of faith.
Reply to Objection 2: The affirmative precepts are distinct from the
negative, when one is not comprised in the other: thus that man
should honor his parents does not include that he should not kill
another man; nor does the latter include the former. But when an
affirmative precept is included in a negative, or vice versa, we do not
find that two distinct precepts are given: thus there is not one
precept saying that "Thou shalt not steal," and another binding one
to keep another's property intact, or to give it back to its owner. In
the same way there are not different precepts about believing in God,
and about not believing in strange gods.
Reply to Objection 3: All covetousness has one common ratio: and
therefore the Apostle speaks of the commandment about
covetousness as though it were one. But because there are various
special kinds of covetousness, therefore Augustine distinguishes
different prohibitions against coveting: for covetousness differs
specifically in respect of the diversity of actions or things coveted,
as the Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 5).