THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.9.

venial; and if occasionally it be mortal, a man may repent of it by
morning and confess it. Consequently, it seems that he ought not to
be prevented from receiving this sacrament.
Objection 5: Further, a sin against the Fifth Commandment is greater
than a sin against the Sixth. But if a man dream that he has broken
the Fifth or Seventh or any other Commandment, he is not on that
account debarred from receiving this sacrament. Therefore it seems
that much less should he be debarred through defilement resulting
from a dream against the Sixth Commandment.
On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 15:16): "The man from whom the
seed of copulation goeth out . . . shall be unclean until evening." But
for the unclean there is no approaching to the sacraments.
Therefore, it seems that owing to such defilement of the flesh a man
is debarred from taking this which is the greatest of the sacraments.
I answer that, There are two things to be weighed regarding the
aforesaid movements: one on account of which they necessarily
prevent a man from receiving this sacrament; the other, on account
of which they do so, not of necessity, but from a sense of propriety.
Mortal sin alone necessarily prevents anyone from partaking of this
sacrament: and although these movements during sleep, considered
in themselves, cannot be a mortal sin, nevertheless, owing to their
cause, they have mortal sin connected with them; which cause,
therefore, must be investigated. Sometimes they are due to an
external spiritual cause, viz. the deception of the demons, who can
stir up phantasms, as was stated in the FP, Question 111, Article 3,
through the apparition of which, these movements occasionally
follow. Sometimes they are due to an internal spiritual cause, such
as previous thoughts. At other times they arise from some internal
corporeal cause, as from abundance or weakness of nature, or even
from surfeit of meat or drink. Now every one of these three causes
can be without sin at all, or else with venial sin, or with mortal sin. If
it be without sin, or with venial sin, it does not necessarily prevent
the receiving of this sacrament, so as to make a man guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord: but should it be with mortal sin, it
prevents it of necessity.
For such illusions on the part of demons sometimes come from
one's not striving to receive fervently; and this can be either a mortal

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.9.

or a venial sin. At other times it is due to malice alone on the part of
the demons who wish to keep men from receiving this sacrament. So
we read in the Conferences of the Fathers (Cassian, Collat. xxii) that
when a certain one always suffered thus on those feast-days on
which he had to receive Communion, his superiors, discovering that
there was no fault on his part, ruled that he was not to refrain from
communicating on that account, and the demoniacal illusion ceased.
In like fashion previous evil thoughts can sometimes be without any
sin whatever, as when one has to think of such things on account of
lecturing or debating; and if it be done without concupiscence and
delectation, the thoughts will not be unclean but honest; and yet
defilement can come of such thoughts, as is clear from the authority
of Augustine (Objection 1). At other times such thoughts come of
concupiscence and delectation, and should there be consent, it will
be a mortal sin: otherwise it will be a venial sin.
In the same way too the corporeal cause can be without sin, as when
it arises from bodily debility, and hence some individuals suffer
seminal loss without sin even in their wakeful hours; or it can come
from the abundance of nature: for, just as blood can flow without sin,
so also can the semen which is superfluity of the blood, according to
the Philosopher (De Gener. Animal. i). But occasionally it is with sin,
as when it is due to excess of food or drink. And this also can be
either venial or mortal sin; although more frequently the sin is mortal
in the case of evil thoughts on account of the proneness to consent,
rather than in the case of consumption of food and drink. Hence
Gregory, writing to Augustine, Bishop of the English (Regist. xi),
says that one ought to refrain from Communion when this arises
from evil thoughts, but not when it arises from excess of food or
drink, especially if necessity call for Communion. So, then, one must
judge from its cause whether such bodily defilement of necessity
hinders the receiving of this sacrament.
At the same time a sense of decency forbids Communion on two
accounts. The first of these is always verified, viz. the bodily
defilement, with which, out of reverence for the sacrament, it is
unbecoming to approach the altar (and hence those who wish to
touch any sacred object, wash their hands): except perchance such
uncleanness be perpetual or of long standing, such as leprosy or
issue of blood, or anything else of the kind. The other reason is the
mental distraction which follows after the aforesaid movements,
especially when they take place with unclean imaginings. Now this