THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.3.

"God," inasmuch as this word "God" stands for the Person of the
Father. And in this way it is not predicated of the Person of the Son,
because the Person of the Son is not the Person of the Father. And,
consequently, it is not necessary that this word "Father" be
predicated of this word "Man," of which the Word "God" is
predicated, inasmuch as "Man" stands for the Person of the Son.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the human nature in Christ is
something new, yet the suppositum of the human nature is not new,
but eternal. And because this word "God" is predicated of man not
on account of the human nature, but by reason of the suppositum, it
does not follow that we assert a new God. But this would follow, if
we held that "Man" stands for a created suppositum: even as must
be said by those who assert that there are two supposita in Christ
[Question 2, Articles 3,6].

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.16, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ can be called a lordly man?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ can be called a lordly man. For
Augustine says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 36) that "we are to be counseled to
hope for the goods that were in the Lordly Man"; and he is speaking
of Christ. Therefore it seems that Christ was a lordly man.
Objection 2: Further, as lordship belongs to Christ by reason of His
Divine Nature, so does manhood belong to the human nature. Now
God is said to be "humanized," as is plain from Damascene (De Fide
Orth. iii, 11), where he says that "being humanized manifests the
conjunction with man." Hence with like reason may it be said
denominatively that this man is lordly.
Objection 3: Further, as "lordly" is derived from "lord," so is Divine
derived from "Deus" [God]. But Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. iv) calls Christ
the "most Divine Jesus." Therefore with like reason may Christ be
called a lordly man.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Retract. i, 19): "I do not see that we
may rightly call Jesus Christ a lordly man, since He is the Lord
Himself."
I answer that, As was said above (Article 2, ad 3), when we say "the
Man Christ Jesus," we signify the eternal suppositum, which is the
Person of the Son of God, because there is only one suppositum of
both natures. Now "God" and "Lord" are predicated essentially of
the Son of God; and hence they ought not to be predicated
denominatively, since this is derogatory to the truth of the union.
Hence, since we say "lordly" denominatively from lord, it cannot
truly and properly be said that this Man is lordly, but rather that He is
Lord. But if, when we say "the Man Christ Jesus," we mean a created
suppositum, as those who assert two supposita in Christ, this man
might be called lordly, inasmuch as he is assumed to a participation
of Divine honor, as the Nestorians said. And, even in this way, the
human nature is not called "divine" by essence, but "deified"---not,
indeed, by its being converted into the Divine Nature, but by its
conjunction with the Divine Nature in one hypostasis, as is plain
from Damascene (De Fide Orth. iii, 11,17).
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine retracts these and the like words