FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

Reply to Objection 2: The literal reason of the paschal banquet was
to commemorate the blessing of being led by God out of Egypt.
Hence by celebrating this banquet they declared that they belonged
to that people which God had taken to Himself out of Egypt. For
when they were delivered from Egypt, they were commanded to
sprinkle the lamb's blood on the transoms of their house doors, as
though declaring that they were averse to the rites of the Egyptians
who worshipped the ram. Wherefore they were delivered by the
sprinkling or rubbing of the blood of the lamb on the door-posts,
from the danger of extermination which threatened the Egyptians.
Now two things are to be observed in their departure from Egypt:
namely, their haste in going, for the Egyptians pressed them to go
forth speedily, as related in Ex. 12:33; and there was danger that
anyone who did not hasten to go with the crowd might be slain by
the Egyptians. Their haste was shown in two ways. First by what
they ate. For they were commanded to eat unleavened bread, as a
sign "that it could not be leavened, the Egyptians pressing them to
depart"; and to eat roast meat, for this took less time to prepare; and
that they should not break a bone thereof, because in their haste
there was no time to break bones. Secondly, as to the manner of
eating. For it is written: "You shall gird your reins, and you shall
have shoes on your feet, holding staves in your hands, and you shall
eat in haste": which clearly designates men at the point of starting
on a journey. To this also is to be referred the command: "In one
house shall it be eaten, neither shall you carry forth of the flesh
thereof out of the house": because, to wit, on account of their haste,
they could not send any gifts of it.
The stress they suffered while in Egypt was denoted by the wild
lettuces. The figurative reason is evident, because the sacrifice of
the paschal lamb signified the sacrifice of Christ according to 1 Cor.
5:7: "Christ our pasch is sacrificed." The blood of the lamb, which
ensured deliverance from the destroyer, by being sprinkled on the
transoms, signified faith in Christ's Passion, in the hearts and on the
lips of the faithful, by which same Passion we are delivered from sin
and death, according to 1 Pt. 1:18: "You were . . . redeemed . . . with
the precious blood . . . of a lamb unspotted." The partaking of its
flesh signified the eating of Christ's body in the Sacrament; and the
flesh was roasted at the fire to signify Christ's Passion or charity.
And it was eaten with unleavened bread to signify the blameless life
of the faithful who partake of Christ's body, according to 1 Cor. 5:8:

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

"Let us feast . . . with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth."
The wild lettuces were added to denote repentance for sins, which is
required of those who receive the body of Christ. Their loins were
girt in sign of chastity: and the shoes of their feet are the examples
of our dead ancestors. The staves they were to hold in their hands
denoted pastoral authority: and it was commanded that the paschal
lamb should be eaten in one house, i.e. in a catholic church, and not
in the conventicles of heretics.
Reply to Objection 3: Some of the sacraments of the New Law had
corresponding figurative sacraments in the Old Law. For Baptism,
which is the sacrament of Faith, corresponds to circumcision. Hence
it is written (Col. 2:11,12): "You are circumcised . . . in the
circumcision of" Our Lord Jesus "Christ: buried with Him in
Baptism." In the New Law the sacrament of the Eucharist
corresponds to the banquet of the paschal lamb. The sacrament of
Penance in the New Law corresponds to all the purifications of the
Old Law. The sacrament of Orders corresponds to the consecration
of the pontiff and of the priests. To the sacrament of Confirmation,
which is the sacrament of the fulness of grace, there would be no
corresponding sacrament of the Old Law, because the time of
fulness had not yet come, since "the Law brought no man to
perfection" (Heb. 7:19). The same applies to the sacrament of
Extreme Unction, which is an immediate preparation for entrance
into glory, to which the way was not yet opened out in the Old Law,
since the price had not yet been paid. Matrimony did indeed exist
under the Old Law, as a function of nature, but not as the sacrament
of the union of Christ with the Church, for that union was not as yet
brought about. Hence under the Old Law it was allowable to give a
bill of divorce, which is contrary to the nature of the sacrament.
Reply to Objection 4: As already stated, the purifications of the Old
Law were ordained for the removal of impediments to the divine
worship: which worship is twofold; viz. spiritual, consisting in
devotion of the mind to God; and corporal, consisting in sacrifices,
oblations, and so forth. Now men are hindered in the spiritual
worship by sins, whereby men were said to be polluted, for instance,
by idolatry, murder, adultery, or incest. From such pollutions men
were purified by certain sacrifices, offered either for the whole
community in general, or also for the sins of individuals; not that
those carnal sacrifices had of themselves the power of expiating sin;
but that they signified that expiation of sins which was to be effected
by Christ, and of which those of old became partakers by protesting