abominable than that? For that which proceeds from thence pollutes the body:
but what comes from the tongue often suffocates the soul.
These things I say, not in anxiety about those who have an ill report falsely:
for they are worthy even of crowns, when they bear what is said nobly; but in
anxiety for you that so speak. For him that is evil reported of falsely, the
Scriptures pronounce "blessed;" but the evil-speaker they expel from the holy
Mysteries, nay even from the very precincts. For it is said, [Psalm 101:5] "Him
that privily speaks against his neighbor, this man did I chase out." And he says
too that such a one is unworthy to read the sacred books. For, "Why," says He,
[Psalm 50:16] "do you declare My righteous laws, and takest My covenant in
your mouth?" Then, annexing the cause He says [Psalm 49:20] "Thou sat and
spoke against your brother." And here indeed he does not distinctly add whether
they be things true or false which he speaks. But elsewhere this too makes part
of His prohibition: He implying, that even though thou speak truths, yet such
things are not to be uttered by you. For, "Judge not," says He, that you be not
judged: [Matthew 7:1] since he too who spoke evil of the publican was
condemned, although it was true which he laid to his neighbor's charge.
"What then," you will say, "if any one be daring and polluted, must we not
correct him? Must we not expose him?" We must both expose and correct: but in
the way which I mentioned before. But if you do it upbraiding him, take heed
lest your imitation of that Pharisee cause you to fall into his state. For no
advantage accrues from hence; none to you who speakest, none to him who
hears you, none to the person accused. But the latter, for his part, becomes more
reckless: since as long as he is unobserved, he is sensible of shame; but as soon
as he becomes manifest and notorious, he casts off the curb also which that
feeling imposed on him.
And the hearer will in his turn be yet more injured. For whether he be
conscious to himself of good deeds, he becomes puffed and swoln up with the
accusation brought against another; or of faults, he then becomes more eager for
iniquity.

Thirdly, the speaker too himself will both incur the bad opinion of the
hearer, and will provoke God to more anger against himself.
Wherefore, I beseech you, let us cast from us every word that is unsavory. If
there be any thing good unto edification, this let us speak.
But have you a fancy to avenge yourself on the other person? Why then
punish yourself instead of him? Nay, do thou, who art so earnestly seeking
redress from those who have annoyed you, avenge yourself as Paul
recommended to take vengeance. "If your enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst,
give him drink." [Romans 12:20] But if you do not so, but only plot against him,
you point the sword against yourself.
Wherefore if that other speak evil, answer him with praises and
commendations. For so will you be able both to take vengeance on him, and wilt
deliver yourself from evil surmising. Since he that feels pain at hearing ill of
himself, is thought to be so affected because of some consciousness of evil: but
he that laughs to scorn what is said, exhibits a most unquestionable token of his
not being conscious to himself of any evil thing.
Seeing then that you profit neither your hearer, nor yourself, nor him that is
accused, and dost but point your sword at your own self, even from such
considerations do thou learn more soberness. For one ought indeed to be moved
by the thought of the kingdom of heaven, and of what pleases God: but since you
are of grosser disposition and bitest like a wild beast, hereby even be thou
instructed; that these arguments having corrected you, you may be able to order
yourself simply from consideration of what pleases God; and having come to be
above every passion, may obtain the heavenly blessings:— which may God
grant us all to obtain, through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and His mercy
towards mankind; with Whom, to the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory,
power, honor, now and henceforth, and unto everlasting ages. Amen.