minister and a witness both of these things which you have seen, and of those
things in the which I will appear unto you: delivering you from the people, and
from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send you, to open their eyes, and to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they
may receive forgiveness of sins [Acts 26:9-18]:— observe how mildly he
discourses— God, he says, said (this) to me, "that they may receive forgiveness
of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Me."
By these things, says he, I was persuaded, by this vision He drew me to Himself,
and so persuaded me, that I made no delay. "Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was
not disobedient unto the heavenly vision: but showed first unto them of
Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judea, and then to
the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works meet for
repentance." (v. 19, 20.) I therefore, who instructed others also concerning the
most excellent way of living, how should I myself have become the author of
sedition and contention? "For these causes the Jews caught me in the temple,
and went about to kill me. Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue
unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than
those which the prophets and Moses did say should come." (v. 21, 22.) See how
free from flattery his speech is, and how he ascribes the whole to God. Then his
boldness— but neither do I now desist: and the sure grounds— for it is from the
prophets that I urge the question, "Whether the Christ was to suffer:" then the
Resurrection and the promise, "Whether He, as the first to rise from the dead,
should show light unto the people and to the Gentiles." [Acts 26:23] Festus saw
the boldness, and what says he? For Paul was all along addressing himself to the
king— he was in a manner annoyed, and says to him, "You are beside yourself,
Paul:" for, "while he thus discoursed, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, you
are beside yourself: much learning does make you mad." [Acts 26:24] What then
says Paul? With gentleness, "I am not mad," says he, "most noble Festus; but
speak forth the words of truth and soberness." [Acts 26:25] Then too he gives
him to understand why, turning from him, he addressed his speech to the king:

"For the king knows of these things, before whom also I speak freely: for I am
persuaded that none of these things are hidden from him: for this thing was not
done in a corner." [Acts 26:26] He shows, that (the king) knows all perfectly; at
the same time, all but saying to the Jews, And ye indeed ought to have known
these things— for this is the meaning of that which he adds, "For this thing was
not done in a corner. And Agrippa, said to Paul, [᾿] [Εν ὀλίγῳ] you persuade me
to be a Christian." What is [ἐ] [ν ὀλίγῳ]? Within a little, [παρὰ μικρόν] . "And
Paul said, I could pray to God," [καὶ ἐν ὀλίγῳ καὶ ἐν πολλᾥ], (that is) "I could
pray to God," for my part, not "in little" (but "in much"): he does not simply
pray, he prays (not briefly, but) with largeness— "that not only thou, but also all
that hear me this day, were such as I am." Then he adds, "except these bonds;"
and yet it was matter of glory; true, but looking to their notion of it, therefore
says he, "except these bonds." [Acts 26:27-29]
(Recapitulation.) "And on the morrow," etc. [Acts 25:23] The Jews desisted
ever since Paul exercised his right of appeal. Then also for him the theatre
becomes a splendid one: "with great pomp" they were present. "And Festus
said," etc. The whole multitude of the Jews— not some of them only, and others
not so— "both at Jerusalem, and also here," they said "that he ought not to live
any longer." [Acts 25:24] "And I having found," etc. It shows that he did right in
appealing to Cæsar. For if though they had no great matter to allege against him,
yet those (at Jerusalem) were mad against him, with good reason may he go to
Cæsar. "That after examination had by you," he says, "I may get somewhat to
write." Observe how the matter is repeatedly put to the test. The Jews therefore
may thank themselves for this vindication (of Paul), which would come to the
ears of those also who were at Rome. See how they become the unwilling
heralds both of their own wickedness and of Paul's virtue, even to the emperor
himself: so that Paul was carried away (to Rome) with more renown than if he
had gone there without bonds: for not as an impostor and a deceiver, after so
many judges had acquitted him, was he now carried there. Quit therefore of all
charges, among those with whom he was bred and born, and not only so, (but)