Hence, whereas the other animals take delight in the objects of the
senses only as ordered to food and sex, man alone takes pleasure in
the beauty of sensible objects for its own sake. Therefore, as the
senses are situated chiefly in the face, other animals have the face
turned to the ground, as it were for the purpose of seeking food and
procuring a livelihood; whereas man has his face erect, in order that
by the senses, and chiefly by sight, which is more subtle and
penetrates further into the differences of things, he may freely
survey the sensible objects around him, both heavenly and earthly,
so as to gather intelligible truth from all things. Secondly, for the
greater freedom of the acts of the interior powers; the brain, wherein
these actions are, in a way, performed, not being low down, but lifted
up above other parts of the body. Thirdly, because if man's stature
were prone to the ground he would need to use his hands as forefeet; and thus their utility for other purposes would cease. Fourthly,
because if man's stature were prone to the ground, and he used his
hands as fore-feet, he would be obliged to take hold of his food with
his mouth. Thus he would have a protruding mouth, with thick and
hard lips, and also a hard tongue, so as to keep it from being hurt by
exterior things; as we see in other animals. Moreover, such an
attitude would quite hinder speech, which is reason's proper
operation.
Nevertheless, though of erect stature, man is far above plants. For
man's superior part, his head, is turned towards the superior part of
the world, and his inferior part is turned towards the inferior world;
and therefore he is perfectly disposed as to the general situation of
his body. Plants have the superior part turned towards the lower
world, since their roots correspond to the mouth; and their inferior
part towards the upper world. But brute animals have a middle
disposition, for the superior part of the animal is that by which it
takes food, and the inferior part that by which it rids itself of the
surplus.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the production of the human body is

fittingly described in Scripture?
Objection 1: It would seem that the production of the human body is
not fittingly described in Scripture. For, as the human body was
made by God, so also were the other works of the six days. But in
the other works it is written, "God said; Let it be made, and it was
made." Therefore the same should have been said of man.
Objection 2: Further, the human body was made by God
immediately, as explained above (Article 2). Therefore it was not
fittingly said, "Let us make man."
Objection 3: Further, the form of the human body is the soul itself
which is the breath of life. Therefore, having said, "God made man of
the slime of the earth," he should not have added: "And He breathed
into him the breath of life."
Objection 4: Further, the soul, which is the breath of life, is in the
whole body, and chiefly in the heart. Therefore it was not fittingly
said: "He breathed into his face the breath of life."
Objection 5: Further, the male and female sex belong to the body,
while the image of God belongs to the soul. But the soul, according
to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. vii, 24), was made before the body.
Therefore having said: "To His image He made them," he should not
have added, "male and female He created them."
On the contrary, Is the authority of Scripture.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine observes (Gen. ad lit. vi, 12), man
surpasses other things, not in the fact that God Himself made man,
as though He did not make other things; since it is written (Ps.
101:26), "The work of Thy hands is the heaven," and elsewhere (Ps.
94:5), "His hands laid down the dry land"; but in this, that man is
made to God's image. Yet in describing man's production, Scripture
uses a special way of speaking, to show that other things were made
for man's sake. For we are accustomed to do with more deliberation
and care what we have chiefly in mind.
Reply to Objection 2: We must not imagine that when God said "Let