wrongs than he wishes (to inflict): from the one we shall come on to the other.
This is the dignity of Christ's disciples. Those crucified Him, when He had come
for the very purpose of doing them good; His disciples they scourged; and after
all this, He admits them to the same honor with His disciples, making them
equally partakers of His gifts. I beseech you, let us be imitators of Christ: in this
regard it is possible to imitate Him: this makes a man like God: this is more than
human. Let us hold fast to Mercy: she is the schoolmistress and teacher of that
higher Wisdom. He that has learned to show mercy to the distressed, will learn
also not to resent injuries; he that has learned this, will be able to do good even
to his enemies. Let us learn to feel for the ills our neighbors suffer, and we shall
learn to endure the ills they inflict. Let us ask the person himself who ill-treats
us, whether he does not condemn himself? Would he not be glad to show a
nobler spirit ([φιλοσοφεἵν])? Must he not own that his behavior is nothing but
passion, that it is little-minded, pitiful? Would he not like to be of those who are
wronged and are silent, and not of those who do wrong, and are beside
themselves with passion? Can he go away not admiring the patient sufferer? Do
not imagine that this makes men despicable. Nothing makes men so despicable,
as insolent and injurious behavior: nothing makes men so respectable, as
endurance under insolence and injury. For the one is a ruffian, the other a
philosopher; the one is less than man, the other is equal to angels. For though he
be inferior to the wrong-doer, yet, for all that, he has the power, if he had the
mind, to be revenged. And besides, the one is pitied by all, the other hated. What
then? The former will be much the better of the two: for everybody will treat the
one as a madman, the other as a man of sense. He cannot speak of him in evil
sort: yea, you fear, says one, lest perchance he be not such (as you would
represent). Best that thou speak not evil in your thought even; next, that you
speak it not to another. Pray not then to God against this man: if you hear him
evil-spoken of, take his part: say, It was passion that spoke such words, not the
man; say, It was anger, not my friend: his madness, not his heart. Thus let us
account of each offense. Wait not for the fire to be kindled, but check it before it

comes to that: do not exasperate the savage beast, rather do not suffer it to
become exasperated: for you will no longer be able to check it, if once the flame
be kindled. For what has the man called you? "Thou fool and simpleton." And
which then is liable to the name? The called, or the caller? For the one, be he
ever so wise, gets the character of being a fool: but the other, even if he be a
simpleton, gets credit for being wise, and of philosophic temper. Say, which is
the simpleton? He who alleges against another what is untrue, or he who even
under such treatment is unmoved? For if it be the mark of true philosophy to be
unmoved however moved; to fall into a passion when none moves to anger—
what folly is it! I say not yet, how sore a manner of punishment is in store for
those who utter such reproaches and revilings against their neighbor. But how?
Has he called you "a low fellow and low-born, a sorry creature and of sorry
extraction?" Again he has turned the taunt against himself. For the other will
appear worthy and respectable, but he a sorry creature indeed: for to cast up such
things, that is to say, meanness of birth, as a disgrace, is little-minded indeed:
while the other will be thought a great and admirable character, because he
thinks nothing of such a taunt, and is no more affected by it than if he were told
that he had about him any other ordinary and quite indifferent circumstance. But
does he call you "adulterer," and such like? At this you may even laugh: for,
when the conscience is not smitten, there can be no occasion for wrath. * * For
when one has considered what bad and disgraceful disclosures he makes, still for
all that, there is no need to grieve. He has but laid bare now, what everybody
must be apprised of by and bye: meanwhile, as regards himself he has shown all
men that he is not to be trusted, for that he knows not how to screen his
neighbor's faults: he has disgraced himself more than he has the other; has
stopped up against himself every harbor: has made terrible to himself the bar at
which he must hereafter be tried. For not the person (whose secrets are betrayed)
will be the object of everybody's aversion, but he, who where he ought not to
have raised the veil, has stripped off the clothes. But speak thou nothing of the
secrets you know, hold thou your peace if you would bear off the good fame. For