drunkard is livid and dissolving, so also is the other's soul. Or rather, even his
body is not free from this disorder, but it is taken even worse, care eating it away
worse than wine does (as do anger too and want of sleep), and by degrees
exhausting it entirely. And he that is seized with illness from wine, after the
night is over may get sober. But this person is always drunken day and night,
watching or sleeping, so paying a severer penalty for it than any prisoner, or
person at work in the mines, or suffering any punishment more grievous than
this, if such there be. Is it then life pray, and not death? Or rather, is it not a fate
more wretched than any death? For death gives the body rest, and sets it free
from ridicule, as well as disgrace and sins: but these drunken fits plunge it into
all these, stopping up the ears, dulling the eyesight, keeping down the
understanding in great darkness. For it will not bear the mention of anything but
interest, and interest upon interest, and shameful gains, and odious traffickings,
and ungentlemanly and slavelike transactions, barking like a dog at everybody,
and hating everybody, averse to everybody, at war with everybody, without any
reason for it, rising up against the poor, grudging at the rich, and civil to nobody.
And if he have a wife, or children, or friends, if he may not use them all towards
getting gain, these are to him more his enemies than natural enemies. What then
can be worse than madness of this sort, and what more wretched? When a man is
preparing rocks for his own self on every side, and shoals, and precipices, and
gulfs, and pits without number, while he has but one body, and is the slave of
one belly. And if any thrust you into a state office, you will be a runaway,
through fear of expense. Yet to yourself you are laying up countless charges far
more distressing than those, enlisting yourself for services not only more
expensive, but also more dangerous, to be done for mammon, and not paying
this tyrant a money contribution only, nor of bodily labor, torture to the soul, and
grief, but even of your blood itself, that you may have some addition to your
property (miserable and sorrow-stricken man!) out of this barbarous slavery. Do
you not see those who are taken day by day to the grave, how they are carried to
tombs naked and destitute of all things, unable to take with them anything that is

in the house, but bearing what clothes they have about them to the worm?
Consider these day by day, and perchance the malady will abate, unless you
mean even by such an occasion to be still more mad at the expensiveness of the
funeral rites— for the malady is importunate, the disease terrible! This then is
why we address you upon this subject at every meeting, and constantly foment
your hearing, that at all events by your growing accustomed to such thoughts,
some good many come. But be not contentious, for it is not only at the Day to
come, but even before it, that this manifold malady brings with it sundry
punishments. For if I were to tell you of those who pass their days in chains, or
of one nailed to a lingering disease, or of one struggling with famine, or of any
other thing whatsoever, I could point out no one who suffers so much as they do
who love money. For what severer evil can befall one, than being hated by all
men, than hating all men, than not having kindly feeling towards any, than being
never satisfied, than being in a continual thirst, than struggling with a perpetual
hunger, and that a more distressing one than what all men esteem such? Than
having pains day by day, than being never sober, than being continually in
worries and harasses? For all these things, and more than these, are what the
covetous set their shoulder to; in the midst of their gaining having no perception
of pleasure, though scraping to themselves from all men, because of their
desiring more. But in the case of their incurring a loss, if it be but of a farthing,
they think they have suffered most grievously, and have been cast out of life
itself. What language then can put these evils before you? And if their fate here
be such, consider also what comes after this life, the being cast out of the
kingdom, the pain that comes from hell, the perpetual chains, the outer darkness,
the venomous worm, the gnashing of teeth, the affliction, the sore straitening, the
rivers of fire, the furnaces that never get quenched. And gathering all these
together, and weighing them against the pleasure of money, tear up now this
disease root and branch, that so receiving the true riches, and being set free from
this grievous poverty, you may obtain the present blessings, and those to come,
by the grace and love toward man, etc.