such; these also we flee for our part in like manner. For instance; To live in
poverty, many account disgraceful: and we flee poverty, not because it is
disgraceful nor because we are so persuaded, but because our masters count it
disgraceful; and we fear them. Again, to be unhonored and contemptible, and
void of all authority seems likewise unto the most part a matter of great shame
and vileness. This again we flee; not condemning the thing itself, but because of
the sentence of our masters.
Again on the contrary side also we undergo the same mischief. As wealth is
counted a good thing, and pride, and pomp, and to be conspicuous. Accordingly
this again we pursue, not either in this case from considering the nature of the
things as good, but persuaded by the opinion of our masters. For the people is
our master and the great mob ([ὅ πολὺς όχλος]); a savage master and a severe
tyrant: not so much as a command being needed in order to make us listen to
him; it is enough that we just know what he wills, and without a command we
submit: so great good will do we bear towards him. Again, God threatening and
admonishing day by day is not heard; but the common people, full of disorder,
made up of all manner of dregs, has no occasion for one word of command;
enough for it only to signify with what it is well pleased, and in all things we
obey immediately.
9. "But how," says some one, "is a man to flee from these masters?" By
getting a mind greater than their's; by looking into the nature of things; by
condemning the voice of the multitude; before all, by training himself in things
really disgraceful to fear not men, but the unsleeping Eye; and again, in all good
things, to seek the crowns which come from Him. For thus neither in other sort
of things shall we be able to tolerate them. For whoso when he does right judges
them unworthy to know his good deeds, and contents himself with the suffrage
of God; neither will he take account of them in matters of the contrary sort.
"And how can this be?" you will say. Consider what man is, what God;
whom you desert, and unto whom you fly for refuge; and you will soon be right
altogether. Man lies under the same sin as yourself, and the same condemnation,

and the same punishment. "Man is like to vanity," [Psalm 144:4, Septuagint] and
has not correct judgment, and needs the correction from above. "Man is dust and
ashes," and if he bestow praise, he will often bestow it at random, or out of
favor, or ill will. And if he calumniate and accuse, this again will he do out of the
same kind of purpose. But God does not so: rather irreprovable in His sentence,
and pure His judgment. Wherefore we must always flee to Him for refuge; and
not for these reasons alone, but because He both made, and more than all spares
you, and loves you better than thou dost yourself.
Why then, neglecting to have so admirable ([θαυμαστόν]) an approver,
betake we ourselves unto man, who is nothing, all rashness, all at random? Does
he call you wicked and polluted when you are not so? So much the more do thou
pity him, and weep because he is corrupt; and despise his opinion, because the
eyes of his understanding are darkened. For even the Apostles were thus evil
reported of; and they laughed to scorn their calumniators. But does he call you
good and kind? If such indeed you are, yet be not at all puffed up by the opinion:
but if you are not such, despise it the more, and esteem the thing to be mockery.
Would you know the judgments of the greater part of men, how corrupt
they are, how useless, and worthy of ridicule; some of them coming only from
raving and distracted persons, others from children at the breast? Hear what has
been from the beginning. I will tell you of judgments, not of the people only, but
also of those who passed for the wisest, of those who were legislators from the
earliest period. For who would be counted wiser among the multitude than the
person considered worthy of legislating for cities and peoples? But yet to these
wise men fornication seems to be nothing evil nor worthy of punishment. At
least, no one of the heathen laws makes its penal or brings men to trial on
account of it. And should any one bring another into court for things of that kind,
the multitude laughs it to scorn, and the judge will not suffer it. Dice-playing,
again, is exempt from all their punishments: nor did any one among them ever
incur penalty for it. Drunkenness and gluttony, so far from being a crime, are
considered by many even as a fine thing. And in military carousals it is a point