THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.7.

soul; but it is not so with whiteness, for the being of whiteness is
other than the being of man to which whiteness comes. But the Word
of God from all eternity had complete being in hypostasis or person;
while in time the human nature accrued to it, not as if it were
assumed unto one being inasmuch as this is of the nature (even as
the body is assumed to the being of the soul), but to one being
inasmuch as this is of the hypostasis or person. Hence the human
nature is not accidentally united to the Son of God.
Reply to Objection 3: Accident is divided against substance. Now
substance, as is plain from Metaph. v, 25, is taken in two ways: first,
for essence or nature; secondly, for suppositum or hypostasis--hence the union having taken place in the hypostasis, is enough to
show that it is not an accidental union, although the union did not
take place in the nature.
Reply to Objection 4: Not everything that is assumed as an
instrument pertains to the hypostasis of the one who assumes, as is
plain in the case of a saw or a sword; yet nothing prevents what is
assumed into the unity of the hypostasis from being as an
instrument, even as the body of man or his members. Hence
Nestorius held that the human nature was assumed by the Word
merely as an instrument, and not into the unity of the hypostasis.
And therefore he did not concede that the man was really the Son of
God, but His instrument. Hence Cyril says (Epist. ad Monach.
Aegyptii): "The Scripture does not affirm that this Emmanuel," i.e.
Christ, "was assumed for the office of an instrument, but as God
truly humanized," i.e. made man. But Damascene held that the
human nature in Christ is an instrument belonging to the unity of the
hypostasis.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the union of the Divine nature and the

human is anything created?
Objection 1: It would seem that the union of the Divine and human
natures is not anything created. For there can be nothing created in
God, because whatever is in God is God. But the union is in God, for
God Himself is united to human nature. Therefore it seems that the
union is not anything created.
Objection 2: Further, the end holds first place in everything. But the
end of the union is the Divine hypostasis or Person in which the
union is terminated. Therefore it seems that this union ought chiefly
to be judged with reference to the dignity of the Divine hypostasis,
which is not anything created. Therefore the union is nothing
created.
Objection 3: Further, "That which is the cause of a thing being such
is still more so" (Poster. i). But man is said to be the Creator on
account of the union. Therefore much more is the union itself
nothing created, but the Creator.
On the contrary, Whatever has a beginning in time is created. Now
this union was not from eternity, but began in time. Therefore the
union is something created.
I answer that, The union of which we are speaking is a relation which
we consider between the Divine and the human nature, inasmuch as
they come together in one Person of the Son of God. Now, as was
said above (FP, Question 13, Article 7), every relation which we
consider between God and the creature is really in the creature, by
whose change the relation is brought into being; whereas it is not
really in God, but only in our way of thinking, since it does not arise
from any change in God. And hence we must say that the union of
which we are speaking is not really in God, except only in our way of
thinking; but in the human nature, which is a creature, it is really.
Therefore we must say it is something created.
Reply to Objection 1: This union is not really in God, but only in our
way of thinking, for God is said to be united to a creature inasmuch
as the creature is really united to God without any change in Him.