to grieve at all, but to pity him; if justly, much more ought thou to keep quiet.
For should any one address you, a poor man, as though thou were rich, the praise
contained in his words is nothing to you, but his encomium is rather mockery;
and so if one insulting you utter things that are untrue, the reproach is nothing to
you either. But if conscience takes hold of what has been said, be not grieved at
the words, but make correction in deeds. This I say with regard to what really are
insults. For if one reproach you with poverty or low birth, laugh at him. These
things are a reproach not to the hearer, but to the speaker, as not knowing true
wisdom. "But," says some one, "when these things are said in the presence of
many who are ignorant of the truth, the wound becomes unbearable." Nay, it is
most bearable, when you have an audience present of witnesses praising and
applauding you, scoffing at and making a jest of him. For not he that defends
himself, but he that says nothing, is applauded by sensible persons. And if none
of those present be a sensible person, then laugh at him most of all, and delight
yourself in the audience of heaven. For there all will praise and applaud and
welcome you. For one Angel is as good as all the world. But why speak I of
Angels, when the Lord Himself proclaims you? Let us exercise ourselves with
these reasonings. For it is no loss to be silent when insulted, but it is, on the
contrary, to defend one's self when insulted. Since were it a fault silently to bear
what is said, Christ would never have told us, "If one smite you on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also." [Matthew 5:39] If then our enemy say what is
not true, let us on this account even pity him, because he draws down upon him
the punishment and vengeance of the accusers, being unworthy even to read the
Scriptures. For to the sinner God says, "Why do you declare My statutes, and
takest My covenant in your mouth? Thou sat and spoke against your brother."
[Psalm 50:16-20, Septuagint] And if he speak the truth, so also he is to be pitied;
since even the Pharisee spoke the truth; yet he did no harm to him who heard
him, but rather good, while he deprived himself of ten thousand blessings,
enduring shipwreck by this accusation. So that either way it is he that suffers
injury, not thou; but thou, if you are sober, wilt have double gain; both the

propitiating God by your silence, and the becoming yet more discreet, the
gaining an opportunity from what has been said to correct what has been done,
and the despising mortal glory. For this is the source of our pain, that many gape
upon the opinion of men. If we are minded to be thus truly wise, we shall know
well that human things are nothing. Let us learn then, and having reckoned up
our faults, let us accomplish their correction in time, and let us determine to
correct one this month, another next month, and a third in that which follows.
And so mounting as it were by steps, let us get to heaven by a Jacob's ladder. For
the ladder seems to me to signify in a riddle by that vision the gradual ascent by
means of virtue, by which it is possible for us to ascend from earth to heaven,
not using material steps, but improvement and correction of manners. Let us then
lay hold on this means of departure and ascent, that having obtained heaven, we
may also enjoy all the blessings there, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.