Homily 25 on the Gospel of John
John 3:5
"Verily I say unto you, Unless a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God."
1. Little children who go daily to their teachers receive their lessons, and
repeat them, and never cease from this kind of acquisition, but sometimes
employ nights as well as days, and this they are compelled to do for perishable
and transient things. Now we do not ask of you who have come to age such toil
as you require of your children; for not every day, but two days only in the week
do we exhort you to hearken to our words, and only for a short portion of the
day, that your task may be an easy one. For the same reason also we divide to
you in small portions what is written in Scripture, that you may be able easily to
receive and lay them up in the storehouses of your minds, and take such pains to
remember them all, as to be able exactly to repeat them to others yourselves,
unless any one be sleepy, and dull, and more idle than a little child.
Let us now attend to the sequel of what has been before said. When
Nicodemus fell into error and wrested the words of Christ to the earthly birth,
and said that it was not possible for an old man to be born again, observe how
Christ in answer more clearly reveals the manner of the Birth, which even thus
had difficulty for the carnal enquirer, yet still was able to raise the hearer from
his low opinion of it. What says He? "Verily I say unto you, Unless a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God." What
He declares is this: "You say that it is impossible, I say that it is so absolutely
possible as to be necessary, and that it is not even possible otherwise to be
saved." For necessary things God has made exceedingly easy also. The earthly
birth which is according to the flesh, is of the dust, and therefore heaven is

walled against it, for what has earth in common with heaven? But that other,
which is of the Spirit, easily unfolds to us the arches above. Hear, you as many
as are unilluminated, shudder, groan, fearful is the threat, fearful the sentence. "It
is not (possible)," He says, "for one not born of water and the Spirit, to enter
into the Kingdom of heaven"; because he wears the raiment of death, of cursing,
of perdition, he has not yet received his Lord's token, he is a stranger and an
alien, he has not the royal watchword. "Except," He says, "a man be born of
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven."
Yet even thus Nicodemus did not understand. Nothing is worse than to
commit spiritual things to argument; it was this that would not suffer him to
suppose anything sublime and great. This is why we are called faithful, that
having left the weakness of human reasonings below, we may ascend to the
height of faith, and commit most of our blessings to her teaching; and if
Nicodemus had done this, the thing would not have been thought by him
impossible. What then does Christ? To lead him away from his groveling
imagination, and to show that He speaks not of the earthly birth, He says,
"Unless a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of heaven." This He spoke, willing to draw him to the faith by the
terror of the threat, and to persuade him not to deem the thing impossible, and
taking pains to move him from his imagination as to the carnal birth. "I mean,"
says He, "another Birth, O Nicodemus. Why do you draw down the saying to
earth? Why do you subject the matter to the necessity of nature? This Birth is too
high for such pangs as these; it has nothing in common with you; it is indeed
called 'birth,' but in name only has it anything in common, in reality it is
different. Remove yourself from that which is common and familiar; a different
kind of childbirth bring I into the world; in another manner will I have men to be
generated: I have come to bring a new manner of Creation. I formed (man) of
earth and water; but that which was formed was unprofitable, the vessel was
wrenched awry; I will no more form them of earth and water, but 'of water' and
'of the Spirit.'"