nothing further to do by way of overthrowing it, but was satisfied with the
simple protestation,
Ver. 17. "God forbid:" for shamelessness and irreverence need not be met
by processes of reasoning, but a mere protest is enough.
Ver. 18. "For if I build up again those things which I destroyed, I prove
myself a transgressor."
Observe the Apostle's discernment; his opponents endeavored to show, that
he who kept not the Law was a transgressor, but he retorts the argument upon
them, and shows that he who did keep the Law was a transgressor, not merely of
faith, but of the Law itself. "I build up again the things which I destroyed," that
is, the Law; he means as follows: the Law has confessedly ceased, and we have
abandoned it, and betaken ourselves to the salvation which comes of faith. But if
we make a point of setting it up again, we become by that very act transgressors,
striving to keep what God has annulled. Next he shows how it has been annulled.
Ver. 19. "For I through the Law died unto the Law."
This may be viewed in two ways; it is either the law of grace which he
speaks of, for he is wont to call this a law, as in the words, "For the law of the
Spirit of life made me free:" [Romans 8:2] or it is the old Law, of which he says,
that by the Law itself he has become dead to the Law. That is to say, the Law
itself has taught me no longer to obey itself, and therefore if I do so, I shall be
transgressing even its teaching. How, in what way has it so taught? Moses says,
speaking of Christ, "The Lord God will raise up unto you a Prophet from the
midst of you of your brethren, like me; unto Him shall you hearken."
[Deuteronomy 18:15] Therefore they who do not obey Him, transgress the Law.
Again, the expression, "I through the Law died unto the Law," may be
understood in another sense: the Law commands all its precepts to be performed,
and punishes the transgressor; therefore we are all dead to it, for no man has
fulfilled it. Here observe, how guardedly he assails it; he says not, "the Law is
dead to me;" but, "I am dead to the Law;" the meaning of which is, that, as it is
impossible for a dead corpse to obey the commands of the Law, so also is it for

me who have perished by its curse, for by its word am I slain. Let it not therefore
lay commands on the dead, dead by its own act, dead not in body only, but in
soul, which has involved the death of the body. This he shows in what follows:
Ver. 19, 20. "That I might live unto God, I have been crucified with Christ."
Having said, "I am dead," lest it should be objected, how then do you live?
He adds the cause of his living, and shows that when alive the Law slew him, but
that when dead Christ through death restored him to life. He shows the wonder
to be twofold; that by Christ both the dead was begotten into life, and that by
means of death. He here means the immortal life, for this is the meaning of the
words, "That I might live unto God I am crucified with Christ." How, it is asked,
can a man now living and breathing have been crucified? That Christ has been
crucified is manifest, but how can you have been crucified, and yet live? He
explains it thus;
Ver. 20. "Yet I live; and yet no longer I, but Christ lives in me."
In these words, "I am crucified with Christ," he alludes to Baptism and in
the words "nevertheless I live, yet not I," our subsequent manner of life whereby
our members are mortified. By saying "Christ lives in me," he means nothing is
done by me, which Christ disapproves; for as by death he signifies not what is
commonly understood, but a death to sin; so by life, he signifies a delivery from
sin. For a man cannot live to God, otherwise than by dying to sin; and as Christ
suffered bodily death, so does Paul a death to sin. "Mortify," says he, "your
members which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness, passion;"
[Colossians 3:5], and again, "our old man was crucified," [Romans 6:6] which
took place in the Bath. After which, if you remain dead to sin, you live to God,
but if you let it live again, you are the ruin of your new life. This however did
not Paul, but continued wholly dead; if then, he says, I live to God a life other
than that in the Law, and am dead to the Law, I cannot possibly keep any part of
the Law. Consider how perfect was his walk, and you will be transported with
admiration of this blessed soul. He says not, "I live," but, "Christ lives in me;"
who is bold enough to utter such words? Paul indeed, who had harnessed himself