is straitened by hunger, to utter encomiums upon the beauty of those who pity
him. And I wish this were all. But there is even another form worse than this. It
compels the poor to be jugglers, and buffoons, and filthy jesters. For when he
fastens on his fingers cups and bowls and cans, and plays on them as cymbals,
and having a pipe, whistles on it those base and amorous melodies, and sings
them at the top of his voice; and then many stand round, and some give him a
piece of bread, some a penny, and others something else, and they detain him
long, and both men and women are delighted; what is more grievous than this?
Are not these things deserving of much groaning? They are indeed trifling, and
are considered trifling, but they engender great sins in our character. For when
any obscene and sweet melody is uttered, it softens the mind, and corrupts the
very soul itself. And the poor man indeed who calls upon God, and invokes a
thousand blessings upon us, is not vouchsafed a word from you; but he who
instead of these things introduces sportive sallies, is admired.
And what has now come into my mind to say to you, that I will utter. And
what is this? When you are involved in poverty and sickness, if from no other
quarter, at least from those who beg, who wander through the narrow streets,
learn to give thanks to the Lord. For they, spending their whole life in begging,
do not blaspheme, are not angry, nor impatient, but make the whole narrative of
their beggary in thanksgiving, magnifying God, and calling Him merciful. He
indeed that is perishing with hunger, calls Him merciful, but you who are living
in plenty, if you cannot get the possessions of all, call Him cruel. How much
better is he! How will he condemn us! God has sent the poor through the world,
as common teachers in our calamities, and consolation under them. Have you
suffered anything contrary to your wishes? Yet nothing like what that poor man
suffers. You have lost an eye, but he both his. You have long labored under
disease, but he has one that is incurable. You have lost your children, but he even
the health of his own body. You have suffered a great loss, but you are not yet
reduced to supplicate from others. Give thanks to God. You see them in the
furnace of poverty, and begging indeed from all, but receiving from few. When

you are weary of praying, and dost not receive, consider how often you have
heard a poor man calling upon you, and hast not listened to him, and he has not
been angry nor insulted you. And yet thou indeed actest thus from cruelty; but
God from mercy even declines to hear. If therefore thou, yourself from cruelty
not hearing your fellow-servant, expectest not to be found fault with, do you find
fault with the Lord, who out of mercy does not hear His servant? Do you see
how great the inequality, how great the injustice?
Let us consider these things constantly, those who are below us, those who
are under greater calamities, and so we shall be able to be thankful to God. Life
abounds with many such instances. And he who is sober, and willing to attend,
gains no small instruction from the houses of prayer. For on this account the
poor sit before the vestibule both in the churches and in the chapels of the
Martyrs, that we may receive great benefit from the spectacle of these things.
For consider, that when we enter into earthly palaces, we can see nothing of this
kind; but men that are dignified and famous, and wealthy and intelligent, are
everywhere hastening to and fro. But into the real palaces, I mean the Church,
and the oratories of the Martyrs, enter the demoniacs, the maimed, the poor, the
aged, the blind, and those whose limbs are distorted. And wherefore? That you
may be instructed by the spectacle of these things; in the first place that if you
have entered drawing after you any pride from without, having looked upon
these, and laid aside your arrogance, and become contrite in heart, so you may
go in, and hear the things that are said; for it is not possible that he who prays
with an arrogant mind should be heard. That when you see an aged man, you
may not be elated at your youth, for these old men were once young. That when
you boast highly of your warfare, or your kingly power, you may consider that
from these are sprung those who have become illustrious in kings' courts. That,
when you presume upon your bodily health, taking heed to these, you may abate
your lofty spirit. For the healthy man who continually enters here will not be
highminded on account of his bodily health; and the sick man will receive no
slight consolation.