persistently call upon Jesus, whom you serve, merely to bow his head; and in a
moment of time all these evils will be dissolved. But if you have already called
upon Him, and yet they have not been dissolved, such is the manner of God's
dealing (for I will resume my former argument); He does not put down evils at
the outset, but when they have grown to a head, when scarcely any form of the
enemy's malice remains ungratified, then He suddenly converts all things to a
state of tranquillity and conducts them to an unexpected settlement. For He is not
only able to turn as many things as we expect and hope, to good, but many more,
yea infinitely more. Wherefore also Paul says "now to Him who is able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think." [Ephesians 3:20] Could
He not, for example, have prevented the three children at the outset from falling
into trial? But He did not choose to do this, thereby conferring great pain upon
them. Therefore He suffered them to be delivered into the hands of barbarians,
and the furnace to be heated to an immeasurable height and the wrath of the king
to blaze even more fiercely than the furnace, and hands and feet to be bound
with great severity and they themselves to be cast into the fire; and then, when
all they who beheld despaired of their rescue, suddenly, and beyond all hope, the
wonder-working power of God, the supreme artificer, was displayed, and shone
forth with exceeding splendour. For the fire was bound, and the bondmen were
released; and the furnace became a temple of prayer, a place of fountains and
dew, of higher dignity than a royal court, and the very hairs of their head
prevailed over that all devouring element which gets the better even of iron and
stone, and masters every kind of substance. And a solemn song of universal
praise was instituted there by these holy men inviting every kind of created thing
to join in the wondrous melody; and they uttered hymns of thanksgiving to God
for that they had been bound, and also burnt, as far at least as the malice of their
enemies had power; that they had been exiles from their country, captives
deprived of their liberty, wandering outcasts from city and home, sojourners in a
strange and barbarous land; for all this was the outpouring of a grateful heart.
And when the malicious devices of their enemies were perfected (for what

further could they attempt after their death?) and the labours of the heroes were
completed, and the garland of victory was woven, and their rewards were
prepared and nothing more was wanting for their renown; then at last their
calamities were brought to an end, and he who caused the furnace to be kindled,
and delivered them over to that great punishment, became himself the panegyrist
of those holy heroes, and the herald of God's marvellous deed, and everywhere
throughout the world issued letters full of reverent praise, recording what had
taken place, and becoming the faithful herald of the miracles wrought by the
wonder-working God. For inasmuch as he had been an enemy and adversary
what he wrote was above suspicion even in the opinion of enemies.
3. Do you see the abundance of resource belonging to God? His wisdom,
His extraordinary power, His loving-kindness and care? Be not therefore
dismayed or troubled but continue to give thanks to God for all things, praising,
and invoking Him; beseeching and supplicating; even if countless tumults and
troubles come upon you, even if tempests are stirred up before your eyes let
none of these things disturb you. For our Master is not baffled by the difficulty,
even if all things are reduced to the extremity of ruin. For it is possible for Him
to raise those who have fallen, to convert those who are in error, to set straight
those who have been ensnared, to release those who have been laden with
countless sins, and make them righteous, to quicken those who are dead, to
restore lustre to decayed things, and freshness to those which have waxen old.
For if He makes things which are not, come into being, and bestows existence on
things which are nowhere by any means manifest, how much more will He
rectify things which already exist. But you will say there are many who perish,
many who are caught by snares. Many such things have indeed often taken
place, yet afterwards have all received their appropriate correction, save some
few who have remained in an incurable condition, even after the change in their
circumstances. Why are you troubled and distracted because such a person is
cast out and such another is put into his place? Christ was crucified and the
release of Barabbas the robber was demanded, and the depraved populace