SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.2.

man; and thus it is evident that no one comes to the summit
suddenly, since every man that lives aright, progresses during the
whole course of his life, so as to arrive at the summit. Secondly, in
comparison with various states; and thus he who desires to reach to
a higher state need not begin from a lower state: for instance, if a
man wish to be a cleric he need not first of all be practiced in the life
of a layman. Thirdly, in comparison with different persons; and in
this way it is clear that one man begins straightway not only from a
higher state, but even from a higher degree of holiness, than the
highest degree to which another man attains throughout his whole
life. Hence Gregory says (Dial. ii, 1): "All are agreed that the boy
Benedict began at a high degree of grace and perfection in his daily
life."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 184, Article 6) the
holy orders prerequire holiness, whereas the religious state is a
school for the attainment of holiness. Hence the burden of orders
should be laid on the walls when these are already seasoned with
holiness, whereas the burden of religion seasons the walls, i.e. men,
by drawing out the damp of vice.
Reply to Objection 4: It is manifest from the words of this gloss that
it is chiefly a question of the order of doctrine, in so far as one has to
pass from easy matter to that which is more difficult. Hence it is
clear from what follows that the statement that certain "heretics" and
"schismatics have perverted this order" refers to the order of
doctrine. For it continues thus: "But he says that he has kept these
things, namely the aforesaid order, binding himself by an oath. Thus
I was humble not only in other things but also in knowledge, for 'I
was humbly minded'; because I was first of all fed with milk, which is
the Word made flesh, so that I grew up to partake of the bread of
angels, namely the Word that is in the beginning with God." The
example which is given in proof, of the newly baptized not being
commanded to fast until Pentecost, shows that no difficult things are
to be laid on them as an obligation before the Holy Ghost inspires
them inwardly to take upon themselves difficult things of their own
choice. Hence after Pentecost and the receiving of the Holy Ghost
the Church observes a fast. Now the Holy Ghost, according to
Ambrose (Super Luc. 1:15), "is not confined to any particular age; He
ceases not when men die, He is not excluded from the maternal
womb." Gregory also in a homily for Pentecost (xxx in Ev.) says: "He
fills the boy harpist and makes him a psalmist: He fills the boy
abstainer and makes him a wise judge [Dan. 1:8-17]," and afterwards

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.2.

he adds: "No time is needed to learn whatsoever He will, for He
teaches the mind by the merest touch." Again it is written (Eccles.
8:8), "It is not in man's power to stop the Spirit," and the Apostle
admonishes us (1 Thess. 5:19): "Extinguish not the Spirit," and (Acts
7:51) it is said against certain persons: "You always resist the Holy
Ghost."
Reply to Objection 5: There are certain chief precepts which are the
ends, so to say, of the commandments and counsels. These are the
precepts of charity, and the counsels are directed to them, not that
these precepts cannot be observed without keeping the counsels,
but that the keeping of the counsels conduces to the better
observance of the precepts. The other precepts are secondary and
are directed to the precepts of charity; in such a way that unless one
observe them it is altogether impossible to keep the precepts of
charity. Accordingly in the intention the perfect observance of the
precepts of charity precedes the counsels, and yet sometimes it
follows them in point of time. For such is the order of the end in
relation to things directed to the end. But the observance in a
general way of the precepts of charity together with the other
precepts, is compared to the counsels as the common to the proper,
because one can observe the precepts without observing the
counsels, but not vice versa. Hence the common observance of the
precepts precedes the counsels in the order of nature; but it does
not follow that it precedes them in point of time, for a thing is not in
the genus before being in one of the species. But the observance of
the precepts apart from the counsels is directed to the observance of
the precepts together with the counsels; as an imperfect to a perfect
species, even as the irrational to the rational animal. Now the perfect
is naturally prior to the imperfect, since "nature," as Boethius says
(De Consol. iii, 10), "begins with perfect things." And yet it is not
necessary for the precepts first of all to be observed without the
counsels, and afterwards with the counsels, just as it is not
necessary for one to be an ass before being a man, or married before
being a virgin. In like manner it is not necessary for a person first of
all to keep the commandments in the world before entering religion;
especially as the worldly life does not dispose one to religious
perfection, but is more an obstacle thereto.