presence is weak,") but when he is away he boasts greatly in what he writes, (for
such is the signification of "his letters are weighty.") Moreover, to enhance their
own credit these persons made a pretence of receiving nothing, to which he also
alludes where he says, "that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we."
[2 Corinthians 11:12] And besides, possessing also the power of language, they
were immediately greatly elated. Wherefore also he calls himself "rude in
speech," [2 Corinthians 11:6] showing that he is not ashamed thereof; nor deems
the contrary any great acquisition. Seeing then it was likely that by these persons
some would be seduced, after commending what was right in their conduct, and
beating down their senseless pride in the things of Judaism, in that out of season
they were contentious to observe them, he administers a gentle rebuke on this
subject also.
2. Such then, to speak summarily and by the way, appears to me the
argument of this Epistle. It remains to consider the introduction, and to say why
after his accustomed salutation he begins, as he does, with the mercies of God.
But first, it is necessary to speak of the very beginning, and inquire why he here
associates Timothy with himself. For, he says, "Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ
through the will of God, and Timothy our brother." In the first Epistle he
promised he would send him; and charged them, saying, "Now if Timothy come,
see that he be with you without fear." [1 Corinthians 16:10] How then is it that he
associates him here in the outset with himself? After he had been among them,
agreeably to that promise of his teacher, "I have sent unto you Timothy who shall
put you in remembrance of my ways which be in Christ," [1 Corinthians 4:17]
and had set everything in order, he had returned back to Paul; who on sending
him, had said, "Set him forward on his journey in peace that he may come to me,
for I expect him with the brethren." [1 Corinthians 16:11]
Since then Timothy was restored to his teacher, and after having with him
set in order the things in Asia, [for, says he, "I will tarry at Ephesus until
Pentecost," 1 Corinthians 16:8;] had crossed again into Macedonia; Paul not
unreasonably associates him hereafter as abiding with himself. For then he wrote

from Asia, but now from Macedonia. Moreover, thus associating him he at once
gains increased respect for him, and displays his own exceeding humility : for
Timothy was very inferior to himself, yet does love bring all things together.
Whence also he everywhere makes him equal with himself; at one time saying,
"as a child serves a father so he served with me;" [Philippians 2:22] at another,
"for he works the work of the Lord, as I also do;" [1 Corinthians 16:10] and here,
he even calls him, "brother;" by all making him an object of respect to the
Corinthians among whom he had been, as I have said, and given proof of his
worth.
"To the Church of God which is at Corinth." Again he calls them "the
Church," to bring and bind them all together in one. For it could not be one
Church, while those within her were sundered and stood apart. With all the saints
which are in the whole of Achaia. In thus saluting all through the Epistle
addressed to the Corinthians, he would at once honor these, and bring together
the whole nation. But he calls them "saints," thereby implying that if any be an
impure person, he has no share in this salutation. But why, writing to the mother
city, does he address all through her, since he does not so everywhere? For
instance, in his Epistle to the Thessalonians he addressed not the Macedonians
also; and in like manner in that to the Ephesians he does not include all Asia;
neither was that to the Romans written to those also who dwell in Italy. But in
this Epistle he does so; and in that to the Galatians. For there also he writes not
to one city, or two, or three, but to all who are scattered every where, saying,
"Paul an Apostle, (not from men neither through man, but through Jesus Christ,
and God the Father, Who raised Him from the dead,) and all the brethren which
are with me, unto the Churches of Galatia. Grace to you and peace." [Galatians
1:1-3] To the Hebrews also he writes one Epistle to all collectively; not
distinguishing them into their several cities. What then can be the reason of this?
Because, as I think, in this case all were involved in one common disorder,
wherefore also he addresses them in common, as needing one common remedy.
For the Galatians were all of them infected. So too were the Hebrews, and so I