But what now do we learn from hence? That no man can protect us there, if
we are betrayed by our works, not because he will not, but because he cannot.
For these too take refuge in the impossibility. This the blessed Abraham also
indicated, saying, "Between us and you there is a great gulf," [Luke 16:26] so
that not even when willing is it permitted them to pass it.
"But go to them that sell, and buy." And who are they that sell? The poor.
And where are these? Here, and then should they have sought them, not at that
time.
2. Do you see what great profit arises to us from the poor? Should you take
them away, you would take away the great hope of our salvation. Wherefore here
must we get together the oil, that it may be useful to us there, when the time calls
us. For that is not the time of collecting it, but this. Spend not then your goods
for nought in luxury and vainglory. For you will have need of much oil there.
Having heard these things, those virgins went their way; but they profited
nothing. And this He says, either pursuing the parable, and working it up; or also
by these things showing, that though we should become humane after our
departure, we shall gain nothing from thence towards our escape. Therefore
neither did their forwardness avail these virgins, because they went to them that
sell not here, but there; nor the rich man, when he became so charitable, as even
to be anxious about his relations. For he that was passing by him that was laid at
the gate, is eager to rescue from perils and from hell them whom he did not so
much as see, and entreats that some be sent to tell them these things. But
nevertheless, he derived no benefit from thence, as neither did these virgins. For
when they having heard these things went their way, the bridegroom came, and
they that were ready went in with Him, but the others were shut out. After their
many labors, after their innumerable toils, and that intolerable fight, and those
trophies which they had set up over the madness of natural appetite, disgraced,
and with their lamps gone out, they withdrew, bending down their faces to the
earth. For nothing is more sullied than virginity not having mercy; so that even
the multitude are wont to call the unmerciful dark. Where then was the profit of

virginity, when they saw not the bridegroom? And not even when they had
knocked did they obtain, but they heard that fearful saying, "Depart, I know you
not." [Matthew 25:12] And when He has said this, nothing else but hell is left,
and that intolerable punishment; or rather, this word is more grievous even than
hell. This word He speaks to them also that work iniquity.
"Watch therefore, for you know not the day nor the hour." [Matthew 25:13]
Do you see how continually He adds this, showing how awful our ignorance
concerning our departure hence? Where now are they, who throughout all their
life are remiss, but when they are blamed by us, are saying, At the time of my
death, I shall leave money to the poor. Let them listen to these words, and be
amended. For indeed at that time many have failed of this, having been snatched
away at once, and not permitted so much as to give charge to their relations
touching what they wished to be done.
This parable was spoken with respect to mercy in alms; but the one that
comes after this, to them that neither in money, nor in word, nor in protection,
nor in any other things whatever, are willing to assist their neighbors, but
withhold all.
And wherefore can it be that this parable brings forward a king, but that a
bridegroom? That you might learn how close Christ is joined unto the virgins
that strip themselves of their possessions; for this indeed is virginity. Wherefore
Paul also makes this as a definition of the thing. "The unmarried woman cares
for the things of the Lord;" [1 Corinthians 7:34-35] such are his words: and, "For
that which is comely, and that you may attend upon the Lord without distraction.
These things we advise," he says.
And if in Luke the parable of the talents is otherwise put, this is to be said,
that the one is really different from the other. For in that, from the one capital
different degrees of increase were made, for from one pound one brought five,
another ten; wherefore neither did they obtain the same recompense; but here, it
is the contrary, and the crown is accordingly equal. For he that received two gave
two, and he that had received the five again in like manner; but there since from