THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.4.

heaven." Therefore it seems presumptuous for a priest, who has
received no revelation on the matter, to say: "I absolve thee," even if
this be explained to mean: "I declare thee absolved."
On the contrary, As our Lord said to His disciples (Mt. 28:19):
"Going . . . teach ye all nations, baptizing them," etc., so did He say
to Peter (Mt. 16:19): "Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth," etc.
Now the priest, relying on the authority of those words of Christ,
says: "I baptize thee." Therefore on the same authority he should say
in this sacrament: "I absolve thee."
I answer that, The perfection of a thing is ascribed to its form. Now it
has been stated above (Article 1, ad 2) that this sacrament is
perfected by that which is done by the priest. Wherefore the part
taken by the penitent, whether it consist of words or deeds, must
needs be the matter of this sacrament, while the part taken by the
priest, takes the place of the form.
Now since the sacraments of the New Law accomplish what they
signify, as stated above (Question 62, Article 1, ad 1), it behooves the
sacramental form to signify the sacramental effect in a manner that
is in keeping with the matter. Hence the form of Baptism is: "I baptize
thee," and the form of Confirmation is: "I sign thee with the sign of
the cross, and I confirm thee with the chrism of salvation," because
these sacraments are perfected in the use of their matter: while in
the sacrament of the Eucharist, which consists in the very
consecration of the matter, the reality of the consecration is
expressed in the words: "This is My Body."
Now this sacrament, namely the sacrament of Penance, consists not
in the consecration of a matter, nor in the use of a hallowed matter,
but rather in the removal of a certain matter, viz. sin, in so far as sins
are said to be the matter of Penance, as explained above (Article 2).
This removal is expressed by the priest saying: "I absolve thee":
because sins are fetters, according to Prov. 5:22. "His own iniquities
catch the wicked, and he is fast bound with the ropes of his own
sins." Wherefore it is evident that this is the most fitting form of this
sacrament: "I absolve thee."
Reply to Objection 1: This form is taken from Christ's very words
which He addressed to Peter (Mt. 16:19): "Whatsoever thou shalt
loose on earth," etc., and such is the form employed by the Church

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.4.

in sacramental absolution. But such absolutions as are given in
public are not sacramental, but are prayers for the remission of
venial sins. Wherefore in giving sacramental absolution it would not
suffice to say: "May Almighty God have mercy on thee," or: "May
God grant thee absolution and forgiveness," because by such words
the priest does not signify the giving of absolution, but prays that it
may be given. Nevertheless the above prayer is said before the
sacramental absolution is given, lest the sacramental effect be
hindered on the part of the penitent, whose acts are as matter in this
sacrament, but not in Baptism or Confirmation.
Reply to Objection 2: The words of Leo are to be understood of the
prayer that precedes the absolution, and do not exclude the fact that
the priest pronounces absolution.
Reply to Objection 3: God alone absolves from sin and forgives sins
authoritatively; yet priests do both ministerially, because the words
of the priest in this sacrament work as instruments of the Divine
power, as in the other sacraments: because it is the Divine power
that works inwardly in all the sacramental signs, be they things or
words, as shown above (Question 62, Article 4; Question 64, Articles
1,2). Wherefore our Lord expressed both: for He said to Peter (Mt.
16:19): "Whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth," etc., and to His
disciples (Jn. 20:23): "Whose sins you shall forgive, they are
forgiven them." Yet the priest says: "I absolve thee," rather than: "I
forgive thee thy sins," because it is more in keeping with the words
of our Lord, by expressing the power of the keys whereby priests
absolve. Nevertheless, since the priest absolves ministerially,
something is suitably added in reference to the supreme authority of
God, by the priest saying: "I absolve thee in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost," or by the power of Christ's
Passion, or by the authority of God. However, as this is not defined
by the words of Christ, as it is for Baptism, this addition is left to the
discretion of the priest.
Reply to Objection 4: Power was given to the apostles, not that they
themselves might heal the sick, but that the sick might be healed at
the prayer of the apostles: whereas power was given to them to work
instrumentally or ministerially in the sacraments; wherefore they
could express their own agency in the sacramental forms rather than
in the healing of infirmities. Nevertheless in the latter case they did
not always use the deprecatory form, but sometimes employed the
indicative or imperative: thus we read (Acts 3:6) that Peter said to the