Homily 38 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XVII. 16, 17
"Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stirred in him,
when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry. Therefore disputed he in the
synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily
with them that met with him."
Observe how he meets with greater trials among the Jews than among the
Gentiles. Thus in Athens he undergoes nothing of this kind; the thing goes as far
as ridicule, and there an end: and yet he did make some converts: whereas
among the Jews he underwent many perils; so much greater was their hostility
against him.— "His spirit," it says, "was roused within him when he saw the city
all full of idols." Nowhere else were so many objects of worship to be seen. But
again "he disputed with the Jews in the synagogue, and in the market daily with
them that met with him. Then certain of the philosophers of the Stoics and
Epicureans encountered him." [Acts 17:18] It is a wonder the philosophers did
not laugh him to scorn, speaking in the way he did. "And some said, What does
this babbler mean to say?" insolently, on the instant: — this is far from
philosophy. "Other some said, He seems to be a setter forth of strange gods,"
from the preaching, because he had no arrogance. They did not understand, nor
comprehend the subjects he was speaking of— how should they? affirming as
they did, some of them, that God is a body; others, that pleasure is the (true)
happiness. "Of strange gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the
Resurrection:" for in fact they supposed "Anastasis" (the Resurrection) to be
some deity, being accustomed to worship female divinities also. "And having
taken him, they brought him to the Areopagus" [Acts 17:19]— not to punish, but
in order to learn — "to the Areopagus" where the trials for murder were held.
Thus observe, in hope of learning (they ask him), saying, "May we know what is

this new doctrine spoken of by you? For you bring certain strange matters to our
ears" [Acts 17:20]: everywhere novelty is the charge: "we would fain know
therefore, what these things may mean." It was a city of talkers, that city of
theirs. "For all the Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in
nothing else, but either to tell, or to hear some new thing. Then Paul stood in the
midst of Mars hill, and said, You men of Athens, I look upon you as being in all
things" (v. 21, 22)— he puts it by way of encomium: (the word) does not seem
to mean anything offensive— [δεισιδαιμονεστέρους], that is, [εὐλαβεστέρους],
"more religiously disposed. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I
found an altar with his inscription, To an Unknown God. What therefore ye
ignorantly worship, this declare I unto you." [Acts 17:23]— "On which was
inscribed, To an Unknown God." The Athenians, namely, as on many occasions
they had received gods from foreign parts also— for instance, the temple of
Minerva, Pan, and others from different countries— being afraid that there might
be some other god not yet known to them, but worshipped elsewhere, for more
assurance, forsooth, erected an altar to that god also: and as the god was not
known, it was inscribed, "To an Unknown God." This God then, he tells them, is
Christ; or rather, the God of all. "Him declare I unto you." Observe how he
shows that they had already received Him, and "it is nothing strange," says he,
"nothing new that I introduce to you." All along, this was what they had been
saying: "What is this new doctrine spoken of by you? For you bring certain
strange matters to our ears." Immediately therefore he removes this surmise of
theirs: and then says, "God that made the world and all things therein, He being
Lord of heaven and earth"— for, that they may not imagine Him to be one of
many, he presently sets them right on this point; adding, "dwells not in temples
made with hands" [Acts 17:24], "neither is worshipped with men's hands, as
though he needed anything"— do you observe how, little by little, he brings in
the philosophy? How he ridicules the heathen error? "seeing it is He that gives to
all life, and breath, and all things; and has made of one blood all nations of men
for to dwell on all the face of the earth." This is peculiar to God. Look, then,