punishment itself be bodily. Wherefore Gregory (Dial. iv) proves the
fire of hell to be corporeal from the very fact that the wicked will be
cast thither after the resurrection. Again Augustine, as quoted in the
text of Sentent. iv, D, 44, clearly admits (De Civ. Dei xxi, 10) that the
fire by which the bodies are tormented is corporeal. And this is the
point at issue for the present. We have said elsewhere (Question 70,
Article 3) how the souls of the damned are punished by this
corporeal fire.
Reply to Objection 1: Damascene does not absolutely deny that this
fire is material, but that it is material as our fire, since it differs from
ours in some of its properties. We may also reply that since that fire
does not alter bodies as to their matter, but acts on them for their
punishment by a kind of spiritual action, it is for this reason that it is
stated not to be material, not as regards its substance, but as to its
punitive effect on bodies and, still more, on souls.
Reply to Objection 2: The assertion of Augustine may be taken in
this way, that the place whither souls are conveyed after death be
described as incorporeal, in so far as the soul is there, not
corporeally, i.e. as bodies are in a place, but in some other spiritual
way, as angels are in a place. Or we may reply that Augustine is
expressing an opinion without deciding the point, as he often does
in those books.
Reply to Objection 3: That fire will be the instrument of Divine justice
inflicting punishment. Now an instrument acts not only by its own
power and in its own way, but also by the power of the principal
agent, and as directed thereby. Wherefore although fire is not able,
of its own power, to torture certain persons more or less, according
to the measure of sin, it is able to do so nevertheless in so far as its
action is regulated by the ordering of Divine justice: even so the fire
of the furnace is regulated by the forethought of the smith, according
as the effect of his art requires.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the fire of hell is of the same species as

ours?
Objection 1: It would seem that this fire is not of the same species as
the corporeal fire which we see. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx,
16): "In my opinion no man knows of what kind is the everlasting fire,
unless the Spirit of God has revealed it to anyone." But all or nearly
all know the nature of this fire of ours. Therefore that fire is not of the
same species as this.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory commenting on Job 10:26, "A fire that
is not kindled shall devour him," says (Moral. xv): "Bodily fire needs
bodily fuel in order to become fire; neither can it be except by being
kindled, nor live unless it be renewed. On the other hand the fire of
hell, since it is a bodily fire, and burns in a bodily way the wicked
cast therein, is neither kindled by human endeavor, nor kept alive
with fuel, but once created endures unquenchably; at one and the
same time it needs no kindling, and lacks not heat." Therefore it is
not of the same nature as the fire that we see.
Objection 3: Further, the everlasting and the corruptible differ
essentially, since they agree not even in genus, according to the
Philosopher (Metaph. x). But this fire of ours is corruptible, whereas
the other is everlasting: "Depart from Me, you cursed, into
everlasting fire" (Mt. 25:41). Therefore they are not of the same
nature.
Objection 4: Further, it belongs to the nature of this fire of ours to
give light. But the fire of hell gives no light, hence the saying of Job
18:5: "Shall not the light of the wicked be extinguished?"
Therefore . . . as above.
On the contrary, According to the Philosopher (Topic. i, 6), "every
water is of the same species as every other water." Therefore in like
manner every fire is of the same species as every other fire.
Further, it is written (Wis. 11:17): "By what things a man sinneth by
the same also he is tormented." Now men sin by the sensible things
of this world. Therefore it is just that they should be punished by
those same things.