except in so far as it is susceptive of the influence of the principal
agent as moving that instrument. In like manner a virtue that does
not proceed from the essential principles of a thing does not indicate
the nature of that thing except in the point of susceptibility. Thus the
virtue whereby hot water can heat is no indication of the nature of
water except in the point of its being receptive of heat. Consequently
nothing prevents water that has this virtue from being of the same
species as water that has it not. In like manner it is not unreasonable
that this fire, which will have the power to cleanse the surface of the
world, will be of the same species as the fire to which we are used,
since the heating power therein arises, not from its essential
principles but from the divine power or operation: whether we say
that this power is an absolute quality, such as heat in hot water, or a
kind of intention as we have ascribed to instrumental virtue (Sent. iv,
D, 1, qu. 1, Article 4) [TP, Question 62, Article 4, ad 1]. The latter is
more probable since that fire will not act save as the instrument of
the Divine power.
Reply to Objection 3: Of its own nature fire tends only upwards; but
in so far as it pursues its matter, which it requires when it is outside
its own sphere, it follows the site of combustible matter. Accordingly
it is not unreasonable for it to take a circular or a downward course,
especially in so far as it acts as the instrument of the Divine power.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether that fire will cleanse also the higher

heavens?
Objection 1: It would seem that that fire will cleanse also the higher
heavens. For it is written (Ps. 101:26,27): "The heavens are the works
of Thy hands: they shall perish but Thou remainest." Now the higher
heavens also are the work of God's hands. Therefore they also shall
perish in the final burning of the world.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (2 Pt. 3:12): "The heavens being on
fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with the burning
heat of fire." Now the heavens that are distinct from the elements are
the higher heavens, wherein the stars are fixed. Therefore it would
seem that they also will be cleansed by that fire.
Objection 3: Further, the purpose of that fire will be to remove from
bodies their indisposition to the perfection of glory. Now in the
higher heaven we find this indisposition both as regards guilt, since
the devil sinned there, and as regards natural deficiency, since a
gloss on Rm. 8:22, "We know that every creature groaneth and is in
labor even until now," says: "All the elements fulfill their duty with
labor: even as it is not without labor that the sun and moon travel
their appointed course." Therefore the higher heavens also will be
cleansed by that fire.
On the contrary, "The heavenly bodies are not receptive of
impressions from without" [Sent. Philosop. ex Arist. collect. lit. c.--Among the works of Bede].
Further, a gloss on 2 Thess. 1:8, "In a flame of fire giving
vengeance," says: "There will be in the world a fire that shall precede
Him, and shall rise in the air to the same height as did the waters of
the deluge." But the waters of the deluge did not rise to the height of
the higher heavens but only 15 cubits higher than the mountain
summits (Gn. 7:20). Therefore the higher heavens will not be
cleansed by that fire.
I answer that, The cleansing of the world will be for the purpose of
removing from bodies the disposition contrary to the perfection of
glory, and this perfection is the final consummation of the universe:
and this disposition is to be found in all bodies, but differently in