FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.7.

natural to the soul to be united to the body; it is not possible for the
perfection of the soul to exclude its natural perfection.
Consequently, we must say that perfect disposition of the body is
necessary, both antecedently and consequently, for that Happiness
which is in all ways perfect. Antecedently, because, as Augustine
says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35), "if body be such, that the governance
thereof is difficult and burdensome, like unto flesh which is
corruptible and weighs upon the soul, the mind is turned away from
that vision of the highest heaven." Whence he concludes that, "when
this body will no longer be 'natural,' but 'spiritual,' then will it be
equalled to the angels, and that will be its glory, which erstwhile was
its burden." Consequently, because from the Happiness of the soul
there will be an overflow on to the body, so that this too will obtain
its perfection. Hence Augustine says (Ep. ad Dioscor.) that "God
gave the soul such a powerful nature that from its exceeding fulness
of happiness the vigor of incorruption overflows into the lower
nature."
Reply to Objection 1: Happiness does not consist in bodily good as
its object: but bodily good can add a certain charm and perfection to
Happiness.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the body has not part in that
operation of the intellect whereby the Essence of God is seen, yet it
might prove a hindrance thereto. Consequently, perfection of the
body is necessary, lest it hinder the mind from being lifted up.
Reply to Objection 3: The perfect operation of the intellect requires
indeed that the intellect be abstracted from this corruptible body
which weighs upon the soul; but not from the spiritual body, which
will be wholly subject to the spirit. On this point we shall treat in the
Third Part of this work (SS, Question 82, seqq.).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.4, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether any external goods are necessary for

happiness?
Objection 1: It would seem that external goods also are necessary
for Happiness. For that which is promised the saints for reward,
belongs to Happiness. But external goods are promised the saints;
for instance, food and drink, wealth and a kingdom: for it is said (Lk.
22:30): "That you may eat and drink at My table in My kingdom": and
(Mt. 6:20): "Lay up to yourselves treasures in heaven": and (Mt.
25:34): "Come, ye blessed of My Father, possess you the kingdom."
Therefore external goods are necessary for Happiness.
Objection 2: Further, according to Boethius (De Consol. iii):
happiness is "a state made perfect by the aggregate of all good
things." But some of man's goods are external, although they be of
least account, as Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii, 19). Therefore they
too are necessary for Happiness.
Objection 3: Further, Our Lord said (Mt. 5:12): "Your reward is very
great in heaven." But to be in heaven implies being in a place.
Therefore at least external place is necessary for Happiness.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 72:25): "For what have I in heaven?
and besides Thee what do I desire upon earth?" As though to say: "I
desire nothing but this,"---"It is good for me to adhere to my God."
Therefore nothing further external is necessary for Happiness.
I answer that, For imperfect happiness, such as can be had in this
life, external goods are necessary, not as belonging to the essence
of happiness, but by serving as instruments to happiness, which
consists in an operation of virtue, as stated in Ethic. i, 13. For man
needs in this life, the necessaries of the body, both for the operation
of contemplative virtue, and for the operation of active virtue, for
which latter he needs also many other things by means of which to
perform its operations.
On the other hand, such goods as these are nowise necessary for
perfect Happiness, which consists in seeing God. The reason of this
is that all suchlike external goods are requisite either for the support
of the animal body; or for certain operations which belong to human
life, which we perform by means of the animal body: whereas that