FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.8.

of man, but they are of small account: whereas spiritual goods are
man's chief goods. Consequently it belongs to Divine justice to give
spiritual goods to the virtuous, and to award them as much temporal
goods or evils, as suffices for virtue: for, as Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. viii), "Divine justice does not enfeeble the fortitude of the
virtuous man, by material gifts." The very fact that others receive
temporal goods, is detrimental to their spiritual good; wherefore the
psalm quoted concludes (verse 6): "Therefore pride hath held them
fast."
Reply to Objection 3: Christ bore a satisfactory punishment, not for
His, but for our sins.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether anyone is punished for another's sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that one may be punished for another's
sin. For it is written (Ex. 20:5): "I am . . . God . . . jealous, visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate Me"; and (Mt. 23:35): "That upon you
may come all the just blood that hath been shed upon the earth."
Objection 2: Further, human justice springs from Divine justice. Now,
according to human justice, children are sometimes punished for
their parents, as in the case of high treason. Therefore also
according to Divine justice, one is punished for another's sin.
Objection 3: Further, if it be replied that the son is punished, not for
the father's sin, but for his own, inasmuch as he imitates his father's
wickedness; this would not be said of the children rather than of
outsiders, who are punished in like manner as those whose crimes
they imitate. It seems, therefore, that children are punished, not for
their own sins, but for those of their parents.
On the contrary, It is written (Ezech. 18:20): "The son shall not bear
the iniquity of the father."
I answer that, If we speak of that satisfactory punishment, which one
takes upon oneself voluntarily, one may bear another's punishment,
in so far as they are, in some way, one, as stated above (Article 7). If,
however, we speak of punishment inflicted on account of sin,
inasmuch as it is penal, then each one is punished for his own sin
only, because the sinful act is something personal. But if we speak
of a punishment that is medicinal, in this way it does happen that
one is punished for another's sin. For it has been stated (Article 7)
that ills sustained in bodily goods or even in the body itself, are
medicinal punishments intended for the health of the soul.
Wherefore there is no reason why one should not have such like
punishments inflicted on one for another's sin, either by God or by
man; e.g. on children for their parents, or on servants for their
masters, inasmuch as they are their property so to speak; in such a
way, however, that, if the children or the servants take part in the sin,
this penal ill has the character of punishment in regard to both the
one punished and the one he is punished for. But if they do not take
part in the sin, it has the character of punishment in regard to the