a violence done to me, I get tripped up without knowing how. Just as we often
say, Such an one came and carried me away with him, without my knowing how;
when it is not ignorance we mean as an excuse, but to show a sort of deceit, and
circumvention, and plot. "For what I would, that I do not: but what I hate, that I
do." How then can you be said not to know what you are doing? For if you will
the good, and hatest the evil, this requires a perfect knowledge. Whence it
appears that he says, "that I would not," not as denying free will, or as adducing
any constrained necessity. For if it was not willingly, but by compulsion, that we
sinned, then the punishments that took place before would not be justifiable. But
as in saying "I know not," it was not ignorance he set before us, but what we
have said; so in adding the "that I would not," it is no necessity he signifies, but
the disapproval he felt of what was done. Since if this was not his meaning in
saying, "That which I would not, that I do:" he would else have gone on, "But I
do what I am compelled and enforced to." For this is what is opposed to willing
and power ([ἐ] [ξουσί& 139·]). But now he does not say this, but in the place of
it he has put the word, "that I hate," that you might learn how when he says,
"that I would not," he does not deny the power. Now, what does the "that I would
not" mean? It means, what I praise not, what I do not approve, what I love not.
And in contradistinction to this, he adds what follows; "But what I hate, that I
do."
Ver. 16. "If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the Law, that it
is good."
You see here, that the understanding is not yet perverted, but keeps up its
own noble character even during the action. For even if it does pursue vice, still
it hates it the while, which would be great commendation, whether of the natural
or the written Law. For that the Law is good, is (he says) plain, from the fact of
my accusing myself, when I disobey the Law, and hate what has been done. And
yet if the Law was to blame for the sin, how comes it that he felt a delight in it,
yet hated what it orders to be done? For, "I consent," he says, "unto the Law, that
it is good."

Ver 17, 18. "Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.
For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing."
On this text, those who find fault with the flesh, and contend it was no part
of God's creation, attack us. What are we to say then? Just what we did before,
when discusssing the Law: that as there he makes sin answerable for everything
so here also. For he does not say, that the flesh works it, but just the contrary, "it
is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me." But if he does say that "there dwells
no good thing in it," still this is no charge against the flesh. For the fact that "no
good thing dwells in it," does not show that it is evil itself. Now we admit, that
the flesh is not so great as the soul, and is inferior to it, yet not contrary, or
opposed to it, or evil; but that it is beneath the soul, as a harp beneath a harper,
and as a ship under the pilot. And these are not contrary to those who guide and
use them, but go with them entirely, yet are not of the same honor with the artist.
As then a person who says, that the art resides not in the harp or the ship, but in
the pilot or harper, is not finding fault with the instruments, but pointing out the
great difference between them and the artist; so Paul in saying, that "in my flesh
dwells no good thing," is not finding fault with the body, but pointing out the
soul's superiority. For this it is that has the whole duty or pilotage put into its
hands, and that of playing. And this Paul here points out, giving the governing
power to the soul, and after dividing man into these two things, the soul and the
body, he says, that the flesh has less of reason, and is destitute of discretion, and
ranks among things to be led, not among things that lead. But the soul has more
wisdom, and can see what is to be done and what not, yet is not equal to pulling
in the horse as it wishes. And this would be a charge not against the flesh only,
but against the soul also, which knows indeed what it ought to do, but still does
not carry out in practice what seems best to it. "For to will," he says, "is present
with me; but how to perform that which is good, I find not." Here again in the
words, "I find not," he does not speak of any ignorance or perplexity, but a kind
of thwarting and crafty assault made by sin, which he therefore points more
clearly out in the next words.