SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.7.

gave, although the other party unjustly retains it.
Again, a man who is guilty of simony, through having conferred
Orders simoniacally, or through having simoniacally granted or
received a benefice, or through having been a go-between in a
simoniacal transaction, if he has done so publicly, is suspended by
virtue of the law, as regards both himself and others; but if he has
acted in secret he is suspended by virtue of the law, as regards
himself alone, and not as regards others.
Reply to Objection 2: One ought not to receive Orders from a bishop
one knows to have been promoted simoniacally, either on account of
his command or for fear of his excommunication: and such as
receive Orders from him do not receive the exercise of their Orders,
even though they are ignorant of his being guilty of simony; and they
need to receive a dispensation. Some, however, maintain that one
ought to receive Orders in obedience to his command unless one
can prove him to be guilty of simony, but that one ought not to
exercise the Order without a dispensation. But this is an
unreasonable statement, because no one should obey a man to the
extent of communicating with him in an unlawful action. Now he that
is, by virtue of the law, suspended as regards both himself and
others, confers Orders unlawfully: wherefore no one should
communicate with him, by receiving Orders from him for any cause
whatever. If, however, one be not certain on the point, one ought not
to give credence to another's sin, and so one ought with a good
conscience to receive Orders from him. And if the bishop has been
guilty of simony otherwise than by a simoniacal promotion, and the
fact be a secret, one can receive Orders from him because he is not
suspended as regards others, but only as regards himself, as stated
above (ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: To be deprived of what one has received is not
only the punishment of a sin, but is also sometimes the effect of
acquiring unjustly, as when one buys a thing of a person who cannot
sell it. Wherefore if a man, knowingly and spontaneously, receives
Orders or an ecclesiastical benefice simoniacally, not only is he
deprived of what he has received, by forfeiting the exercise of his
order, and resigning the benefice and the fruits acquired therefrom,
but also in addition to this he is punished by being marked with
infamy. Moreover, he is bound to restore not only the fruit actually
acquired, but also such as could have been acquired by a careful
possessor (which, however, is to be understood of the net fruits,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.7.

allowance being made for expenses incurred on account of the
fruits), excepting those fruits that have been expended for the good
of the Church.
On the other hand, if a man's promotion be procured simoniacally by
others, without his knowledge and consent, he forfeits the exercise
of his Order, and is bound to resign the benefice obtained together
with fruits still extant; but he is not bound to restore the fruits which
he has consumed, since he possessed them in good faith. Exception
must be made in the case when his promotion has been deceitfully
procured by an enemy of his; or when he expressly opposes the
transaction, for then he is not bound to resign, unless subsequently
he agree to the transaction, by paying what was promised.
Reply to Objection 4: Money, property, or fruits simoniacally
received, must be restored to the Church that has incurred loss by
their transfer, notwithstanding the fact that the prelate or a member
of the chapter of that church was at fault, since others ought not to
be the losers by his sin: in suchwise, however, that, as far as
possible, the guilty parties be not the gainers. But if the prelate and
the entire chapter be at fault, restitution must be made, with the
consent of superior authority, either to the poor or to some other
church.
Reply to Objection 5: If there are any persons who have been
simoniacally admitted into a monastery, they must quit: and if the
simony was committed with their knowledge since the holding of the
General Council [Fourth Lateran Council, A.D. 1215, held by Innocent
III], they must be expelled from their monastery without hope of
return, and do perpetual penance under a stricter rule, or in some
house of the same order, if a stricter one be not found. If, however,
this took place before the Council, they must be placed in other
houses of the same order. If this cannot be done, they must be
received into monasteries of the same order, by way of
compensation, lest they wander about the world, but they must not
be admitted to their former rank, and must be assigned a lower
place.
On the other hand, if they were received simoniacally, without their
knowledge, whether before or after the Council, then after quitting
they may be received again, their rank being changed as stated.