bear malice, he is no sooner stricken than he is healed." When such an one falls
into any misfortune, who will not pity him? When he has offended, who will not
pardon him? When he asks a favor of others, who will not grant it to him? Who
will not be willing to be the friend and servant of so good a soul? Yea, I entreat
you, let us do all things for Him, not to our friends, not to our relations only, but
even to our domestics. For He says, "Forbearing threatening, knowing that your
Master also is in heaven." [Ephesians 6:9]
If we forgive our neighbors their trespasses, ours will be forgiven to us, if
we bestow alms, if we be humble. For this also takes away sins. For if the
publican, only for saying, "God be merciful to me a sinner" [Luke 18:13], went
down justified, much more we also, if we be humble and contrite, shall be able
to obtain abundant lovingkindness. If we confess our own sins and condemn
ourselves, we shall be cleansed from the most of our defilement. For there are
many ways that purify. Let us therefore in every way war against the devil. I
have said nothing difficult, nothing burdensome. Forgive him that has injured
you, have pity on the needy, humble your soul, and though thou be a grievous
sinner, you will be able to obtain the kingdom, by these means purging off your
sins themselves, and wiping off their stain. And God grant that we all, having
purified ourselves here by confession from all the filth of our sins, may there
obtain the blessings promised in Christ Jesus our Lord, etc.

## Homily 2 on Philemon

Philemon i. 4-6
" I thank my God, making mention of you always in my prayers, Hearing of
your love and faith, which you have towards the Lord Jesus, and toward all
saints. That the communication of your faith may become effectual by the
acknowledging [in the knowledge] of every good thing which is in us, in Christ
Jesus."
He does not immediately at the commencement ask the favor, but having
first admired the man, and having praised him for his good actions, and having
shown no small proof of his love, that he always made mention of him in his
prayers, and having said that many are refreshed by him, and that he is obedient
and complying in all things; then he puts it last of all, by this particularly putting
him to the blush. For if others obtain the things which they ask, much more Paul.
If coming before others, he was worthy to obtain, much more when he comes
after others, and asks a thing not pertaining to himself, but in behalf of another.
Then, that he may not seem to have written on this account only, and that no one
may say, "If it were not for Onesimus you would not have written," see how he
assigns other causes also of his Epistle. In the first place manifesting his love,
then also desiring that a lodging may be prepared for him.
"Hearing," he says, "of your love."
This is wonderful, and much greater than if being present he had seen it
when he was present. For it is plain that from its being excessive it had become
manifest, and had reached even to Paul. And yet the distance between Rome and
Phrygia was not small. For he seems to have been there from the mention of
Archippus. For the Colossians were of Phrygia, writing to whom he said, "When
this Epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the Church of the
Laodiceans, and that you likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea." [Colossians