Let us then, bearing in mind all these things, put out of the way these our
superfluous pleas and excuses, and apply ourselves to those toils which the cause
of virtue requires. For thus shall we both attract to ourselves more favor from
God, and persuade Him to assist us in our struggles, and we shall obtain the
eternal blessings; unto which God grant that we may all attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and victory for
ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 9 on Matthew

Matt. II. 16.
"Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was
exceeding angry."
Yet surely it was a case not for anger, but for fear and awe: he ought to have
perceived that he was attempting impossible things. But he is not refrained. For
when a soul is insensible and incurable, it yields to none of the medicines given
by God. See for example this man following up his former efforts, and adding
many murders to one, and hurried down the steep any whither. For driven wild
by this anger, and envy, as by some demon, he takes account of nothing, but
rages even against nature herself, and his anger against the wise men who had
mocked him he vents upon the children that had done no wrong: venturing then
in Palestine upon a deed akin to the things that had been done in Egypt. For he
"sent forth," it is said, "and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in
all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which
he had diligently inquired of the wise men."
Here attend to me carefully. Because many things are uttered by many very
idly touching these children, and the course of events is charged with injustice,
and some of these express their perplexity about it in a more moderate way,
others with more of audaciousness and frenzy. In order then that we may free
these of their madness and those of their perplexity, suffer us to discourse a little
upon this topic. Plainly, then, if this be their charge, that the children were left to
be slain, they should find fault likewise with the slaughter of the soldiers that
kept Peter. [Acts 12:19] For as here, when the young child had fled, other
children are massacred in the place of Him who was sought; even so then, too,
Peter having been delivered from his prison and chains by the angel, one of like
name with this tyrant, and like temper too, when he had sought him, and found

him not, slew instead of him the soldiers that kept him.
"But what is this?" it may be said; "why this is not a solution, but an
enhancement of our difficulty." I know it too, and for this intent I bring forward
all such cases, that to all I may adduce one and the same solution. What then is
the solution of these things? Or what fair account of them can we give? That
Christ was not the cause of their slaughter, but the king's cruelty; as indeed
neither was Peter to those others, but the madness of Herod. For if he had seen
the wall broken through, or the doors overthrown, he might, perhaps, have had
ground to accuse the soldiers that kept the apostle, of neglect; but now when all
things continued in due form, and the doors were thrown wide open, and the
chains fastened to the hands of them that kept him (for in fact they were bound
unto him), he might have inferred from these things (that is, if he had been
strictly doing a judge's office on the matters before him), that the event was not
of human power or craft, but of some divine and wonder-working power; he
might have adored the doer of these things, instead of waging war with the
sentinels. For God had so done all that He did, that so far from exposing the
keepers, He was by their means leading the king unto the truth. But if he proved
senseless, what signifies to the skillful Physician of Souls, managing all things to
do good, the insubordination of him that is diseased?
And just this one may say in the present case likewise. For, wherefore are
you angry, O Herod, at being mocked of the wise men? Did you not know that
the birth was divine? Did you not summon the chief priests? Did you not gather
together the scribes? Did not they, being called, bring the prophet also with them
into your court of judgment, proclaiming these things beforehand from of old?
Did you not see how the old things agreed with the new? Did you not hear that a
star also ministered to these men? Did you not reverence the zeal of the
barbarians? Did you not marvel at their boldness? Were you not horror-struck at
the truth of the prophet? Did you not from the former things perceive the very
last also? Wherefore did you not reason with yourself from all these things, that
this event was not of the craft of the wise men, but of a Divine Power, duly