wisdom remained as it was, while they came into existence as it was
fitting and when it was fitting. So, too, it is written in the book of
Ecclesiasticus: "All things are known to Him ere ever they were created:
so also after they were perfected." "So," he says, not otherwise; so were
they known to Him, both ere ever they were created, and after they were
perfected. This knowledge, therefore, is far unlike our knowledge. And
the knowledge of God is itself also His wisdom, and His wisdom is itself
His essence or substance. Because in the marvellous simplicity of that
nature, it is not one thing to be wise and another to be, but to be wise is to
be; as we have often said already also in the earlier books. But our
knowledge is in most things capable both of being lost and of being
recovered, because to us to be is not the same as to know or to be wise;
since it is possible for us to be, even although we know not, neither are
wise in that which we have learned from elsewhere. Therefore, as our
knowledge is unlike that knowledge of God, so is our word also, which is
born from our knowledge, unlike that Word of God which is born from
the essence of the Father. And this is as if I should say, born from the
Father's knowledge, from the Father's wisdom; or still more exactly, from
the Father who is knowledge, from the Father who is wisdom.

### CHAP. 14.—THE WORD OF GOD IS IN ALL THINGS EQUAL TO THE FATHER, FROM WHOM IT IS

23. The Word of God, then, the only-begotten Son of the Father, in all
things like and equal to the Father, God of God, Light of Light, Wisdom of
Wisdom, Essence of Essence, is altogether that which the Father is, yet is
not the Father, because the one is Son, the other is Father. And hence He
knows all that the Father knows; but to Him to know, as to be, is from the
Father, for to know and to be is there one. And therefore, as to be is not to
the Father from the Son, so neither is to know. Accordingly, as though
uttering Himself, the Father begat the Word equal to Himself in all
things; for He would not have uttered Himself wholly and perfectly, if
there were in His Word anything more or less than in Himself. And here
that is recognized in the highest sense, "Yea, yea; nay, nay." And therefore
this Word is truly truth, since whatever is in that knowledge from which it
is born is also in itself and whatever is not in that knowledge is not in the
Word. And this Word can never have anything false, because it is

unchangeable, as He is from whom it is. For "the Son can do nothing of
Himself, but what He seeth the Father do." Through power He cannot
do this; nor is it infirmity, but strength, by which truth cannot be false.
Therefore God the Father knows all things in Himself, knows all things in
the Son; but in Himself as though Himself, in the Son as though His own
Word which Word is spoken concerning all those things that are in
Himself. Similarly the Son knows all things, viz. in Himself, as things
which are born of those which the Father knows in Himself, and in the
Father, as those of which they are born, which the Son Himself knows in
Himself. The Father, then, and the Son know mutually; but the one by
begetting, the other by being born. And each of them sees simultaneously
all things that are in their knowledge, in their wisdom, in their essence:
not by parts or singly, as though by alternately looking from this side to
that, and from that side to this, and again from this or that object to this
or that object, so as not to be able to see some things without at the same
time not seeing others; but, as I said, sees all things simultaneously,
whereof there is not one that He does not always see.
24. And that word, then, of ours which has neither sound nor thought of
sound, but is of that thing in seeing which we speak inwardly, and which
therefore belongs to no tongue; and hence is in some sort like, in this
enigma, to that Word of God which is also God; since this too is born of
our knowledge, in such manner as that also is born of the knowledge of
the Father: such a word, I say, of ours, which we find to be in some way
like that Word, let us not be slow to consider how unlike also it is, as it
may be in our power to utter it.