FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.4.

But there are some habits, which even on the part of the subject in
which they are, imply primarily and principally relation to an act. For,
as we have said, habit primarily and of itself implies a relation to the
thing's nature. If therefore the nature of a thing, in which the habit is,
consists in this very relation to an act, it follows that the habit
principally implies relation to an act. Now it is clear that the nature
and the notion of power is that it should be a principle of act.
Wherefore every habit is subjected in a power, implies principally
relation to an act.
Reply to Objection 1: Habit is an act, in so far as it is a quality: and in
this respect it can be a principle of operation. It is, however, in a
state of potentiality in respect to operation. Wherefore habit is called
first act, and operation, second act; as it is explained in De Anima ii,
text. 5.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not the essence of habit to be related to
power, but to be related to nature. And as nature precedes action, to
which power is related, therefore habit is put before power as a
species of quality.
Reply to Objection 3: Health is said to be a habit, or a habitual
disposition, in relation to nature, as stated above. But in so far as
nature is a principle of act, it consequently implies a relation to act.
Wherefore the Philosopher says (De Hist. Animal. x, 1), that man, or
one of his members, is called healthy, "when he can perform the
operation of a healthy man." And the same applies to other habits.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether habits are necessary?

Objection 1: It would seem that habits are not necessary. For by
habits we are well or ill disposed in respect of something, as stated
above. But a thing is well or ill disposed by its form: for in respect of
its form a thing is good, even as it is a being. Therefore there is no
necessity for habits.
Objection 2: Further, habit implies relation to an act. But power
implies sufficiently a principle of act: for even the natural powers,
without any habits, are principles of acts. Therefore there was no
necessity for habits.
Objection 3: Further, as power is related to good and evil, so also is
habit: and as power does not always act, so neither does habit.
Given, therefore, the powers, habits become superfluous.
On the contrary, Habits are perfections (Phys. vii, text. 17). But
perfection is of the greatest necessity to a thing: since it is in the
nature of an end. Therefore it is necessary that there should be
habits.
I answer that, As we have said above (Articles 2,3), habit implies a
disposition in relation to a thing's nature, and to its operation or end,
by reason of which disposition a thing is well or ill disposed thereto.
Now for a thing to need to be disposed to something else, three
conditions are necessary. The first condition is that which is
disposed should be distinct from that to which it is disposed; and
so, that it should be related to it as potentiality is to act. Whence, if
there is a being whose nature is not composed of potentiality and
act, and whose substance is its own operation, which itself is for
itself, there we can find no room for habit and disposition, as is
clearly the case in God.
The second condition is, that that which is in a state of potentiality in
regard to something else, be capable of determination in several
ways and to various things. Whence if something be in a state of
potentiality in regard to something else, but in regard to that only,
there we find no room for disposition and habit: for such a subject
from its own nature has the due relation to such an act. Wherefore if
a heavenly body be composed of matter and form, since that matter