THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.9.

and in some respect differs from both. For the order of the terms is
common to these three; that is, that after one thing there is another
(for, in creation there is being after non-being; in this sacrament,
Christ's body after the substance of bread; in natural transmutation
white after black, or fire after air); and that the aforesaid terms are
not coexistent.
Now the conversion, of which we are speaking, has this in common
with creation, that in neither of them is there any common subject
belonging to either of the extremes; the contrary of which appears in
every natural transmutation.
Again, this conversion has something in common with natural
transmutation in two respects, although not in the same fashion.
First of all because in both, one of the extremes passes into the
other, as bread into Christ's body, and air into fire; whereas nonbeing is not converted into being. But this comes to pass differently
on the one side and on the other; for in this sacrament the whole
substance of the bread passes into the whole body of Christ;
whereas in natural transmutation the matter of the one receives the
form of the other, the previous form being laid aside. Secondly, they
have this in common, that on both sides something remains the
same; whereas this does not happen in creation: yet differently; for
the same matter or subject remains in natural transmutation;
whereas in this sacrament the same accidents remain.
From these observations we can gather the various ways of
speaking in such matters. For, because in no one of the aforesaid
three things are the extremes coexistent, therefore in none of them
can one extreme be predicated of the other by the substantive verb
of the present tense: for we do not say, "Non-being is being" or,
"Bread is the body of Christ," or, "Air is fire," or, "White is black."
Yet because of the relationship of the extremes in all of them we can
use the preposition "ex" [out of], which denotes order; for we can
truly and properly say that "being is made out of non-being," and
"out of bread, the body of Christ," and "out of air, fire," and "out of
white, black." But because in creation one of the extremes does not
pass into the other, we cannot use the word "conversion" in
creation, so as to say that "non-being is converted into being": we
can, however, use the word in this sacrament, just as in natural
transmutation. But since in this sacrament the whole substance is
converted into the whole substance, on that account this conversion
is properly termed transubstantiation.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.9.

Again, since there is no subject of this conversion, the things which
are true in natural conversion by reason of the subject, are not to be
granted in this conversion. And in the first place indeed it is evident
that potentiality to the opposite follows a subject, by reason whereof
we say that "a white thing can be black," or that "air can be fire";
although the latter is not so proper as the former: for the subject of
whiteness, in which there is potentiality to blackness, is the whole
substance of the white thing; since whiteness is not a part thereof;
whereas the subject of the form of air is part thereof: hence when it
is said, "Air can be fire," it is verified by synecdoche by reason of the
part. But in this conversion, and similarly in creation, because there
is no subject, it is not said that one extreme can be the other, as that
"non-being can be being," or that "bread can be the body of Christ":
and for the same reason it cannot be properly said that "being is
made of [de] non-being," or that "the body of Christ is made of
bread," because this preposition "of" [de] denotes a consubstantial
cause, which consubstantiality of the extremes in natural
transmutations is considered according to something common in
the subject. And for the same reason it is not granted that "bread will
be the body of Christ," or that it "may become the body of Christ,"
just as it is not granted in creation that "non-being will be being," or
that "non-being may become being," because this manner of
speaking is verified in natural transmutations by reason of the
subject: for instance, when we say that "a white thing becomes
black," or "a white thing will be black."
Nevertheless, since in this sacrament, after the change, something
remains the same, namely, the accidents of the bread, as stated
above (Article 5), some of these expressions may be admitted by
way of similitude, namely, that "bread is the body of Christ," or,
"bread will be the body of Christ," or "the body of Christ is made of
bread"; provided that by the word "bread" is not understood the
substance of bread, but in general "that which is contained under the
species of bread," under which species there is first contained the
substance of bread, and afterwards the body of Christ.
Reply to Objection 1: That out of which something else is made,
sometimes implies together with the subject, one of the extremes of
the transmutation, as when it is said "a black thing is made out of a
white one"; but sometimes it implies only the opposite or the
extreme, as when it is said---"out of morning comes the day." And so
it is not granted that the latter becomes the former, that is, "that