is tossed by the waves, but as instructing those who are sailing with a favourable
breeze, so that they may not become overwhelmed. And how may this be
effected? By observing the vicissitudes of human affairs. For even this man had
he stood in fear of vicissitude would not have experienced it; but whereas neither
his own conscience, nor the counsels of others wrought any improvement in him,
do ye at least who plume yourselves on your riches profit by his calamity: for
nothing is weaker than human affairs. Whatever term therefore one may employ
to express their insignificance it will fall short of the reality; whether he calls
them smoke, or grass, or a dream or spring flowers, or by any other name; so
perishable are they, and more naught than nonentities; but that together with their
nothingness they have also a very perilous element we have a proof before us.
For who was more exalted than this man? Did he not surpass the whole world in
wealth? Had he not climbed to the very pinnacle of distinction? Did not all
tremble and fear before him? Yet lo! He has become more wretched than the
prisoner, more pitiable than the menial slave, more indigent than the beggar
wasting away with hunger, having every day a vision of sharpened swords and of
the criminal's grave, and the public executioner leading him out to his death; and
he does not even know if he once enjoyed past pleasure, nor is he sensible even
of the sun's ray, but at mid day his sight is dimmed as if he were encompassed by
the densest gloom. But even let me try my best I shall not be able to present to
you in language the suffering which he must naturally undergo, in the hourly
expectation of death. But indeed what need is there of any words from me, when
he himself has clearly depicted this for us as in a visible image? For yesterday
when they came to him from the royal court intending to drag him away by
force, and he ran for refuge to the holy furniture, his face was then, as it is now,
no better than the countenance of one dead: and the chattering of his teeth, and
the quaking and quivering of his whole body, and his faltering voice, and
stammering tongue, and in fact his whole general appearance were suggestive of
one whose soul was petrified.
3. Now I say these things not by way of reproaching him, or insulting his

misfortune, but from a desire to soften your minds towards him, and to induce
you to compassion, and to persuade you to be contented with the punishment
which has already been inflicted. For since there are many inhuman persons
among us who are inclined, perhaps, to find fault with me for having admitted
him to the sanctuary, I parade his sufferings from a desire to soften their
hardheartedness by my narrative.
For tell me, beloved brother, wherefore are you indignant with me? You say
it is because he who continually made war upon the Church has taken refuge
within it. Yet surely we ought in the highest degree to glorify God, for permitting
him to be placed in such a great strait as to experience both the power and the
lovingkindness of the Church:— her power in that he has suffered this great
vicissitude in consequence of the attacks which he made upon her: her
lovingkindness in that she whom he attacked now casts her shield in front of him
and has received him under her wings, and placed him in all security not
resenting any of her former injuries, but most lovingly opening her bosom to
him. For this is more glorious than any kind of trophy, this is a brilliant victory,
this puts both Gentiles and Jews to shame, this displays the bright aspect of the
Church: in that having received her enemy as a captive, she spares him, and
when all have despised him in his desolation, she alone like an affectionate
mother has concealed him under her cloak, opposing both the wrath of the king,
and the rage of the people, and their overwhelming hatred. This is an ornament
for the altar. A strange kind of ornament, you say, when the accused sinner, the
extortioner, the robber is permitted to lay hold of the altar. Nay! say not so: for
even the harlot took hold of the feet of Jesus, she who was stained with the most
accursed and unclean sin: yet her deed was no reproach to Jesus, but rather
redounded to His admiration and praise: for the impure woman did no injury to
Him who was pure, but rather was the vile harlot rendered pure by the touch of
Him who was the pure and spotless one. Grudge not then, O man. We are the
servants of the crucified one who said "Forgive them for they know not what they
do." [Luke 23:34] But, you say, he cut off the right of refuge here by his