74. What is called for is an evangelization capable of shedding light on these new ways of relating
to God, to others and to the world around us, and inspiring essential values. It must reach the
places where new narratives and paradigms are being formed, bringing the word of Jesus to the
inmost soul of our cities. Cities are multicultural; in the larger cities, a connective network is found
in which groups of people share a common imagination and dreams about life, and new human
interactions arise, new cultures, invisible cities. Various subcultures exist side by side, and often
practise segregation and violence. The Church is called to be at the service of a difficult dialogue.
On the one hand, there are people who have the means needed to develop their personal and
family lives, but there are also many “non-citizens”, “half citizens” and “urban remnants”. Cities
create a sort of permanent ambivalence because, while they offer their residents countless
possibilities, they also present many people with any number of obstacles to the full development
of their lives. This contrast causes painful suffering. In many parts of the world, cities are the
scene of mass protests where thousands of people call for freedom, a voice in public life, justice
and a variety of other demands which, if not properly understood, will not be silenced by force.

75. We cannot ignore the fact that in cities human trafficking, the narcotics trade, the abuse and
exploitation of minors, the abandonment of the elderly and infirm, and various forms of corruption
and criminal activity take place. At the same time, what could be significant places of encounter
and solidarity often become places
of isolation and mutual distrust. Houses and neighbourhoods are more often built to isolate and
protect than to connect and integrate. The proclamation of the Gospel will be a basis for restoring
the dignity of human life in these contexts, for Jesus desires to pour out an abundance of life upon
our cities (cf. Jn 10:10). The unified and complete sense of human life that the Gospel proposes is
the best remedy for the ills of our cities, even though we have to realize that a uniform and rigid

program of evangelization is not suited to this complex reality. But to live our human life to the
fullest and to meet every challenge as a leaven of Gospel witness in every culture and in every city
will make us better Christians and bear fruit in our cities.

### II. Temptations faced by pastoral workers

76. I feel tremendous gratitude to all those who are committed to working in and for the Church.
Here I do not wish to discuss at length the activities of the different pastoral workers, from bishops
down to those who provide the most humble and hidden services. Rather, I would like to reflect on
the challenges that all of them must face in the context of our current globalized culture. But in
justice, I must say first that the contribution of the Church in today’s world is enormous. The pain
and the shame we feel at the sins of some members of the Church, and at our own, must never
make us forget how many Christians are giving their lives in love. They help so many people to be
healed or to die in peace in makeshift hospitals. They are present to those enslaved by different
addictions in the poorest places on earth. They devote themselves to the education of children and
young people. They take care of the elderly who have been forgotten by everyone else. They look
for ways to communicate values in hostile environments. They are dedicated in many other ways
to showing an immense love for humanity inspired by the God who became man. I am grateful for
the beautiful example given to me by so many Christians who joyfully sacrifice their lives and their
time. This witness comforts and sustains me in my own effort to overcome selfishness and to give
more fully of myself.