6. Come then, and in return for these favours, (I speak of their love and kind
feeling), let us give them a provision, and so send them home; and let us again
raise the question concerning oaths; that from the minds of all we may pluck up
by the roots this evil custom. But first, I desire to put you a little in mind today
of the things we spoke of lately.
When the Jews, having been released from Persia, and set free from that
tyranny, were returned back to their own county, "I saw," says one, "a flying
sickle, twenty cubits in length, and ten cubits broad." [Zechariah 5:1-2] They
heard also the Prophet giving them this instruction, "This is the curse, that goes
forth over the face of the whole land, and enters into the house of him that
swears falsely; and it shall rest in the midst thereof, and throw down the timber
and all the stones." When we had read this passage, we also enquired then why it
was, that it should destroy not the swearer only, but also his house, and we stated
this to be the reason; that God will have the punishments of the most grievous
sins to remain continually visible; that all may afterwards learn prudence.
Inasmuch then as it was necessary that the perjurer when dead should be buried,
and committed to the bosom of the earth; in order that his wickedness might not
be buried along with him, his house was made a heap, so that all who passed by,
beholding it, and learning the reason of the overthrow, might avoid imitating the
sin.
7. This also happened at Sodom. For when they burned in their lust one
towards another, then too the very earth itself was burned up, being kindled by
the fire from above. For He designed, that the vengeance of this sin should
permanently remain.
And observe the mercy of God! Those who had sinned, He caused not to
continue burning to the present day, but when they had been for once in flames,
He buried them; and burning up the face of the ground, He placed it visibly
before all who after should desire to look at these things; and now the sight of
the land, through all the generations since, has given an admonition beyond all
powers of speech, crying out as it were, and saying, "Dare not to do the deeds of

Sodom, lest ye suffer the lot of Sodom!" For precept commonly makes not so
deep an impression upon the mind as a fearful spectacle does, which bears upon
it the vestiges of calamity though all time. And persons that have visited these
places bear witness, who often, when they hear the Scripture discoursing of these
things, are not much terrified; but when they have gone and stood upon the site,
and see the whole surface of it disfigured, and have witnessed the effects of the
fire, with soil no where visible, but every thing dust and ashes, they come away
astonished with the sight, and taking with them a strong lesson of chastity. For
truly, the very nature of the punishment was a pattern of the nature of the sin!
Even as they devised a barren intercourse, not having for its end the procreation
of children, so did God bring on them such a punishment, as made the womb of
the land ever barren, and destitute of all fruits! For this reason also He threatened
to destroy the dwellings of the swearers, in order that by their punishments, they
may make others to be more self-controlled.
8. But I am ready to show today, not the destruction of one, two, or three
houses in consequence of oaths, but that of a whole city and of a people beloved
of God; of a nation that had always enjoyed much of the divine care; and of a
race that had escaped many dangers. For Jerusalem herself, the city of God,
which had the holy ark, and all that divine service—where there were once
prophets, and the grace of the Spirit, and the ark; and the tables of the covenant,
and the golden pot—where angels were frequent visitors—this city, I say, when a
multitude of wars took place, and many foreign nations made attacks upon it, as
if girt by a wall of adamant, ever laughed them all to scorn, and while the land
was utterly destroyed, sustained no injury! And not only is this to be wondered
at, but that frequently in driving out its enemies, it inflicted upon them a heavy
blow, and enjoyed so much of the providential care of God, that God Himself
said, "I found Israel as a bunch of grapes in the desert; and I beheld your fathers
as the earliest fruit on the fig tree." [Hosea 9:10] And again, of the city itself:
"As olive berries on the extremity of the highest bough, and they shall say, Do
them no harm." Nevertheless, the city beloved of God; that had escaped so many