Hebrews 11:34
"Stopped the mouths of lions," [Hebrews 11:34] "quenched the violence of
fire, escaped the edge of the sword." See how they were in death itself, Daniel
encompassed by the lions, the three children abiding in the furnace, the
Israelites, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, in various temptations; and yet not even so did
they despair. For this is Faith; when things are turning out adversely, then we
ought to believe that nothing adverse is done, but all things in due order.
"Escaped the edge of the sword." I think that he is again speaking of the
three children.
"Out of weakness were made strong." Here he alludes to what took place at
their return from Babylon. For "out of weakness," is out of captivity. When the
condition of the Jews had now become desperate, when they were no better than
dead bones, who could have expected that they would return from Babylon, and
not return only; but also "wax valiant" and "turn to flight armies of aliens"? 'But
to us,' some one says, 'no such thing has happened.' But these are figures of "the
things to come."

Hebrews 11:35
"Women received their dead raised to life again." [Hebrews 11:35] He here
speaks of what occurred in regard to the prophets, Elisha, [and] Elijah; for they
raised the dead.
5. [Hebrews 11:35] "And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance,
that they might obtain a better resurrection." But we have not obtained a
Resurrection. I am able however, he means, to show that they also were cut off,
and did "not accept [deliverance], that they might obtain a better resurrection."
For why, tell me, when it was open to them to live, did they not choose it? Were
they not evidently looking for a better life? And they who had raised up others,
themselves chose to die; in order "to obtain a better resurrection," not such as
the children of those women.
Here I think he alludes both to John and to James. For beheading is called
"torturing." It was in their power still to behold the sun. It was in their power to
abstain from reproving [sinners], and yet they chose to die; even they who had
raised others chose to die themselves, "that they might obtain a better
resurrection."

Hebrews 11:36
[Hebrews 11:36] "And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings,
yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment." He ends with these; with things that
come nearer home. For these [ex amples] especially bring consolation, when the
distress is from the same cause, since even if you mention something more
extreme, yet unless it arise from the same cause, you have effected nothing.
Therefore he concluded his discourse with this, mentioning "bonds,
imprisonments, scourges, stonings," alluding to the case of Stephen, also to that
of Zacharias.
Wherefore he added, "They were slain with the sword." What do you say?
Some "escaped the edge of the sword," and some "were slain by the sword."
[Hebrews 11:34] What is this? Which do you praise? Which do you admire? The
latter or the former? Nay, he says: the former indeed, is appropriate to you, and
the latter, because Faith was strong even unto death itself, and it is a type of
things to come. For the wonderful qualities of Faith are two, that it both
accomplishes great things, and suffers great things, and counts itself to suffer
nothing.
And you can not say (he says) that these were sinners and worthless. For
even if you put the whole world against them, I find that they weigh down the
beam and are of greater value. What then were they to receive in this life? Here
he raises up their thoughts, teaching them not to be riveted to things present, but
to mind things greater than all that are in this present life, since the "world is not
worthy" of them. What then do you wish to receive here? For it were an insult to
you, should you receive your reward here.
6. Let us not then mind worldly things, nor seek our recompense here, nor
be so beggarly. For if "the" whole "world is not worthy of" them, why do you
seek after a part of it? And with good reason; for they are friends of God.