Reply to Objection 5: Matrimony is a sacrament: and therefore so far
as the sacramental essentials are concerned, it requires purity with
regard to the sacrament of faith, namely Baptism, rather than with
regard to interior faith. For which reason also this impediment is not
called disparity of faith, but disparity of worship which concerns
outward service, as stated above (Sent. iii, D, 9, Question 1, Article 1,
qu. 1). Consequently if a believer marry a baptized heretic, the
marriage is valid, although he sins by marrying her if he knows her
to be a heretic: even so he would sin were he to marry an
excommunicate woman, and yet the marriage would not be void:
whereas on the other hand if a catechumen having right faith but not
having been baptized were to marry a baptized believer, the marriage
would not be valid.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there can be marriage between

unbelievers?
Objection 1: It would seem that there can be no marriage between
unbelievers. For matrimony is a sacrament of the Church. Now
Baptism is the door of the sacraments. Therefore unbelievers, since
they are not baptized, cannot marry any more than they can receive
other sacraments.
Objection 2: Further, two evils are a greater impediment to good than
one. But the unbelief of only one party is an impediment to marriage.
Much more, therefore, is the unbelief of both, and consequently
there can be no marriage between unbelievers.
Objection 3: Further, just as there is disparity of worship between
believer and unbeliever, so can there be between two unbelievers,
for instance if one be a heathen and the other a Jew. Now disparity
of worship is an impediment to marriage, as stated above (Article 1).
Therefore there can be no valid marriage at least between
unbelievers of different worship.
Objection 4: Further, in marriage there is real chastity. But according
to Augustine (De Adult. Conjug. i, 18) there is no real chastity
between an unbeliever and his wife, and these words are quoted in
the Decretals (XXVIII, qu. i, can. Sic enim.). Neither therefore is there
a true marriage.
Objection 5: Further, true marriage excuses carnal intercourse from
sin. But marriage contracted between unbelievers cannot do this,
since "the whole life of unbelievers is a sin," as a gloss observes on
Rm. 14:23, "All that is not of faith is sin." Therefore there is no true
marriage between unbelievers.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 7:12): "If any brother hath a wife
that believeth not, and she consent to dwell with him, let him not put
her away." But she is not called his wife except by reason of
marriage. Therefore marriage between unbelievers is a true marriage.
Further, the removal of what comes after does not imply the removal
of what comes first. Now marriage belongs to an office of nature,
which precedes the state of grace, the principle of which is faith.