to be punished eternally.
Reply to Objection 1: Mortal and venial sins are infinitely apart as
regards what they "turn away from," not as regards what they "turn
to," viz. the object which specifies them. Hence nothing hinders the
same species from including mortal and venial sins; for instance, in
the species "adultery" the first movement is a venial sin; while an
idle word, which is, generally speaking, venial, may even be a mortal
sin.
Reply to Objection 2: From the fact that one sin is mortal by reason
of its species, and another venial by reason of its species, it follows
that this difference is consequent to the specific difference of sins,
not that it is the cause thereof. And this difference may be found
even in things of the same species, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: The reward is intended by him that merits or
acts virtually; whereas the punishment is not intended by the sinner,
but, on the contrary, is against his will. Hence the comparison fails.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether sins of commission and omission differ

specifically?
Objection 1: It would seem that sins of commission and omission
differ specifically. For "offense" and "sin" are condivided with one
another (Eph. 2:1), where it is written: "When you were dead in your
offenses and sins," which words a gloss explains, saying:
"'Offenses,' by omitting to do what was commanded, and 'sins,' by
doing what was forbidden." Whence it is evident that "offenses" here
denotes sins of omission; while "sin" denotes sins of commission.
Therefore they differ specifically, since they are contrasted with one
another as different species.
Objection 2: Further, it is essential to sin to be against God's law, for
this is part of its definition, as is clear from what has been said
(Question 71, Article 6). Now in God's law, the affirmative precepts,
against which is the sin of omission, are different from the negative
precepts, against which is the sin of omission. Therefore sins of
omission and commission differ specifically.
Objection 3: Further, omission and commission differ as affirmation
and negation. Now affirmation and negation cannot be in the same
species, since negation has no species; for "there is neither species
nor difference of non-being," as the Philosopher states (Phys. iv,
text. 67). Therefore omission and commission cannot belong to the
same species.
On the contrary, Omission and commission are found in the same
species of sin. For the covetous man both takes what belongs to
others, which is a sin of commission; and gives not of his own to
whom he should give, which is a sin of omission. Therefore
omission and commission do not differ specifically.
I answer that, There is a twofold difference in sins; a material
difference and a formal difference: the material difference is to be
observed in the natural species of the sinful act; while the formal
difference is gathered from their relation to one proper end, which is
also their proper object. Hence we find certain acts differing from
one another in the material specific difference, which are
nevertheless formally in the same species of sin, because they are
directed to the one same end: thus strangling, stoning, and stabbing