Moreover there are passages in which Holy Scripture expressly bars the suspicion of
Christ being a mere appearance, Matt. xiv, 26, 27: Luke xxiv, 37-39: Acts x, 40, 41: and
St John's words, What was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have
seen with our eyes, what we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the
word of life (1 John i, 1). In fact, if Christ had not a real body, He did not really die;
neither therefore did he really rise again: And if Christ be not risen again, then is our
preaching vain, and your faith is also vain, yea and we are found false witnesses of
God, because we have given testimony of God that he hath raised up Christ, whom he
hath not raised up [if He never really died] (1 Cor. xv, 14, 15).

CHAPTERS XXXII, XXXIII--Of the Error of Arius and Apollinaris concerning the Soul of
Christ
ARIUS held that Christ had no soul, but assumed flesh alone, to which the Divinity
stood in the place of a soul. In this he was followed by Apollinaris. Apollinaris however
was brought to confess that Christ had a sensitive soul; but he averred that the Divinity
stood to that sensitive soul in place of mind and intellect (S. Aug. de haeresibus, 55).

## CHAPTER XXXIV--Of the Error of Theodore of Mopsuestia concerning the Union of the
Word with Man
BY the foregoing chapters it appears that neither was the divine nature wanting to
Christ, as Photinus said; nor a true human body, according to the error of the
Manicheans; nor again a human soul, as Arius and Apollinaris supposed. These three
substances then meet in Christ, the Divinity, a human soul, and a true human body. It
remains to enquire, according to the evidence of Scripture, what is to be thought of the
union of the three. Theodore of Mopsuestia, then, and Nestorius, his follower, brought
out the following theory of this union.
They said that a human soul and a human body were naturally united in Christ to
constitute one man of the same species and nature with other men; and that in this man
God dwelt as in His temple by grace, as He does in other holy men. Hence He said
Himself: Dissolve this temple, and in three days I will raise it up: which the Evangelist
explains: He spoke of the temple of his body (John ii, 19). Hereupon there followed a
union of affections between the Man Christ and God, the Man adhering with hearty
good will to God, and God willingly accepting Him, as He says Himself: He that sent me
is with me; and he hath not left me alone, because I do always the things that are
pleasing to him (John viii, 29): giving us to understand that the union of that Man with
God is as the union of which the Apostle speaks: He that adhereth to God, is one spirit
(1 Cor. vi, 17). And as by this union the names that properly apply to God are
transferred to men, so that they are called gods, and sons of God, and lords, and holy
ones, and christs, as appears by divers passages of Scripture (e.g., Pss. lxxxi, civ); so
are divine names duly applied to the Man Christ, and by reason of the indwelling of God
and the union of affections with Him He is called God, and Son of God, and Lord, and
Holy One, and Christ. Moreover, because in that Man there was greater fulness of
grace than in other holy men, He was above others the temple of God, and more closely
united with God in affection, and shared the divine names by a peculiar privilege of His
own; and for this excellence of grace He was put in participation of divine honour and
dignity, and has come to be adored along with God. And thus one is the person of the
Word of God, and another the person of that Man who is adored along with God. Or if
there is said to be one person of them both, that will be by reason of the aforesaid union
of affections, on the strength of which that Man and the Word of God will be one person,
in the same way in which it is said of husband and wife that they are no more two, but
one flesh (Matt. xix, 6). And because such a union does not authorise us to predicate of
the one whatever can be predicated of the other – for not whatever is true of the
husband is true of the wife, or vice versa, -- therefore in the case of the union of the
Word with that Man this Nestorian doctrine has it we should not fail to notice how the
properties of that Man, belonging to His human nature, cannot fitly be predicated of the
Word of God, or God. Thus it is proper to that Man to have been born of a Virgin, to
have suffered, died, and been buried: all of which things, Nestorians say, are impossible
to predicate of God, or of the Word of God. But because there are some names which,
while applying to God in the first place, are communicated to man in a sense, as Christ,
Lord, Holy One, or even Son of God, they see no difficulty in terms expressive of the
above incidents of humanity being united as predicates with these names. So they think