Because he had said "his brother," and had also added, that God is the
avenger, showing that even if an unbeliever has suffered this, he who has done it
shall suffer punishment, he says, it is not as avenging him that He punishes you,
but because you have insulted Himself. He Himself called you, you have
insulted Him who called you. On this account, he has added,
Ver. 8. "Therefore he that rejects, rejects not man, but God, who gives His
Holy Spirit unto you."
So that even if you should defile the Empress, he says, or even your own
handmaid, that has a husband, the crime is the same. Why? Because He avenges
not the persons that are injured, but Himself. For you are equally defiled, you
have equally insulted God; for both the one and the other is adultery, as both the
one and the other is marriage. And though you should not commit adultery, but
fornication, though the harlot has no husband, yet nevertheless God avenges, for
He avenges Himself. For thou dost this act, not despising the man, so much as
God. And it is manifest from this, that you do it concealing it from man, but you
pretend that God does not see you. For tell me, if one who was thought worthy
of the purple, and of infinite honor from the king (Emperor), and was
commanded to live suitably to the honor, should go and defile himself with any
woman; whom has he insulted? Her, or the king who gave him all? She indeed is
insulted too, but not equally.
Wherefore, I beseech you, let us guard against this sin. For as we punish
women, when, being married to us, they give themselves to others, so also are
we punished, though not by the Roman laws, yet by God. For this also is
adultery. For not only is adultery committed in doing so by her who is married to
another, but by him also, who is yoked to a wife. Attend carefully to what I say.
For although what is said is offensive to many, it is necessary to be said, to set
the matter right for the future. Not only is this adultery, when we defile a woman
who is married to a man; but if we ourselves being married to a woman defile
one who is free and disengaged, the matter is adultery. For what, if she with
whom the adultery is committed is not bound? Yet are you bound. You have

transgressed the law. You have injured your own flesh. For tell me, wherefore do
you punish your wife, if she commit fornication with a man who is loosed, and
has not a wife? Because it is adultery. Why? Yet he who defiled her has not a
wife, but she is bound to a husband. Well then, thou also art bound to a wife; so
that in like manner your offense also is adultery. For it is said, "Every one that
puts away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, makes her an adulteress:
and whosoever shall marry her when she is put away, commits adultery."
[Matthew 5:32] If he who marries her who is divorced commits adultery, he
who, with a wife of his own, defiles himself also with that other— it is manifest
to every one. But perhaps to you who are men, enough has been said on this
subject. For concerning them that are such, Christ says, "Their worm will not die
and the fire will not be quenched." [Mark 9:44] But for the sake of the young it
is necessary to speak to you, not to the young themselves so much, but to you.
For these things are suitable not to them only, but also to you. And how? I will
now tell you. He who has not learned to commit fornication, will neither know
how to commit adultery. But he who wallows among harlots, will quickly also
arrive at the other, and will defile himself, if not with the married, yet with those
who are disengaged.
What then do I advise, so as to extirpate the roots? So many of you as have
young sons, and are bringing them up to a worldly life, quickly draw them under
the yoke of marriage. For since while he is yet young desires trouble him, for the
time before marriage, by admonitions, threats, fears, promises, and numberless
other methods restrain them. But at the season of marriage, let no one defer it.
Behold, I speak the words of a match-maker, that you should let your sons
marry. But I am not ashamed to speak thus, since not even Paul was ashamed to
say, "Defraud ye not one the other" [1 Corinthians 7:5], which seems more
shameful than what I have said; yet he was not ashamed. For he did not pay heed
to words, but to the acts that were set right by words. When your son is grown
up, before he enters upon warfare, or any other course of life, consider of his
marriage. And if he sees that you will soon take a bride for him, and that the