FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.2.

also that which pertains to each power, and to the entire man.
Wherefore man wills naturally not only the object of the will, but also
other things that are appropriate to the other powers; such as the
knowledge of truth, which befits the intellect; and to be and to live
and other like things which regard the natural well-being; all of which
are included in the object of the will, as so many particular goods.
Reply to Objection 1: The will is distinguished from nature as one
kind of cause from another; for some things happen naturally and
some are done voluntarily. There is, however, another manner of
causing that is proper to the will, which is mistress of its act, besides
the manner proper to nature, which is determinate to one thing. But
since the will is founded on some nature, it is necessary that the
movement proper to nature be shared by the will, to some extent:
just as what belongs to a previous cause is shared by a subsequent
cause. Because in every thing, being itself, which is from nature,
precedes volition, which is from the will. And hence it is that the will
wills something naturally.
Reply to Objection 2: In the case of natural things, that which is
natural, as a result of the form only, is always in them actually, as
heat is in fire. But that which is natural as a result of matter, is not
always in them actually, but sometimes only in potentiality: because
form is act, whereas matter is potentiality. Now movement is "the act
of that which is in potentiality" (Aristotle, Phys. iii, 1). Wherefore that
which belongs to, or results from, movement, in regard to natural
things, is not always in them. Thus fire does not always move
upwards, but only when it is outside its own place. [The Aristotelian
theory was that fire's proper place is the fiery heaven, i.e. the
Empyrean.] And in like manner it is not necessary that the will (which
is reduced from potentiality to act, when it wills something), should
always be in the act of volition; but only when it is in a certain
determinate disposition. But God's will, which is pure act, is always
in the act of volition.
Reply to Objection 3: To every nature there is one thing
corresponding, proportionate, however, to that nature. For to nature
considered as a genus, there corresponds something one
generically; and to nature as species there corresponds something
one specifically; and to the individualized nature there corresponds
some one individual. Since, therefore, the will is an immaterial power
like the intellect, some one general thing corresponds to it, naturally
which is the good; just as to the intellect there corresponds some

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.2.

one general thing, which is the true, or being, or "what a thing is."
And under good in general are included many particular goods, to
none of which is the will determined.