approaching it. But in this spiritual cure (the Sacrament of Penance), it is our own
act, informed with divine grace, that unites us with Christ. Hence the effect of remission
is not always gained totally by this union, nor do all gain it equally. The turning of mind
and heart to God and to detestation of sin may be so vehement as to gain for the
penitent a perfect remission of sin, including at once purification from guilt and a
discharge of the entire debt of punishment. But this does not always occur. Sometimes,
though the guilt is taken away and the debt of eternal punishment cancelled, there still
remains some obligation of temporal punishment, to save the justice of God, which
redresses fault by punishment.
But since the infliction of punishment for fault requires a trial, the penitent who has
committed himself to Christ for his cure must await the judgement of Christ in the
assessment of his punishment. This judgement Christ exercises through His ministers,
as in the other Sacraments. No one can give judgement upon faults that he is ignorant
of. Therefore a second part of this Sacrament is the practice of Confession, the object of
which is to make the penitent's fault known to Christ's minister. The minister then, to
whom Confession is made, must have judicial power as viceregent of Christ, who is
appointed judge of the living and of the dead (Acts x, 42). There are two requisites of
judicial power, authority to investigate the offence, and power to acquit (potestas
absolvendi) or condemn. This science of discerning and this power of binding or
loosing are the two keys of the Church, which the Lord committed to Peter (Matt. xvi,
19). He is not to be understood to have committed them to Peter for Peter to hold them
alone, but that through him they might be transmitted to others; or else the salvation of
the faithful would not be sufficiently provided for. These keys have their efficacy from
the Passion of Christ, whereby Christ has opened to us the gate of the heavenly
kingdom. As then without Baptism, in which the Passion of Christ works, there can be
no salvation for men, -- whether the Baptism be actually received, or purposed in desire,
when necessity, not contempt, sets the Sacrament aside; so for sinners after Baptism
there can be no salvation unless they submit themselves to the keys of the Church
either by actual Confession and undergoing of the judgement of the ministers of the
Church, or at least by purposing so to do with a purpose to be fulfilled in seasonable
time: because there is no other name under heaven given to men, whereby we are to
be saved (Acts iv, 12).
Hereby is excluded the error of certain persons, who said that a man could obtain
pardon of his sins without confession and purpose of confession; or that the prelates of
the Church could dispense a sinner from the obligation of confession. The prelates of
the Church have no power to frustrate the keys of the Church, in which their whole
power is contained; nor to enable a man to obtain forgiveness of his sins without the
Sacrament which has its efficacy from the Passion of Christ: only Christ, the institutor
and author of the Sacraments, can do that. The prelates of the Church can no more
dispense a man from confession and absolution in order to remission of sin than they
can dispense him from baptism in order to salvation.
But this is a point to observe. Baptism may be efficacious to the remission of sin before
it is actually received, while one purposes to receive it: though afterwards it takes fuller