THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.7.

baptize, he would not sin in baptizing. For it is clear that then he
does not exercise the ministry of the Church, but comes to the aid of
one who is in need of his services. It is not so with the other
sacraments, which are not so necessary as baptism, as we shall
show further on (Question 65, Articles 3,4; Question 62, Article 3).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether angels can administer sacraments?

Objection 1: It seems that angels can administer sacraments.
Because a higher minister can do whatever the lower can; thus a
priest can do whatever a deacon can: but not conversely. But angels
are higher ministers in the hierarchical order than any men
whatsoever, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. ix). Therefore, since men
can be ministers of sacraments, it seems that much more can angels
be.
Objection 2: Further, in heaven holy men are likened to the angels
(Mt. 22:30). But some holy men, when in heaven, can be ministers of
the sacraments; since the sacramental character is indelible, as
stated above (Question 63, Article 5). Therefore it seems that angels
too can be ministers of sacraments.
Objection 3: Further, as stated above (Question 8, Article 7), the devil
is head of the wicked, and the wicked are his members. But
sacraments can be administered by the wicked. Therefore it seems
that they can be administered even by demons.
On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 5:1): "Every high priest taken from
among men, is ordained for men in the things that appertain to God."
But angels whether good or bad are not taken from among men.
Therefore they are not ordained ministers in the things that appertain
to God, i.e. in the sacraments.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3; Question 62, Article 5), the
whole power of the sacraments flows from Christ's Passion, which
belongs to Him as man. And Him in their very nature men, not
angels, resemble; indeed, in respect of His Passion, He is described
as being "a little lower than the angels" (Heb. 2:9). Consequently, it
belongs to men, but not to angels, to dispense the sacraments and
to take part in their administration.
But it must be observed that as God did not bind His power to the
sacraments, so as to be unable to bestow the sacramental effect
without conferring the sacrament; so neither did He bind His power
to the ministers of the Church so as to be unable to give angels
power to administer the sacraments. And since good angels are
messengers of truth; if any sacramental rite were performed by good

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.8.

angels, it should be considered valid, because it ought to be evident
that this is being done by the will of God: for instance, certain
churches are said to have been consecrated by the ministry of the
angels [Acta S.S., September 29]. But if demons, who are "lying
spirits," were to perform a sacramental rite, it should be pronounced
as invalid.
Reply to Objection 1: What men do in a less perfect manner, i.e. by
sensible sacraments, which are proportionate to their nature, angels
also do, as ministers of a higher degree, in a more perfect manner, i.
e. invisibly---by cleansing, enlightening, and perfecting.
Reply to Objection 2: The saints in heaven resemble the angels as to
their share of glory, but not as to the conditions of their nature: and
consequently not in regard to the sacraments.
Reply to Objection 3: Wicked men do not owe their power of
conferring sacraments to their being members of the devil.
Consequently, it does not follow that "a fortiori" the devil, their head,
can do so.