the dignity of the sacrament, but not for its lawfulness, nor for its
validity. Hence some can without sin be raised to the minor orders
before the years of discretion, if there be an urgent reason for it and
hope of their proficiency. and they are validly ordained; for although
at the time they are not qualified for the offices entrusted to them,
they will become qualified by being habituated thereto. For the
higher Orders, however, the use of reason is required both out of
respect for, and for the lawfulness of the sacrament, not only on
account of the vow of continency annexed thereto, but also because
the handling of the sacraments is entrusted to them. But for the
episcopate whereby a man receives power also over the mystical
body, the act of accepting the pastoral care of souls is required;
wherefore the use of reason is necessary for the validity of episcopal
consecration. Some, however, maintain that the use of reason is
necessary for the validity of the sacrament in all the Orders. but this
statement is not confirmed either by authority or by reason.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated in the Article, not all that is
necessary for the lawfulness of a sacrament is required for its
validity.
Reply to Objection 2: The cause of matrimony is consent, which
cannot be without the use of reason. Whereas in the reception of
Orders no act is required on the part of the recipients since no act on
their part is expressed in their consecration. Hence there is no
comparison.
Reply to Objection 3: Act and power are in the same subject; yet
sometimes a power, such as the free-will, precedes its act; and thus
it is in the case in point.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the state of slavery is an impediment to

receiving Orders?
Objection 1: It would seem that the state of slavery is not an
impediment to receiving Orders. For corporal subjection is not
incompatible with spiritual authority. But in a slave there is corporal
subjection. Therefore he is not hindered from receiving the spiritual
authority which is given in orders.
Objection 2: Further, that which is an occasion for humility should
not be an impediment to the reception of a sacrament. Now such is
slavery, for the Apostle counsels a man, if possible, rather to remain
in slavery (1 Cor. 7:21). Therefore it should not hinder him from
being raised to Orders.
Objection 3: Further, it is more disgraceful for a cleric to become a
slave than for a slave to be made a cleric. Yet a cleric may lawfully be
sold as a slave; for a bishop of Nola, Paulinus, to wit, sold himself as
a slave as related by Gregory (Dial. iii). Much more therefore can a
slave be made a cleric.
Objection 4: On the contrary, It would seem that it is an impediment
to the validity of the sacrament. For a woman, on account of her
subjection, cannot receive the sacrament of Orders. But greater still
is the subjection in a slave; since woman was not given to man as
his handmaid (for which reason she was not made from his feet).
Therefore neither can a slave receive this sacrament.
Objection 5: Further, a man, from the fact that he receives an Order,
is bound to minister in that Order. But he cannot at the same time
serve his carnal master and exercise his spiritual ministry. Therefore
it would seem that he cannot receive Orders, since the master must
be indemnified.
I answer that, By receiving Orders a man pledges himself to the
Divine offices. And since no man can give what is not his, a slave
who has not the disposal of himself, cannot be raised to Orders. If,
however, he be raised, he receives the Order, because freedom is
not required for the validity of the sacrament, although it is requisite
for its lawfulness, since it hinders not the power, but the act only.
The same reason applies to all who are under an obligation to