these miseries is not due to man: they go with human nature, as such, unless God
grants an exemption, as He did to the first man, who sinned and lost it.

## CHAPTER L--That Original Sin is transmitted from our First Parent to his Posterity
THIS expressly appears from the words of the Apostle: As by one man sin came into
the world, and by sin death, so death passed on to all men, seeing that all have sinned
(Rom. v, 12) . It cannot be said that by one man sin entered into the world by way
of imitation, because in that interpretation sin would have reached only to those who
imitate the first man in sinning; and since by sin death came into the world, death would
reach only those who sin in the likeness of the first man that sinned. But to exclude this
interpretation the Apostle adds: Death reigned from Adam to Moses even over those
who did not sin in the likeness of the transgression of Adam. The Apostle's meaning
therefore was not that by one man sin entered into the world in the way of imitation, but
in the way of origin.
Moreover, the common custom of the Church is to administer baptism to new-born
children. But there would be no purpose in such administration, unless there were sin in
them. If it is said that the purpose of infant baptism is not the cleansing of sin, but the
arriving at the kingdom of God, the saying is nonsensical. They who say so, appeal to
our Lord's words: Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot
enter into the kingdom of God (John iii, 5). The fact is, no one is excluded from the
kingdom of God except for some fault. For the end of every rational creature is to arrive
at happiness; which happiness can be only in the kingdom of God; which kingdom again
is nothing else than the organised society of those who enjoy the vision of God, in which
true happiness consists (B. III, Chap.LXIII). But nothing fails to gain its end
except through some fault or flaw. If then unbaptised children cannot arrive at the
kingdom of God, we must say that there is some fault, flaw, or sin in them.

impossibility. Of this difficult doctrine of original sin, the best English exposition is in the
Essay on the Immaculate Conception in the late Father Harper's Peace through the
Truth, First Series.

CHAPTERS LI, LII--Arguments against Original Sin, with Replies
CHAP. LII -- Before dealing with objections, we must premise that there are apparent in
mankind certain probable signs of original sin, as we can argue fault from penalty. Now
the human race generally suffers various penalties, corporal and spiritual. Among
corporal penalties the chief is death, to which all the others lead up, as hunger, thirst,
and the like. Among spiritual penalties the chief is the weak hold that reason takes of
man, so that man with difficulty arrives at the knowledge of truth, easily falls into error,
and cannot altogether surmount his bestial appetites, but often has his mind clouded by
them. Some one may say that these defects, corporal and spiritual, are not penal, but
natural. But looking at the thing rightly, and supposing divine providence, which to all
varieties of perfection has adapted subjects apt to take up each variety, we may
form a fairly probable conjecture that God, in uniting the higher nature of the soul to the
lower nature of the body, had the intention that the former should control the latter; and
further intended to remove, by His special and supernatural providence, any
impediment to such control arising out of any defect of nature. Thus, as the rational soul
is of a higher nature than the body, it might be supposed that such would be the terms
of the union of the soul with the body, that nothing could possibly be in the body
contrary to the soul whereby the body lives; and in like manner, as reason in man is
associated with sensitive appetite and other sensitive powers, it might be expected that
reason would not be hampered by those sensitive powers, but rather would rule them.
In accordance with these natural anticipations, we lay it down, according to the doctrine
of faith, that the original constitution of man was such that, so long as his reason was
subject to God, his lower faculties served him without demur, and no bodily impediment
could stand in the way of his body obeying him, God and His grace supplying whatever
was wanting in nature to the achievement of this result. But when his reason turned
away from God, his lower powers revolted from reason; and his body became subject to
passions contrary to the [rational] life that is by the soul. Thus then, though it may be
admitted that these defects are natural, if we look at human nature on its lower side;
nevertheless, if we consider divine providence and the dignity of the higher portion of
human nature, we have a fairly probable ground for arguing that these defects are
penal. Thus we may gather the inference [a priori] that the human race must have been
infected with some sin from its first origin. Now we may answer the arguments to the
contrary.
Arg. 1. The son shall not bear the iniquity of his father (Ezech. xviii, 20).
Reply 1. There is a difference between what affects one individual and what affects the
nature of a whole species: for by partaking in the species many men are as one man, as
Porphyry says. The sin then that belongs to one individual is not imputable to another
individual, unless he sins too, because the one is personally distinct from the other. But
any sin touching the specific nature itself may without difficulty be propagated from one
to another, as the specific nature is imparted by one to others [by generation].
Since sin is an evil of rational nature, and evil is a privation of good, we must consider of
what good the privation is, in order to decide whether the sin in question belongs to our
common nature, or is the particular sin of a private individual. The actual sins then, that