came into the town, his tongue was paralyzed, and he was for a long time
speechless, so that he could pronounce nothing articulately; however, he could
read indeed, and attended masters for a long time, but that was all, and there was
nothing to mark his progress. So all his hopes (in life) were cut off, and his
mother was full of grief: and though the physicians suggested many plans, and
many others did so too, yet nobody was able to do him any good, until the
merciful God loosed the string of his tongue [cf. Mark 7:35], and then he
recovered, and was restored to his former readiness and distinctness of speech.
His mother also related, that when a very little child, he had an affection in the
nose, which they call a polypus: and then too the physicians had given him over
and his father cursed him (for the father was then living), and (even) his mother
prayed for him to die; and all was full of distress. But he on a sudden having
coughed, owing to the collection of mucus, by the force of the breath expelled
the creature ([τὸ θηρίον]) from his nostrils, and all the danger was removed. But
this evil having been extinguished, an acrid and viscid running from the eyes
formed such a thick gathering of the humors ([τὰς λήμας]), that it was like a skin
drawn over the pupil, and what was worse, it threatened blindness, and
everybody said this would be the issue. But from this disease also was he
quickly freed by the grace of God. So far what I have heard from others: now I
will tell you what I myself know. Once on a time a suspicion of tyrants was
raised in our city— at that time I was but a youth— and all the soldiers being set
to watch without the city as it chanced, they were making strict inquisition after
books of sorcery and magic. And the person who had written the book, had flung
it unbound ([ἀ] [κατασκέυαστον]) into the river, and was taken, and when asked
for it, was not able to give it up, but was carried all around the city in bonds:
when, however, the evidence being brought home to him, he had suffered
punishment, just then it chanced that I, wishing to go to the Martyrs' Church,
was returning through the gardens by the riverside in company with another
person. He, seeing the book floating on the water at first thought it was a linen
cloth, but when he got near, perceived it was a book, so he went down, and took

it up. I however called shares in the booty, and laughed about it. But let us see,
says he, what in the world it is. So he turns back a part of the page, and finds the
contents to be magic. At that very moment it chanced that a soldier came by: * *
* then having taken from within, he went off. There were we congealed with
fear. For who would have believed our story that we had picked it up from the
river, when all were at that time, even the unsuspected, under strict watch? And
we did not dare to cast it away, lest we should be seen, and there was a like
danger to us in tearing it to pieces. God gave us means, and we cast it away, and
at last we were free for that time from the extreme peril. And I might mention
numberless cases, if I had a mind to recount all. And even these I have
mentioned for your sakes, so that, if any have other cases, although not such as
these, let him bear them in mind constantly: for example, if at any time a stone
having been hurled, and being about to strike you, has not struck you, do thou
bear this ever in your mind: these things produce in us great affection towards
God. For if on remembering any men who have been the means of saving us, we
are much mortified if we be not able to requite them, much more (should we feel
thus) with regard to God. This too is useful in other respects. When we wish not
to be overmuch grieved, let us say: "If we have received good things at the hand
of the Lord, shall not we endure evil things?" [Job 2:10] And when Paul told
them from whence he had been delivered, [2 Timothy 4:17] the reason was that
he might put them also in mind. See too how Jacob kept all these things in his
mind: wherefore also he said: "The Angel which redeemed me from my youth up"
[Genesis 48:16]; and not only that he redeemed him, but how and for what
purpose. See accordingly how he also calls to mind the benefits he had received
in particular. "With my staff," he says, "I passed over Jordan." [Genesis 32:10]
The Jews also always remembered the things which happened to their
forefathers, turning over in their minds the things done in Egypt. Then much
more let us, bearing in mind the special mercies which have happened to us also,
how often we have fallen into dangers and calamities, and unless God had held
his hand over us, should long ago have perished: I say, let us all, considering