any affection, either to fever or to wounds, so also is it with this. And he said not
Restrain, but "Mortify" (put to death), so that they never rise up more, and "put
them away." That which is dead, we put away; for instance, if there be callosities
in the body, their body is dead, and we put it away. Now, if you cut into that
which is quick, it produces pain, but if into that which is dead, we are not even
sensible of it. So, in truth, is it with the passions; they make the soul unclean;
they make the soul, which is immortal, passible.
How covetousness is said to be idolatry, we have oftentimes explained. For
the things which do most of all lord it over the human race, are these,
covetousness, and unchasteness, and evil desire. "For which things' sake comes,"
he says, "the wrath of God upon the sons of disobedience." Sons of
disobedience, he calls them, to deprive them of excuse, and to show that it was
because they would not be obedient, that they were in that condition. "In the
which you also," he says, "walked aforetime," and (afterward) became obedient.
He points them out as still in them, and praises them, saying, "But now do ye
also put away all these, anger, wrath, malice, railing, shameful speaking." But
against others he advances his discourse. Under the head of "passion and
railing" he means revilings, just as under "wrath" he means wickedness. And in
another place, to shame them, he says, "for we are members one of another."
[Ephesians 4:25] He makes them out to be as it were manufacturers of men;
casting away this one, and receiving that. He spoke of a man's "members"
[Colossians 3:5]; here he says, "all." He spoke of his heart, wrath, mouth,
blasphemy, eyes, fornication, covetousness, hands and feet, lying, the
understanding itself, and the old mind. One royal form it has, that, namely, of
Christ. They whom he has in view, appear to me rather to be of the Gentiles. For
like as earth, being but sand, even though one part be greater, another less, losing
its own previous form, does afterwards become gold; and like as wool, of
whatever kind it be, receives another aspect, and hides its former one: so truly is
it also with the faithful. "Forbearing," he says, "one another"; he shows what is
just. Thou forbearest him, and he you; and so he says in the Epistle to the

Galatians, "Bear one another's burdens." [Galatians 6:2] "And be thankful," he
says. For this is what he everywhere especially seeks; the chiefest of good
things.
Give we thanks then in all things; whatever may have happened; for this is
thankfulness. For to do so in prosperity indeed, is no great thing, for the nature
of the circumstances of itself impels one thereto; but when being in extremities
we give thanks, then it is admirable. For when, in circumstances under which
others blaspheme, and exclaim discontentedly, we give thanks, see how great
philosophy is here. First, you have rejoiced God; next, you have shamed the
devil; thirdly, you have even made that which has happened to be nothing; for all
at once, thou both givest thanks, and God cuts short the pain, and the devil
departs. For if you have exclaimed discontentedly, he, as having succeeded to his
wish, stands close by you, and God, as being blasphemed, leaves you, and your
calamity is heightened; but if you have given thanks, he, as gaining nought,
departs; and God, as being honored, requites you with greater honor. And it is
not possible, that a man, who gives thanks for his evils should be sensible of
them. For his soul rejoices, as doing what is right; immediately his conscience is
bright, it exults in its own commendation; and that soul which is bright, cannot
possibly be sad of countenance. But in the other case, along with the misfortune,
conscience also assails him with her lash; while in this she crowns, and
proclaims him.
Nothing is holier than that tongue, which in evils gives thanks to God; truly
in no respect does it fall short of that of martyrs; both are alike crowned, both
this, and they. For over this one also stands the executioner to force it to deny
God, by blasphemy; the devil stands over it, torturing it with executioner
thoughts, darkening it with despondencies. If then one bear his griefs, and give
thanks, he has gained a crown of martyrdom. For instance, is her little child sick,
and does she give God thanks? This is a crown to her. What torture so bad that
despondency is not worse? Still it does not force her to vent forth a bitter word.
It dies: again she has given thanks. She has become the daughter of Abraham.