her house as in some school of true wisdom, and collects her thoughts within
herself, will be enabled to apply herself to prayers, and readings, and other
heavenly wisdom. And as they who dwell in deserts have none to disturb them,
so she being continually within can enjoy a perpetual calm. Nor even if at any
time she need to go forth, is there then any cause for confusion. For the
necessary occasions for a women to leave her house are, either for the purpose of
coming hither, or when the body need to be cleansed in the bath; but for the most
part she sits at home, and it is possible for her both to be herself truly wise, and
receiving her husband when agitated to calm and compose him, to abate the
excess and fierceness of his thoughts, and so to send him forth again, having put
off all the mischiefs which he collected from the market-place, and carrying with
him whatever good he learned at home. For nothing, nothing is more powerful
than a pious and sensible women to bring a man into proper order, and to mould
his soul as she will. For he will not endure friends, or teachers, or rulers, as he
will his partner advising and counseling him, since the advice carries even some
pleasure with it, because she who gives the counsel is greatly loved. I could tell
of many hard and disobedient men who have been softened in this way. For she
who shares his table, his bed, and his embraces, his words and secrets, his
comings in and goings out, and many other things, who is entirely given up and
joined to him, as it is likely that a body would be joined to a head, if she happen
to be discreet and well attuned, will go beyond and excel all others in the
management of her husband.
4. Wherefore I exhort women to make this their employment, and to give
fitting counsel. For as they have great power for good, so have they also for evil.
A women destroyed Absalom, a woman destroyed Amnon, a woman was like to
have destroyed Job, a woman rescued Nabal from the slaughter. Women have
preserved whole nations; for Deborah and Judith exhibited successes worthy of
men; so also do ten thousand other women. Wherefore Paul says, "For what do
you know, O wife, whether you shall save your husband?" [1 Corinthians 7:16]
And in those times we see Persis and Mary and Priscilla taking part in the labors

of the Apostles [Romans 16]; whom we also needs must imitate, and not by
words only, but also by actions, bring into order him that dwells with us. But
how shall we instruct him by our actions? When he sees that you are not evilly
disposed, not fond of expense or ornament, not demanding extravagant supplies
of money, but content with what you have, then will he endure you counseling
him. But if you are wise in word, and in actions doest the contrary, he will
condemn you for very foolish talking. But when together with words you afford
him also instruction by your works, then will he admit you and obey you the
more readily; as when you desire not gold, nor pearls, nor costly clothing, but
instead of these, modesty, sobriety, kindness; when you exhibit these virtues on
your part and requirest them on his. For if you must needs do somewhat to
please your husband, you should adorn your soul, not adorn and so spoil your
person. The gold which you put about you will not make you so lovely and
desirable to him, as modesty and kindness towards himself, and a readiness to
die for your partner; these things most subdue men. Indeed, that splendor of
apparel even displeases him, as straitening his means, and causing him much
expense and care; but those things which I have named will rivet a husband to a
wife; for kindness and friendship and love cause no cares, give rise to no
expense, but quite the contrary. That outward adornment becomes palling by use,
but that of the soul blooms day by day, and kindles a stronger flame. So that if
you would please your husband, adorn your soul with modesty, piety, and
management of the house. These things both subdue him more, and never cease.
Age destroys not this adornment, sickness wastes it not. The adornment of the
body length of time is wont to undo, sickness and many other things to waste,
but what relates to the soul is above all this. That adornment causes envy, and
kindles jealousy, but this is pure from disease, and free from all vainglory. Thus
will matters at home be easier, and your income without trouble, when the gold
is not laid on about your body or encircling your arms, but passes on to
necessary uses, such as the feeding of servants, the necessary care of children,
and other useful purposes. But if this be not the case, if the (wife's) face be