THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.40, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it was becoming that Christ should lead

an austere life in this world?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was becoming that Christ should
lead an austere life in this world. For Christ preached the perfection
of life much more than John did. But John led an austere life in order
that he might persuade men by his example to embrace a perfect life;
for it is written (Mt. 3:4) that "the same John had his garment of
camel's hair and a leathern girdle about his loins: and his meat was
locusts and wild honey"; on which Chrysostom comments as follows
(Hom. x): "It was a marvelous and strange thing to behold such
austerity in a human frame: which thing also particularly attracted
the Jews." Therefore it seems that an austere life was much more
becoming to Christ.
Objection 2: Further, abstinence is ordained to continency; for it is
written (Osee 4:10): "They shall eat and shall not be filled; they have
committed fornication, and have not ceased." But Christ both
observed continency in Himself and proposed it to be observed by
others when He said (Mt. 19:12): "There are eunuchs who have made
themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven: he that can take it
let him take it." Therefore it seems that Christ should have observed
an austere life both in Himself and in His disciples.
Objection 3: Further, it seems absurd for a man to begin a stricter
form of life and to return to an easier life: for one might quote to his
discredit that which is written, Lk. 14:30: "This man began to build,
and was not able to finish." Now Christ began a very strict life after
His baptism, remaining in the desert and fasting for "forty days and
forty nights." Therefore it seems unbecoming that, after leading such
a strict life, He should return to the common manner of living.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 11:19): "The Son of Man came
eating and drinking."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), it was in keeping with the
end of the Incarnation that Christ should not lead a solitary life, but
should associate with men. Now it is most fitting that he who
associates with others should conform to their manner of living;
according to the words of the Apostle (1 Cor. 9:22): "I became all
things to all men." And therefore it was most fitting that Christ

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.40, C.3.

should conform to others in the matter of eating and drinking. Hence
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xvi) that "John is described as
'neither eating nor drinking,' because he did not take the same food
as the Jews. Therefore, unless our Lord had taken it, it would not be
said of Him, in contrast, 'eating and drinking.'"
Reply to Objection 1: In His manner of living our Lord gave an
example of perfection as to all those things which of themselves
relate to salvation. Now abstinence in eating and drinking does not
of itself relate to salvation, according to Rm. 14:17: "The kingdom of
God is not meat and drink." And Augustine (De Qq. Evang. ii, qu. 11)
explains Mt. 11:19, "Wisdom is justified by her children," saying that
this is because the holy apostles "understood that the kingdom of
God does not consist in eating and drinking, but in suffering
indigence with equanimity," for they are neither uplifted by affluence,
nor distressed by want. Again (De Doctr. Christ. iii), he says that in
all such things "it is not making use of them, but the wantonness of
the user, that is sinful." Now both these lives are lawful and
praiseworthy---namely, that a man withdraw from the society of other
men and observe abstinence; and that he associate with other men
and live like them. And therefore our Lord wished to give men an
example of either kind of life.
As to John, according to Chrysostom (Hom. xxxvii super Matth.), "he
exhibited no more than his life and righteous conduct . . . but Christ
had the testimony also of miracles. Leaving, therefore, John to be
illustrious by his fasting, He Himself came the opposite way, both
coming unto publicans' tables and eating and drinking."
Reply to Objection 2: Just as by abstinence other men acquire the
power of self-restraint, so also Christ, in Himself and in those that
are His, subdued the flesh by the power of His Godhead. Wherefore,
as we read Mt. 9:14, the Pharisees and the disciples of John fasted,
but not the disciples of Christ. On which Bede comments, saying
that "John drank neither wine nor strong drink: because abstinence
is meritorious where the nature is weak. But why should our Lord,
whose right by nature it is to forgive sins, avoid those whom He
could make holier than such as abstain?"
Reply to Objection 3: As Chrysostom says (Hom. xiii super Matth.),
"that thou mightest learn how great a good is fasting, and how it is a
shield against the devil, and that after baptism thou shouldst give
thyself up, not to luxury, but to fasting---for this cause did He fast,