THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.4.

according to Rm. 1:5: "For obedience to the faith in all nations for
His name." Now Christ had most perfect obedience to God,
according to Phil. 2:8: "Becoming obedient unto death." And hence
He taught nothing pertaining to merit which He did not fulfil more
perfectly Himself.
Reply to Objection 3: As a gloss says in the same place, faith is that
"whereby such things as are not seen are believed." But faith in
things seen is improperly so called, and only after a certain
similitude with regard to the certainty and firmness of the assent.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether in Christ there was hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was hope in Christ. For it is
said in the Person of Christ (Ps. 30:1): "In Thee, O Lord, have I
hoped." But the virtue of hope is that whereby a man hopes in God.
Therefore the virtue of hope was in Christ.
Objection 2: Further, hope is the expectation of the bliss to come, as
was shown above (SS, Question 17, Article 5, ad 3). But Christ
awaited something pertaining to bliss, viz. the glorifying of His body.
Therefore it seems there was hope in Him.
Objection 3: Further, everyone may hope for what pertains to his
perfection, if it has yet to come. But there was something still to
come pertaining to Christ's perfection, according to Eph. 4:12: "For
the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
building up of the body of Christ." Hence it seems that it befitted
Christ to have hope.
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 8:24): "What a man seeth, why doth
he hope for?" Thus it is clear that as faith is of the unseen, so also is
hope. But there was no faith in Christ, as was said above (Article 1):
neither, consequently, was there hope.
I answer that, As it is of the nature of faith that one assents to what
one sees not, so is it of the nature of hope that one expects what as
yet one has not; and as faith, forasmuch as it is a theological virtue,
does not regard everything unseen, but only God; so likewise hope,
as a theological virtue, has God Himself for its object, the fruition of
Whom man chiefly expects by the virtue of hope; yet, in
consequence, whoever has the virtue of hope may expect the Divine
aid in other things, even as he who has the virtue of faith believes
God not only in Divine things, but even in whatsoever is divinely
revealed. Now from the beginning of His conception Christ had the
Divine fruition fully, as will be shown (Question 34, Article 4), and
hence he had not the virtue of hope. Nevertheless He had hope as
regards such things as He did not yet possess, although He had not
faith with regard to anything; because, although He knew all things
fully, wherefore faith was altogether wanting to Him, nevertheless He
did not as yet fully possess all that pertained to His perfection, viz.
immortality and glory of the body, which He could hope for.