Do you give to the poor? What you give is not yours, but your Master's, common
to you and your fellow-servants. For which cause you ought especially to be
humbled, in the calamities of those who are your kindred foreseeing your own,
and taking knowledge of your own nature in their cases. We ourselves perhaps
are sprung from such ancestors; and if wealth has shifted to you, it is probable
that it will leave you again. And after all, what is wealth? A vain shadow,
dissolving smoke, a flower of the grass, or rather something meaner than a
flower. Why then are you high-minded over grass? Does not wealth fall to
thieves, and effeminates, and harlots, and tomb-breakers? Does this puff you up,
that you have such as these to share in your possession? Or do you desire honor?
Towards gaining honor nothing is more serviceable than almsgiving. For the
honors arising from wealth and power are compulsory, and attended with hatred,
but these others are from the free will and real feeling of the honorers; and
therefore those who pay them can never give them. Now if men show such
reverence for the merciful, and invoke all blessings upon them, consider what
return, what recompense they shall receive from the merciful God. Let us then
seek this wealth which endures forever, and never deserts us, that, becoming
great here and glorious there, we may obtain everlasting blessings, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and
the Holy Spirit be glory, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 34 on the Gospel of John
John 4:28-29
"The woman then left her water pot, and went her way into the city, and says to
the men, Come, see a Man which told me all things that ever I did; is not this the
Christ?"
1. We require much fervor and uproused zeal, for without these it is
impossible to obtain the blessings promised to us. And to show this, Christ at
one time says, "Except a man take up his cross and follow Me, he is not worthy
of Me" [Matthew 10:38]; at another, "I have come to send fire upon the earth,
and what will I if it be already kindled?" [Luke 12:49]; by both these desiring to
represent to us a disciple full of heat and fire, and prepared for every danger.
Such an one was this woman. For so kindled was she by His words, that she left
her water pot and the purpose for which she came, ran into the city, and drew all
the people to Jesus. "Come," she says, "see a Man which told me all things that
ever I did."
Observe her zeal and wisdom. She came to draw water, and when she had
lighted upon the true Well, she after that despised the material one; teaching us
even by this trifling instance when we are listening to spiritual matters to
overlook the things of this life, and make no account of them. For what the
Apostles did, that, after her ability, did this woman also. They when they were
called, left their nets; she of her own accord, without the command of any, leaves
her water pot, and winged by joy performs the office of Evangelists. And she
calls not one or two, as did Andrew and Philip, but having aroused a whole city
and people, so brought them to Him.
Observe too how prudently she speaks; she said not, "Come and see the
Christ," but with the same condescension by which Christ had netted her she
draws the men to Him; "Come," she says, "see a Man who told me all that ever I