know full well, how they indeed are citizens of heaven, but we are not worthy so
much as of the earth.
So that therefore, when any one invested with rank has come unto them,
then is all inflated pride found utterly vain. For the laborer there, and he that has
no experience of worldly affairs, sits near him that is a commander of troops,
and prides himself on his authority, upon the grass, upon a mean cushion. For
there are none to extol him, none to puff him up; but the same result takes place,
as if any one were to go to a goldsmith, and a garden of roses, for he receives
some brightness from the gold and from the roses; so they too, gaining a little
from the splendor of these, are delivered from their former arrogance. And like
as if any were to go upon a high place, though he be exceedingly short, he
appears high; so these too, coming unto their exalted minds, appear like them, so
long as they abide there, but when they are gone down are abased again, on
descending from that height.
A king is nothing among them, a governor is nothing; but like as we, when
children are playing at these things, laugh; so do they also utterly spurn the
inflamed pride of them who strut without. And this is evident from hence, that if
any one would give them a kingdom to possess in security, they would never
take it; yet they would take it, unless their thoughts were upon what is greater
than it, unless they accounted the thing to be but for a season.
What then? Shall we not go over unto blessedness so great? Shall we not
come unto these angels; shall we not receive clean garments, and join in the
ceremonies of this wedding feast; but shall we continue begging, in no respect in
a better condition than the poor in the streets, or rather in a state far worse and
more wretched? For much worse than these are they that are rich in evil ways,
and it is better to beg than to spoil, for the one has excuse, but the other brings
punishment; and the beggar in no degree offends God, but this other both men
and God; and undergoes the labors of rapine, but all the enjoyment thereof other
men often reap.
Knowing then these things, let us lay aside all covetousness, and covet the

things above, with great earnestness "taking the kingdom by force."
[Matthew 11:12] For it cannot be, it cannot be that any one who is remiss should
enter therein.
But God grant that we all having become earnest, and watchful may attain
thereto, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 70 on Matthew

Matt. XXII. 15.
"Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle Him
in His talk."
Then. When? When most of all they ought to have been moved to
compunction, when they should have been amazed at His love to man, when
they should have feared the things to come, when from the past they ought to
have believed touching the future also. For indeed the things that had been said
cried aloud in actual fulfillment. I mean, that publicans and harlots believed, and
prophets and righteous men were slain, and from these things they ought not to
have gainsaid touching their own destruction, but even to believe and to be
sobered.
But nevertheless not even so do their wicked acts cease, but travail and
proceed further. And forasmuch as they could not lay hands on Him (for they
feared the multitude), they took another way with the intention of bringing Him
into danger, and making Him guilty of crimes against the state.
For "they sent out unto Him their disciples with the Herodians saying,
Master, we know that you are true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither
do you care for any man; for you regard not the person of men. Tell us therefore,
What do you think? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Cæsar or not?"
[Matthew 22:16-17]
For they were now tributaries, their state having passed under the rule of the
Romans. Forasmuch then as they saw that Theudas and Judas [Acts 5:36-37]
with their companies for this cause were put to death, as having prepared for a
revolt, they were minded to bring Him too by these words into such a suspicion.
Therefore they sent both their own disciples, and Herod's soldiers, digging, as
they thought, a precipice on either side, and in every direction setting the snare,