clothes we have the earth, fairest of coverings, and more suited for the nature of
such bodies as ours. If then where there are so many needs we must not search
for anything superfluous, much more where there is no such necessity, is the
ostentation unseasonable.
6. "But the lookers-on will laugh," says some one. Most certainly if there be
any laughter, we need not care much for one so exceedingly foolish; but at
present there are many who rather admire and accept our true wisdom. For these
are not the things which deserve laughter, but those which we do at present,
weeping, and wailing, and burying ourselves with the departed; these things
deserve ridicule and punishment. But to show true wisdom, both in these
respects and in the modesty of the attire used, prepares crowns and praises for
us, and all will applaud us, and will admire the power of Christ, and will say,
"Amazing! How great is the power of the Crucified One! He has persuaded those
who are perishing and wasting, that death is not death; they therefore do not act
as perishing men, but as men who send the dead before them to a distant and
better dwelling-place. He has persuaded them that this corruptible and earthy
body shall put on a garment more glorious than silk or cloth of gold, the
garment of immortality; therefore they are not very anxious about their burial,
but deem a virtuous life to be an admirable winding-sheet." These things they
will say, if they see us showing true wisdom; but if they behold us bent down
with grief, playing the woman, placing around troops of female mourners, they
will laugh, and mock, and find fault in ten thousand ways, pulling to pieces our
foolish expense, our vain labor. With these things we hear all finding fault; and
very reasonably. For what excuse can we have, when we adorn a body, which is
consumed by corruption and worms, and neglect Christ when thirsting, going
about naked, and a stranger? Cease we then from this vain trouble. Let us
perform the obsequies of the departed, as is good both for us and them, to the
glory of God: let us do much alms for their sake, let us send with them the best
provision for the way. For if the memory of admirable men, though dead, has
protected the living, (for, "I will defend," it says, "this city for Mine Own sake,

and for My servant David's sake" [2 Kings 19:34]) much more will alms-doing
effect this; for this has raised even the dead, as when the widows stood round
showing what things Dorcas had made, while she was with them. [Acts 9:39]
When therefore one is about to die, let the friend of that dying person prepare the
obsequies, and persuade the departing one to leave somewhat to the needy. With
these garments let him send him to the grave, leaving Christ his heir. For if they
who write kings among their heirs, leave a safe portion to their relations, when
one leaves Christ heir with his children, consider how great good he will draw
down upon himself and all his. These are the right sort of funerals, these profit
both those who remain and those who depart. If we be so buried, we shall be
glorious at the Resurrection-time. But if caring for the body we neglect the soul,
we then shall suffer many terrible things, and incur much ridicule. For neither is
it a common unseemliness to depart without being clothed with virtue, nor is the
body, though cast out without a tomb, so disgraced, as a soul appearing bare of
virtue in that day. This let us put on, this let us wrap around us; it is best to do so
during all our lifetime; but if we have in this life been negligent, let us at least in
our end be sober, and charge our relations to help us when we depart by almsdoing; that being thus assisted by each other, we may attain to much confidence,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, dominion, and honor, now and ever and
world without end. Amen.