FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.4.

ways, however, because the natural active principles are always
determined to the same acts; so that the different species of natural
acts are taken not only from the objects, which are the ends or terms
of those acts, but also from their active principles: thus heating and
cooling are specifically distinct with reference to hot and cold. On
the other hand, the active principles in voluntary acts, such as the
acts of sins, are not determined, of necessity, to one act, and
consequently from one active or motive principle, diverse species of
sins can proceed: thus from fear engendering false humility man
may proceed to theft, or murder, or to neglect the flock committed to
his care; and these same things may proceed from love enkindling to
undue ardor. Hence it is evident that sins do not differ specifically
according to their various active or motive causes, but only in
respect of diversity in the final cause, which is the end and object of
the will. For it has been shown above (Question 1, Article 3; Question
18, Articles 4,6) that human acts take their species from the end.
Reply to Objection 1: The active principles in voluntary acts, not
being determined to one act, do not suffice for the production of
human acts, unless the will be determined to one by the intention of
the end, as the Philosopher proves (Metaph. ix, text. 15,16), and
consequently sin derives both its being and its species from the end.
Reply to Objection 2: Objects, in relation to external acts, have the
character of matter "about which"; but, in relation to the interior act
of the will, they have the character of end; and it is owing to this that
they give the act its species. Nevertheless, even considered as the
matter "about which," they have the character of term, from which
movement takes its species (Phys. v, text. 4; Ethic. x, 4); yet even
terms of movement specify movements, in so far as term has the
character of end.
Reply to Objection 3: These distinctions of sins are given, not as
distinct species of sins, but to show their various causes.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether sin is fittingly divided into sin against

God, against oneself, and against one's neighbor?
Objection 1: It would seem that sin is unfittingly divided into sin
against God, against one's neighbor, and against oneself. For that
which is common to all sins should not be reckoned as a part in the
division of sin. But it is common to all sins to be against God: for it
is stated in the definition of sin that it is "against God's law," as
stated above (Question 66, Article 6). Therefore sin against God
should not be reckoned a part of the division of sin.
Objection 2: Further, every division should consist of things in
opposition to one another. But these three kinds of sin are not
opposed to one another: for whoever sins against his neighbor, sins
against himself and against God. Therefore sin is not fittingly divided
into these three.
Objection 3: Further, specification is not taken from things external.
But God and our neighbor are external to us. Therefore sins are not
distinguished specifically with regard to them: and consequently sin
is unfittingly divided according to these three.
On the contrary, Isidore (De Summo Bono), in giving the division of
sins, says that "man is said to sin against himself, against God, and
against his neighbor."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 71, Articles 1,6), sin is an
inordinate act. Now there should be a threefold order in man: one in
relation to the rule of reason, in so far as all our actions and
passions should be commensurate with the rule of reason: another
order is in relation to the rule of the Divine Law, whereby man should
be directed in all things: and if man were by nature a solitary animal,
this twofold order would suffice. But since man is naturally a civic
and social animal, as is proved in Polit. i, 2, hence a third order is
necessary, whereby man is directed in relation to other men among
whom he has to dwell. Of these orders the second contains the first
and surpasses it. For whatever things are comprised under the order
of reason, are comprised under the order of God Himself. Yet some
things are comprised under the order of God, which surpass the
human reason, such as matters of faith, and things due to God
alone. Hence he that sins in such matters, for instance, by heresy,