THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether this be a suitable form of Baptism: "I

baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost"?
Objection 1: It seems that this is not a suitable form of Baptism: "I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost." For action should be ascribed to the principal agent
rather than to the minister. Now the minister of a sacrament acts as
an instrument, as stated above (Question 64, Article 1); while the
principal agent in Baptism is Christ, according to Jn. 1:33, "He upon
Whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining upon Him,
He it is that baptizeth." It is therefore unbecoming for the minister to
say, "I baptize thee": the more so that "Ego" [I] is understood in the
word "baptizo" [I baptize], so that it seems redundant.
Objection 2: Further, there is no need for a man who does an action,
to make mention of the action done; thus he who teaches, need not
say, "I teach you." Now our Lord gave at the same time the precepts
both of baptizing and of teaching, when He said (Mt. 28:19): "Going,
teach ye all nations," etc. Therefore there is no need in the form of
Baptism to mention the action of baptizing.
Objection 3: Further, the person baptized sometimes does not
understand the words; for instance, if he be deaf, or a child. But it is
useless to address such a one; according to Ecclus. 32:6: "Where
there is no hearing, pour not out words." Therefore it is unfitting to
address the person baptized with these words: "I baptize thee."
Objection 4: Further, it may happen that several are baptized by
several at the same time; thus the apostles on one day baptized
three thousand, and on another, five thousand (Acts 2,4). Therefore
the form of Baptism should not be limited to the singular number in
the words, "I baptize thee": but one should be able to say, "We
baptize you."
Objection 5: Further, Baptism derives its power from Christ's
Passion. But Baptism is sanctified by the form. Therefore it seems
that Christ's Passion should be mentioned in the form of Baptism.
Objection 6: Further, a name signifies a thing's property. But there
are three Personal Properties of the Divine Persons, as stated in the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.6.

FP, Question 32, Article 3. Therefore we should not say, "in the
name," but "in the names of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost."
Objection 7: Further, the Person of the Father is designated not only
by the name Father, but also by that of "Unbegotten and Begetter";
and the Son by those of "Word," "Image," and "Begotten"; and the
Holy Ghost by those of "Gift," "Love," and the "Proceeding One."
Therefore it seems that Baptism is valid if conferred in these names.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Mt. 28:19): "Going . . . teach ye all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost."
I answer that, Baptism receives its consecration from its form,
according to Eph. 5:26: "Cleansing it by the laver of water in the
word of life." And Augustine says (De Unico Baptismo iv) that
"Baptism is consecrated by the words of the Gospel." Consequently
the cause of Baptism needs to be expressed in the baptismal form.
Now this cause is twofold; the principal cause from which it derives
its virtue, and this is the Blessed Trinity; and the instrumental cause,
viz. the minister who confers the sacrament outwardly. Wherefore
both causes should be expressed in the form of Baptism. Now the
minister is designated by the words, "I baptize thee"; and the
principal cause in the words, "in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost." Therefore this is the suitable form of
Baptism: "I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost."
Reply to Objection 1: Action is attributed to an instrument as to the
immediate agent; but to the principal agent inasmuch as the
instrument acts in virtue thereof. Consequently it is fitting that in the
baptismal form the minister should be mentioned as performing the
act of baptizing, in the words, "I baptize thee"; indeed, our Lord
attributed to the ministers the act of baptizing, when He said:
"Baptizing them," etc. But the principal cause is indicated as
conferring the sacrament by His own power, in the words, "in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost": for
Christ does not baptize without the Father and the Holy Ghost.
The Greeks, however, do not attribute the act of baptizing to the
minister, in order to avoid the error of those who in the past ascribed