Reply to Objection 4: A body is not that which is most distant from
God; for it participates something of a likeness to the Divine Being,
forasmuch as it has a form. That which is most distant from God is
primary matter; which is in no way active, since it is a pure
potentiality.
Reply to Objection 5: The term of a body's action is both an
accidental form and a substantial form. For the active quality, such
as heat, although itself an accident, acts nevertheless by virtue of
the substantial form, as its instrument: wherefore its action can
terminate in a substantial form; thus natural heat, as the instrument
of the soul, has an action terminating in the generation of flesh. But
by its own virtue it produces an accident. Nor is it against the nature
of an accident to surpass its subject in acting, but it is to surpass it
in being; unless indeed one were to imagine that an accident
transfers its identical self from the agent to the patient; thus
Democritus explained action by an issue of atoms.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there are any seminal virtues in

corporeal matter?
Objection 1: It would seem that there are no seminal virtues in
corporeal matter. For virtue [ratio] implies something of a spiritual
order. But in corporeal matter nothing exists spiritually, but only
materially, that is, according to the mode of that in which it is.
Therefore there are no seminal virtues in corporeal matter.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine (De Trin. iii, 8,9) says that demons
produce certain results by employing with a hidden movement
certain seeds, which they know to exist in matter. But bodies, not
virtues, can be employed with local movement. Therefore it is
unreasonable to say that there are seminal virtues in corporeal
matter.
Objection 3: Further, seeds are active principles. But there are no
active principles in corporeal matter; since, as we have said above,
matter is not competent to act (Article 1, ad 2,4). Therefore there are
no seminal virtues in corporeal matter.
Objection 4: Further, there are said to be certain "causal
virtues" (Augustine, De Gen. ad lit. v, 4) which seem to suffice for the
production of things. But seminal virtues are not causal virtues: for
miracles are outside the scope of seminal virtues, but not of causal
virtues. Therefore it is unreasonable to say that there are seminal
virtues in corporeal matter.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 8): "Of all the things
which are generated in a corporeal and visible fashion, certain seeds
lie hidden in the corporeal things of this world."
I answer that, It is customary to name things after what is more
perfect, as the Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 4). Now in the whole
corporeal nature, living bodies are the most perfect: wherefore the
word "nature" has been transferred from living things to all natural
things. For the word itself, "nature," as the Philosopher says
(Metaph. v, Did. iv, 4), was first applied to signify the generation of
living things, which is called "nativity": and because living things are
generated from a principle united to them, as fruit from a tree, and
the offspring from the mother, to whom it is united, consequently the