6. Tell me then do you lament this that God has reserved you from such a
cruel bondage, and that He has barred every avenue against these pestilential
diseases? For while your husband was living they ceased not continually
assaulting the thoughts of your heart, but since his death they have no starting
point whence they can lay hold of your understanding. This then is a discipline
which ought to be practised in future— to abstain from lamenting the withdrawal
of these evils, and from hankering after the bitter tyranny which they exercise.
For where they blow a heavy blast they upset all things from the foundation and
shatter them to pieces; and just as many prostitutes, although by nature ill
favoured and ugly, do yet by means of enamels and pigments excite the feelings
of the youthful while they are still tender, and when they have got them under
their control treat them more insolently than any slave; so also do these passions,
vainglory and arrogance, defile the souls of men more than any other kind of
pollution.
On this account also wealth has seemed to the majority of men to be a good
thing; at least when it is stripped of this passion of vainglory it will no longer
seem desirable. At any rate those who have been permitted to obtain in the midst
of their poverty popular glory have no longer preferred wealth, but rather have
despised much gold when it was bestowed upon them. And you have no need to
learn from me who these men were, for you know them better than I do,
Epaminondas, Socrates, Aristeides, Diogenes, Krates who turned his own land
into a sheep walk. The others indeed, inasmuch as it was not possible for them to
get rich, saw glory brought to them in the midst of their poverty, and straightway
devoted themselves to it, but this man threw away even what he possessed; so
infatuated were they in the pursuit of this cruel monster. Let us not then weep
because God has rescued us from this shameful thraldom which is an object of
derision and of much reproach; for there is nothing splendid in it save the name
it bears, and in reality it places those who possess it in a position which belies its
appellation, and there is no one who does not laugh to scorn the man who does
anything with a view to glory. For it is only he who has not an eye to this who

will be enabled to win respect and glory; but he who sets a great value on
popular glory, and does and endures everything for the sake of obtaining it is the
very man who will fail to attain it, and be subjected to all the exact opposites of
glory, ridicule, and accusation, scoffing, enmity and hatred. And this is wont to
happen not only among men, but also among you women, and indeed more
especially in your case. For the woman who is unaffected in mien, and gait, and
dress, and seeks no honour from any one is admired by all women, and they are
ecstatic in their praise and call her blessed, and invoke all manner of good things
upon her; but a vain-glorious woman they behold with aversion and detestation,
and avoid her like some wild beast and load her with infinite execrations and
abuse. And not only do we escape these evils by refusing to accept popular
glory, but we shall gain the highest advantages in addition to those which have
been already mentioned, being trained gradually to loosen our hold of earth and
move in the direction of heaven, and despise all worldly things. For he who feels
no need of the honour which comes from men, will perform with security
whatever good things he does, and neither in the troubles, nor in the prosperities
of this life will he be very seriously affected; for neither can the former depress
him, and cast him down, nor can the latter elate and puff him up, but in
precarious and troubled circumstances he himself remains exempt from change
of any kind. And this I expect will speedily be the case with your own soul, and
having once for all torn yourself away from all worldly interests you will display
among us a heavenly manner of life, and in a little while will laugh to scorn the
glory which you now lament, and despise its hollow and vain mask. But if you
long for the security which you formerly enjoyed owing to your husband, and
the protection of your property, and immunity from the designs of any of those
persons who trample upon the misfortunes of others "Cast your care upon the
Lord and He will nourish you." "For look," it is said, "to past generations and
see, who ever placed his hope on the Lord and was put to shame, or who ever
called upon Him, and was neglected, or who ever remained constant to His
commandments and was forsaken?" [Sirach 2:10] For He who has alleviated this