FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.3.

will, although determinate to one thing in general, viz. the good,
according to the order of nature, is nevertheless indeterminate in
respect of particular goods. Consequently choice belongs properly
to the will, and not to the sensitive appetite which is all that irrational
animals have. Wherefore irrational animals are not competent to
choose.
Reply to Objection 1: Not every desire of one thing on account of an
end is called choice: there must be a certain discrimination of one
thing from another. And this cannot be except when the appetite can
be moved to several things.
Reply to Objection 2: An irrational animal takes one thing in
preference to another, because its appetite is naturally determinate
to that thing. Wherefore as soon as an animal, whether by its sense
or by its imagination, is offered something to which its appetite is
naturally inclined, it is moved to that alone, without making any
choice. Just as fire is moved upwards and not downwards, without
its making any choice.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated in Phys. iii, 3 "movement is the act of
the movable, caused by a mover." Wherefore the power of the mover
appears in the movement of that which it moves. Accordingly, in all
things moved by reason, the order of reason which moves them is
evident, although the things themselves are without reason: for an
arrow through the motion of the archer goes straight towards the
target, as though it were endowed with reason to direct its course.
The same may be seen in the movements of clocks and all engines
put together by the art of man. Now as artificial things are in
comparison to human art, so are all natural things in comparison to
the Divine art. And accordingly order is to be seen in things moved
by nature, just as in things moved by reason, as is stated in Phys. ii.
And thus it is that in the works of irrational animals we notice certain
marks of sagacity, in so far as they have a natural inclination to set
about their actions in a most orderly manner through being ordained
by the Supreme art. For which reason, too, certain animals are called
prudent or sagacious; and not because they reason or exercise any
choice about things. This is clear from the fact that all that share in
one nature, invariably act in the same way.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.3.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.13, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether choice is only of the means, or

sometimes also of the end?
Objection 1: It would seem that choice is not only of the means. For
the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 12) that "virtue makes us choose
aright; but it is not the part of virtue, but of some other power to
direct aright those things which are to be done for its sake." But that
for the sake of which something is done is the end. Therefore choice
is of the end.
Objection 2: Further, choice implies preference of one thing to
another. But just as there can be preference of means, so can there
be preference of ends. Therefore choice can be of ends, just as it can
be of means.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 2) that "volition is
of the end, but choice of the means."
I answer that, As already stated (Article 1, ad 2), choice results from
the decision or judgment which is, as it were, the conclusion of a
practical syllogism. Hence that which is the conclusion of a practical
syllogism, is the matter of choice. Now in practical things the end
stands in the position of a principle, not of a conclusion, as the
Philosopher says (Phys. ii, 9). Wherefore the end, as such, is not a
matter of choice.
But just as in speculative knowledge nothing hinders the principle of
one demonstration or of one science, from being the conclusion of
another demonstration or science; while the first indemonstrable
principle cannot be the conclusion of any demonstration or science;
so too that which is the end in one operation, may be ordained to
something as an end. And in this way it is a matter of choice. Thus in
the work of a physician health is the end: wherefore it is not a matter
of choice for a physician, but a matter of principle. Now the health of
the body is ordained to the good of the soul, consequently with one
who has charge of the soul's health, health or sickness may be a
matter of choice; for the Apostle says (2 Cor. 12:10): "For when I am
weak, then am I powerful." But the last end is nowise a matter of
choice.
Reply to Objection 1: The proper ends of virtues are ordained to