to utter some harsh sounding [speech], think of the gnashing of teeth, and the
fear will be a bridle to you. And if you purpose to plunder, hear the Judge
commanding, and saying, "Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into the outer
darkness," [Matthew 22:13] and you will cast out this lust also. And if you are
drunken, and surfeitest continually, hear the rich man saying, 'Send Lazarus, that
with the tip of his finger he may cool this scorching tongue;' [Luke 16:24] yet
not obtaining this; and you will hold yourself aloof from that distemper. But if
you love luxury, think of the affliction and the straitness there, and you will not
think at all of this. If again you are harsh and cruel, bethink you of those virgins
who when their lamps had gone out missed so of the bridal chamber, and you
will quickly become humane. Or sluggish are you, and remiss? Consider him
that hid the talent, and you will be more vehement than fire. Or does desire of
your neighbor's substance devour you? Think of the worm that dies not, and you
will easily both put away from you this disease, and in all other things wilt do
virtuously. For He has enjoined nothing irksome or oppressive. Whence then do
His injunctions appear irksome to us? From our own slothfulness. For as if we
labor diligently, even what appears intolerable will be light and easy; so if we are
slothful, even things tolerable will seem to us difficult.
Considering then all these things, let us think not of the luxurious, but what
is their end; here indeed filth and obesity, there the worm and fire: not of the
rapacious, but what is their end; cares here, and fears, and anxieties; there chains
indissoluble: not of the lovers of glory, but what these things bring forth; here
slavery and dissemblings, and there both loss intolerable and perpetual burnings.
For if we thus discourse with ourselves, and if with these and such like things we
charm perpetually our evil lusts, quickly shall we both cast out the love of the
present things, and kindle that of the things to come. Let us therefore kindle it
and make it blaze. For if the conception of them, although a faint sort of one,
affords so great pleasure; think how great the gladness, the manifest experience
itself shall bring us. Blessed, and thrice blessed, yea, thrice blessed many times,
are they who enjoy those good things; just as, consequently, pitiable and thrice

wretched are they Who endure the opposite of these. That then we may be not of
these but those, let us choose virtue. For so shall we attain unto the good things
to come as well; which may all we attain, through the grace and love towards
men of our Lord Jesus Christ; by Whom, and with Whom, to the Father, together
with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, and honor, now and for ever, and world
without end. Amen.