to the heathen, "I indeed delivered them over unto a few things, but they have set
themselves on together unto evil things;" [Zechariah 1:15. Septuagint] they shall
suffer ills irremediable. For there is nothing, no, nothing, that does so much
exasperate God as rapine and violence and extortion. And why forsooth?
Because it is very easy to abstain from this sin. For here it is not any natural
desire that perturbs the mind, but it arises from wilful negligence. How then does
the Apostle call it, "a root of evils." [1 Timothy 6:10] Why, I say so too, but this
root is from us, and not from the nature of the things. And, if you will, let us
make a comparison and see which is the more imperious, the desire of money or
of beauty ; for that which shall be found to have struck down great men is the
more difficult to master. Let us see then what great man the desire of money ever
got possession of. Not one; only of exceeding pitiful and abject persons, Gehazi,
Ahab, Judas, the priests of the Jews: but the desire for beauty overcame even the
great prophet David. And this I say, not as extending forgiveness to those who
are conquered by such a lust, but rather, as preparing them to be watchful. For
when I have shown the strength of the passion, then, most especially, I show
them to be deprived of every claim to forgiveness. For if indeed you had not
known the wild beast, you would have this to take refuge in; but now, having
known, yet falling into it, you will have no excuse. After him , it took possession
of his son still more completely. And yet there was never man wiser than he, and
all other virtue did he attain; still, however, he was seized so violently by this
passion, that even in his vitals he received the wound. And the father indeed rose
up again and renewed the struggle, and was crowned again; but the son showed
nothing of the kind.
Therefore also Paul said, "It is better to marry than to burn:" [1 Corinthians
7:9] and Christ, "He that is able to receive it, let him receive it." [Matthew
14:12] But concerning money He spoke not so, but, "whoso has forsaken" his
goods "shall receive an hundredfold." [Matthew 14:29] 'How then,' says one,
'did He say of the rich, that they shall hardly obtain the kingdom.' Again
implying their weakness of character; not the imperiousness of money, but their

utter slavery. And this is evident also from the advice which Paul gave. For from
that lust he leads men quite away, saying, "But they that desire to be rich fall into
temptation;" [1 Timothy 6:9] but in the case of the other not so; but having
separated them "for a season" only, and that by "consent," he advises to 'come
together again' [1 Corinthians 7:5] For he feared the billows of lust lest they
should occasion a grievous shipwreck. This passion is even more vehement than
anger. For it is not possible to feel anger when there is nothing proving it, but a
man cannot help desiring even when the face which moves to it is not seen.
Therefore this passion indeed He did not cut off altogether, but added the words,
"without a cause." [Matthew 5:22] Nor again did He abolish all desire, but only
that which is unlawful, for he says, "Nevertheless, because of desires , let every
man have his own wife." [1 Corinthians 7:2] But to lay up treasure He allowed
not, either with cause or without. For those passions were implanted in our
nature for a necessary end; desire, for the procreation of children, and anger, for
the succor of the injured, but desire of money not so. Therefore neither is the
passion natural to us. So then if you are made captive by it, you will suffer so
much the more the vilest punishment. Therefore surely, it is, that Paul,
permitting even a second marriage, demands in the case of money great
strictness, saying, "Why not rather take wrong? Why not rather be defrauded?"
[1 Corinthians 6:7] And when treating of virginity, he says, "I have no
commandment," [1 Corinthians 7:25] and "I speak this for your profit, not that I
may cast a snare upon you;" [1 Corinthians 7:35] but when his discourse is of
money, he says, "Having raiment and food, let us be therewith content." [1
Timothy 6:8] 'How then is it,' says one, 'that by this, more than the other, are
many overcome?' Because they stand not so much on their guard against it as
against lasciviousness and fornication; for if they had thought it equally
dangerous, they would not, perhaps, have been made its captives. So also were
those wretched virgins cast out of the bridechamber, because that, having struck
down the great adversary, they were wounded by one weaker, and who was
nothing. [Matthew 25:1, etc.] Besides this, one may say further, that if any,