10. The Gospel offers us the chance to live life on a higher plane, but with no less intensity: “Life
grows by being given away, and it weakens in isolation and comfort. Indeed, those who enjoy life
most are those who leave security on the shore and become excited by the mission of
communicating life to others”. When the Church summons Christians to take up the task of
evangelization, she is simply pointing to the source of authentic personal fulfilment. For “here we
discover a profound law of reality: that life is attained and matures in the measure that it is offered
up in order to give life to others. This is certainly what mission means”. Consequently, an
evangelizer must never look like someone who has just come back from a funeral! Let us recover
and deepen our enthusiasm, that “delightful and comforting joy of evangelizing, even when it is in
tears that we must sow… And may the world of our time, which is searching, sometimes with
anguish, sometimes with hope, be enabled to receive the good news not from evangelizers who
are dejected, discouraged, impatient or anxious, but from ministers of the Gospel whose lives glow
with fervour, who have first received the joy of Christ”.

Eternal newness

11. A renewal of preaching can offer believers, as well as the lukewarm and the non-practising,
new joy in the faith and fruitfulness in the work of evangelization. The heart of its message will
always be the same: the God who revealed his immense love in the crucified and risen Christ.
God constantly renews his faithful ones, whatever their age: “They shall mount up with wings like
eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not be faint” (Is 40:31). Christ is the
“eternal Gospel” (Rev 14:6); he “is the same yesterday and today and forever” (Heb 13:8), yet his
riches and beauty are inexhaustible. He is for ever young and a constant source of newness. The
Church never fails to be amazed at “the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God”
(Rom 11:33). Saint John of the Cross says that “the thicket of God’s wisdom and knowledge is so
deep and so broad that the soul, however much it has come to know of it, can always penetrate
deeper within it”. Or as Saint Irenaeus writes: “By his coming, Christ brought with him all
newness”. With this newness he is always able to renew our lives and our communities, and
even if the Christian message has known periods of darkness and ecclesial weakness, it will never
grow old. Jesus can also break through the dull categories with which we would enclose him and
he constantly amazes us by his divine creativity. Whenever we make the effort to return to the
source and to recover the original freshness of the Gospel, new avenues arise, new paths of
creativity open up, with different forms of expression, more eloquent signs and words with new
meaning for today’s world. Every form of authentic evangelization is always “new”.