In a third way, a method is called rational from the rational power, that is, inasmuch as in our
procedure we follow the manner proper to the rational soul in knowing, and in this sense the
rational method is proper to natural science. For in its procedures natural science keeps the
characteristic method of the rational soul in two ways. (1) First, in this respect, that just as the
rational soul receives from sensible things (which are more knowable relatively to us) knowledge
of intelligible things (which are more knowable in their nature), so natural science proceeds from
what is better known to us and less knowable in its own nature. This is evident in the Physics.
Moreover, demonstration by means of a sign or an effect is used especially in natural science. (2)
Secondly, natural science uses a rational method in this respect, that it is characteristic of reason
to move from one thing to another; and this method is observed particularly in natural science,
where we go from the knowledge of one thing to the knowledge of another; for example, from
the knowledge of an effect to the knowledge of its cause. (a) And the procedure in natural
science is not only a movement from one thing to another distinct from it in the mind and not in
reality, as when we go from the concept animal to the concept man. In the mathematical sciences
we proceed only by means of what is of the essence of a thing, since they demonstrate only
through a formal cause. In these sciences, therefore, we do not demonstrate something about one
thing through another thing, but through the proper definition of that thing. It is true that some
demonstrations about the circle are made by means of the triangle or vice versa, but this is only
because the triangle is potentially in the circle and vice versa. (b) But in natural science, where
demonstration takes place through extrinsic causes, something is proved of one thing through
another thing entirely external to it. So the method of reason is particularly observed in natural
science; and on this account natural science among all the others is most in conformity with the
human intellect. Consequently, we say that natural science proceeds rationally, not because this is

true of it alone, but because it is especially characteristic of it.

#### Replies to Opposing Arguments:

Reply to 1. That argument is based on the method that is called rational in the first way. In this
sense a rational method is proper to rational and divine science, but not to natural science.

Reply to 2. That argument is based on the method that is called rational in the second way.

Reply to 3. The method of reason is observed in all the sciences insofar as they proceed from
one item to another that is mentally distinct from it, but not in the sense that they go from one
thing to another thing. As has been said, that is proper to natural science.