Therefore the happiness of the saints will be greater after the
resurrection of the body than before.
I answer that, It is manifest that the happiness of the saints will
increase in extent after the resurrection, because their happiness will
then be not only in the soul but also in the body. Moreover, the
soul's happiness also will increase in extent, seeing that the soul will
rejoice not only in its own good, but also in that of the body. We may
also say that the soul's happiness will increase in intensity. For
man's body may be considered in two ways: first, as being
dependent on the soul for its completion; secondly, as containing
something that hampers the soul in its operations, through the soul
not perfectly completing the body. As regards the first way of
considering the body, its union with the soul adds a certain
perfection to the soul, since every part is imperfect, and is
completed in its whole; wherefore the whole is to the part as form to
matter. Consequently the soul is more perfect in its natural being,
when it is in the whole---namely, man who results from the union of
soul and body---than when it is a separate part. But as regards the
second consideration the union of the body hampers the perfection
of the soul, wherefore it is written (Wis. 9:15) that "the corruptible
body is a load upon the soul." If, then, there be removed from the
body all those things wherein it hampers the soul's action, the soul
will be simply more perfect while existing in such a body than when
separated therefrom. Now the more perfect a thing is in being, the
more perfectly is it able to operate: wherefore the operation of the
soul united to such a body will be more perfect than the operation of
the separated soul. But the glorified body will be a body of this
description, being altogether subject to the spirit. Therefore, since
beatitude consists in an operation [FS, Question 3, Article 2, seqq.],
the soul's happiness after its reunion with the body will be more
perfect than before. For just as the soul separated from a corruptible
body is able to operate more perfectly than when united thereto, so
after it has been united to a glorified body, its operation will be more
perfect than while it was separated. Now every imperfect thing
desires its perfection. Hence the separated soul naturally desires
reunion with the body and on account of this desire which proceeds
from the soul's imperfection its operation whereby it is borne
towards God is less intense. This agrees with the saying of
Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii, 35) that "on account of the body's desire it
is held back from tending with all its might to that sovereign good."
Reply to Objection 1: The soul united to a glorified body is more like

to God than when separated therefrom, in so far as when united it
has more perfect being. For the more perfect a thing is the more it is
like to God: even so the heart, the perfection of whose life consists
in movement, is more like to God while in movement than while at
rest, although God is never moved.
Reply to Objection 2: A power which by its own nature is capable of
being in matter is more effective when subjected in matter than when
separated from matter, although absolutely speaking a power
separate from matter is more effective.
Reply to Objection 3: Although in the act of understanding the soul
does not make use of the body, the perfection of the body will
somewhat conduce to the perfection of the intellectual operation in
so far as through being united to a glorified body, the soul will be
more perfect in its nature, and consequently more effective in its
operation, and accordingly the good itself of the body will conduce
instrumentally, as it were, to the operation wherein happiness
consists: thus the Philosopher asserts (Ethic. i, 8,10) that external
goods conduce instrumentally to the happiness of life.
Reply to Objection 4: Although finite added to infinite does not make
a greater thing, it makes more things, since finite and infinite are two
things, while infinite taken by itself is one. Now the greater extent of
joy regards not a greater thing but more things. Wherefore joy is
increased in extent, through referring to God and to the body's glory,
in comparison with the joy which referred to God. Moreover, the
body's glory will conduce to the intensity of the joy that refers to
God, in so far as it will conduce to the more perfect operation
whereby the soul tends to God: since the more perfect is a becoming
operation, the greater the delight [FS, Question 32, Article 1], as
stated in Ethic. x, 8.