FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.12, C.5.

consider principle and conclusion absolutely, it considers each by a
distinct act; but when it assents to the conclusion on account of the
principles, there is but one act of the intellect.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking of seeing the window
and of seeing, through the window, the passersby, according as the
will is moved to either absolutely.
Reply to Objection 2: The end, considered as a thing, and the means
to that end, are distinct objects of the will. But in so far as the end is
the formal object in willing the means, they are one and the same
object.
Reply to Objection 3: A movement which is one as to the subject,
may differ, according to our way of looking at it, as to its beginning
and end, as in the case of ascent and descent (Phys. iii, 3).
Accordingly, in so far as the movement of the will is to the means, as
ordained to the end, it is called "choice": but the movement of the
will to the end as acquired by the means, it is called "intention." A
sign of this is that we can have intention of the end without having
determined the means which are the object of choice.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.12, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether intention is within the competency of

irrational animals?
Objection 1: It would seem that irrational animals intend the end. For
in things void of reason nature stands further apart from the rational
nature, than does the sensitive nature in irrational animals. But
nature intends the end even in things void of reason, as is proved in
Phys. ii, 8. Much more, therefore, do irrational animals intend the
end.
Objection 2: Further, just as intention is of the end, so is enjoyment.
But enjoyment is in irrational animals, as stated above (Question 11,
Article 2). Therefore intention is too.
Objection 3: Further, to intend an end belongs to one who acts for an
end; since to intend is nothing else than to tend to something. But
irrational animals act for an end; for an animal is moved either to
seek food, or to do something of the kind. Therefore irrational
animals intend an end.
On the contrary, Intention of an end implies ordaining something to
an end: which belongs to reason. Since therefore irrational animals
are void of reason, it seems that they do not intend an end.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), to intend is to tend to
something; and this belongs to the mover and to the moved.
According, therefore, as that which is moved to an end by another is
said to intend the end, thus nature is said to intend an end, as being
moved to its end by God, as the arrow is moved by the archer. And
in this way, irrational animals intend an end, inasmuch as they are
moved to something by natural instinct. The other way of intending
an end belongs to the mover; according as he ordains the movement
of something, either his own or another's, to an end. This belongs to
reason alone. Wherefore irrational animals do not intend an end in
this way, which is to intend properly and principally, as stated above
(Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: This argument takes intention in the sense of
being moved to an end.
Reply to Objection 2: Enjoyment does not imply the ordaining of one