FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.5.

I answer that, The state of the world may change in two ways. In one
way, according to a change of law: and thus no other state will
succeed this state of the New Law. Because the state of the New Law
succeeded the state of the Old Law, as a more perfect law a less
perfect one. Now no state of the present life can be more perfect that
the state of the New Law: since nothing can approach nearer to the
last end than that which is the immediate cause of our being brought
to the last end. But the New Law does this: wherefore the Apostle
says (Heb. 10:19-22): "Having therefore, brethren, a confidence in the
entering into the Holies by the blood of Christ, a new . . . way which
He hath dedicated for us . . . let us draw near." Therefore no state of
the present life can be more perfect than that of the New Law, since
the nearer a thing is to the last end the more perfect it is.
In another way the state of mankind may change according as man
stands in relation to one and the same law more or less perfectly.
And thus the state of the Old Law underwent frequent changes,
since at times the laws were very well kept, and at other times were
altogether unheeded. Thus, too, the state of the New Law is subject
to change with regard to various places, times, and persons,
according as the grace of the Holy Ghost dwells in man more or less
perfectly. Nevertheless we are not to look forward to a state wherein
man is to possess the grace of the Holy Ghost more perfectly than
he has possessed it hitherto, especially the apostles who "received
the firstfruits of the Spirit, i.e. sooner and more abundantly than
others," as a gloss expounds on Rm. 8:23.
Reply to Objection 1: As Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. v), there is a
threefold state of mankind; the first was under the Old Law; the
second is that of the New Law; the third will take place not in this
life, but in heaven. But as the first state is figurative and imperfect in
comparison with the state of the Gospel; so is the present state
figurative and imperfect in comparison with the heavenly state, with
the advent of which the present state will be done away as
expressed in that very passage (1 Cor. 13:12): "We see now through
a glass in a dark manner; but then face to face."
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix, 31),
Montanus and Priscilla pretended that Our Lord's promise to give the
Holy Ghost was fulfilled, not in the apostles, but in themselves. In
like manner the Manicheans maintained that it was fulfilled in Manes
whom they held to be the Paraclete. Hence none of the above

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.5.

received the Acts of the Apostles, where it is clearly shown that the
aforesaid promise was fulfilled in the apostles: just as Our Lord
promised them a second time (Acts 1:5): "You shall be baptized with
the Holy Ghost, not many days hence": which we read as having
been fulfilled in Acts 2. However, these foolish notions are refuted by
the statement (Jn. 7:39) that "as yet the Spirit was not given, because
Jesus was not yet glorified"; from which we gather that the Holy
Ghost was given as soon as Christ was glorified in His Resurrection
and Ascension. Moreover, this puts out of court the senseless idea
that the Holy Ghost is to be expected to come at some other time.
Now the Holy Ghost taught the apostles all truth in respect of
matters necessary for salvation; those things, to wit, that we are
bound to believe and to do. But He did not teach them about all
future events: for this did not regard them according to Acts 1:7: "It
is not for you to know the times or moments which the Father hath
put in His own power."
Reply to Objection 3: The Old Law corresponded not only to the
Father, but also to the Son: because Christ was foreshadowed in the
Old Law. Hence Our Lord said (Jn. 5:46): "If you did believe Moses,
you would perhaps believe me also; for he wrote of Me." In like
manner the New Law corresponds not only to Christ, but also to the
Holy Ghost; according to Rm. 8:2: "The Law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus," etc. Hence we are not to look forward to another law
corresponding to the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 4: Since Christ said at the very outset of the
preaching of the Gospel: "The kingdom of heaven is at hand" (Mt.
4:17), it is most absurd to say that the Gospel of Christ is not the
Gospel of the kingdom. But the preaching of the Gospel of Christ
may be understood in two ways. First, as denoting the spreading
abroad of the knowledge of Christ: and thus the Gospel was
preached throughout the world even at the time of the apostles, as
Chrysostom states (Hom. lxxv in Matth.). And in this sense the words
that follow---"and then shall the consummation come," refer to the
destruction of Jerusalem, of which He was speaking literally.
Secondly, the preaching of the Gospel may be understood as
extending throughout the world and producing its full effect, so that,
to wit, the Church would be founded in every nation. And in these
sense, as Augustine writes to Hesychius (Epist. cxcix), the Gospel is
not preached to the whole world yet, but, when it is, the
consummation of the world will come.