Word subsists as well in the human as in the divine nature: but what subsists in human
nature is `this man': therefore the Word Himself is spoken of when we say `this
Man.'
Arg. 11. If the personality of the divine and human nature in Christ is the same, divine
personality must be part of the notion of the Man who is Christ. But it is not part of the
notion of other men. Therefore the application of the common term `man' to Christ and
to other men is an instance of the use of the same term not in the same sense; and thus
He will not be of the same species with us.
Reply 11. Variation of the sense of a term comes from diversity of form connoted, not
from diversity of person denoted. The term `man' does not vary in sense by denoting
sometimes Plato, sometimes Socrates. The term `man' then, whether used of
Christ or of other men, always connotes the same form, that is, human nature, and is
predicated of them all in the same sense. But the denotation varies in this that, as taken
for Christ, the term denotes an uncreated person; but as taken for other men, a created
person.

## CHAPTER XLIV--That the Human Nature, assumed by the Word, was perfect in Soul
and Body in the instant of Conception
THE Word of God took a body through the medium of a rational soul: for the body of
man is not more assumable by God than other bodies except for the rational soul.
The Word of God then did not assume a body without a rational soul. Since then the
Word of God assumed a body from the first instant of conception, in that very instant the
rational soul must have been united with the body.
4. The body which the Word assumed was formed from the first instant of conception,
because it would have been against the fitness of things for the Word of God to have
assumed anything that was formless. Moreover the soul, like any other natural form,
requires its proper matter. Now the proper matter of the soul is an organised body: for
"the soul is the actualisation of an organic, natural body, that is in potentiality to life."

process is drawn out at length in B. II, Chapp.LXXXVIII,LXXXIX. (d) This
ordinary process of nature had to be set aside in the formation of Mary's miraculous
Child. His Body was complete from the first, a fit receptacle for a rational soul. His Body
consequently did not develop, it simply grew. Now the link (c) of this chain is broken by
modern Catholic theologians. They see no difficulty in a rational soul informing a body
not yet developed to human shape. They hold that the rational soul is always infused in
the very instant of conception. Thereupon they conclude that the way of formation of
Christ's body, after conception, in no way differed from that of other human bodies, nihil
differens fuisse a reliquis foetibus humanis (Pesch, Praelectiones Dogmaticae, vol. IV,
p. 85, ed. 1896). Scripture is silent on the subject; modern biology would be amazed at
such a mode of growth as St Thomas and Suarez after him suppose; and miracles, as
Suarez himself here owns, are not to be multiplied without necessity or high congruity
(Suarez, De mysteriis Christi, disp. II, sect. 2, nn. 2, 4). This discussion has an extrinsic
interest as illustrating two several views of another mighty development, that of Church
government and doctrine. The development of the Bridegroom may well be the pattern
of that of the Bride. Accepting St Thomas's supposition of the three successive souls, as
a supposition not yet quite exploded, there is still some doubt as to his conclusion, in
point of link (b). The Word remained united with the dead Body of Christ, from whence
all soul was departed: might it not then unite itself with a living Body into which in due
course of nature a rational soul was soon to come?