FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: Since power denotes a principle of movement
or action, Dionysius calls love a power, in so far as it is a principle of
movement in the appetite.
Reply to Objection 2: Union belongs to love in so far as by reason of
the complacency of the appetite, the lover stands in relation to that
which he loves, as though it were himself or part of himself. Hence it
is clear that love is not the very relation of union, but that union is a
result of love. Hence, too, Dionysius says that "love is a unitive
force" (Div. Nom. iv), and the Philosopher says (Polit. ii, 1) that union
is the work of love.
Reply to Objection 3: Although love does not denote the movement
of the appetite in tending towards the appetible object, yet it denotes
that movement whereby the appetite is changed by the appetible
object, so as to have complacency therein.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether love is the same as dilection?

Objection 1: It would seem that love is the same as dilection. For
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that love is to dilection, "as four is to
twice two, and as a rectilinear figure is to one composed of straight
lines." But these have the same meaning. Therefore love and
dilection denote the same thing.
Objection 2: Further, the movements of the appetite differ by reason
of their objects. But the objects of dilection and love are the same.
Therefore these are the same.
Objection 3: Further, if dilection and love differ, it seems that it is
chiefly in the fact that "dilection refers to good things, love to evil
things, as some have maintained," according to Augustine (De Civ.
Dei xiv, 7). But they do not differ thus; because as Augustine says
(De Civ. Dei xiv, 7) the holy Scripture uses both words in reference to
either good or bad things. Therefore love and dilection do not differ:
thus indeed Augustine concludes (De Civ. Dei xiv, 7) that "it is not
one thing to speak of love, and another to speak of dilection."
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that "some holy men
have held that love means something more Godlike than dilection
does."
I answer that, We find four words referring in a way, to the same
thing: viz. love, dilection, charity and friendship. They differ,
however, in this, that "friendship," according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. viii, 5), "is like a habit," whereas "love" and "dilection" are
expressed by way of act or passion; and "charity" can be taken
either way.
Moreover these three express act in different ways. For love has a
wider signification than the others, since every dilection or charity is
love, but not vice versa. Because dilection implies, in addition to
love, a choice [electionem] made beforehand, as the very word
denotes: and therefore dilection is not in the concupiscible power,
but only in the will, and only in the rational nature. Charity denotes,
in addition to love, a certain perfection of love, in so far as that which
is loved is held to be of great price, as the word itself implies.