done sacrifice with the people." [Acts 14:11-13] But this purpose was not yet
manifest, for they spoke in their own tongue, saying, "The gods in the likeness of
men have come down to us:" therefore the Apostle said nothing to them as yet.
But when they saw the garlands, then they went out, and rent their garments,
"Which when the Apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of, they rent their clothes,
and ran in among the people, crying out, and saying, Sirs, why do ye these
things? We also are men of like passions with you." (v. 14, 15.) See how on all
occasions they are clean from the lust of glory, not only not coveting, but even
repudiating it when offered: just as Peter also said, "Why gaze ye on us, as
though by our own power or holiness we had made him to walk" [Acts 3:12]? So
these also say the same. And Joseph also said of the dreams, "Is not their
interpretation of God?" [Genesis 60:8] And Daniel in like manner, "And to me
also, not through the wisdom that is in me was it revealed." [Daniel 2:30] And
Paul everywhere says this, as when he says, "And for these things who is
sufficient? Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think (anything) as of
ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God." [2 Corinthians 2:16; 3:5] But let us
look over again what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "And when they had gone out," etc. [Acts 13:42]. Not
merely were the multitudes drawn to them, but how? They besought to have the
same words spoken to them again, and by their actions they showed their
earnestness. "Now when the congregation," etc. [Acts 13:43] See the Apostles on
all occasions exhorting, not merely accepting men, nor courting them, but,
"speaking unto them," it says, "they persuaded them to continue in the grace of
God. But when the Jews," etc. [Acts 13:45] Why did they not contradict before
this? Do you observe who on all occasions they were moved by passion? And
they not only contradicted, but blasphemed also. For indeed malice stops at
nothing. But see what boldness of speech! "It was necessary," he says, "that the
word should have been spoken first to you, but since you put it from you,"—
[Acts 13:46] it is not put as affronting (though) it is in fact what they did in the
case of the prophets: "Talk not to us," said they, "with talk"— [Isaiah 30:10]:

"but since you put it from you"— it, he says, not us: for the affront on your part
is not to us. For that none may take it as an expression of their piety (that he
says,) "You judge not yourselves worthy," therefore he first says, "You put it from
you," and then, "We turn unto the Gentiles." The expression is full of gentleness.
He does not say, We abandon you, but so that it is possible— he would say—
that we may also turn hither again: and this too is not the consequence of the
affront from you, "for so has (the Lord) commanded us."— [Acts 13:47] "Then
why have ye not done this?" It was indeed needful that the Gentiles should hear,
and this not before you: it is your own doing, the "before you." "For so has the
Lord commanded us: I have set you for a light of the Gentiles, that you should be
for salvation," i.e. for knowledge which is unto salvation, and not merely of the
Gentiles, but of all men, "unto the ends of the earth— As many as were ordained
unto eternal life" [Acts 13:48]: this is also a proof, that their having received
these Gentiles was agreeable with the mind of God. But "ordained," not in
regard of necessity: "whom He foreknew," says the Apostle, "He did
predestinate." [Romans 8:29] "And the word of the Lord," etc. [Acts 13:49] No
longer in the city (only) were (their doctrines) disseminated, but also in the
(whole) region. For when they of the Gentiles had heard it, they also after a little
while came over. "But the Jews stirred up the devout women, and raised
persecution"— observe even of what is done by the women, they are the authors
— "and cast them," it says, "out of their coasts" [Acts 13:50], not from the city
merely. Then, what is more terrible, "they shook off the dust of their feet against
them, and came unto Iconium. But the disciples, it says, were filled with joy, and
with the Holy Ghost." (v. 51, 52.) The teachers were suffering persecution, and
the disciples rejoiced.
"And so spoke, that a great multitude," etc. [Acts 14:1] Do you mark the
nature of the Gospel, the great virtue it has? "Made their minds evil-affected," it
says, "against the brethren:" [Acts 14:2] i.e. slandered the Apostles, raised
numberless accusations against them: (these people, being simple, they "made
evil-affected," disposed them to act a malignant part. And see how on all