224. Sometimes I wonder if there are people in today’s world who are really concerned about
generating processes of people-building, as opposed to obtaining immediate results which yield
easy, quick short-term political gains, but do not enhance human fullness. History will perhaps
judge the latter with the criterion set forth by Romano Guardini: “The only measure for properly
evaluating an age is to ask to what extent it fosters the development and attainment of a full and
authentically meaningful human existence, in accordance with the peculiar character and the
capacities of that age”.

225. This criterion also applies to evangelization, which calls for attention to the bigger picture,
openness to suitable processes and concern for the long run. The Lord himself, during his earthly
life, often warned his disciples that there were things they could not yet understand and that they
would have to await the Holy Spirit (cf. Jn 16:12-13). The parable of the weeds among the wheat
(cf. Mt 13:24-30) graphically illustrates an important aspect of evangelization: the enemy can
intrude upon the kingdom and sow harm, but ultimately he is defeated by the goodness of the
wheat.

Unity prevails over conflict

226. Conflict cannot be ignored or concealed. It has to be faced. But if we remain trapped in
conflict, we lose our perspective, our horizons shrink and reality itself begins to fall apart. In the
midst of conflict, we lose our sense of the profound unity of reality.

227. When conflict arises, some people simply look at it and go their way as if nothing happened;

they wash their hands of it and get on with their lives. Others embrace it in such a way that they
become its prisoners; they lose their bearings, project onto institutions their own confusion and
dissatisfaction and thus make unity impossible. But there is also a third way, and it is the best way
to deal with conflict. It is the willingness to face conflict head on, to resolve it and to make it a link
in the chain of a new process. “Blessed are the peacemakers!” (Mt 5:9).

228. In this way it becomes possible to build communion amid disagreement, but this can only be
achieved by those great persons who are willing to go beyond the surface of the conflict and to
see others in their deepest dignity. This requires acknowledging a principle indispensable to the
building of friendship in society: namely, that unity is greater than conflict. Solidarity, in its deepest
and most challenging sense, thus becomes a way of making history in a life setting where
conflicts, tensions and oppositions can achieve a diversified and life-giving unity. This is not to opt
for a kind of syncretism, or for the absorption of one into the other, but rather for a resolution which
takes place on a higher plane and preserves what is valid and useful on both sides.