understands is the same as that which is understood" (De Anima iii).
Now God is supremely devoid of matter. Since then our intellect,
which is created, cannot attain to be an uncreated essence, it is
impossible for our intellect to see God in His essence.
Objection 1:: Further, whatever is seen in its essence is known as to
what it is. But our intellect cannot know of God what He is, but only
what He is not as Dionysius (Coel. Hier. ii) and Damascene (De Fide
Orth. i) declare. Therefore our intellect will be unable to see God in
His essence.
Objection 1:: Further, every infinite thing, as such, is unknown. But
God is in every way infinite. Therefore He is altogether unknown.
Therefore it will be impossible for Him to be seen in His essence by a
created intellect.
Objection 1:: Further, Augustine says (De Videndo Deo: Ep. cxlvii):
"God is by nature invisible." Now that which is in God by nature
cannot be otherwise. Therefore it is impossible for Him to be seen in
His essence.
Objection 1:: Further, whatever is in one way and is seen in another
way is not seen as it is. Now God is in one way and will be seen in
another way by the saints in heaven: for He according to His own
mode, but will be seen by the saints according to their mode.
Therefore He will not be seen by the saints as He is, and thus will not
be seen in His essence.
Objection 1:: Further, that which is seen through a medium is not
seen in its essence. Now God will be seen in heaven through a
medium which is the light of glory, according to Ps. 35:10, "In Thy
light we shall see light." Therefore He will not be seen in His
essence.
Objection 1:: Further, in heaven God will be seen face to face,
according to 1 Cor. 13:12. Now when we see a man face to face, we
see him through his likeness. Therefore in heaven God will be seen
through His likeness, and consequently not in His essence.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 13:12): "We see now through a
glass in a dark manner, but then face to face." Now that which is
seen face to face is seen in its essence. Therefore God will be seen

in His essence by the saints in heaven.
Further, it is written (1 Jn. 3:2): "When He shall appear we shall be
like to Him, because we shall see Him as He is." Therefore we shall
see Him in His essence.
Further, a gloss on 1 Cor. 15:24, "When He shall have delivered up
the kingdom to God and the Father," says: "Where," i.e. in heaven,
"the essence of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost shall be seen: this is
given to the clean of heart alone and is the highest bliss." Therefore
the blessed will see God in His essence.
Further, it is written (Jn. 14:21): "He that loveth Me shall be loved of
My Father; and I will love him, and will manifest Myself to him." Now
that which is manifested is seen in its essence. Therefore God will be
seen in His essence by the saints in heaven.
Further, Gregory commenting (Moral. xviii) on the words of Ex. 33:20,
"Man shall not see Me and live," disapproves of the opinion of those
who said that "in this abode of bliss God can be seen in His glory but
not in His nature; for His glory differs not from His nature." But His
nature is His essence. Therefore He will be seen in His essence.
Further, the desire of the saints cannot be altogether frustrated. Now
the common desire of the saints is to see God in His essence,
according to Ex. 33:13, "Show me Thy glory"; Ps. 79:20, "Show Thy
face and we shall be saved"; and Jn. 14:8, "Show us the Father and it
is enough for us." Therefore the saints will see God in His essence.
I answer that, Even as we hold by faith that the last end of man's life
is to see God, so the philosophers maintained that man's ultimate
happiness is to understand immaterial substances according to their
being. Hence in reference to this question we find that philosophers
and theologians encounter the same difficulty and the same
difference of opinion. For some philosophers held that our passive
intellect can never come to understand separate substances. thus
Alfarabius expresses himself at the end of his Ethics, although he
says the contrary in his book On the Intelligence, as the
Commentator attests (De Anima iii). In like manner certain
theologians held that the human intellect can never attain to the
vision of God in His essence. on either side they were moved by the
distance which separates our intellect from the Divine essence and