For bodily things are nearer to us, from these therefore he introduced
instruction. But it is not so now. For we ought not to be confined to figures, and
shadows, but to adhere to the truth, and to uphold it: sin is the unclean thing.
From that let us flee, from that let us abstain. "If you come near it, it will bite
you." [Sirach 21:2] Nothing is more unclean than covetousness. Whence is this
manifest? From the facts themselves. For what does it not defile? The hands, the
soul, the very house where the ill-gotten treasure is laid up. But the Jews
consider this as nothing. And yet Moses carried off the bones of Joseph. Samson
drank from the jawbone of an ass, and ate honey from the lion, and Elijah was
nourished by ravens, and by a widow woman. And tell me, if we were to be
precise about these things, what can be more unclean than our books, which are
made of the skins of animals? The fornicator, then, is not the only one that is
unclean, but others more than he, as the adulterer. But both the one and the other
are unclean, not on account of the intercourse, (for according to that reasoning a
man cohabiting with his own wife would be unclean,) but because of the
wickedness of the act, and the injury done to his neighbor in his nearest interests.
Do you see that it is wickedness that is unclean? He who had two wives was not
unclean, and David who had many wives was not unclean. But when he had one
unlawfully, he became unclean. Why? Because he had injured and defrauded his
neighbor. And the fornicator is not unclean on account of the intercourse, but on
account of the manner of it, because it injures the woman, and they injure one
another, making the woman common, and subverting the laws of nature. For she
ought to be the wife of one man, since it is said, "Male and female created He
them." [Genesis 1:27] And, "they two shall be one flesh." Not "those many," but
"they two shall be one flesh." Here then is injustice, and therefore the act is
wicked. Again, when anger exceeds due measure, it makes a man unclean, not in
itself, but because of its excess. Since it is not said, "He that is angry," merely,
but "angry without a cause." Thus every way to desire overmuch is unclean, for
it proceeds from a greedy and irrational disposition. Let us therefore be sober, I
beseech you, let us be pure, in that which is real purity, that we may be thought

worthy to see God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, etc.

## Homily 4 on Titus

[Titus 2:2-5]
"That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in
patience. The aged women likewise, that they be in behavior as becomes
holiness, not false accusers, not given to much wine, teachers of good things;
That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to love
their children, To be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their
own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed."
There are some failings which age has, that youth has not. Some indeed it
has in common with youth, but in addition it has a slowness, a timidity, a
forgetfulness, an insensibility, and an irritability. For this reason he exhorts old
men concerning these matters, "to be vigilant." For there are many things which
at this period make men otherwise than vigilant, especially what I mentioned,
their general insensibility, and the difficulty of stirring or exciting them.
Wherefore he also adds, "grave, temperate." Here he means prudent. For
temperance is named from the well-tempered mind. For there are, indeed there
are, among the old, some who rave and are beside themselves, some from wine,
and some from sorrow. For old age makes them narrowminded.
"Sound in faith, in charity [love], in patience."
He has well added "in patience," for this quality more especially befits old
men.
Ver. 3. "The aged women likewise, that they be in behavior as becomes
holiness."
That is, that in their very dress and carriage they exhibit modesty.
"Not false accusers, not given to much wine."
For this was particularly the vice of women and of old age. For from their
natural coldness at that period of life arises the desire of wine, therefore he