zeal worthy of the grace. For therefore is it that we also press forward, knowing
both the shortness and the suitableness of the time. Wherefore also he said; "And
working together we intreat also. Working together" with you; 'for we work
together with you, rather than with God for Whom we are ambassadors. For He
is in need of nothing, but the salvation all passes over to you.' But if it is even
with God that he speaks of working together, he repudiates not even this
[interpretation]; for he says in another place, "we are God's fellow-workers:" [1
Corinthians 3:9] in this way, says he, to save men. Again, "We entreat also." For
he indeed, when beseeching, does not barely beseech, but sets forth these His
just claims; namely, that He gave His Son, the Righteous One that did not so
much as know sin, and made Him to be sin for us sinners, that we might become
righteous: which claims having, and being God, He displayed such goodness.
But what we beseech is that you would receive the benefit and not reject the gift.
Be persuaded therefore by us, and "receive not the grace in vain." For lest they
should think that this of itself is "reconciliation," believing on Him that calls; he
adds these words, requiting that earnestness which respects the life. For, for one
who has been freed from sins and made a friend to wallow in the former things,
is to return again unto enmity, and to "receive the grace in vain," in respect of
the life. For from "the grace" we reap no benefit towards salvation, if we live
impurely; nay, we are even harmed, having this greater aggravation even of our
sins, in that after such knowledge and such a gift we have gone back to our
former vices. This however he does not mention as yet: that he may not make his
work harsh, but says only that we reap no benefit. Then he also reminds of a
prophecy, urging and compelling them to bestir themselves in order to lay hold
of their own salvation.
"For," says he, He says,
At an acceptable time I hearkened unto you,
And in a day of salvation did I succor you:
"behold, now is the acceptable time: behold, now is the day of

salvation."
"The acceptable time." What is this? That of the Gift, that of the Grace,
when it is appointed not that an account should be required of our sins nor
penalty exacted; but besides being delivered, that we should also enjoy ten
thousand goods, righteousness, sanctification, and all the rest. For how much toil
would it have behooved us to undergo in order to obtain this "time!" But, behold,
without our toiling at all it has come, bringing remission of all that was before.
Wherefore also He calls it "acceptable," because He both accepted those that
had transgressed in ten thousand things, and not acceded merely, but advanced
them to the highest honor; just as when a monarch arrives, it is a time not for
judgment, but for grace and pardon. Wherefore also He calls it acceptable.
Whilst then we are yet in the lists , while we are at work in the vineyard, while
the eleventh hour is left [us], let us draw near and show forth life; for it is also
easy. For he that strives for the mastery at such a time, when so great a gift has
been shed forth, when so great grace, will early obtain the prizes. For in the case
of monarchs here below also, at the time of their festivals, and when they appear
in the dress of Consuls, he who brings a small offering receives large gifts; but
on the days in which they sit in judgment, much strictness, much sifting is
requisite. Let us too therefore strive for the mastery in the time of this gift. It is a
day of grace, of grace divine; wherefore with ease even we shall obtain the
crown. For if when laden with so great evils He both received and delivered us:
when delivered from all and contributing our part, shall He not rather accept us?
2. Then, as it is his constant wont, namely, to place himself before them and
bid them hence to take their example, so he does in this place also. Wherefore
also he adds,