think these (Achaians) also.
3. So then having brought the whole nation together in one, and saluted
them with his accustomed greeting, for, says he, "Grace to you and peace from
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:" [2 Corinthians 1:2] hear how aptly
to the purpose in hand he begins, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort." [2 Corinthians 1:3]
Do you ask, how is this aptly to the purpose in hand? I reply, Very much so; for
observe, they were greatly vexed and troubled that the Apostle had not come to
them, and that, though he had promised, but had spent the whole time in
Macedonia; preferring as it seemed others to themselves. Setting himself then to
meet this feeling against him, he declares the cause of his absence; not however
directly stating it, as thus; "I know, indeed, I promised to come, but since I was
hindered by afflictions forgive me, nor judge me guilty of any sort of contempt or
neglect towards you:" but after another manner he invests the subject at once
with more dignity and trustworthiness, and gives it greatness by the nature of the
consolation , so that thereafter they might not so much as ask the reason of his
delay. Just as if one, having promised to come to one he longed for, at length
arriving after dangers innumerable, should say, "Glory to You, O God, for letting
me see the sight so longed for of his dear countenance! Blessed be Thou, O God,
from what perils have You delivered me!" for such a doxology is an answer to
him who was preparing to find fault, and will not let him so much as complain of
the delay; for one that is thanking God for deliverance from such great
calamities he cannot for shame drag to the bar, and bid clear himself of loitering.
Whence Paul thus begins, "Blessed be the God of mercies," implying by the very
words that he had been both brought into and delivered from mighty perils. For
as David also does not address God every where in one way or with the same
titles; but when he is upon battle and victory, "I will love You, he says, O Lord
my strength; the Lord is my buckler :" when again upon delivery from affliction
and the darkness which overwhelmed him, "The Lord is my light and my
salvation;" [Psalm 27:1] and as the immediate occasion suggests, he names Him

now from His loving-kindness, now from His justice, now from His righteous
judgment:— in like way Paul also here at the beginning describes Him by His
loving-kindness, calling Him "the God of mercies," that is, "Who has showed me
so great mercies as to bring me up from the very gates of death."
And thus to have mercy is the peculiar and excellent attribute of God, and
the most inherent in His nature; whence he calls Him the "God of mercies."
And observe, I pray you, herein also the lowly-mindedness of Paul. For
though he were in peril because of the Gospel he preached; yet says he not, he
was saved for his merit, but for the mercies of God. But this he afterwards
declares more clearly, and now goes on to say, "Who comforts us in all
affliction." [2 Corinthians 1:4] He says not, "Who suffers us not to come into
affliction:" but, "Who comforts in affliction." For this at once declares the power
of God; and increases the patience of those afflicted. For, says he, "tribulation
works patience." [Romans 5:3] And so also the prophet, "You have set me at
large when I was in distress." [Psalm 4:1] He does not say, "You have not
suffered me to fall into affliction," nor yet, "You have quickly removed my
affliction," but, while it continues, "You have set me at large:" [Daniel 3:21, etc.]
that is, "hast granted me much freedom and refreshment." Which truly happened
also in the case of the three children, for neither did He prevent their being cast
into the flame, nor when so cast, did He quench it, but while the furnace was
burning He gave them liberty. And such is ever God's way of dealing; as Paul
also implies when he says, "Who comforts us in all affliction."
But he teaches something more in these words: Do you ask what? Namely,
that God does this not once, nor twice, but without intermission. For He does not
one while comfort, another not, but ever and constantly. Wherefore he says,
"Who comforts," not, "Who has comforted," and, "in all affliction," not, "in this
or that," but, "in all."
"That we may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction through
the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God." See you not how he
is beforehand with his defence by suggesting to the hearer the thought of some