than these things? What more insulting?
For the things that were done go beyond all language. For as though they
were afraid lest they should seem to fall short at all in the crime, having killed
the prophets with their own hands, but this man with the sentence of a judge, so
they do in every deed; and make it the work of their own hands, and condemn
and sentence both among themselves and before Pilate, saying, "His blood be on
us and on our children," [Matthew 27:25] and insult Him, and do despite unto
Him themselves, binding Him, leading Him away, and render themselves authors
of the spiteful acts done by the soldiers, and nail Him to the cross, and revile
Him, and spit at Him, and deride Him. For Pilate contributed nothing in this
matter, but they themselves did every thing, becoming accusers, and judges, and
executioners, and all.
And these things are read among us, when all meet together. For that the
heathens may not say, that you display to people and nations the things that are
glorious and illustrious, such as the signs and the miracles, but that you hide
these which are matters of reproach; the grace of the Spirit has brought it to pass,
that in the full festival, when men in multitude and women are present, and all,
as one may say, at the great eve of the passover, then all these things should be
read; when the whole world is present, then are all these acts proclaimed with a
clear voice. And these being read, and made known to all, Christ is believed to
be God and, besides all the rest, is worshipped, even because of this, that He
vouchsafed to stoop so much for us as actually to suffer these things, and to
teach us all virtue.
These things then let us read continually; for indeed great is the gain, great
the advantage to be thence obtained. For when you see Him, both by gestures
and by deeds, mocked and worshipped with so much derision, and beaten and
suffering the utmost insults, though thou be very stone, you will become softer
than any wax, and wilt cast out of your soul all haughtiness.
Hear therefore also what follows. For after "they had mocked Him, they led
Him to crucify Him," it is said, and when they had stripped Him, they took His

garments, and sat down and watched Him, when He should die. And they divide
His garments among them, which sort of thing is done in the case of very vile
and abject criminals, and such as have no one belonging to them, and are in utter
desolation.
They parted the garments, by which such great miracles were done. But
they wrought none now, Christ restraining His unspeakable power. And this was
no small addition of insult. For as to one base and abject, as I said, and the vilest
of all men; so do they dare to do all things. To the thieves at any rate they did
nothing of the kind, but to Christ they dare it all. And they crucified Him in the
midst of them, that He might share in their reputation.
And they gave Him gall to drink, and this to insult Him, but He would not.
But another says, that having tasted it, He said, "It is finished." [John 19:30] And
what means, "It is finished?" The prophecy was fulfilled concerning Him. "For
they gave me," it is said, "gall for my meat, and for my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink." But neither does that evangelist indicate that He drank, for
merely to taste differs not from not drinking, but has one and the same
signification.
But nevertheless not even here does their contumely stop, but after having
stripped and crucified Him, and offered Him vinegar, they proceeded still
further, and beholding Him impaled upon the cross, they revile Him, both they
themselves and the passers by; and this was more grievous than all, that on the
charge of being an impostor and deceiver He suffered these things, and as a
boaster, and vainly pretending what He said. Therefore they both crucified Him
publicly, that they might make a show of it in the sight of all; and therefore also
they did it by the hands of the soldiers, that these things being perpetrated even
by a public tribunal, the insult might be the greater.
2. And yet who would not have been moved by the multitude that was
following Him, and lamenting Him? Nay, not these wild beasts. Wherefore also
He to the multitude vouchsafes an answer, but to these men not so. For after
having done what they would, they endeavor also to injure His honor, fearing