they were natural agents. For every mover, in a fashion, either draws
the patient to itself, or repels it from itself. Now in drawing it to itself,
it does three things in the patient. Because, in the first place, it gives
the patient an inclination or aptitude to tend to the mover: thus a
light body, which is above, bestows lightness on the body
generated, so that it has an inclination or aptitude to be above.
Secondly, if the generated body be outside its proper place, the
mover gives it movement towards that place. Thirdly, it makes it to
rest, when it shall have come to its proper place: since to the same
cause are due, both rest in a place, and the movement to that place.
The same applies to the cause of repulsion.
Now, in the movements of the appetitive faculty, good has, as it
were, a force of attraction, while evil has a force of repulsion. In the
first place, therefore, good causes, in the appetitive power, a certain
inclination, aptitude or connaturalness in respect of good: and this
belongs to the passion of "love": the corresponding contrary of
which is "hatred" in respect of evil. Secondly, if the good be not yet
possessed, it causes in the appetite a movement towards the
attainment of the good beloved: and this belongs to the passion of
"desire" or "concupiscence": and contrary to it, in respect of evil, is
the passion of "aversion" or "dislike." Thirdly, when the good is
obtained, it causes the appetite to rest, as it were, in the good
obtained: and this belongs to the passion of "delight" or "joy"; the
contrary of which, in respect of evil, is "sorrow" or "sadness."
On the other hand, in the irascible passions, the aptitude, or
inclination to seek good, or to shun evil, is presupposed as arising
from the concupiscible faculty, which regards good or evil
absolutely. And in respect of good not yet obtained, we have "hope"
and "despair." In respect of evil not yet present we have "fear" and
"daring." But in respect of good obtained there is no irascible
passion: because it is no longer considered in the light of something
arduous, as stated above (Article 3). But evil already present gives
rise to the passion of "anger."
Accordingly it is clear that in the concupiscible faculty there are
three couples of passions; viz. love and hatred, desire and aversion,
joy and sadness. In like manner there are three groups in the
irascible faculty; viz. hope and despair, fear and daring, and anger
which has not contrary passion.
Consequently there are altogether eleven passions differing

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.5.

specifically; six in the concupiscible faculty, and five in the irascible;
and under these all the passions of the soul are contained.
From this the replies to the objections are evident.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.1.