overmuch, there was given to me a thorn," [2 Corinthians 12:7] he says: and
again, "Lest any man should account of me above that which he sees me to be, or
hears from me;" and in another place again, "that we should not trust in
ourselves:" [2 Corinthians 1:9] here, however, that the power of God might be
manifested. Do you see how great the gain of his trials? For it both showed the
power of God, and more disclosed His grace. For, says He, "My grace is
sufficient for you." [2 Corinthians 12:9] It also anointed them unto lowliness of
mind, and prepared them for keeping down the rest, and made them to be more
hardy. "For patience," says he, "works probation, and probation hope." [Romans
5:4] For they who had fallen into ten thousand dangers and through the hope
they had in God had been recovered , were taught to hold by it more and more in
all things.

2 Corinthians 4:10
"Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life
also of Jesus may be manifested in our body."
And what is the "dying of the Lord Jesus," which they bare about? Their
daily deaths by which also the resurrection was showed. 'For if any believe not,'
he says, 'that Jesus died and rose again, beholding us every day die and rise
again, let him believe henceforward in the resurrection.' Do you see how he has
discovered yet another reason for the trials? What then is this reason? "That his
life also may be manifested in our body." He says, 'by snatching us out of the
perils. So that this which seems a mark of weakness and destitution, this, [I say,]
proclaims His resurrection. For His power had not so appeared in our suffering
no unpleasantness, as it is now shown in our suffering indeed, but without being
overcome.'

2 Corinthians 4:11
"For we which live are also delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, that the
life also of Jesus may be manifested in us in our mortal flesh."
For every where when he has said any thing obscure, he interprets himself
again. So he has done here also, giving a clear interpretation of this which I have
cited. 'For therefore, "we are delivered,"' he says, 'in other words, we bear about
His dying that the power of His life may be made manifest, who permits not
mortal flesh, though undergoing so great sufferings, to be overcome by the
snowstorm of these calamities.' And it may be taken too in another way. How?
As he says in another place, "If we die with him, we shall also live with Him." [2
Timothy 2:11] 'For as we endure His dying now, and choose while living to die
for His sake: so also will he choose, when we are dead, to beget us then unto life.
For if we from life come into death, He also will from death lead us by the hand
into life.'

2 Corinthians 4:12
"So then death works in us, but life in you."
Speaking no more of death in the strict sense , but of trials and of rest. 'For
we indeed,' he says, 'are in perils and trials, but you in rest; reaping the life
which is the fruit of these perils. And we indeed endure the dangerous, but you
enjoy the good things; for you undergo not so great trials.'