THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.6.

instance, if he "grieve over past sins," and "propose to avoid them in
the future" [Rule of Augustine]. But if he be ignorant that what he did
was a sinful act, through ignorance of the fact, which excuses, for
instance, if a man approach a woman whom he believed to be his
wife whereas she was not, he is not to be called a sinner on that
account; in the same way if he has utterly forgotten his sin, general
contrition suffices for blotting it out, as will be said hereafter (XP,
Question 2, Article 3, ad 2); hence he is no longer to be called a
sinner.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.7.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether to approach this sacrament with

consciousness of sin is the gravest of all sins?
Objection 1: It seems that to approach this sacrament with
consciousness of sin is the gravest of all sins; because the Apostle
says (1 Cor. 11:27): "Whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink the
chalice of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and of the
blood of the Lord": upon which the gloss observes: "He shall be
punished as though he slew Christ." But the sin of them who slew
Christ seems to have been most grave. Therefore this sin, whereby a
man approaches Christ's table with consciousness of sin, appears to
be the gravest.
Objection 2: Further, Jerome says in an Epistle (xlix): "What hast
thou to do with women, thou that speakest familiarly with God at the
altar?". Say, priest, say, cleric, how dost thou kiss the Son of God
with the same lips wherewith thou hast kissed the daughter of a
harlot? "Judas, thou betrayest the Son of Man with a kiss!" And thus
it appears that the fornicator approaching Christ's table sins as
Judas did, whose sin was most grave. But there are many other sins
which are graver than fornication, especially the sin of unbelief.
Therefore the sin of every sinner approaching Christ's table is the
gravest of all.
Objection 3: Further, spiritual uncleanness is more abominable to
God than corporeal. But if anyone was to cast Christ's body into mud
or a cess-pool, his sin would be reputed a most grave one.
Therefore, he sins more deeply by receiving it with sin, which is
spiritual uncleanness, upon his soul.
On the contrary, Augustine says on the words, "If I had not come,
and had not spoken to them, they would be without sin" (Tract.
lxxxix in Joan.), that this is to be understood of the sin of unbelief,
"in which all sins are comprised," and so the greatest of all sins
appears to be, not this, but rather the sin of unbelief.
I answer that, As stated in the FS, Question 73, Articles 3,6; SS,
Question 73, Article 3, one sin can be said to be graver than another
in two ways: first of all essentially, secondly accidentally.
Essentially, in regard to its species, which is taken from its object:
and so a sin is greater according as that against which it is