altogether cut off from the fellowship of God's city, and this is the
effect of every sin committed against charity, which is the bond
uniting this same city together. Consequently, for mortal sin which is
contrary to charity a person is expelled for ever from the fellowship
of the saints and condemned to everlasting punishment, because as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 11), "as men are cut off from this
perishable city by the penalty of the first death, so are they excluded
from that imperishable city by the punishment of the second death."
That the punishment inflicted by the earthly state is not deemed
everlasting is accidental, either because man endures not for ever,
or because the state itself comes to an end. Wherefore if man lived
for ever, the punishment of exile or slavery, which is pronounced by
human law, would remain in him for ever. On the other hand, as
regards those who sin in such a way as not to deserve to be entirely
cut off from the fellowship of the saints, such as those who sin
venially, their punishment will be so much the shorter or longer
according as they are more or less fit to be cleansed, through sin
clinging to them more or less: this is observed in the punishments of
this world and of purgatory according to Divine justice.
We find also other reasons given by the saints why some are justly
condemned to everlasting punishment for a temporal sin. One is
because they sinned against an eternal good by despising eternal
life. This is mentioned by Augustine (De Civ. Dei. xii, 12): "He is
become worthy of eternal evil, who destroyed in himself a good
which could be eternal." Another reason is because man sinned in
his own eternity [FS, Question 87, Article 3, ad 1]; wherefore Gregory
says (Dial. iv), it belongs to the great justice of the judge that those
should never cease to be punished, who in this life never ceased to
desire sin. And if it be objected that some who sin mortally propose
to amend their life at some time, and that these accordingly are
seemingly not deserving of eternal punishment, it must be replied
according to some that Gregory speaks of the will that is made
manifest by the deed. For he who falls into mortal sin of his own will
puts himself in a state whence he cannot be rescued, except God
help him: wherefore from the very fact that he is willing to sin, he is
willing to remain in sin for ever. For man is "a wind that goeth,"
namely to sin, "and returneth not by his own power" (Ps. 77:39).
Thus if a man were to throw himself into a pit whence he could not
get out without help, one might say that he wished to remain there
for ever, whatever else he may have thought himself. Another and a
better answer is that from the very fact that he commits a mortal sin,
he places his end in a creature; and since the whole of life is directed