SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.3.

proffer significant words to Him to Whom in our hearts we offer the
things which we designate thereby," as Augustine states (De Civ. Dei
x, 19). Moreover we find that in every country the people are wont to
show the sovereign ruler some special sign of honor, and that if this
be shown to anyone else, it is a crime of high-treason. Therefore, in
the Divine law, the death punishment is assigned to those who offer
Divine honor to another than God.
Reply to Objection 1: The name of the Godhead is communicated to
certain ones, not equally with God, but by participation; hence
neither is equal honor due to them.
Reply to Objection 2: The offering of a sacrifice is measured not by
the value of the animal killed, but by its signification, for it is done in
honor of the sovereign Ruler of the whole universe. Wherefore, as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 19), "the demons rejoice, not in the
stench of corpses, but in receiving divine honors."
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei viii, 19), "we do
not raise temples and priesthoods to the martyrs, because not they
but their God is our God. Wherefore the priest says not: I offer
sacrifice to thee, Peter or Paul. But we give thanks to God for their
triumphs, and urge ourselves to imitate them."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the offering of sacrifice is a special act of

virtue?
Objection 1: It would seem that the offering of sacrifice is not a
special act of virtue. Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 6): "A true
sacrifice is any work done that we may cleave to God in holy
fellowship." But not every good work is a special act of some definite
virtue. Therefore the offering of sacrifice is not a special act of a
definite virtue.
Objection 2: Further, the mortification of the body by fasting belongs
to abstinence, by continence belongs to chastity, by martyrdom
belongs to fortitude. Now all these things seem to be comprised in
the offering of sacrifice, according to Rm. 12:1, "Present your bodies
a living sacrifice." Again the Apostle says (Heb. 13:16): "Do not
forget to do good and to impart, for by such sacrifices God's favor is
obtained." Now it belongs to charity, mercy and liberality to do good
and to impart. Therefore the offering of sacrifice is not a special act
of a definite virtue.
Objection 3: Further, a sacrifice is apparently anything offered to
God. Now many things are offered to God, such as devotion, prayer,
tithes, first-fruits, oblations, and holocausts. Therefore sacrifice
does not appear to be a special act of a definite virtue.
On the contrary, The law contains special precepts about sacrifices,
as appears from the beginning of Leviticus.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 18, Articles 6,7), where
an act of one virtue is directed to the end of another virtue it
partakes somewhat of its species; thus when a man thieves in order
to commit fornication, his theft assumes, in a sense, the deformity of
fornication, so that even though it were not a sin otherwise, it would
be a sin from the very fact that it was directed to fornication.
Accordingly, sacrifice is a special act deserving of praise in that it is
done out of reverence for God; and for this reason it belongs to a
definite virtue, viz. religion. But it happens that the acts of the other
virtues are directed to the reverence of God, as when a man gives
alms of his own things for God's sake, or when a man subjects his
own body to some affliction out of reverence for God; and in this
way the acts also of other virtues may be called sacrifices. On the