Hebrews 13:14-15
"For we have here no continuing city" (he says) "but we seek one to come.
By Him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is,
the fruit of our lips giving thanks to His Name."
"By Him," as by an High Priest, according to the flesh. "Giving thanks" (he
says) "to His Name." (See p. 514.) Let us utter nothing blasphemous, nothing
hasty, nothing bold, nothing presumptuous, nothing desperate. This is "with
reverence and godly fear." [Hebrews 12:28] For a soul in tribulations becomes
desponding, and reckless. But let not us [be so]. See here he again says the same
thing which he said before, "not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together,"
for so shall we be able to do all things with reverence. For oftentimes even out of
respect for men, we refrain from doing many evil things.

Hebrews 13:16
"But to do good and to communicate forget not." I speak not [merely] with
reference to the brethren present, but to those absent also. But if others have
plundered your property, display your hospitality out of such things as you have.
What excuse then shall we have henceforward, when they, even after the
spoiling of their goods, were thus admonished?
5. And he did not say, "Be not forgetful" of the entertaining of strangers, but
"of hospitality": that is, do not merely entertain strangers, but [do it] with love
for the strangers. Moreover he did not speak of the recompense that is future,
and in store for us, lest he should make them more supine, but of that already
given. For "thereby some" (he says) "have entertained angels unawares."
But let us see in what sense "Marriage is honorable in all and the bed
undefiled." Because (he means) it preserves the believer in chastity. Here he also
alludes to the Jews, because they accounted the woman after childbirth polluted:
and "whosoever comes from the bed," it is said, "is not clean." Those things are
not polluted which arise from nature, O ungrateful and senseless Jew, but those
which arise from choice. For if "marriage is honorable" and pure, why forsooth
do you think that one is even polluted by it?
"Let your conversation" (he says) "be without covetousness": since many
after having exhausted their property, afterwards wish to recover it again under
the guise of alms, therefore he says, "Let your conversation be without
covetousness"; that is, that we should be [desirous only] of what is necessary and
indispensable. What then (you say) if we should not have a supply even of
these? This is not possible; indeed it is not. "For He has said," and He does not
lie, "I will never leave you, nor forsake you. So that we boldly say, The Lord is
my Helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me." You have the promise
from Himself: do not doubt henceforward. He has promised; make no question.