But there are other truths to which the aforesaid first principles do not extend; e.g., the truths of
faith and things that exceed the faculty of reason, such as knowledge of future contingent events,
and the like; and such things the human mind cannot know unless it is divinely illuminated by a
new light, superadded to that which it naturally possesses.

For, although it does not require the addition of new light for knowledge of those things to
which reason naturally extends, it does require divine operation: for over and above that
operation by which God created the natures of thingsgiving to each its proper form and ability,

by which they are able to exercise their proper operation. He also operates in things the works of
Providence, directing and moving the capabilities of all things to their proper acts. For in this
way the whole universe of creatures is subject to the divine governance, as instruments are
subject to the direction of the workman and as natural qualities are subject to the power of the
nutritive soul, as is said in II De anima. Therefore, as the work of digestion is accompanied by a
natural heat, according to the measure which the digestive function imposes upon heat, and as all
the inferior powers of the body operate according as they are directed and moved by virtue of the
heavenly bodies, so all the active created powers are governed and moved by the Creator.

Thus, therefore, in all cognition of truth, the human mind requires the divine operation. In the
realm of naturally known truths, however, it requires no new light, but only the divine motion
and direction; for the knowledge of other (supernatural) truths it needs also a new illumination.
And because it is of such things that Boethius speaks, he says: "To the extent that the divine light
has deigned to enkindle the feeble spark of my mind."

Answers to objections.

1. Although we are in no way sufficient of ourselves, as from ourselves, to know anything
without the operation of God, yet it is not necessary that for every operation of ours a new light
should be given to us.

2. In matters of natural cognition God teaches us interiorly in this way: that He is the cause of the
natural light which is in us, and He directs it to the truth; but in other (supernatural) matters He
further teaches us by the infusion of a new light.

3. The eye of the body, when illuminated by the light of the material sun, does not respond to a
light which is in any way natural (i.e., intrinsic) to itself, by means of which it makes things to be
actually visible; even as is the case with the mind when it is illuminated by the uncreated Light;
and therefore the eye always requires an exterior light, but not the mind.

4. Where there is pure light of intellect, as in the angels, it makes,evident without difficulty all
things known in the natural order, so that in them there is cognition of all objects naturally
intelligible to them: in us, however, this light is obscure, being overshadowed as it were by
reason of conjunction with the body and with corporeal powers, and on this account it ii hindered
so that it cannot freely and naturally behold that truth which is itself knowable, as is said in the
Book of Wisdom (9:15): "For the corruptible body is a load upon the soul; and the earthly
habitation presseth down the mind that museth upon many things." From this it follows that on
account of the impediment (of the body) it is not in our power to know truth altogether in its
fullness. But each one possesses more or less the power to know in proportion to the purity of
the intellectual light which is in him.