THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.9.

yet those three days were ordained unto the manifestation of the
reality of His death, as stated above (Question 53, Article 2). It is
therefore clear that neither on the part of the Trinity, nor on the part
of Christ's Passion, is the trine immersion essential to the
sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: Pope Pelagius understood the trine immersion
to be ordained by Christ in its equivalent; in the sense that Christ
commanded Baptism to be conferred "in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." Nor can we argue from the form
to the use of the matter, as stated above (ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 64, Article 8), the
intention is essential to Baptism. Consequently, one Baptism results
from the intention of the Church's minister, who intends to confer
one Baptism by a trine immersion. Wherefore Jerome says on Eph.
4:5,6: "Though the Baptism," i.e. the immersion, "be thrice repeated,
on account of the mystery of the Trinity, yet it is reputed as one
Baptism."
If, however, the intention were to confer one Baptism at each
immersion together with the repetition of the words of the form, it
would be a sin, in itself, because it would be a repetition of Baptism.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether Baptism may be reiterated?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism may be reiterated. For Baptism
was instituted, seemingly, in order to wash away sins. But sins are
reiterated. Therefore much more should Baptism be reiterated:
because Christ's mercy surpasses man's guilt.
Objection 2: Further, John the Baptist received special
commendation from Christ, Who said of him (Mt. 11:11): "There hath
not risen among them that are born of women, a greater than John
the Baptist." But those whom John had baptized were baptized
again, according to Acts 19:1-7, where it is stated that Paul
rebaptized those who had received the Baptism of John. Much more,
therefore, should those be rebaptized, who have been baptized by
heretics or sinners.
Objection 3: Further, it was decreed in the Council of Nicaea (Can.
xix) that if "any of the Paulianists or Cataphrygians should be
converted to the Catholic Church, they were to be baptized": and this
seemingly should be said in regard to other heretics. Therefore
those whom the heretics have baptized, should be baptized again.
Objection 4: Further, Baptism is necessary for salvation. But
sometimes there is a doubt about the baptism of those who really
have been baptized. Therefore it seems that they should be baptized
again.
Objection 5: Further, the Eucharist is a more perfect sacrament than
Baptism, as stated above (Question 65, Article 3). But the sacrament
of the Eucharist is reiterated. Much more reason, therefore, is there
for Baptism to be reiterated.
On the contrary, It is written, (Eph. 4:5): "One faith, one Baptism."
I answer that, Baptism cannot be reiterated.
First, because Baptism is a spiritual regeneration; inasmuch as a
man dies to the old life, and begins to lead the new life. Whence it is
written (Jn. 3:5): "Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy
Ghost, He cannot see the kingdom of God." Now one man can be
begotten but once. Wherefore Baptism cannot be reiterated, just as