For I fear lest when my arguments are employed on any one subject, I may
without knowing it be treating you for one disease while you are ill of others. So
that if this congregation were but one person, I should not have judged it so
absolutely necessary to make my discourse varied; but since in such a multitude
there are probably also many maladies, I not unreasonably diversify my
teaching, since my discourse will be sure to attain its object when it is made to
embrace you all. For this cause also Scripture is something multiform, and
speaks on ten thousand matters, because it addresses itself to the nature of
mankind in common, and in such a multitude all the passions of the soul must
needs be; though all be not in each. Let us then cleanse ourselves of these, and so
listen to the divine oracles, and with contrite heart hear what has been this day
read to us.
And what is that? "This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of
Galilee." I told you the other day, that there are some who say that this is not the
beginning. "For what," says one, "if 'Cana of Galilee' be added? This shows that
this was 'the beginning' He made 'in Cana.'" But on these points I would not
venture to assert anything exactly. I before have shown that He began His
miracles after His Baptism, and wrought no miracle before it; but whether of the
miracles done after His Baptism, this or some other was the first, it seems to me
unnecessary to assert positively.
"And manifested forth His glory."
"How?" asks one, "and in what way? For only the servants, the ruler of the
feast, and the bridegroom, not the greater number of those present, gave heed to
what was done." How then did he "manifest forth His glory"? He manifested it at
least for His own part, and if all present hear not of the miracle at the time, they
would hear of it afterwards, for unto the present time it is celebrated, and has not
been unnoticed. That all did not know it on the same day is clear from what
follows, for after having said that He "manifested forth His glory," the Evangelist
adds,
"And His disciples believed on Him."

His disciples, who even before this regarded Him with wonder. Do you see
that it was especially necessary to work the miracles at times when men were
present of honest minds, and who would carefully give heed to what was done?
For these would more readily believe, and attend more exactly to the
circumstances. "And how could He have become known without miracles?"
Because His doctrine and prophetic powers were sufficient to cause wonder in
the souls of His hearers, so that they took heed to what He did with a right
disposition, their minds being already well affected towards Him. And therefore
in many other places the Evangelists say, that He did no miracle on account of
the perversity of the men who dwelt there. [Matthew 12:38; ch. 13:58, etc.]