for them to dwell together, let not the marriage be broken off. "For," says he,
"the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife." So great is the
superabundance of your purity.
What then, is the Greek holy? Certainly not: for he said not, He is holy; but,
"He is sanctified in his wife." And this he said, not to signify that he is holy, but
to deliver the woman as completely as possible from her fear and lead the man to
desire the truth. For the uncleanness is not in the bodies wherein there is
communion, but in the mind and the thoughts. And here follows the proof;
namely, that if you continuing unclean have offspring, the child, not being of you
alone, is of course unclean or half clean. But now it is not unclean. To which
effect he adds, "else were your children unclean; but now are they holy;" that is,
not unclean. But the Apostle calls them, "holy," by the intensity of the expression
again casting out the dread arising from that sort of suspicion.

1 Corinthians 7:15
"Yet if the unbelieving departs, let him depart," for in this case the matter is
no longer fornication. But what is the meaning of, "if the unbelieving departs?"
For instance, if he bid you sacrifice and take part in his ungodliness on account
of your marriage, or else part company; it were better the marriage were
annulled, and no breach made in godliness. Wherefore he adds, "A brother is not
under bondage, nor yet a sister, in such cases." If day by day he buffet you and
keep up combats on this account, it is better to separate. For this is what he
glances at, saying, "But God has called us in peace." For it is the other party
who furnished the ground of separation, even as he did who committed
uncleanness.

1 Corinthians 7:16
"For how do you know, O wife, whether you shall save your husband?"
This again refers to that expression, "let her not leave him." That is, "if he makes
no disturbance, remain," says he, "for there is even profit in this; remain and
advise and give counsel and persuade." For no teacher will have such power to
prevail (Reg. [πεῖσαι] . Bened. [ἰσχὺσαι] . ) as a wife. And neither, on one hand,
does he lay any necessity upon her and absolutely demand the point of her, that
he may not again do what would be too painful; nor, on the other, does he tell her
to despair: but he leaves the matter in suspense through the uncertainty of the
future, saying, "For how do you know, O wife, whether you shall save your
husband? Or how do you know, O husband whether you shall save your wife?"

1 Corinthians 7:17-22
5. And again, "Only as God has distributed to each man, as the Lord has
called each, so let him walk. Was any one called being circumcised? Let him not
become uncircumcised. Was any called in uncircumcision? Let him not be
circumcised. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing; but the
keeping of the commandments of God. Let each man abide in that calling
wherein he was called. Were you called, being a slave? Care not for it." These
things contribute nothing unto faith, says he. Be not then contentious neither be
troubled; for the faith has cast out all these things.
Let each man abide in that calling wherein he was called. Have you been
called, having an unbelieving wife? Continue to have her. Cast not out your wife
for the faith's sake. Have you been called, being a slave? Care not for it.
Continue to be a slave. Have you been called, being in uncircumcision? Remain
uncircumcised. Being circumcised, did you become a believer? Continue
circumcised. For this is the meaning of, "As God has distributed unto each man."
For these are no hindrances to piety. You are called, being a slave; another, with
an unbelieving wife; another, being circumcised.
Astonishing! Where has he put slavery? As circumcision profits not: and
uncircumcision does no harm; so neither does slavery, nor yet liberty. And that
he might point out this with surpassing clearness, he says, "But even ([Αλλ' εὶ
καὶ] [δυνάσαι]) if you can become free, use it rather:" that is, rather continue a
slave. Now upon what possible ground does he tell the person who might be set
free to remain a slave? He means to point out that slavery is no harm but rather
an advantage.
Now we are not ignorant that some say, the words, "use it rather," are
spoken with regard to liberty: interpreting it, "if you can become free, become
free." But the expression would be very contrary to Paul's manner if he intended