And though the saying seem to have much obscurity, yet if we attend, its
solution will prove easy.
First then it were well to listen to the very words: "All manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy of the Holy Ghost
shall not be forgiven unto them. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of
Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it
shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come."
What now is it that He affirms? Many things have ye spoken against me;
that I am a deceiver, an adversary of God. These things I forgive you on your
repentance, and exact no penalty of you; but blasphemy against the Spirit shall
not be forgiven, no, not to those who repent. And how can this be right? For
even this was forgiven upon repentance. Many at least of those who said these
words believed afterward, and all was forgiven them. What is it then that He
says? That this sin is above all things unpardonable. Why so? Because Himself
indeed they knew not, who He might be, but of the Spirit they received ample
experience. For the prophets also by the Spirit said whatever they said; and
indeed all in the Old Testament had a very high notion of Him.
What He says, then, is this: Be it so: you are offended at me, because of the
flesh with which I am encompassed: can you say of the Spirit also, We know it
not? And therefore is your blasphemy unpardonable, and both here and hereafter
shall you suffer punishment. For many indeed have been punished here only (as
he who had committed fornication, as they who partook unworthily of the
mysteries, among the Corinthians); but you, both here and hereafter.
Now as to your blasphemies against me, before the cross, I forgive them:
and the daring crime too of the cross itself; neither shall you be condemned for
your unbelief alone. (For neither had they, that believed before the cross, perfect
faith. And on many occasions He even charges them to make Him known to no
man before the Passion; and on the cross He said that this sin was forgiven
them.) But as to your words touching the Spirit, they will have no excuse. For in
proof that He is speaking of what was said of Him before the crucifixion, He

added, "Whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of Man, it shall be
forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the Holy Ghost," there is no
more forgiveness. Wherefore? Because this is known to you; and the truths are
notorious which you harden yourselves against. For though ye say that you know
not me; yet of this surely you are not ignorant, that to cast out devils, and to do
cures, is a work of the Holy Ghost. It is not then I only whom you are insulting,
but the Holy Ghost also. Wherefore your punishment can be averted by no
prayers, neither here nor there.
For so of men, some are punished both here, and there, some here only,
some there only, others neither here nor there. Here and there, as these very men
(for both here did they pay a penalty, when they suffered those incurable ills at
the taking of their city, and there shall they undergo a very grievous one), as the
inhabitants of Sodom; as many others. There only, as the rich man who endured
the flames, and had not at his command so much as a drop of water. Here, as he
that had committed fornication among the Corinthians. Neither here nor there, as
the apostles, as the prophets, as the blessed Job; for their sufferings were not
surely in the way of punishment, but as contests and wrestlings.
Let us labor, therefore, to be of the same part with these: or if not with
these, at least with them that wash away their sins here. For fearful indeed is that
other judgment, and inexorable the vengeance, and incurable the punishment.
6. But if you desire not to be punished even here, pass judgment on
yourself, exact your own penalty. Listen to Paul, when he says, "If we would
judge ourselves, we should not be judged." If you do this, proceeding in order
you shall even arrive at a crown.
But how are we to exact our own penalty? One may ask. Lament, groan
bitterly, humble, afflict yourself, call to remembrance your sins in their
particulars. This thing is no small torture to a man's soul. If any man has been in
a state of contrition, he knows that the soul is punished by this more than
anything. If any has been living in remembrance of sins, he knows the anguish
thence arising. Therefore does God appoint righteousness as a reward for such