unjustly; and of being punished in a similar way with the guilty—we who have
had nothing to do with the crimes of which we are suspected." What do you say,
tell me? Are you afraid of dying unjustly, and would you wish to die justly. But
who is there so wretched and miserable, that when he had the alternative of
dying unjustly, would rather depart by an act of justice? For if it be necessary to
fear death, it is necessary to fear it when it comes upon us justly; since he indeed
who dies unjustly, is by this very means made a partaker with all the saints. For
many of those who were approved and distinguished by God, have been
subjected to an unjust end; and first of all Abel. For it was not that he had sinned
against his brother, or done Cain any harm; but inasmuch as he had honoured
God, therefore was he slaughtered. But God permitted it. Was it, think you,
because He loved him, or because He hated him? Most clearly, because He loved
him, and wished to make his crown the brighter, by that most unjust murder. Do
you see then, that it becomes us not to be afraid of dying by violence; nor yet of
dying unjustly; but of dying in a state of sin? Abel died unjustly. Cain lived,
groaning and trembling! Which then, I would ask, was the more blessed of the
two; he who went to rest in righteousness, or he who lived in sin; he who died
unjustly, or he who was justly punished? Would you have me declare unto your
Charity, whence it is that we are afraid of death? The love of the kingdom has
not penetrated us, nor the desire of things to come inflamed us: otherwise we
should despise all present things, even as the blessed Paul did. Add to this, on
the other hand, that we do not stand in awe of hell; therefore death is terrible. We
are not sensible of the unsufferable nature of the punishment there; therefore,
instead of sin, we fear death; since if the fear of the one held possession of our
souls, the fear of the other would not be able to enter.
10. And this I will endeavour to make manifest, not from anything of a
remote nature, but from what is at our own doors; and from the events which
have happened among us in these days. For when the Emperor's letter came,
ordering that tribute to be imposed which was thought to be so intolerable, all
were in a tumult; all quarrelled with it; thought it a sore grievance, resented it;

and when they met one another said, "Our life is not worth living, the city is
undone—no one will be able to stand under this heavy burden;" and they were
distressed as if placed in the extremest danger. After this, when the rebellion was
actually perpetrated, and certain vile, yea, thoroughly vile persons, trampling
under foot the laws, threw down the statues, and involved all in the utmost peril;
and now that we are in fear for our very lives, through the indignation of the
Emperor, this loss of money no longer stings us. But instead of such complaints,
I hear from all a language of a different kind. "Let the Emperor take our
substance, we will gladly be deprived of our fields and possessions, if any one
will but ensure us safety for the bare body." As therefore, before the fear of death
pressed upon us, the loss of our wealth tormented us; and after these lawless
outrages had been perpetrated, the fear of death succeeding, expelled the grief
for that loss; so if the fear of hell had held possession of our souls, the fear of
death would not have possessed them. But even as it is with the body, when two
kinds of pain seize upon us, the more powerful usually overshadows the weaker
one, so also would it now happen; if the dread of future punishment remained in
the soul, that would overshadow all human fear. So that if any one endeavours
always to have the remembrance of hell, he will deride every kind of death; and
this will not only deliver him from the present distress, but will even rescue him
from the flame to come. For he who is always afraid of hell, will never fall into
the fire of hell; being made sober by this continual fear!
11. Permit me, that I now say to you at a fitting time, "Brethren, be not
children in understanding; howbeit in malice be ye children."
[1 Corinthians 14:20] For this is a childish terror of ours, if we fear death, but are
not fearful of sin. Little children too are afraid of masks, but fear not the fire. On
the contrary, if they are carried by accident near a lighted candle, they stretch out
the hand without any concern towards the candle and the flame; yet a mask
which is so utterly contemptible terrifies them; whereas they have no dread of
fire, which is really a thing to be afraid of. Just so we too have a fear of death,
which is a mask that might well be despised; but have no fear of sin, which is