much as mutter; but down they bowed and as unto a king gave place, one and all,
though much exasperated and exceeding relentless. For even the heads of spears
raised upright by many soldiers are not as fearful as were then those fearful
thoughts, armed not with spears, but what is harder to deal with than many
spears, the sympathy of nature! Wherefore they had power to pierce his soul
more than sharpened spear point. For never spear could be so sharp as were the
goads of those thoughts, which, sharpened and upraised from beneath, from his
affections, were piercing through and through the mind of that righteous man.
For here there needs time and purpose and a stroke and pain, and then death
follows; but there, there needed none of these, so much were the wounds
speedier and acuter. But still though so many thoughts were then in arms against
him, there was a deep calm, and they stood all in fair array; adorning rather than
daunting him. See him at least stretching out the knife, and set forth as many as
thou wilt, kings, emperors, Cæsars, yet shall you tell of nought like this, have no
like mien to point to, so noble, so worthy of the heavens. For that righteous man
erected a trophy at that movement over the most arbitrary of tyrannies. For
nothing is so tyrannical as nature; and find ten thousand tyrannicides, one like
this shall you never show us. For it was the triumph in that moment of an angel,
not a man. For consider. Nature was dashed to the ground with all her weapons,
with all her host: and he stood with outstretched hand, grasping not a crown, but
a knife more glorious than any crown, and the throng of angels applauded, and
God from heaven proclaimed him conquerer.
For seeing that his citizenship was in heaven, thence also he received that
proclamation. [Philippians 3:20] What could be more glorious than this? Rather,
what trophy could ever be equal to it? For if on occasion of a wrestler's success,
not a herald below but the king above should have risen up and himself
proclaimed the Olympic Victor, would not this have seemed to him more
glorious than the crown, and have turned the gaze of the whole theatre upon
him? When then no mortal king, but God Himself, not in this theatre but in the
theatre of the universe, in the assembly of the angels, the archangels, proclaims

his name with uplifted voice shouting from heaven, tell me what place shall we
assign to this holy man?
6. But if you will, let us listen too to the voice itself. What then was the
voice? "Abraham, Abraham, lay not your hand upon Isaac, neither do thou any
thing unto him. For now I know that you fear God, and hast not spared your son,
your well-beloved, for My sake." [Genesis 22:11-12] What is this? He that knows
all things before they are, did He now know! And yet even to man the Patriarch's
fear of God was evident: so many proofs had he given that his heart was right
toward God , as when He said to him, "Get you out of your country, and from
your kindred;" [Genesis 12:1] when for His sake and the honor due to Him he
relinquished to his sister's son his priority; when He delivered him out of so great
perils; when He bade him go into Egypt, and on his wife's being taken from him,
he repined not, and more instances besides; and as I said, from these things even
man would have learned the Patriarch's fear of God, much more than God Who
waits not for the acts to know the end. And how too justified he him, if He knew
not? For it is written, "Abraham believed, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness." [Genesis 15:6; Romans 4:3]
What then means this, "Now I know?" The Syriac has, "Now you have made
known;" that is, to men. For I knew of old, even before all those commandments.
And why, to men even, "now?" for were not those acts enough to prove his mind
was right toward God? They were enough indeed, but this one so much greater
than them all that they appear nothing beside it. As exalting then this good work
and showing its superiority to all, He so spoke. For of things which exceed and
surpass all that went before, most men are wont to speak so: for instance, if one
receive from another a gift greater than any former one, he often says, "Now I
know that such an one loves me," not hereby meaning that he knew not in the
time past, but as intending to declare what is now given to be greater than all. So
also God, speaking after the manner of men, says, "Now I know," intending only
to mark the exceeding greatness of the exploit; not that He "then" came to know
either his fear or the greatness of it. For when He says, "Come, let Us go down