time is seemingly not the chief purpose of nature, but as it were,
subordinate to something else; otherwise, when it ceased to exist,
nature's purpose would become void.
Therefore, since in things corruptible none is everlasting and
permanent except the species, it follows that the chief purpose of
nature is the good of the species; for the preservation of which
natural generation is ordained. On the other hand, incorruptible
substances survive, not only in the species, but also in the
individual; wherefore even the individuals are included in the chief
purpose of nature.
Hence it belongs to man to beget offspring, on the part of the
naturally corruptible body. But on the part of the soul, which is
incorruptible, it is fitting that the multitude of individuals should be
the direct purpose of nature, or rather of the Author of nature, Who
alone is the Creator of the human soul. Wherefore, to provide for the
multiplication of the human race, He established the begetting of
offspring even in the state of innocence.
Reply to Objection 1: In the state of innocence the human body was
in itself corruptible, but it could be preserved from corruption by the
soul. Therefore, since generation belongs to things corruptible, man
was not to be deprived thereof.
Reply to Objection 2: Although generation in the state of innocence
might not have been required for the preservation of the species, yet
it would have been required for the multiplication of the individual.
Reply to Objection 3: In our present state a division of possessions
is necessary on account of the multiplicity of masters, inasmuch as
community of possession is a source of strife, as the Philosopher
says (Politic. ii, 5). In the state of innocence, however, the will of men
would have been so ordered that without any danger of strife they
would have used in common, according to each one's need, those
things of which they were masters---a state of things to be observed
even now among many good men.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether in the state of innocence there would

have been generation by coition?
Objection 1: It would seem that generation by coition would not have
existed in the state of innocence. For, as Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. ii, 11; iv, 25), the first man in the terrestrial Paradise was "like
an angel." But in the future state of the resurrection, when men will
be like the angels, "they shall neither marry nor be married," as is
written Mt. 22:30. Therefore neither in paradise would there have
been generation by coition.
Objection 2: Further, our first parents were created at the age of
perfect development. Therefore, if generation by coition had existed
before sin, they would have had intercourse while still in paradise:
which was not the case according to Scripture (Gn. 4:1).
Objection 3: Further, in carnal intercourse, more than at any other
time, man becomes like the beasts, on account of the vehement
delight which he takes therein; whence contingency is praiseworthy,
whereby man refrains from such pleasures. But man is compared to
beasts by reason of sin, according to Ps. 48:13: "Man, when he was
in honor, did not understand; he is compared to senseless beasts,
and is become like to them." Therefore, before sin, there would have
been no such intercourse of man and woman.
Objection 4: Further, in the state of innocence there would have been
no corruption. But virginal integrity is corrupted by intercourse.
Therefore there would have been no such thing in the state of
innocence.
On the contrary, God made man and woman before sin (Gn. 1,2). But
nothing is void in God's works. Therefore, even if man had not
sinned, there would have been such intercourse, to which the
distinction of sex is ordained. Moreover, we are told that woman was
made to be a help to man (Gn. 2:18,20). But she is not fitted to help
man except in generation, because another man would have proved
a more effective help in anything else. Therefore there would have
been such generation also in the state of innocence.
I answer that, Some of the earlier doctors, considering the nature of
concupiscence as regards generation in our present state,