by words—namely, that the "old things are passed away, behold they have
become new;" and that "if any man is in Christ he is a new creature;" [2
Corinthians 5:17] and that "if you receive circumcision, Christ will profit you
nothing." [Galatians 5:2] In maintaining this truth we gave place not even for an
hour. Then, as he was directly met by the conduct of the Apostles, and the reason
of their enjoining the rite would probably be asked, he proceeds to solve this
objection. This he does with great skill, for he does not give the actual reason,
which was, that the Apostles acted by way of condescension and in the use of a
scheme, ([οἰκονομία]) as it were; for otherwise his hearers would have been
injured. For those, who are to derive benefit from a scheme should be
unacquainted with the design of it; all will be undone, if this appears. Wherefore,
he who is to take part in it should know the drift of it; those who are to benefit
by it should not. To make my meaning more evident, I will take an example from
our present subject. The blessed Paul himself, who meant to abrogate
circumcision, when he was about to send Timothy to teach the Jews, first
circumcised him and so sent him. This he did, that his hearers might the more
readily receive him; he began by circumcising, that in the end he might abolish
it. But this reason he imparted to Timothy only, and told it not to the disciples.
Had they known that the very purpose of his circumcision was the abolition of
the rite, they would never have listened to his preaching, and the whole benefit
would have been lost. But now their ignorance was of the greatest use to them,
for their idea that his conduct proceeded from a regard to the Law, led them to
receive both him and his doctrine with kindness and courtesy, and having
gradually received him, and become instructed, they abandoned their old
customs. Now this would not have happened had they known his reasons from
the first; for they would have turned away from him, and being turned away
would not have given him a hearing, and not hearing, would have continued in
their former error. To prevent this, he did not disclose his reasons; here too he
does not explain the occasion of the scheme, ([οἰκονομία],) but shapes his
discourse differently; thus:

Ver. 6. "But from those who were reputed to be somewhat (whatsoever they
were, it makes no matter to me, God accepts no man's person.)"
Here he not only does not defend the Apostles, but even presses hard upon
those holy men, for the benefit of the weak. His meaning is this: although they
permit circumcision, they shall render an account to God, for God will not
accept their persons, because they are great and in station. But he does not speak
so plainly, but with caution. He says not, if they vitiate their doctrine, and swerve
from the appointed rule of their preaching, they shall be judged with the utmost
rigor, and suffer punishment; but he alludes to them more reverently, in the
words, "of those who were reputed to be somewhat, whatsoever they were." He
says not, "whatsoever they 'are,'" but "were," showing that they too had
thenceforth ceased so to preach, the doctrine having extended itself universally.
The phrase, "whatsoever they were," implies, that if they so preached they
should render account, for they had to justify themselves before God, not before
men. This he said, not as doubtful or ignorant of the rectitude of their procedure,
but (as I said before) from a sense of the expediency of so forming his discourse.
Then, that he may not seem to take the opposite side and to accuse them, and so
create a suspicion of their disagreement, he straightway subjoins this correction:
"for those who were reputed to be somewhat, in conference imparted nothing to
me." This is his meaning; What you may say, I know not; this I know well, that
the Apostles did not oppose me, but our sentiments conspired and accorded. This
appears from his expression, "they gave me the right hand of fellowship;" but he
does not say this at present, but only that they neither informed or corrected him
on any point, nor added to his knowledge.
Ver. 6. "For those who were reputed to be somewhat, imparted nothing to
me:"
That is to say, when told of my proceedings, they added nothing, they
corrected nothing, and though aware that the object of my journey was to
communicate with them, that I had come by revelation of the Spirit, and that I
had Titus with me who was uncircumcised, they neither circumcised him, nor