FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.2.

Now in those things that are done by the will, the proximate rule is
the human reason, while the supreme rule is the Eternal Law. When,
therefore, a human action tends to the end, according to the order of
reason and of the Eternal Law, then that action is right: but when it
turns aside from that rectitude, then it is said to be a sin. Now it is
evident from what has been said (Question 19, Articles 3,4) that
every voluntary action that turns aside from the order of reason and
of the Eternal Law, is evil, and that every good action is in accord
with reason and the Eternal Law. Hence it follows that a human
action is right or sinful by reason of its being good or evil.
Reply to Objection 1: Monsters are called sins, inasmuch as they
result from a sin in nature's action.
Reply to Objection 2: The end is twofold; the last end, and the
proximate end. In the sin of nature, the action does indeed fail in
respect of the last end, which is the perfection of the thing
generated; but it does not fail in respect of any proximate end
whatever; since when nature works it forms something. In like
manner, the sin of the will always fails as regards the last end
intended, because no voluntary evil action can be ordained to
happiness, which is the last end: and yet it does not fail in respect of
some proximate end: intended and achieved by the will. Wherefore
also, since the very intention of this end is ordained to the last end,
this same intention may be right or sinful.
Reply to Objection 3: Each thing is ordained to its end by its action:
and therefore sin, which consists in straying from the order to the
end, consists properly in an action. On the other hand, punishment
regards the person of the sinner, as was stated in the FP, Question
48, Article 5, ad 4; Article 6, ad 3.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a human action deserves praise or

blame, by reason of its being good or evil?
Objection 1: It would seem that a human action does not deserve
praise or blame by reason of its being good or evil. For "sin happens
even in things done by nature" (Phys. ii, 8). And yet natural things
are not deserving of praise or blame (Ethic. iii, 5). Therefore a human
action does not deserve blame, by reason of its being evil or sinful;
and, consequently, neither does it deserve praise, by reason of its
being good.
Objection 2: Further, just as sin occurs in moral actions, so does it
happen in the productions of art: because as stated in Phys. ii, 8 "it
is a sin in a grammarian to write badly, and in a doctor to give the
wrong medicine." But the artist is not blamed for making something
bad: because the artist's work is such, that he can produce a good or
a bad thing, just as he lists. Therefore it seems that neither is there
any reason for blaming a moral action, in the fact that it is evil.
Objection 3: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that evil is "weak
and incapable." But weakness or inability either takes away or
diminishes guilt. Therefore a human action does not incur guilt from
being evil.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Virt. et Vit. i) that
"virtuous deeds deserve praise, while deeds that are opposed to
virtue deserve censure and blame." But good actions are virtuous;
because "virtue makes that which has it, good, and makes its action
good" (Ethic. ii, 6): wherefore actions opposed to virtue are evil.
Therefore a human action deserves praise or blame, through being
good or evil.
I answer that, Just as evil is more comprehensive than sin, so is sin
more comprehensive than blame. For an action is said to deserve
praise or blame, from its being imputed to the agent: since to praise
or to blame means nothing else than to impute to someone the
malice or goodness of his action. Now an action is imputed to an
agent, when it is in his power, so that he has dominion over it:
because it is through his will that man has dominion over his
actions, as was made clear above (Question 1, Articles 1,2). Hence it
follows that good or evil, in voluntary actions alone, renders them