FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a circumstance can make a venial sin to

be mortal?
Objection 1: It would seem that a circumstance can make a venial sin
mortal. For Augustine says in a sermon on Purgatory (De Sanctis,
serm. xli) that "if anger continue for a long time, or if drunkenness be
frequent, they become mortal sins." But anger and drunkenness are
not mortal but venial sins generically, else they would always be
mortal sins. Therefore a circumstance makes a venial sin to be
mortal.
Objection 2: Further, the Master says (Sentent. ii, D, 24) that
delectation, if morose [Question 74, Article 6], is a mortal sin, but
that if it be not morose, it is a venial sin. Now moroseness is a
circumstance. Therefore a circumstance makes a venial sin to be
mortal.
Objection 3: Further, evil and good differ more than venial and
mortal sin, both of which are generically evil. But a circumstance
makes a good act to be evil, as when a man gives an alms for
vainglory. Much more, therefore, can it make a venial sin to be
mortal.
On the contrary, Since a circumstance is an accident, its quantity
cannot exceed that of the act itself, derived from the act's genus,
because the subject always excels its accident. If, therefore, an act
be venial by reason of its genus, it cannot become mortal by reason
of an accident: since, in a way, mortal sin infinitely surpasses the
quantity of venial sin, as is evident from what has been said
(Question 72, Article 5, ad 1; Question 87, Article 5, ad 1).
I answer that, As stated above (Question 7, Article 1; Question 18,
Article 5, ad 4; Articles 10,11), when we were treating of
circumstances, a circumstance, as such, is an accident of the moral
act: and yet a circumstance may happen to be taken as the specific
difference of a moral act, and then it loses its nature of
circumstance, and constitutes the species of the moral act. This
happens in sins when a circumstance adds the deformity of another
genus; thus when a man has knowledge of another woman than his
wife, the deformity of his act is opposed to chastity; but if this other
be another man's wife, there is an additional deformity opposed to

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.6.

justice which forbids one to take what belongs to another; and
accordingly this circumstance constitutes a new species of sin
known as adultery.
It is, however, impossible for a circumstance to make a venial sin
become mortal, unless it adds the deformity of another species. For
it has been stated above (Article 1) that the deformity of a venial sin
consists in a disorder affecting things that are referred to the end,
whereas the deformity of a mortal sin consists in a disorder about
the last end. Consequently it is evident that a circumstance cannot
make a venial sin to be mortal, so long as it remains a circumstance,
but only when it transfers the sin to another species, and becomes,
as it were, the specific difference of the moral act.
Reply to Objection 1: Length of time is not a circumstance that
draws a sin to another species, nor is frequency or custom, except
perhaps by something accidental supervening. For an action does
not acquire a new species through being repeated or prolonged,
unless by chance something supervene in the repeated or prolonged
act to change its species, e.g. disobedience, contempt, or the like.
We must therefore reply to the objection by saying that since anger
is a movement of the soul tending to the hurt of one's neighbor, if
the angry movement tend to a hurt which is a mortal sin generically,
such as murder or robbery, that anger will be a mortal sin
generically: and if it be a venial sin, this will be due to the
imperfection of the act, in so far as it is a sudden movement of the
sensuality: whereas, if it last a long time, it returns to its generic
nature, through the consent of reason. If, on the other hand, the hurt
to which the angry movement tends, is a sin generically venial, for
instance, if a man be angry with someone, so as to wish to say some
trifling word in jest that would hurt him a little, the anger will not be
mortal sin, however long it last, unless perhaps accidentally; for
instance, if it were to give rise to great scandal or something of the
kind.
With regard to drunkenness we reply that it is a mortal sin by reason
of its genus; for, that a man, without necessity, and through the mere
lust of wine, make himself unable to use his reason, whereby he is
directed to God and avoids committing many sins, is expressly
contrary to virtue. That it be a venial sin, is due some sort of
ignorance or weakness, as when a man is ignorant of the strength of
the wine, or of his own unfitness, so that he has no thought of