31. The bishop must always foster this missionary communion in his diocesan Church, following
the ideal of the first Christian communities, in which the believers were of one heart and one soul
(cf. Acts 4:32). To do so, he will sometimes go before his people, pointing the way and keeping
their hope vibrant. At other times, he will simply be in their midst with his unassuming and merciful
presence. At yet other times, he will have to walk after them, helping those who lag behind and –
above all – allowing the flock to strike out on new paths. In his mission of fostering a dynamic,
open and missionary communion, he will have to encourage and develop the means of
participation proposed in the Code of Canon Law, and other forms of pastoral dialogue, out of
a desire to listen to everyone and not simply to those who would tell him what he would like to
hear. Yet the principal aim of these participatory processes should not be ecclesiastical
organization but rather the missionary aspiration of reaching everyone.

32. Since I am called to put into practice what I ask of others, I too must think about a conversion
of the papacy. It is my duty, as the Bishop of Rome, to be open to suggestions which can help
make the exercise of my ministry more faithful to the meaning which Jesus Christ wished to give it
and to the present needs of evangelization. Pope John Paul II asked for help in finding “a way of

exercising the primacy which, while in no way renouncing what is essential to its mission, is
nonetheless open to a new situation”. We have made little progress in this regard. The papacy
and the central structures of the universal Church also need to hear the call to pastoral
conversion. The Second Vatican Council stated that, like the ancient patriarchal Churches,
episcopal conferences are in a position “to contribute in many and fruitful ways to the concrete
realization of the collegial spirit”. Yet this desire has not been fully realized, since a juridical
status of episcopal conferences which would see them as subjects of specific attributions,
including genuine doctrinal authority, has not yet been sufficiently elaborated. Excessive
centralization, rather than proving helpful, complicates the Church’s life and her missionary
outreach.

33. Pastoral ministry in a missionary key seeks to abandon the complacent attitude that says: “We
have always done it this way”. I invite everyone to be bold and creative in this task of rethinking
the goals, structures, style and methods of evangelization in their respective communities. A
proposal of goals without an adequate communal search for the means of achieving them will
inevitably prove illusory. I encourage everyone to apply the guidelines found in this document
generously and courageously, without inhibitions or fear. The important thing is to not walk alone,
but to rely on each other as brothers and sisters, and especially under the leadership of the
bishops, in a wise and realistic pastoral discernment.