beginning, the devil made his attack; in the very midst of such signs and
wonders, how this man was hardened! Something of the same kind had
happened upon a time in the Old Testament. The son of Charmi coveted the
devoted thing: for observe there also what vengeance ensues upon the sin.
Sacrilege, beloved, is a most grievous crime, insulting, and full of contempt. We
neither obliged you to sell, the Apostle says, nor to give your money when you
had sold; of your own free choice you did it; why have you then stolen from the
sacred treasury? "Why," he says, "has Satan filled your heart?" [Acts 5:3] Well,
if Satan did the thing, why is the man made guilty of it? For admitting the
influence of the devil, and being filled with it. You will say, they ought to have
corrected him. But he would not have received correction; for he that has seen
such things as he had seen, and is none the better, would certainly be none the
better for anything else that could be done; the matter was not one to be simply
passed over: like a gangrene, it must be cut out, that it might not infect the rest of
the body. As it is, both the man himself is benefitted in regard that he is not left
to advance further in wickedness, and the rest, in that they are made more
earnest; otherwise the contrary would have ensued. In the next place, Peter
proves him guilty, and shows that the deed was not hidden from him, and then
pronounces the sentence. But wherefore, upon what purpose have you done this?
Did you wish to keep it? You ought to have kept it all along, and never to have
professed to give it. The sacrilege, beloved, is a grievous one. For another, it
may be, coveted what was not his own: but it was at your discretion to keep what
was your own. Why then did you first make it sacred, and then take it? Out of
excessive contempt have you done this. The deed does not admit of pardon, it is
past pleading for.— Therefore let it be no stumbling-block to any, if at present
also there are sacrilegious persons. If there were such persons then, much more
now, when evils are many. But let us "rebuke them before all, that others also
may fear." [1 Timothy 5:20] Judas was sacrilegious, but it was no stumblingblock to the disciples. Do you see how many evils spring from love of money?
"And great fear, it is said, came on all them that heard these things." [Acts 5:5]

That man was punished, and others profited thereby. Not without cause. And yet,
signs had been wrought before: true, but there was not such a sense of fear. So
true is that saying, "The Lord is known by executing judgments." [Psalm 9:16]
The same thing had occurred in the case of the Ark: Uzzah was punished and
fear came upon the rest. [2 Samuel 6:7] But in that instance the king through fear
removed from him the Ark; but here the disciples became more earnestly
heedful. ["And it was about the space of three hours after, when his wife, not
knowing what was done, came in," etc.] [Acts 5:7] But observe how Peter,
instead of sending for her, waited till she entered; and how none of the others
dared carry out the intelligence. Such the teacher's awfulness, such the disciples'
reverence, such the obedience! "An interval of three hours,"— and yet the
woman did not hear of it, and none of those present reported it, although there
was time enough for it to be noised abroad; but they were afraid. This
circumstance the Evangelist relates with wonder even, when he says, "Not
knowing what was done, came in." "And Peter answered unto her," etc. [Acts
5:8] And yet she might have perceived even from this that Peter knew the secret.
For why, having questioned none other, does he question you? Was it not clear
that he asked because he knew? But so great was her hardness, it would not let
her attempt to evade the guilt; and with great confidence she replied; for she
thought she was speaking only to a man. The aggravation of the sin was, that
they committed it as with one soul, just as upon a settled compact between them.
"How is it that you have agreed together," he said, "to tempt the Spirit of the
Lord? Behold, the feet of them which have buried your husband are at the door."
[Acts 5:9] First he makes her learn the sin, and then shows that she will justly
suffer the same punishment with her husband, since she has committed the same
wickedness: "And they shall carry you out. And she fell down straightway at his
feet," for she was standing near him, "and yielded up the ghost." [Acts 5:10] So
entirely by their own act had they invited upon themselves the vengeance! Who
after that would not be struck with awe? Who would not fear the Apostle? Who
would not marvel? Who not be afraid? "And they were with one accord, all of