1 Corinthians 12:18
"But now God has set the members each one of them in the body, even as it
pleased Him."
Even as he said of the Spirit, "as He will," so also here, "as it pleased Him."
Now do not thou seek further into the cause, why it is thus and why not thus. For
though we have ten thousand reasons to give, we shall not be so able to show
them that it is well done, as when we say, that as the best Artificer pleased, so it
came to pass. For as it is expedient, so He wills it. Now if in this body of ours we
do not curiously enquire about the members, much more in the Church. And see
his thoughtfulness in that he does not state the difference which arises from their
nature nor that from their operation, but that from their local situation. For
"now," says he, "God has set the members each one of them in the body even as
it pleased Him." And he said well, "each one," pointing out that the use extends
to all. For you can not say, "This He has Himself placed but not that: but every
one according to His will, so it is situated." So that to the foot also it is profitable
that it should be so stationed, and not to the head only: and if it should invert the
order and leaving its own place, should go to another, though it might seem to
have bettered its condition, it would be the undoing and ruin of the whole. For it
both falls from its own, and reaches not the other station.

1 Corinthians 12:19-20
5. "And if they were all one member, where were the body?" "But now are
they many members, but one body."
Thus having silenced them sufficiently by God's own arrangement, again he
states reasons. And he neither does this always nor that, but alternates and varies
his discourse. Since on the one hand, he who merely silences, confounds the
hearer, and he, on the contrary, who accustoms him to demand reasons for all
things, injures him in the matter of faith; for this cause then Paul is continually
practising both the one and the other, that they may both believe and may not be
confounded; and after silencing them, he again gives a reason likewise. And
mark his earnestness in the combat and the completeness of his victory. For from
what things they supposed themselves unequal in honor because in them there
was great diversity, even from these things he shows that for this very reason
they are equal in honor. How, I will tell you.
"If all were one member," says he, "where were the body?"
Now what he means is, If there were not among you great diversity, you
could not be a body; and not being a body, you could not be one; and not being
one, you could not be equal in honor. Whence it follows again that if you were
all equal in honor, you were not a body; and not being a body, you were not one;
and not being one, how could ye be equal in honor? As it is, however, because
you are not all endowed with some one gift, therefore are you a body; and being
a body, you are all one, and differ nothing from one another in this that you are a
body. So that this very difference is that which chiefly causes your equality in
honor. And accordingly he adds, "But now they are many members, yet one
body."
6. These things then let us also consider and cast out all envy, and neither
grudge against them that have greater gifts nor despise them that possess the