SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.4.

the swearer.
Reply to Objection 4: Just as when we instruct a man in some
science, we begin by putting before him certain general maxims,
even so the Law, which forms man to virtue by instructing him in the
precepts of the decalogue, which are the first of all precepts, gave
expression, by prohibition or by command, to those things which are
of most common occurrence in the course of human life. Hence the
precepts of the decalogue include the prohibition of perjury, which is
of more frequent occurrence than blasphemy, since man does not
fall so often into the latter sin.
Reply to Objection 5: Reverence is due to the Divine names on the
part of the thing signified, which is one, and not on the part of the
signifying words, which are many. Hence it is expressed in the
singular: "Thou shalt not take the name of . . . thy God in vain": since
it matters not in which of God's names perjury is committed.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.121, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the third precept of the decalogue,

concerning the hallowing of the Sabbath, is fittingly
expressed?
Objection 1: It seems that the third precept of the decalogue,
concerning the hallowing of the Sabbath, is unfittingly expressed.
For this, understood spiritually, is a general precept: since Bede in
commenting on Lk. 13:14, "The ruler of the synagogue being angry
that He had healed on the Sabbath," says (Comment. iv): "The Law
forbids, not to heal man on the Sabbath, but to do servile works," i.e.
"to burden oneself with sin." Taken literally it is a ceremonial
precept, for it is written (Ex. 31:13): "See that you keep My Sabbath:
because it is a sign between Me and you in your generations." Now
the precepts of the decalogue are both spiritual and moral. Therefore
it is unfittingly placed among the precepts of the decalogue.
Objection 2: Further, the ceremonial precepts of the Law contain
"sacred things, sacrifices, sacraments and observances," as stated
above (FS, Question 101, Article 4). Now sacred things comprised
not only sacred days, but also sacred places and sacred vessels,
and so on. Moreover, there were many sacred days other than the
Sabbath. Therefore it was unfitting to omit all other ceremonial
observances and to mention only that of the Sabbath.
Objection 3: Further, whoever breaks a precept of the decalogue,
sins. But in the Old Law some who broke the observances of the
Sabbath did not sin---for instance, those who circumcised their sons
on the eighth day, and the priests who worked in the temple on the
Sabbath. Also Elias (3 Kgs. 19), who journeyed for forty days unto
the mount of God, Horeb, must have traveled on a Sabbath: the
priests also who carried the ark of the Lord for seven days, as
related in Josue 7, must be understood to have carried it on a
Sabbath. Again it is written (Lk. 13:15): "Doth not every one of you
on the Sabbath day loose his ox or his ass . . . and lead them to
water?" Therefore it is unfittingly placed among the precepts of the
decalogue.
Objection 4: Further, the precepts of the decalogue have to be
observed also under the New Law. Yet in the New Law this precept is
not observed, neither in the point of the Sabbath day, nor as to the
Lord's day, on which men cook their food, travel, fish, and do many