hope of salvation."
"Of faith and love," he says. Here he glances at life and doctrine. He has
shown what it is to watch and be sober, to have "the breastplate of faith and
love." Not a common faith, he says, but as nothing can soon pierce through a
breastplate, but it is a safe wall to the breast—so do thou also, he says, surround
your soul with faith and love, and none of the fiery darts of the devil can ever be
fixed in it. For where the power of the soul is preoccupied with the armor of
love, all the devices of those who plot against it are vain and ineffectual. For
neither wickedness, nor hatred, nor envy, nor flattery, nor hypocrisy, nor any
other thing will be able to penetrate such a soul. He has not simply said "love,"
but he has bid them put it on as a strong breastplate. "And for a helmet the hope
of salvation." For as the helmet guards the vital part in us, surrounding the head
and covering it on every side, so also this hope does not suffer the reason to
falter, but sets it upright as the head, not permitting anything from without to fall
upon it. And while nothing falls on it, neither does it slip of itself. For it is not
possible that one who is fortified with such arms as these, should ever fall. For
"now abides faith, hope, love." [1 Corinthians 13:13] Then having said, Put on,
and array yourselves, he himself provides the armor, whence faith, hope, and
love may be produced, and may become strong.
Ver. 9. "For God appointed us not unto wrath, but unto the obtaining of
salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us."
Thus God has not inclined to this, that He might destroy us, but that He
might save us. And whence is it manifest that this is His will? He has given His
own Son for us. So does He desire that we should be saved, that He has given
His Son, and not merely given, but given Him to death. From these
considerations hope is produced. For do not despair of yourself, O man, in going
to God, who has not spared even His Son for you. Faint not at present evils. He
who gave His Only-Begotten, that He might save you and deliver you from hell,
what will He spare henceforth for your salvation? So that you ought to hope for
all things kind. For neither should we fear, if we were going to a judge who was

about to judge us, and who had shown so much love for us, as to have sacrificed
his son. Let us hope therefore for kind and great things, for we have received the
principal thing; let us believe, for we have seen an example; let us love, for it is
the extreme of madness for one not to love who has been so treated.
Ver. 10, 11. "That, whether we wake or sleep," he says, "we should live
together with Him. Wherefore exhort one another, and build each other up, even
as also ye do."
And again, "whether we wake or sleep"; by sleep there he means one thing,
and here another. For here, "whether we sleep" signifies the death of the body;
that is, fear not dangers; though we should die, we shall live. Do not despair
because you are in danger. You have a strong security. He would not have given
His Son if He had not been inflamed by vehement love for us. So that, though
you should die, you will live; for He Himself also died. Therefore whether we
die, or whether we live, we shall live with Him. This is a matter of indifference:
it is no concern of mine, whether I live or die; for we shall live with Him. Let us
therefore do everything for that life: looking to that, let us do all our works. Vice,
O beloved, is darkness, it is death, it is night; we see nothing that we ought, we
do nothing that becomes us. As the dead are unsightly and of evil odor, so also
the souls of those who are vicious are full of much impurity. Their eyes are
closed, their mouth is stopped, they remain without motion in the bed of vice; or
rather more wretched than those who are naturally dead. For they truly are dead
to both, but these are insensible indeed to virtue, but alive to vice. If one should
strike a dead man, he perceives it not, he revenges it not, but is like a dry stick.
So also his soul is truly dry, having lost its life; it receives daily numberless
wounds, and has no feeling of any, but lies insensible to everything.
One would not err in comparing such men to those who are mad, or drunk,
or delirious. All these things belong to vice, and it is worse than all these. He
that is mad is much allowed for by those who see him, for his disease is not from
choice, but from nature alone; but how shall he be pardoned, who lives in vice?
Whence then is vice? Whence are the majority bad? Tell me, whence have