God and creatures analogically, and not in a purely equivocal nor in
a purely univocal sense. For we can name God only from creatures
(Article 1). Thus whatever is said of God and creatures, is said
according to the relation of a creature to God as its principle and
cause, wherein all perfections of things pre-exist excellently. Now
this mode of community of idea is a mean between pure
equivocation and simple univocation. For in analogies the idea is
not, as it is in univocals, one and the same, yet it is not totally
diverse as in equivocals; but a term which is thus used in a multiple
sense signifies various proportions to some one thing; thus
"healthy" applied to urine signifies the sign of animal health, and
applied to medicine signifies the cause of the same health.
Reply to Objection 1: Although equivocal predications must be
reduced to univocal, still in actions, the non-univocal agent must
precede the univocal agent. For the non-univocal agent is the
universal cause of the whole species, as for instance the sun is the
cause of the generation of all men; whereas the univocal agent is not
the universal efficient cause of the whole species (otherwise it would
be the cause of itself, since it is contained in the species), but is a
particular cause of this individual which it places under the species
by way of participation. Therefore the universal cause of the whole
species is not an univocal agent; and the universal cause comes
before the particular cause. But this universal agent, whilst it is not
univocal, nevertheless is not altogether equivocal, otherwise it could
not produce its own likeness, but rather it is to be called an
analogical agent, as all univocal predications are reduced to one first
non-univocal analogical predication, which is being.
Reply to Objection 2: The likeness of the creature to God is
imperfect, for it does not represent one and the same generic thing
(Question 4, Article 3).
Reply to Objection 3: God is not the measure proportioned to things
measured; hence it is not necessary that God and creatures should
be in the same genus.
The arguments adduced in the contrary sense prove indeed that
these names are not predicated univocally of God and creatures; yet
they do not prove that they are predicated equivocally.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether names predicated of God are predicated

primarily of creatures?
Objection 1: It seems that names are predicated primarily of
creatures rather than of God. For we name anything accordingly as
we know it, since "names", as the Philosopher says, "are signs of
ideas." But we know creatures before we know God. Therefore the
names imposed by us are predicated primarily of creatures rather
than of God.
Objection 2: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i): "We name God
from creatures." But names transferred from creatures to God, are
said primarily of creatures rather than of God, as "lion," "stone," and
the like. Therefore all names applied to God and creatures are
applied primarily to creatures rather than to God.
Objection 3: Further, all names equally applied to God and creatures,
are applied to God as the cause of all creatures, as Dionysius says
(De Mystica Theol.). But what is applied to anything through its
cause, is applied to it secondarily, for "healthy" is primarily
predicated of animal rather than of medicine, which is the cause of
health. Therefore these names are said primarily of creatures rather
than of God.
On the contrary, It is written, "I bow my knees to the Father, of our
Lord Jesus Christ, of Whom all paternity in heaven and earth is
named" (Eph. 3:14,15); and the same applies to the other names
applied to God and creatures. Therefore these names are applied
primarily to God rather than to creatures.
I answer that, In names predicated of many in an analogical sense,
all are predicated because they have reference to some one thing;
and this one thing must be placed in the definition of them all. And
since that expressed by the name is the definition, as the
Philosopher says (Metaph. iv), such a name must be applied
primarily to that which is put in the definition of such other things,
and secondarily to these others according as they approach more or
less to that first. Thus, for instance, "healthy" applied to animals
comes into the definition of "healthy" applied to medicine, which is
called healthy as being the cause of health in the animal; and also
into the definition of "healthy" which is applied to urine, which is