But above all, in the Church of that time and of every time Mary was and is the one who
is "blessed because she believed"; she was the first to believe. From the moment of the
Annunciation and conception, from the moment of his birth in the stable at Bethlehem,
Mary followed Jesus step by step in her maternal pilgrimage of faith. She followed him
during the years of his hidden life at Nazareth; she followed him also during the time
after he left home, when he began "to do and to teach" (cf. Acts 1:1) in the midst of
Israel. Above all she followed him in the tragic experience of Golgotha. Now, while
Mary was with the Apostles in the Upper Room in Jerusalem at the dawn of the Church,
her faith, born from the words of the Annunciation, found confirmation. The angel had
said to her then: "You will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his
name Jesus. He will be great...and he will reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of
his kingdom there will be no end." The recent events on Calvary had shrouded that
promise in darkness, yet not even beneath the Cross did Mary's faith fail. She had still
remained the one who, like Abraham, "in hope believed against hope" (Rom. 4:18). But it
is only after the Resurrection that hope had shown its true face and the promise had
begun to be transformed into reality. For Jesus, before returning to the Father, had said to
the Apostles: "Go therefore and make disciples of all nations . . . lo, I am with you
always, to the close of the age" (cf. Mt. 28:19-20). Thus had spoken the one who by his
Resurrection had revealed himself as the conqueror of death, as the one who possessed
the kingdom of which, as the angel said, "there will be no end."

27. Now, at the first dawn of the Church, at the beginning of the long journey through
faith which began at Pentecost in Jerusalem, Mary was with all those who were the seed
of the "new Israel." She was present among them as an exceptional witness to the
mystery of Christ. And the Church was assiduous in prayer together with her, and at the
same time "contemplated her in the light of the Word made man." It was always to be so.
For when the Church "enters more intimately into the supreme mystery of the
Incarnation," she thinks of the Mother of Christ with profound reverence and devotion.
Mary belongs indissolubly to the mystery of Christ, and she belongs also to the mystery
of the Church from the beginning, from the day of the Church's birth. At the basis of what
the Church has been from the beginning, and of what she must continually become from
generation to generation, in the midst of all the nations of the earth, we find the one "who
believed that there would be a fulfillment of what was spoken to her from the Lord" (Lk. 1:45). It is precisely Mary's faith which marks the beginning of the new and eternal
Covenant of God with man in Jesus Christ; this heroic faith of hers "precedes" the
apostolic witness of the Church, and ever remains in the Church's heart hidden like a
special heritage of God's revelation. All those who from generation to generation accept