say, we shall out of the Gospels know perfectly. If you follow in becoming
quietness, we shall be able to lead you about everywhere, and to show where
death is set forth crucified, and where sin is hanged up, and where are the many
and wondrous offerings from this war, from this battle.
You shall see likewise the tyrant here bound, and the multitude of the
captives following, and the citadel from which that unholy demon overran all
things in time past. You will see the hiding places, and the dens of the robber,
broken up now, and laid open, for even there also was our King present.
But be not thou weary, beloved, for if any one were describing a visible
war, and trophies, and victories, would you feel no satiety at all; nay, you would
not prefer either drink or meat to this history. But if that kind of narrative be
welcome, much more this. For consider what a thing it is to hear, how on the one
side God from Heaven, arising "out of the royal thrones, leaped down
[Wisdom 18:15] " unto the earth, and even unto hell itself, and stood in the battle
array; and how the devil on the other hand set himself in array against Him; or
rather not against God unveiled, but God hidden in man's nature.
And what is marvellous, you will see death destroyed by death, and curse
extinguished by curse, and the dominion of the devil put down by those very
things whereby he did prevail. Let us therefore rouse ourselves thoroughly, and
let us not sleep, for lo, I see the gates opening to us; but let us enter in with all
seemly order, and with trembling, setting foot straightway within the vestibule
itself.
2. But what is this vestibule? "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ,
Son of David, Son of Abraham."
"What do you say? Did you not promise to discourse of the Only-begotten
Son of God, and do you make mention of David, a man born after a thousand
generations, and say that he is both father and ancestor?" Stay, seek not to learn
all at once, but gently and little by little. Why, it is in the vestibule that you are
standing, by the very porch; why then do you hasten towards the inner shrine?
As yet you have not well marked all without. For neither for a while do I declare

unto you that other generation: or rather not even this which comes after, for it is
unutterable, and unspeakable. And before me the Prophet Esaias has told you
this; where when proclaiming His passion, and His great care for the world, and
admiring who He was, and what He became, and whither He descended, he cried
out loud and clear, saying thus, "Who shall declare His generation?"
It is not then of that we are now to speak, but of this beneath, this which
took place on earth, which was among ten thousand witnesses. And concerning
this again we will relate in such wise as it may be possible for us, having
received the grace of the Spirit. For not even this may any one set forth
altogether plainly, forasmuch as this too is most awful. Think not, therefore, it is
of small things you are hearing, when you hear of this birth, but rouse up your
mind, and straightway tremble, being told that God has come upon earth. For so
marvellous was this, and beyond expectation, that because of these things the
very angels formed a choir, and in behalf of the world offered up their praise for
them, and the prophets from the first were amazed at this, that "He was seen
upon earth, and conversed with men [Baruch 3:37] ." Yea, for it is far beyond all
thought to hear that God the Unspeakable, the Unutterable, the
Incomprehensible, and He that is equal to the Father, has passed through a
virgin's womb, and has vouchsafed to be born of a woman, and to have Abraham
and David for forefathers. But why do I say Abraham and David? For what is
even more amazing, there are those women, whom we have lately mentioned.
3. Hearing these things, arise, and surmise nothing low: but even because of
this very thing most of all should you marvel, that being Son of the Unoriginate
God, and His true Son, He suffered Himself to be called also Son of David, that
He might make you Son of God. He suffered a slave to be father to Him, that He
might make the Lord Father to you a slave.
Do you see at once from the beginning of what nature are the Gospels? If
you doubt concerning the things that pertain to you, from what belongs to Him
believe these also. For it is far more difficult, judging by human reason, for God
to become man, than for a man to be declared a Son of God. When therefore you