spiritual relationship are opposed to marriage, because in one the
distance is greater, and in the other less, than required by marriage.
Hence there is an impediment to marriage in either case.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether spiritual relationship is contracted by

baptism only?
Objection 1: It would seem that spiritual relationship is contracted by
Baptism only. For as bodily kinship is to bodily birth, so is spiritual
kinship to spiritual birth. Now Baptism alone is called spiritual birth.
Therefore spiritual kinship is contracted by Baptism only, even as
only by carnal birth is carnal kinship contracted.
Objection 2: Further, a character is imprinted in order as in
Confirmation. But spiritual relationship does not result from
receiving orders. Therefore it does not result from Confirmation but
only from Baptism.
Objection 3: Further, sacraments are more excellent than
sacramentals. Now spiritual relationship does not result from certain
sacraments, for instance from Extreme Unction. Much less therefore
does it result from catechizing, as some maintain.
Objection 4: Further, many other sacramentals are attached to
Baptism besides catechizing. Therefore spiritual relationship is not
contracted from catechism any more than from the others.
Objection 5: Further, prayer is no less efficacious than instruction of
catechism for advancement in good. But spiritual relationship does
not result from prayer. Therefore it does not result from catechism.
Objection 6: Further, the instruction given to the baptized by
preaching to them avails no less than preaching to those who are
not yet baptized. But no spiritual relationship results from preaching.
Neither therefore does it result from catechism.
Objection 7: On the other hand, It is written (1 Cor. 4:15): "In Christ
Jesus by the gospel I have begotten you." Now spiritual birth causes
spiritual relationship. Therefore spiritual relationship results from
the preaching of the gospel and instruction, and not only from
Baptism.
Objection 8: Further, as original sin is taken away by Baptism, so is
actual sin taken away by Penance. Therefore just as Baptism causes
spiritual relationship, so also does Penance.

Objection 9: Further, "father" denotes relationship. Now a man is
called another's spiritual father in respect of Penance, teaching,
pastoral care and many other like things. Therefore spiritual
relationship is contracted from many other sources besides Baptism
and Confirmation.
I answer that, There are three opinions on this question. Some say
that as spiritual regeneration is bestowed by the sevenfold grace of
the Holy Ghost, it is caused by means of seven things, beginning
with the first taste of blessed salt and ending with Confirmation
given by the bishop: and they say that spiritual relationship is
contracted by each of these seven things. But this does not seem
reasonable, for carnal relationship is not contracted except by a
perfect act of generation. Wherefore affinity is not contracted except
there be mingling of seeds, from which it is possible for carnal
generation to follow. Now spiritual generation is not perfected except
by a sacrament: wherefore it does not seem fitting for spiritual
relationship to be contracted otherwise than through a sacrament.
Hence others say that spiritual relationship is only contracted
through three sacraments, namely catechism, Baptism and
Confirmation, but these do not apparently know the meaning of what
they say, since catechism is not a sacrament but a sacramental.
Wherefore others say that it is contracted through two sacraments
only, namely Confirmation and Baptism, and this is the more
common opinion. Some however of these say that catechism is a
weak impediment, since it hinders the contracting of marriage but
does not void the contract.
Reply to Objection 1: Carnal birth is twofold. The first is in the womb,
wherein that which is born is a weakling and cannot come forth
without danger: and to this birth regeneration by Baptism is likened;
wherein a man is regenerated as though yet needing to be fostered
in the womb of the Church. The second is birth from out of the
womb, when that which was born in the womb is so far strengthened
that it can without danger face the outer world which has a natural
corruptive tendency. To this is likened Confirmation, whereby man
being strengthened goes forth abroad to confess the name of Christ.
Hence spiritual relationship is fittingly contracted through both these
sacraments.
Reply to Objection 2: The effect of the sacrament of order is not
regeneration but the bestowal of power, for which reason it is not