them up is not merely taking care of them; they must be brought up well; as he
said before, "If they continue in faith, and charity, and holiness." [1 Timothy
2:15] Observe how constantly he sets kindnesses to our own relatives before
those to strangers. First he says, "If she have brought up children," then, "If she
have lodged strangers, if she have washed the Saints' feet, if she have relieved
the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work." But what if she be
poor? Not even in that case is she debarred from bringing up children, lodging
strangers, relieving the afflicted. She is not more destitute than the widow who
gave the two mites. Poor though she be, she has an house, she does not lodge in
the open air. "If," he says, "she have washed the Saints' feet." This is not a costly
work. "If she have diligently followed every good work." What precept does he
give here? He exhorts them to contribute bodily service, for women are
peculiarly fitted for such attendance, for making the bed of the sick, and
composing them to rest.
Strange! What strictness does he require of widows; almost as much as of
the Bishop himself. For he says, "If she have diligently followed every good
work." This is as though he meant that, if she could not of herself perform it, she
shared and cooperated in it. When he cuts off luxury, he would have her
provident, a good economist, and at the same time continually persevering in
prayer. Such was Anna. Such strictness does he require of widows. Greater even
than of virgins, from whom he yet requires much strictness, and eminent virtue.
For when he speaks of "that which is comely," and "that she may attend upon the
Lord without distraction" [1 Corinthians 7:35], he gives, in a manner, a summary
of all virtue. You see that it is not merely the not contracting a second marriage
that is enough to make a widow, many other things are necessary. But why does
he discourage second marriages? Is the thing condemned? By no means. That is
heretical. Only he would have her henceforth occupied in spiritual things,
transferring all her care to virtue. For marriage is not an impure state, but one of
much occupation. He speaks of their having leisure, not of their being more pure
by remaining unmarried. For marriage certainly implies much secular

engagement. If you abstain from marriage that you may have leisure for the
service of God, and yet do not so employ that leisure, it is of no advantage to
you, (if you do not use your leisure,) to perform all services to strangers, and to
the Saints. If you do not thus, you abstain from marriage not for any good end,
but as though you condemned the state. So the virgin, who is not truly crucified
to the world, by declining marriage, appears to condemn it as accursed and
impure.
Observe, the hospitality here spoken of is not merely a friendly reception,
but one given with zeal and alacrity, with readiness, and going about it as if one
were receiving Christ Himself. The widows should perform these services
themselves, not commit them to their handmaids. For Christ said, "If I your
Master and Lord have washed your feet, you ought also to wash one another's
feet." [John 13:14] And though a woman may be very rich, and of the highest
rank, vain of her birth and noble family, there is not the same distance between
her and others, as between God and the disciples. If you receive the stranger as
Christ, be not ashamed, but rather glory: but if you receive him not as Christ,
receive him not at all. "He that receives you," He said, "receives Me." [Matthew
10:40] If you do not so receive him, you have no reward. Abraham was
receiving men that passed as travelers, as he thought, and he did not leave to his
servants to make the preparations for their entertainment, but took the greater
part of the service upon himself, and commanded his wife to mix the flour,
though he had three hundred and eighteen servants born in his house, of whom
there must have been many maidservants; but he wished that himself and his
wife should have the reward, not of the cost only, but of the service. Thus ought
we ever to exercise hospitality by our own personal exertions, that we may be
sanctified, and our hands be blessed. And if you give to the poor, disdain not
yourself to give it, for it is not to the poor that it is given, but to Christ; and who
is so wretched, as to disdain to stretch out his own hand to Christ?
This is hospitality, this is truly to do it for God's sake. But if you give orders
with pride, though you bid him take the first place, it is not hospitality, it is not