just as when He said, [Matthew 12:42] "The queen of the south shall rise up and
condemn this generation:" and, "The men of Nineveh shall arise and condemn
this generation." For when beholding the same sun and sharing all the same
things, we shall be found believers but they unbelievers, they will not be able to
take refuge in ignorance. For we shall accuse them, simply by the things which
we have done. And many such ways of judgment one will find there.
Then, that no one should think he speaks about other persons, mark how he
generalizes his speech. "And if the world is judged in you, are you unworthy to
judge the smallest matters?"
The thing is a disgrace to you, he says, and an unspeakable reproach. For
since it was likely that they would be out of countenance at being judged by
those that were within; "nay," says he, "on the contrary, the disgrace is when you
are judged by those without: for those are the very small controversies, not
these."

1 Corinthians 6:3
"Do you not know that we shall judge angels? How much more, things
which pertain to this life?"
Some say that here the priests are hinted at, but away with this. His speech
is about demons. For had he been speaking about corrupt priests, he would have
meant them above when he said, "the world is judged in you:" (for the Scripture
is wont to call evil men also "The world:") and he would not have said the same
thing twice, nor would he, as if he was saying something of greater consequence,
have put it down afterwards. But he speaks concerning those angels about whom
Christ says, "Depart ye into the fire which is prepared for the devil and his
angels." [Matthew 25:41] And Paul, "his angels fashion themselves as ministers
of righteousness." [2 Corinthians 11:15] For when the very incorporeal powers
shall be found inferior to us who are clothed with flesh, they shall suffer heavier
punishment.
But if some should still contend that he speaks of priests, "What sort of
priests?" let us ask. Those whose walk in life has been worldly, of course. In
what sense then does he say, "We shall judge angels, much more things that
relate to this life?" He mentions the angels, in contradistinction to "things
relating to this life": likely enough; for they are removed from the need of these
things, because of the superior excellence of their nature.

1 Corinthians 6:4
6. "If then you have to judge things pertaining to this life, set them to judge
who are of no account in the Church."
Wishing to instruct us as forcibly as possible that they ought not to commit
themselves to those without, whatsoever the matter may be; having raised what
seemed to be an objection, he answers it in the first instance. For what he says is
something like this: Perhaps some one will say, "No one among you is wise, nor
competent to pass sentence; all are contemptible." Now what follows? "Even
though none be wise," says he, "I bid you entrust things to those who are of least
weight."