Again, religion consists also in activity regarding the neighbor, as is evident in Jas. 1:27:

"Religion clean and undefiled before God and the Father is this: to visit the fatherless and
widows in their tribulation"; faith has no act except that which is referred to God; therefore
religion is altogether distinct from faith.

Again, those are commonly called "religious" who are bound by special vows, but they are not
the only ones called 1. the faithful." Since, therefore, one of the faith and a religious are not the
same thing, faith and religion are not the same.

Response. I answer that it must be said that, as is evident from Augustine (X De civ. Dei),
theosebia, which the worship of God is called, includes as pertaining to it in the same way,
religion, piety and latria, since all have as their purpose the worship of God. Reverence paid to
anything, however, seems to be nothing else than a due operation performed with regard to it;
and consequently men are said to cherish in various ways their fields, their parefits, their country,
and other like things because different works are fitting to each. But God is not "cherished" in
this same way: that any operation of ours would be of benefit or assistance to Him, as in the case
of the above-mentioned instances; but it implies only that we submit ourselves to Him and show
ourselves to be His subjects. Therefore this reverence which is absolutely divine is designated by
the name of theosebia. But religion implies a certain "binding, back" according to which man
obliges himself in some manner to this worship of God; wherefore Augustine says in his book,
De vera religione: "The word 'religion' is thought to be derived from the religare ('to bind
back'), or from recte eligere ('to choose rightly')," as is said in IV De civ. Dei. For it is by
proper choicethat a person binds himself to do something that must be done. We must also
reelect those things which by negligence we have lost, as he also says. Therefore it is that those
who consecrate their whole lives and themselves to the service of God by certain vows are called
religious; but piety regards the mind of the worshiper, that it be not insincere or moved by desire
of gain.

Since also a certain divine veneration, as it were, is due to those above us, even the acts of
kindness which are done for the unfortunate are in a way sacrifices to God, according to the last
part of the Epistle to the Hebrews (13: 16): "And do not forget to do good and to impart: for by
such sacrifices God's favor is obtained." Hence it is that the name of piety and of religion are
transferred to works of mercy, and especially to benefits done to parents and country. But latria
implies a reverence that is of obligation, or worship in its essence; and this is so because we are,
indeed, the subjects of Him whom we honor, not after the manner in which one man is said to be
the servant of another, because of some accidental debt to him, but because all that we are we
owe to Him as our Creator. Therefore latria is not any kind of service, but that by which man
acknowledges his subjection to God. Thus, therefore, religion consists in an operation by which
man honors God by submitting to Him; and this operation ought to be in harmony with Him
who is honored, and with the one offering homage.