SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.4.

established not only for the works of the contemplative life, but also
for the works of the active life, in so far as they are concerned in
helping our neighbor and in the service of God, but not in so far as
they are directed to a worldly object. Now the occupation of
soldiering may be directed to the assistance of our neighbor, not
only as regards private individuals, but also as regards the defense
of the whole commonwealth. Hence it is said of Judas Machabeus (1
Macc. 3:2,3) that "he fought with cheerfulness the battle of Israel,
and he got his people great honor." It can also be directed to the
upkeep of divine worship, wherefore (1 Macc. 3:21) Judas is stated to
have said: "We will fight for our lives and our laws," and further on (1
Macc. 13:3) Simon said: "You know what great battles I and my
brethren, and the house of my father, have fought for the laws and
the sanctuary."
Hence a religious order may be fittingly established for soldiering,
not indeed for any worldly purpose, but for the defense of divine
worship and public safety, or also of the poor and oppressed,
according to Ps. 81:4: "Rescue the poor, and deliver the needy out of
the hand of the sinner."
Reply to Objection 1: Not to resist evil may be understood in two
ways. First, in the sense of forgiving the wrong done to oneself, and
thus it may pertain to perfection, when it is expedient to act thus for
the spiritual welfare of others. Secondly, in the sense of tolerating
patiently the wrongs done to others: and this pertains to
imperfection, or even to vice, if one be able to resist the wrongdoer
in a becoming manner. Hence Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 27): "The
courage whereby a man in battle defends his country against
barbarians, or protects the weak at home, or his friends against
robbers is full of justice": even so our Lord says in the passage
quoted, " . . . thy goods, ask them not again." If, however, a man
were not to demand the return of that which belongs to another, he
would sin if it were his business to do so: for it is praiseworthy to
give away one's own, but not another's property. And much less
should the things of God be neglected, for as Chrysostom [Hom. v in
Matth. in Opus Imperfectum] says, "it is most wicked to overlook the
wrongs done to God."
Reply to Objection 2: It is inconsistent with any religious order to act
as counsel at law for a worldly object, but it is not inconsistent to do
so at the orders of one's superior and in favor of one's monastery, as
stated in the same Decretal, or for the defense of the poor and

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.4.

widows. Wherefore it is said in the Decretals (Dist. lxxxviii, cap. 1):
"The holy synod has decreed that henceforth no cleric is to buy
property or occupy himself with secular business, save with a view
to the care of the fatherless . . . and widows." Likewise to be a soldier
for the sake of some worldly object is contrary to all religious life,
but this does not apply to those who are soldiers for the sake of
God's service.
Reply to Objection 3: Worldly soldiering is forbidden to penitents,
but the soldiering which is directed to the service of God is imposed
as a penance on some people, as in the case of those upon whom it
is enjoined to take arms in defense of the Holy Land.
Reply to Objection 4: The establishment of a religious order for the
purpose of soldiering does not imply that the religious can wage war
on their own authority; but they can do so only on the authority of
the sovereign or of the Church.