received by his subsequent labors, and his zeal, and his diligence. And look at
the carefulness of God; neither did he give the whole to you then, nor withhold
the whole, but gave part, and promised part. And for what reason did he not give
the whole then? In order that you might show your faith about Him, believing,
on his promise alone, in what was not yet given. And for what reason again did
he not there dispense the whole, but did give the grace of the Spirit, and
righteousness and sanctification? In order that he might lighten your labors for
you, and by what has been already given may also put you in good hope for that
which is to come. On this account, too, you are about to be called newlyenlightened, because your light is ever new, if you will, and is never quenched.
For this light of day, whether we will or no, the night succeeds, but darkness
knows not that light's ray. "For the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness
apprehended it not." Not so bright at least is the world, when the sunbeams come
forth, as the soul shines and becomes brighter when it has received grace from
the Spirit and learns more exactly the nature of the case. For when night prevails,
and there is darkness, often a man has seen a coil of rope and has thought it was
a serpent, and has fled from an approaching friend as from an enemy, and being
aware of some noise, has become very much alarmed; but when the day has
come, nothing of this sort could happen, but all appears just as it really is; which
thing also occurs in the case of our soul. For when grace has come, and driven
away the darkness of the understanding, we learn the exact nature of things, and
what was before dreadful to us becomes contemptible. For we no longer fear
death, after learning exactly, from this sacred initiation, that death is not death,
but a sleep and a seasonable slumber; nor poverty nor disease, nor any other
such thing, knowing that we are on our way to a better life, undefiled and
incorruptible, and free from all such vicissitudes.
2. Let us not therefore remain craving after the things of this life, neither
after the luxury of the table, or costliness of raiment. For you have the most
excellent of raiment, you have a spiritual table you have the glory from on high,
and Christ has become to you all things, your table, your raiment, your home,

your head, your stem. "For as many of you as were baptized into Christ, did put
on Christ." [Galatians 3:27] See how he has become raiment for you. Do you
wish to learn how he becomes a table for you? "He who eats me," says He, "as I
live because of the Father, he also shall live because of me;" and that he
becomes a home for you, "he that eats my flesh abides in me, and I in him;"
[John 6:56] and that He is stem He says again, "I am the vine, you the branches,"
[John 15:5] and that he is brother, and friend, and bride-groom, "I no longer call
you servants: for you are my friends;" [John 15:15] and Paul again, "I espoused
you to one husband, that I might present you as a pure virgin to Christ;"
[2 Corinthians 11:2] and again, "That he might be the first-born among many
brethren;" [Romans 8:29] and we become not his brethren only, but also his
children, "For behold," he says, "I and the children which God has given me"
[Isaiah 8:18] and not this only, but His members, and His body. For as if what
has been said were not enough to show forth the love and the good will which
He has shown forth towards us, He has added another thing greater and nearer
still, calling himself besides, our head. Knowing all these matters, beloved,
requite your benefactor by the best conversation, and considering the greatness
of the sacrifice, adorn the members of your body; consider what you receive in
your hand, and never suffer it to strike any one, nor shame what has been
honored with so great a gift by the sin of a blow. Consider what you receive in
your hand, and keep it clean from all covetousness and extortion; think that thou
dost not receive this in your hand, but also puttest it to your mouth, and guard
your tongue in purity from base and insolent words, blasphemy, perjury, and all
other such things. For it is disastrous that what is ministered to by such most
dread mysteries, and has been dyed red with such blood, and has become a
golden sword, should be perverted to purposes of raillery, and insult, and
buffoonery. Reverence the honor with which God has honoured it, and bring it
not down to the vileness of sin, but having reflected again that after the hand and
the tongue, the heart receives this dread mystery, do not ever weave a plot
against your neighbor, but keep your thoughts pure from all evil. Thus you shall