Reply to Objection 2: When Christ's Passion was not as yet
consummated actually but only in the faith of believers, Baptism
proportionately caused the gates to be opened, not in fact but in
hope. For the baptized who died then looked forward, with a sure
hope, to enter the heavenly kingdom.
Reply to Objection 3: The baptized are subject to death and the
penalties of the present life, not by reason of a personal debt of
punishment but by reason of the state of their nature. And therefore
this is no bar to their entrance to the heavenly kingdom, when death
severs the soul from the body; since they have paid, as it were, the
debt of nature.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.69, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether Baptism has an equal effect in all?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism has not an equal effect in all. For
the effect of Baptism is to remove guilt. But in some it takes away
more sins than in others; for in children it takes away only original
sins, whereas in adults it takes away actual sins, in some many, in
others few. Therefore Baptism has not an equal effect in all.
Objection 2: Further, grace and virtues are bestowed on man by
Baptism. But some, after Baptism, seem to have more grace and
more perfect virtue than others who have been baptized. Therefore
Baptism has not an equal effect in all.
Objection 3: Further, nature is perfected by grace, as matter by form.
But a form is received into matter according to its capacity.
Therefore, since some of the baptized, even children, have greater
capacity for natural gifts than others have, it seems that some
receive greater grace than others.
Objection 4: Further, in Baptism some receive not only spiritual, but
also bodily health; thus Constantine was cleansed in Baptism from
leprosy. But all the infirm do not receive bodily health in Baptism.
Therefore it has not an equal effect in all.
On the contrary, It is written (Eph. 4:5): "One Faith, one Baptism."
But a uniform cause has a uniform effect. Therefore Baptism has an
equal effect in all.
I answer that, The effect of Baptism is twofold, the essential effect,
and the accidental. The essential effect of Baptism is that for which
Baptism was instituted, namely, the begetting of men unto spiritual
life. Therefore, since all children are equally disposed to Baptism,
because they are baptized not in their own faith, but in that of the
Church, they all receive an equal effect in Baptism. Whereas adults,
who approach Baptism in their own faith, are not equally disposed to
Baptism; for some approach thereto with greater, some with less,
devotion. And therefore some receive a greater, some a smaller
share of the grace of newness; just as from the same fire, he
receives more heat who approaches nearest to it, although the fire,
as far as it is concerned, sends forth its heat equally to all.