SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.4.

an unjust cause unknowingly, thinking it just, he is to be excused
according to the measure in which ignorance is excusable.
Reply to Objection 1: The physician injures no man by undertaking
to heal a desperate malady, whereas the advocate who accepts
service in an unjust cause, unjustly injures the party against whom
he pleads unjustly. Hence the comparison fails. For though he may
seem to deserve praise for showing skill in his art, nevertheless he
sins by reason of injustice in his will, since he abuses his art for an
evil end.
Reply to Objection 2: If an advocate believes from the outset that the
cause is just, and discovers afterwards while the case is proceeding
that it is unjust, he ought not to throw up his brief in such a way as
to help the other side, or so as to reveal the secrets of his client to
the other party. But he can and must give up the case, or induce his
client to give way, or make some compromise without prejudice to
the opposing party.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 40, Article 3), it is
lawful for a soldier, or a general to lay ambushes in a just war, by
prudently concealing what he has a mind to do, but not by means of
fraudulent falsehoods, since we should keep faith even with a foe, as
Tully says (De offic. iii, 29). Hence it is lawful for an advocate, in
defending his case, prudently to conceal whatever might hinder its
happy issue, but it is unlawful for him to employ any kind of
falsehood.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is lawful for an advocate to take a fee

for pleading?
Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for an advocate to take a fee for
pleading. Works of mercy should not be done with a view to human
remuneration, according to Lk. 14:12, "When thou makest a dinner or
a supper, call not thy friends . . . nor thy neighbors who are rich: lest
perhaps they also invite thee again, and a recompense be made to
thee." Now it is a work of mercy to plead another's cause, as stated
above (Article 1). Therefore it is not lawful for an advocate to take
payment in money for pleading.
Objection 2: Further, spiritual things are not to be bartered with
temporal things. But pleading a person's cause seems to be a
spiritual good since it consists in using one's knowledge of law.
Therefore it is not lawful for an advocate to take a fee for pleading.
Objection 3: Further, just as the person of the advocate concurs
towards the pronouncement of the verdict, so do the persons of the
judge and of the witness. Now, according to Augustine (Ep. cliii ad
Macedon.), "the judge should not sell a just sentence, nor the
witness true evidence." Therefore neither can an advocate sell a just
pleading.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. cliii ad Macedon.) that "an
advocate may lawfully sell his pleading, and a lawyer his advice."
I answer that, A man may justly receive payment for granting what he
is not bound to grant. Now it is evident that an advocate is not
always bound to consent to plead, or to give advice in other people's
causes. Wherefore, if he sell his pleading or advice, he does not act
against justice. The same applies to the physician who attends on a
sick person to heal him, and to all like persons; provided, however,
they take a moderate fee, with due consideration for persons, for the
matter in hand, for the labor entailed, and for the custom of the
country. If, however, they wickedly extort an immoderate fee, they
sin against justice. Hence Augustine says (Ep. cliii ad Macedon.) that
"it is customary to demand from them restitution of what they have
extorted by a wicked excess, but not what has been given to them in
accordance with a commendable custom."