Because he makes everything common to both. The Gospel itself he calls "the
Gospel of God." And whatever we suffer here, he implies, things present are as
nothing.
"Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith."
This too is encouraging. For if he evinced such faith as to be called
peculiarly Paul's "own" son, he might be confident also with respect to the
future. For it is the part of faith not to be cast down or disturbed, though
circumstances occur that seem contrary to the promises. But observe he says,
"my son," and even "my own son," and yet he is not of the same substance. But
what? Was he of irrational kind? "Well," says one, "he was not of Paul, so this
does not imply 'being of' another." What then? Was he of another substance?
Neither was it so, for after saying "my own son," he adds, "in the faith," to show
that he was really "his own son," and truly from him. There was no difference.
The likeness he bore to him was in respect to his faith, as in human births there
is a likeness in respect of substance. The son is like the father in human beings,
but with respect to God the proximity is greater. For here a father and a son,
though of the same substance, differ in many particulars, as in color, figure,
understanding, age, bent of mind, endowments of soul and body, and in many
other things they may be like or unlike, but there is no such dissimilarity in the
divine Essence. "By commandment." This is a stronger expression than "called",
as we learn from other passages. As he here calls Timothy "my own son," in like
manner he says to the Corinthians, "in Christ Jesus I have begotten you," i.e. in
faith; but he adds the word "own," to show his particular likeness to himself, as
well as his own love and great affection for him. Notice again the "in" applied to
the faith. "My own son," he says, "in the faith." See what an honorable
distinction, in that he calls him not only his "son," but his "own" son.
Ver. 2. "Grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father and Jesus Christ our
Lord."
Why is mercy mentioned here, and not in the other Epistles? This is a
further mark of his affection. Upon his son he invokes greater blessings, with the

anxious apprehension of a parent. For such was his anxiety, that he gives
directions to Timothy, which he has done in no other case, to attend to his bodily
health; where he says, "Use a little wine for your stomach's sake, and your
frequent infirmities" [1 Timothy 5:23] Teachers indeed stand more in need of
mercy.
"From God our Father," he says, "and Jesus Christ our Lord."
Here too is consolation. For if God is our Father, He cares for us as sons, as
Christ says, "What man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give
him a stone?" [Matthew 7:9]
Ver. 3. "As I besought you to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia."
Observe the gentleness of the expression, more like that of a servant than of
a master. For he does not say "I commanded," or "bade" or even "exhorted," but
"I besought you." But this tone is not for all: only meek and virtuous disciples
are to be treated thus. The corrupt and insincere are to be dealt with in a different
manner, as Paul himself elsewhere directs, "Rebuke them with all authority"
[Titus 2:15]; and here he says "charge," not "beseech," but "charge some that
they teach no other doctrine." What means this? That Paul's Epistle which he
sent them was not sufficient? Nay, it was sufficient; but men are apt sometimes
to slight Epistles, or perhaps this may have been before the Epistles were
written. He had himself passed some time in that city. There was the temple of
Diana, and there he had been exposed to those great sufferings. For after the
assembly in the Theater had been dissolved, and he had called to him and
exhorted the disciples, he found it necessary to sail away, though afterwards he
returned to them. It were worth enquiry, whether he stationed Timothy there at
that time. For he says, that "you might charge some that they teach no other
doctrine": he does not mention the persons by name, that he might not, by the
openness of his rebuke, render them more shameless. There were in that city
certain false Apostles of the Jews, who wished to oblige the faithful to observe
the Jewish law, a fault he is everywhere noticing in his Epistles; and this they did