Prophet in his words; "You, O Lord, from the beginning hast founded the earth,
and the heavens are the work of Your hands. They shall perish, but you shall
endure; and they all shall grow old like a garment, and You shall fold them up
like a cloak, and they shall be changed." [Psalm 102:25-26] Isaiah too declares
the same, when he says, "Look to the heaven above, and upon the earth beneath,
for the heavens are as a firmament of smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a
garment, and they that dwell therein shall perish in like manner." [Isaiah 51:6].
Now you see in what sense the creation is "in bondage to vanity," and how it is
to be freed from the ruined state. For the one says, "You shall fold them up as a
garment, and they shall be changed;" and Isaiah says, "and they that dwell
therein shall perish in like manner," not of course meaning an utter perishing.
For neither do they that dwell therein, mankind, that is, undergo such an one, but
a temporary one, and through it they are changed into an incorruptible [1
Corinthians 15:53] state, and so therefore will the creature be. And all this he
showed by the way, by his saying "in like manner" [2 Peter 3:13], which Paul
also says farther on. At present, however, he speaks about the bondage itself, and
shows for what reason it became such, and gives ourselves as the cause of it.
What then? Was it harshly treated on another's account? By no means, for it was
on my account that it was made. What wrong then is done it, which was made
for my sake, when it suffers these things for my correction? Or, indeed, one has
no need to moot the question of right and wrong at all in the case of things void
of soul and feeling. But Paul, since he had made it a living person, makes use of
none of these topics I have mentioned, but another kind of language, as desiring
to comfort the hearer with the utmost advantage. And of what kind is this? What
have you to say? He means. It was evil intreated for your sake, and became
corruptible; yet it has had no wrong done it. For incorruptible will it be for your
sake again. This then is the meaning of "in hope." But when he says, it was "not
willingly" that it was made subject, it is not to show that it is possessed of
judgment that he says so, but that you may learn that the whole is brought about
by Christ's care, and this is no achievement of its own. And now say in what

hope?
Ver. 21. "That the creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption."
Now what is this creation? Not yourself alone, but that also which is your
inferior, and partakes not of reason or sense, this too shall be a sharer in your
blessings. For "it shall be freed," he says, "from the bondage of corruption," that
is, it shall no longer be corruptible, but shall go along with the beauty given to
your body; just as when this became corruptible, that became corruptible also; so
now it is made incorruptible, that also shall follow it too. And to show this he
proceeds. ([εἰς]) "Into the glorious liberty of the children of God." That is,
because of their liberty. For as a nurse who is bringing up a king's child, when he
has come to his father's power, does herself enjoy the good things along with
him, thus also is the creation, he means. You see how in all respects man takes
the lead, and that it is for his sake that all things are made. See how he solaces
the struggler, and shows the unspeakable love of God toward man. For why, he
would say, do you fret at your temptations? You are suffering for yourself, the
creation for you. Nor does he solace only, but also shows what he says to be
trustworthy. For if the creation which was made entirely for you is "in hope,"
much more ought thou to be, through whom the creation is to come to the
enjoyment of those good things. Thus men (3 manuscripts fathers) also when a
son is to appear at his coming to a dignity, clothe even the servants with a
brighter garment, to the glory of the son; so will God also clothe the creature
with incorruption for the glorious liberty of the children.
Ver. 22. "For we know that the whole creation groans and travails in pain
together until now."
Observe, how he shames the hearer, saying almost, Be not thou worse than
the creation, neither find a pleasure in resting in things present. Not only ought
we not to cling to them, but even to groan over the delay of our departure hence.
For if the creation does this, much more ought thou to do so, honored with
reason as you are. But as this was not yet enough to force their attention, he