having become wealthier, we may leave riches to others, and these again to
others after them, and they that follow these to their posterity, becoming rather a
kind of passers on of our possessions and of our money, but not masters.
Hence great is our folly; hence the free are less esteemed than the slaves.
For slaves we reprove, if not for their sake, yet for our own; but the free enjoy
not the benefit even of this care, but are more vile in our estimation than these
slaves. And why do I say, than our slaves? For our children are less esteemed
than cattle; and we take care of horses and asses rather than of children. And
should one have a mule, great is his anxiety to find the best groom, and not one
either harsh, or dishonest, or drunken, or ignorant of his art; but if we have set a
tutor over a child's soul, we take at once, and at random, whoever comes in our
way. And yet than this art there is not another greater. For what is equal to
training the soul, and forming the mind of one that is young? For he that has this
art, ought to be more exactly observant than any painter and any sculptor.
But we take no account of this, but look to one thing only, that he may be
trained as to his tongue. And to this again we have directed our endeavors for
money's sake. For not that he may be able to speak, but that he may get money,
does he learn speaking; since if it were possible to grow rich even without this,
we should have no care even for this.
Do you see how great is the tyranny of riches? How it has seized upon all
things, and having bound them like some slaves or cattle, drags them where it
will?
But what are we advantaged by such accusations against it? For we indeed
shoot at it in words, but it prevails over us in deeds. Nevertheless, not even so
shall we cease to shoot at it with words from our tongue. For if any advance is
made, both we are gainers and you; but if you continue in the same things, all
our part at least has been performed.
But may God both deliver you from this disease, and cause us to glory in
you, for to Him be glory, and dominion, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 60 on Matthew

Matt. XVIII. 15.
"If your brother shall trespass against you, go and tell him his fault between
you and him alone. If he shall hear you, you have gained your brother."
For, since He had used vehement language against them that cause offense,
and on every hand had moved them to fear; in order that the offended might not
in this way on the other hand become supine, neither supposing all to be cast
upon others, should be led on to another vice, soften in themselves, and desiring
to be humored in everything, and run upon the shoal of pride; do you see how
He again checks them also, and commands the telling of the faults to be between
the two alone, lest by the testimony of the many he should render his accusation
heavier, and the other, become excited to opposition, should continue
incorrigible.
Wherefore He says, "Between you and him alone," and, "If he shall hear
you, you have gained your brother." What is, "If he shall hear you?" If he shall
condemn himself, if he shall be persuaded that he has done wrong.
"You have gained your brother." He did not say, You have a sufficient
revenge, but, "You have gained your brother," to show that there is a common
loss from the enmity. For He said not, "He has gained himself only," but, "thou
too hast gained him," whereby He showed that both the one and the other were
losers before this, the one of his brother, the other of his own salvation.
This, when He sat on the mount also, He advised; at one time bringing him
who has given the pain to him that had been pained, and saying, "Be reconciled
to your brother," and at another commanding him that had been wronged to
forgive his neighbor. For He taught men to say, "Forgive us our debts, like as we
forgive our debtors." [Matthew 6:12]
But here He is devising another mode. For not him that gave the pain, does