"genus" of such contraries---thus, for instance, the pupil of the eye
is without color, so as to be in potentiality as regards all colors;
which is not possible in the organ of touch, since it is composed of
the very elements, the qualities of which are perceived by that
sense---or so that the organ is a medium between two contraries, as
much needs be the case with regard to touch; for the medium is in
potentiality to the extremes.
Reply to Objection 4: In the slime of the earth are earth, and water
binding the earth together. Of the other elements, Scripture makes
no mention, because they are less in quantity in the human body, as
we have said; and because also in the account of the Creation no
mention is made of fire and air, which are not perceived by senses of
uncultured men such as those to whom the Scripture was
immediately addressed.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the human body was immediately

produced by God?
Objection 1: It would seem that the human body was not produced
by God immediately. For Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 4), that
"corporeal things are disposed by God through the angels." But the
human body was made of corporeal matter, as stated above (Article
1). Therefore it was produced by the instrumentality of the angels,
and not immediately by God.
Objection 2: Further, whatever can be made by a created power, is
not necessarily produced immediately by God. But the human body
can be produced by the created power of a heavenly body; for even
certain animals are produced from putrefaction by the active power
of a heavenly body; and Albumazar says that man is not generated
where heat and cold are extreme, but only in temperate regions.
Therefore the human body was not necessarily produced
immediately by God.
Objection 3: Further, nothing is made of corporeal matter except by
some material change. But all corporeal change is caused by a
movement of a heavenly body, which is the first movement.
Therefore, since the human body was produced from corporeal
matter, it seems that a heavenly body had part in its production.
Objection 4: Further, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. vii, 24) that man's
body was made during the work of the six days, according to the
causal virtues which God inserted in corporeal creatures; and that
afterwards it was actually produced. But what pre-exists in the
corporeal creature by reason of causal virtues can be produced by
some corporeal body. Therefore the human body was produced by
some created power, and not immediately by God.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 17:1): "God created man out of
the earth."
I answer that, The first formation of the human body could not be by
the instrumentality of any created power, but was immediately from
God. Some, indeed, supposed that the forms which are in corporeal
matter are derived from some immaterial forms; but the Philosopher
refutes this opinion (Metaph. vii), for the reason that forms cannot be