THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.8.

so little that it does not alter the sense of the words; or so great that
it destroys it. But it is easier for the one to happen on the part of the
beginning of the words, and the other at the end.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether it is lawful to add anything to the words

in which the sacramental form consists?
Objection 1: It seems that it is not lawful to add anything to the
words in which the sacramental form consists. For these
sacramental words are not of less importance than are the words of
Holy Scripture. But it is not lawful to add anything to, or to take
anything from, the words of Holy Scripture: for it is written (Dt. 4:2):
"You shall not add to the word that I speak to you, neither shall you
take away from it"; and (Apoc. 22:18,19): "I testify to everyone that
heareth the words of the prophecy of this book: if any man shall add
to these things, God shall add to him the plagues written in this
book. And if any man shall take away . . . God shall take away his
part out of the book of life." Therefore it seems that neither is it
lawful to add anything to, or to take anything from, the sacramental
forms.
Objection 2: Further, in the sacraments words are by way of form, as
stated above (Article 6, ad 2; Article 7). But any addition or
subtraction in forms changes the species, as also in numbers
(Metaph. viii). Therefore it seems that if anything be added to or
subtracted from a sacramental form, it will not be the same
sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, just as the sacramental form demands a certain
number of words, so does it require that these words should be
pronounced in a certain order and without interruption. If therefore,
the sacrament is not rendered invalid by addition or subtraction of
words, in like manner it seems that neither is it, if the words be
pronounced in a different order or with interruptions.
On the contrary, Certain words are inserted by some in the
sacramental forms, which are not inserted by others: thus the Latins
baptize under this form: "I baptize thee in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost"; whereas the Greeks use the
following form: "The servant of God, N . . . is baptized in the name of
the Father," etc. Yet both confer the sacrament validly. Therefore it is
lawful to add something to, or to take something from, the
sacramental forms.
I answer that, With regard to all the variations that may occur in the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.9.

sacramental forms, two points seem to call for our attention. one is
on the part of the person who says the words, and whose intention is
essential to the sacrament, as will be explained further on (Question
64, Article 8). Wherefore if he intends by such addition or
suppression to perform a rite other from that which is recognized by
the Church, it seems that the sacrament is invalid: because he
seems not to intend to do what the Church does.
The other point to be considered is the meaning of the words. For
since in the sacraments, the words produce an effect according to
the sense which they convey, as stated above (Article 7, ad 1), we
must see whether the change of words destroys the essential sense
of the words: because then the sacrament is clearly rendered invalid.
Now it is clear, if any substantial part of the sacramental form be
suppressed, that the essential sense of the words is destroyed; and
consequently the sacrament is invalid. Wherefore Didymus says (De
Spir. Sanct. ii): "If anyone attempt to baptize in such a way as to omit
one of the aforesaid names," i.e. of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
"his baptism will be invalid." But if that which is omitted be not a
substantial part of the form, such an omission does not destroy the
essential sense of the words, nor consequently the validity of the
sacrament. Thus in the form of the Eucharist---"For this is My Body,"
the omission of the word "for" does not destroy the essential sense
of the words, nor consequently cause the sacrament to be invalid;
although perhaps he who makes the omission may sin from
negligence or contempt.
Again, it is possible to add something that destroys the essential
sense of the words: for instance, if one were to say: "I baptize thee in
the name of the Father Who is greater, and of the Son Who is less,"
with which form the Arians baptized: and consequently such an
addition makes the sacrament invalid. But if the addition be such as
not to destroy the essential sense, the sacrament is not rendered
invalid. Nor does it matter whether this addition be made at the
beginning, in the middle, or at the end: For instance, if one were to
say, "I baptize thee in the name of the Father Almighty, and of the
only Begotten Son, and of the Holy Ghost, the Paraclete," the
baptism would be valid; and in like manner if one were to say, "I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost"; and may the Blessed Virgin succour thee, the baptism
would be valid.
Perhaps, however, if one were to say, "I baptize thee in the name of