[Matthew 6:33] Do you see that these things are given by Him in the way of
addition, that we might not faint? For as the athletes have the benefit of careful
attention, even when engaged in the combat, but do not then enjoy entire ease,
living under rules, yet afterwards they enjoy it entire: so God also does not grant
us here to partake of "entire" ease. For even here He does give [some].
4. "But having seen them afar off," he says, "and embraced them." Here he
hints at something mystical: that they received beforehand all the things which
have been spoken concerning things to come; concerning the resurrection,
concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, concerning the other things, which Christ
proclaimed when He came, for these are "the promises" of which he speaks.
Either then he means this, or, that they did not indeed receive them, but died in
confidence respecting them, and they were [thus] confident through Faith only.
"Having seen them afar off": four generations before; for after so many
[generations], they went up out of Egypt.
"And embraced them," says he, and were glad. They were so persuaded of
them as even to embrace [or "salute"] them, from the metaphor of persons on
ship-board seeing from afar the longed-for cities: which, before they enter them,
they take and occupy by words of greeting.

Hebrews 11:10
"For they looked" (he says) "for the city which has foundations, whose
builder and maker is God." Do you see that they received them in this sense, in
their already accepting them and being confident respecting them. If then to be
confident is to receive, it is in your power also to receive. For these, although
they enjoyed not those [blessings], yet still saw them by their longing desire.
Why now do these things happen? That we might be put to shame, in that they
indeed, when things on earth were promised them, regarded them not, but sought
the future "city": whereas God again and again speaks to us of the city which is
above, and yet we seek that which is here. He said to them, I will give you the
things of the present [world]. But when He saw, or rather, when they showed
themselves worthy of greater things, then He no longer suffers them to receive
these, but those greater ones; wishing to show us that they are worthy of greater
things, being unwilling to be bound to these. As if one should promise
playthings to an intelligent child, not that he might receive them, but by way of
exhibiting his philosophy, when he asks for things more important. For this is to
show, that they held off from the land with so great earnestness, that they did not
even accept what was given. Wherefore their posterity receive it on this account,
for themselves were worthy of the land.
What is, "the city which has foundations"? For are not these [which are
visible] "foundations"? In comparison of the other, they are not.
"Whose Builder and Maker is God." O! What an encomium on that city!