formally as good; because the will is naturally ordained to good as to
its proper object. Consequently the will of the angels is referred to
opposites, as to doing many things, or not doing them. But they have
no tendency to opposites with regard to God Himself, Whom they
see to be the very nature of goodness; but in all things their aim is
towards God, which ever alternative they choose, that is not sinful.
Reply to Objection 3: Free-will in its choice of means to an end is
disposed just as the intellect is to conclusions. Now it is evident that
it belongs to the power of the intellect to be able to proceed to
different conclusions, according to given principles; but for it to
proceed to some conclusion by passing out of the order of the
principles, comes of its own defect. Hence it belongs to the
perfection of its liberty for the free-will to be able to choose between
opposite things, keeping the order of the end in view; but it comes of
the defect of liberty for it to choose anything by turning away from
the order of the end; and this is to sin. Hence there is greater liberty
of will in the angels, who cannot sin, than there is in ourselves, who
can sin.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether the beatified angels advance in

beatitude?
Objection 1: It would seem that the beatified angels can advance in
beatitude. For charity is the principle of merit. But there is perfect
charity in the angels. Therefore the beatified angels can merit. Now,
as merit increases, the reward of beatitude increases. Therefore the
beatified angels can progress in beatitude.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i) that "God
makes use of us for our own gain, and for His own goodness. The
same thing happens to the angels, whom He uses for spiritual
ministrations"; since "they are all ministering spirits, sent to minister
for them who shall receive the inheritance of salvation" (Heb. 1:14).
This would not be for their profit were they not to merit thereby, nor
to advance to beatitude. It remains, then, that the beatified angels
can merit, and can advance in beatitude.
Objection 3: Further, it argues imperfection for anyone not
occupying the foremost place not to be able to advance. But the
angels are not in the highest degree of beatitude. Therefore if unable
to ascend higher, it would appear that there is imperfection and
defect in them; which is not admissible.
On the contrary, Merit and progress belong to this present condition
of life. But angels are not wayfarers travelling towards beatitude,
they are already in possession of beatitude. Consequently the
beatified angels can neither merit nor advance in beatitude.
I answer that, In every movement the mover's intention is centered
upon one determined end, to which he intends to lead the movable
subject; because intention looks to the end, to which infinite
progress is repugnant. Now it is evident, since the rational creature
cannot of its own power attain to its beatitude, which consists in the
vision of God, as is clear from what has gone before (Question 12,
Article 4), that it needs to be moved by God towards its beatitude.
Therefore there must be some one determined thing to which every
rational creature is directed as to its last end.
Now this one determinate object cannot, in the vision of God, consist
precisely in that which is seen; for the Supreme Truth is seen by all