angels, nor to be an angel, except in so far as she announced the counsel
of the Father, which was her own also; nor, again, to be with men or in
men, for this too took place before, both in the fathers and in the
prophets; but that the Word itself should be made flesh, that is, should be
made man. In which future mystery, when revealed, was to be the
salvation of those wise and holy men also, who, before He was born of the
Virgin, were born of women; and in which, when done and made known,
is the salvation of all who believe, and hope, and love. For this is "the
great mystery of godliness, which4 was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into glory.". Therefore the Word of God is sent by Him, of whom He is the Word;
He is sent by Him, from whom He was begotten (genitum); He sends who
begot, That is sent which is begotten. And He is then sent to each one,
when He is apprehended and perceived by each, in so far as He can be
apprehended and perceived, in proportion to the comprehension of the
rational soul, either advancing towards God, or already perfect in God.
The Son, therefore, is not properly said to have been sent in that He is
begotten of the Father; but either in that the Word made flesh appeared
to the world, whence He says, "I came forth from the Father, and am
come into the world;" or in that from time to time, He is perceived by the
mind of each, according to the saying, "Send her, that, being present with
me, she may labor with me." What then is born (natum) from eternity is
eternal, "for it is the brightness of the everlasting light;" but what is sent
from time to time, is that which is apprehended by each. But when the
Son of God was made manifest in the flesh, He was sent into this world in
the fullness of time, made of a woman. "For after that, in the wisdom of
God, the world by wisdom knew not God" (since "the light shineth in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not"), it "pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe," and that the Word
should be made flesh, and dwell among us.9 But when from time to time
He comes forth and is perceived by the mind of each, He is said indeed to
be sent, but not into this world; for He does not appear sensibly, that is,
He does not present Himself to the corporeal senses. (For we ourselves,
too, are not in this world, in respect to our grasping with the mind as far
as we can that which is eternal; and the spirits of all the righteous are not

in this world, even of those who are still living in the flesh, in so far as
they have discernment in things divine.) But the Father is not said to be
sent, when from time to time He is apprehended by any one, for He has
no one of whom to be, or from whom to proceed; since Wisdom says, "I
came out of the mouth of the Most High," and it is said of the Holy Spirit,
"He proceedeth from the Father," but the Father is from no one.
29. As, therefore, the Father begat, the Son is begotten; so the Father
sent, the Son was sent. But in like manner as He who begat and He who
was begotten, so both He who sent and He who was sent, are one, since
the Father and the Son are one. So also the Holy Spirit is one with them,
since these three are one. For as to be born, in respect to the Son, means
to be from the Father; so to be sent, in respect to the Son, means to be
known to be from the Father. And as to be the gift of God in respect to the
Holy Spirit, means to proceed from the Father; so to be sent, is to be
known to proceed from the Father. Neither can we say that the Holy
Spirit does not also proceed from the Son, for the same Spirit is not
without reason said to be the Spirit both of the Father and of the Son.
Nor do I see what else He intended to signify, when He breathed on the
face of the disciples, and said, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost." For that
bodily breathing, proceeding from the body with the feeling of bodily
touching, was not the substance of the Holy Spirit, but a declaration by a
fitting sign, that the Holy Spirit proceeds not only from the Father, but
also from the Son. For the veriest of madmen would not say, that it was
one Spirit which He gave when He breathed on them, and another which
He sent after His ascension.15 For the Spirit of God is one, the Spirit of
the Father and of the Son, the Holy Spirit, who worketh all in all. But that
He was given twice was certainly a significant economy, which we will
discuss in its place, as far as the Lord may grant. That then which the
Lord says,—"Whom I will send unto you from the Father,"—shows the
Spirit to be both of the Father and of the Son; because, also, when He had
said, "Whom the Father will send," He added also, "in my name." Yet He
did not say, Whom the Father will send from me, as He said, "Whom I
will send unto you from the Father,"—showing, namely, that the Father is
the beginning (principium) of the whole divinity, or if it is better so
expressed, deity. He, therefore, who proceeds from the Father and from
the Son, is referred back to Him from whom the Son was born (natus).