them is so great as to be an exceeding help, not to ourselves only, but to those
also who are using us despitefully. And in this chiefly stands their excellence,
that while they induce us to suffer wrong, they by the same means teach them
also that do the wrong to control themselves. For while he on his part thinks it a
great thing to take what belongs to others, but you signify to him, that to you it is
easy to give even what he does not ask: while you bring in liberality for a
counterpoise to his meanness, and a wise moderation to his covetousness:
consider what a lesson he will get, being taught not by sayings, but by actual
deeds, to scorn vice and to seek after virtue.
For God will have us profitable not to ourselves alone, but to all our
neighbors as well. Now if you give, and abstainest from suing, you have sought
your own advantage only; but if you give him some other thing, you have made
him too better, and so sent him away. Of this nature is salt, which is what He
would have them to be; seeing it both recruits itself, and keeps all other bodies
with which it may associate: of this nature is light; for it shows objects both to a
man's self and to all others. Forasmuch then as He has set you in the rank of
these things, help thou likewise him who is sitting in darkness, and teach him
that neither before did he take any thing by force: persuade him that he has done
no despite. Yea, for thus you yourself also will be had in more respect and
reverence, if you signify that you gave freely and were not robbed. Make
therefore his sin, through your moderation, an instance of your own bounty.
3. And if you think this a great thing, wait, and you will see clearly, that
neither yet have you attained to perfection. For not even here does He stop with
you, who is laying down the laws of patient endurance, but He proceeds even
further, thus saying,
"If any one shall compel you to go one mile, go with him two."
[Matthew 5:41]
Do you see the height of self-denial? In this at least, that after giving your
coat, and your cloak, not even if your enemy should wish to use your naked
body for hardships and labors, not even so (says He), must thou forbid him. For

He would have us possess all things in common, both our bodies and our goods,
as with them that are in need, so with them that insult us: for the latter comes of
manliness, the former of mercifulness.
Because of this, He said, "If any one shall compel you to go one mile, go
with him two:" again leading you higher up, and commanding you to show forth
the same kind of ambition.
For if the things of which He spoke at the beginning, being far less than
these, have so great blessings pronounced on them; consider what sort of portion
awaits them, who duly perform these, and what they become even before their
rewards, in a human and passible body winning entire freedom from passion.
Since when neither insult, nor blows, nor the spoiling of their property, galls
them; while they give way to no such thing, but rather add in large measure to
their endurance; reflect what kind of training their soul is undergoing.
On this account then, as in regard of blows, as in regard of our goods, so in
this case also, He has bidden us act. "For why," says He, "do I mention insult,
and property? Though he should want to make use of your very own limbs for
toil and weary work, and this unjustly, do thou again conquer and overpass His
unjust desire."
For "to compel" is this, to drag unjustly and without any reason, and by way
of despite. Nevertheless, for this also be thou ready in your station, so as to
suffer more than the other would fain do to you.
"Give to him that asks you, and from him that would borrow of you, turn not
thou away." [Matthew 5:42]
These last are less than what went before; but marvel not, for this He is ever
wont to do, mingling the small with the great. And if these be little in
comparison with those, let them hearken, who take the goods of others, who
distribute their own among harlots, and kindle to themselves a double fire, both
by the unrighteous income, and by the pernicious outlay.
But by "borrowing," here, He means not the compact with usury, but the
use merely. And elsewhere He even amplifies it, saying that we should give to