nothing over-subtly, the man who devises no evil. Let us listen then to the
blessed Paul, and let us pity, yea, let us weep for the bitter-minded, and let us
practice every method, let us do everything to extirpate this vice from their
souls. For how is it not absurd, that when there is bile within us (though that
indeed is a useful element, for without bile a man cannot possibly exist, that bile,
I mean, which is an element of his nature,) how then, I say, is it not absurd that
we should do all we can to get rid of this, though we are so highly benefited by
it; and yet that we should do nothing, nor take any pains, to get rid of that which
is in the soul, though it is in no case beneficial, but even in the highest degree
injurious. He that thinks that he is "wise among you," says he, "let him become a
fool, that he may become wise." [1 Corinthians 3:18] Hearken too again to what
Luke says, "They did take their food with gladness and singleness of heart,
praising God, and having favor with all the people." [Acts 2:46-47] Why, do we
not see even now that the simple and guileless enjoy the common esteem of all?
No one envies such an one when he is in prosperity, no one tramples upon him
when he is in adversity, but all rejoice with him when he does well, and grieve
with him in misfortune. Whereas whenever a bitter man fares prosperously, one
and all lament it, as though some evil thing happened; but if he is unfortunate,
one and all rejoice. Let us then pity them, for they have common enemies all
over the world. Jacob was a guileless man, yet he overcame the treacherous
Esau. "For into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter." [Wisdom 1:4] "Let all
bitterness be put away from you." Let not even a remnant remain, for it will be
sure, if stirred, as if from a smouldering brand, to turn all within to an entire
blaze. Let us then distinctly understand what this bitterness is. Take, for
example, the hollow-hearted man, the crafty, the man who is on the watch to do
mischief, the man of evil suspicion. From him then "wrath" and "anger" are ever
produced; for it is not possible for a soul like this to be in tranquillity, but the
very root of "anger" and "wrath" is "bitterness." The man of this character is
both sullen, and never unbends his soul; he is always moody, always gloomy.
For as I was saying, they themselves are the first to reap the fruit of their own

evil ways.
"And clamor," he adds.
What now, and do you take away clamor also? Yes, for the mild man must
needs be of such a character, because clamor carries anger, as a horse his rider;
trip the horse, and you will throw the rider.
Moral. This let women above all attend to, them who on every occasion cry
aloud and bawl. There is but one thing in which it is useful to cry aloud, in
preaching and in teaching. But in no other case whatever, no, not even in prayer.
And if you would learn a practical lesson, never cry aloud at all, and then will
you never be angry at all. Behold a way to keep your temper; for as it is not
possible that the man that does not cry out should be enraged, so is it not that the
man who does cry out should be otherwise than enraged. For tell me not of a
man being implacable, and revengeful, and of pure natural bitterness, and natural
choler. We are now speaking of the sudden paroxysm of this passion.
It contributes then no little to this end, to discipline the soul never to raise
the voice and cry aloud at all. Cut off clamor, and you will clip the wings of
anger, thou dost repress the first rising of the heart. For as it is impossible for a
man to wrestle without lifting up his hands, so is it not possible that he should be
entangled in a quarrel without lifting up his voice. Bind the hands of the boxer,
and then bid him strike. He will be unable to do so. So likewise will wrath be
disarmed. But clamor raises it, even where it does not exist. And hence it is
especially that the female sex are so easily overtaken in it. Women, whenever
they are angry with their maid-servants, fill the whole house with their own
clamor. And oftentimes too, if the house happens to be built along a narrow
street, then all the passers-by hear the mistress scolding, and the maid weeping
and wailing. What can possibly be more disgraceful than the sound of those
wailings? What in the world has happened there? All the women round
immediately peep in and one of them says, "Such a one is beating her own
maid." Whatever can be more shameless than this? "What then, ought one not to
strike at all?" No, I say not so, (for it must be done,) but then it must be neither