Divine will, to which the last end is to be referred: as every desire of
a subordinate ought to be regulated by the will of his superior; for
instance, the soldier's will, according to the will of his commanding
officer. Thus only in the Divine will can there be no sin; whereas
there can be sin in the will of every creature; considering the
condition of its nature.
Reply to Objection 1: In the angels there is no potentiality to natural
existence. Yet there is potentiality in their intellective part, as
regards their being inclined to this or the other object. In this respect
there can be evil in them.
Reply to Objection 2: The heavenly bodies have none but a natural
operation. Therefore as there can be no evil of corruption in their
nature; so neither can there be evil of disorder in their natural action.
But besides their natural action there is the action of free-will in the
angels, by reason of which evil may be in them.
Reply to Objection 3: It is natural for the angel to turn to God by the
movement of love, according as God is the principle of his natural
being. But for him to turn to God as the object of supernatural
beatitude, comes of infused love, from which he could be turned
away by sinning.
Reply to Objection 4: Mortal sin occurs in two ways in the act of freewill. First, when something evil is chosen; as man sins by choosing
adultery, which is evil of itself. Such sin always comes of ignorance
or error; otherwise what is evil would never be chosen as good. The
adulterer errs in the particular, choosing this delight of an inordinate
act as something good to be performed now, from the inclination of
passion or of habit; even though he does not err in his universal
judgment, but retains a right opinion in this respect. In this way there
can be no sin in the angel; because there are no passions in the
angels to fetter reason or intellect, as is manifest from what has been
said above (Question 59, Article 4); nor, again, could any habit
inclining to sin precede their first sin. In another way sin comes of
free-will by choosing something good in itself, but not according to
proper measure or rule; so that the defect which induces sin is only
on the part of the choice which is not properly regulated, but not on
the part of the thing chosen; as if one were to pray, without heeding
the order established by the Church. Such a sin does not
presuppose ignorance, but merely absence of consideration of the
things which ought to be considered. In this way the angel sinned,

by seeking his own good, from his own free-will, insubordinately to
the rule of the Divine will.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether only the sin of pride and envy can exist

in an angel?
Objection 1: It would seem that there can be other sins in the angels
besides those of pride and envy. Because whosoever can delight in
any kind of sin, can fall into the sin itself. But the demons delight
even in the obscenities of carnal sins; as Augustine says (De Civ.
Dei xiv, 3). Therefore there can also be carnal sins in the demons.
Objection 2: Further, as pride and envy are spiritual sins, so are
sloth, avarice, and anger. But spiritual sins are concerned with the
spirit, just as carnal sins are with the flesh. Therefore not only can
there be pride and envy in the angels; but likewise sloth and avarice.
Objection 3: Further, according to Gregory (Moral. xxxi), many vices
spring from pride; and in like manner from envy. But, if the cause is
granted, the effect follows. If, therefore, there can be pride and envy
in the angels, for the same reason there can likewise be other vices
in them.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 3) that the devil "is
not a fornicator nor a drunkard, nor anything of the like sort; yet he
is proud and envious."
I answer that, Sin can exist in a subject in two ways: first of all by
actual guilt, and secondly by affection. As to guilt, all sins are in the
demons; since by leading men to sin they incur the guilt of all sins.
But as to affection only those sins can be in the demons which can
belong to a spiritual nature. Now a spiritual nature cannot be
affected by such pleasures as appertain to bodies, but only by such
as are in keeping with spiritual things; because nothing is affected
except with regard to something which is in some way suited to its
nature. But there can be no sin when anyone is incited to good of the
spiritual order; unless in such affection the rule of the superior be
not kept. Such is precisely the sin of pride---not to be subject to a
superior when subjection is due. Consequently the first sin of the
angel can be none other than pride.
Yet, as a consequence, it was possible for envy also to be in them,
since for the appetite to tend to the desire of something involves on
its part resistance to anything contrary. Now the envious man