truly, and a shame! And then, "an eye," say they, "has caught the child."
Where will these satanical doings end? How will not the Greeks laugh?
How will they not gibe when we say unto them, "Great is the virtue of the
Cross"; how will they be won, when they see us having recourse to those things,
which themselves laugh to scorn? Was it for this that God gave physicians and
medicines? What then? Suppose they do not cure him, but the child depart?
Whither will he depart? Tell me, miserable and wretched one! Will he depart to
the demons? Will he depart to some tyrant? Will he not depart to heaven? Will
he not depart to his own Lord? Why then do you grieve? Why do you weep?
Why do you mourn? Why do you love your infant more than your Lord? Is it not
through Him that you have this also? Why are you ungrateful? Do you love the
gift more than the Giver? "But I am weak," she replies, "and cannot bear the fear
of God." Well, if in bodily evils the greater covers the less, much rather in the
soul, fear destroyed fear, and sorrow, sorrow. Was the child beautiful? But be it
what it may, not more beauteous is he than Isaac: and he too was an only one.
Was it born in your old age? So too was he. But is it fair? Well: however fair it
may be, it is not lovelier than Moses [Acts 7:20], who drew even barbarian eyes
unto a tender love of him, and this too at a time of life when beauty is not yet
disclosed; and yet this beloved thing did the parents cast into the river. You
indeed both see it laid out, and deliver it to the burying, and go to its monument;
but they did not so much as know whether it would be food for fishes, or for
dogs, or for other beasts that prey in the sea; and this they did, knowing as yet
nothing of the Kingdom, nor of the Resurrection.
But suppose it is not an only child; but that after you have lost many, this
also has departed. But not so sudden is your calamity as was Job's, and (his was)
of sadder aspect? It is not when a roof has fallen in, it is not as they are feasting
the while, it is not following on the tidings of other calamities.
But was it beloved by you? But not more so than Joseph, the devoured of
wild beasts; but still the father bore the calamity, and that which followed it, and
the next to that. He wept; but acted not with impiety; he mourned, but he uttered

not discontent, but stayed at those words, saying, "Joseph is not, Simeon is not,
and will you take Benjamin away? All these things are against me." [Genesis
42:36] Do you see how the constraint of famine prevailed with him to be
regardless of his children? And does not the fear of God prevail with you as
much as famine?
Weep: I do not forbid you: but anything blasphemous neither say nor do. Be
your child what he may, he is not like Abel; and yet nought of this kind did
Adam say; although that calamity was a sore one, that his brother should have
killed him. But I am reminded of others also that have killed their brothers;
when, for instance, Absalom killed Amnon the eldest born [2 Samuel 13], and
King David loved his child, and sat indeed in sackcloth and ashes, but he neither
brought soothsayers, nor enchanters, (although there were such then, as Saul
shows,) but he made supplication to God. So do thou likewise: as that just man
did, so do thou also; the same words say thou, when your child is dead, "I shall
go to him, but he will not come to me." [2 Samuel 12:23] This is true wisdom,
this is affection. However much you may love your child, you will not love so
much as he did then. For even though his child were born of adultery, yet that
blessed man's love of the mother was at its height, and you know that the
offspring shares the love of the parents. And so great was his love toward it, that
he even wished it to live, though it would be his own accuser, but still he gave
thanks to God. What, do you think, did Rebecca suffer, when his brother
threatened Jacob, and she grieved not her husband, but bade him send her son
away? [Genesis 27:46; 28:1] When you have suffered any calamity, think on
what is worse than it; and you will have a sufficient consolation; and consider
with yourself, what if he had died in battle? What if in fire? And whatsoever our
sufferings may be, let us think upon things yet more fearful, and we shall have
comfort sufficient, and let us ever look around us on those who have undergone
more terrible things, and if we ourselves have ever suffered heavier calamities.
So does Paul also exhort us; as when he says, "You have not yet resisted unto
blood, striving against sin" [Hebrews 12:4]: and again, "There has no temptation