conversion, cohabit with his wife if she were a Gentile, but not if she
were a Jewess, unless she promised to be converted. This is the
sense of that decree. Now, however, they are on a par, namely
Gentiles and Jews, because both are obstinate; and therefore unless
the unbelieving wife be willing to be converted, he is not allowed to
cohabit with her, be she Gentile or Jew.
Reply to Objection 3: Non-baptized unbelievers are not bound by the
laws of the Church, but they are bound by the ordinances of the
Divine law. Hence unbelievers who have married within the degrees
forbidden by the Divine law, whether both or one of them be
converted to the faith, cannot continue in a like marriage. But if they
have married within the degrees forbidden by a commandment of the
Church, they can remain together if both be converted, or if one be
converted and there be hope of the other's conversion.
Reply to Objection 4: To have several wives is contrary to the natural
law by which even unbelievers are bound. Wherefore an unbeliever
is not truly married save to her whom he married first. Consequently
if he be converted with all his wives, he may remain with the first,
and must put the others away. If, however, the first refuse to be
converted, and one of the others be converted, he has the same right
to marry her again as he would have to marry another. We shall treat
of this matter further on (Article 5).
Reply to Objection 5: To divorce a wife is contrary to the law of
nature, wherefore it is not lawful for an unbeliever to divorce his
wife. Hence if he be converted after divorcing one and marrying
another, the same judgment is to be pronounced in this case as in
the case of a man who had several wives, because if he wish to be
converted he is bound to take the first whom he had divorced and to
put the other away.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether a believer can, after his conversion, put

away his unbelieving wife if she be willing to cohabit with him
without insult to the Creator?
Objection 1: It would seem that a believer, after his conversion,
cannot put away his unbelieving wife if she be willing to cohabit with
him without insult to the Creator. For the husband is more bound to
his wife than a slave to his master. But a converted slave is not freed
from the bond of slavery, as appears from 1 Cor. 7:21; 1 Tim. 6:1.
Therefore neither can a believing husband put away his unbelieving
wife.
Objection 2: Further, no one may act to another's prejudice without
the latter's consent. Now the unbelieving wife had a right in the body
of her unbelieving husband. If, then, her husband's conversion to the
faith could be prejudicial to the wife, so that he would be free to put
her away, the husband could not be converted to the faith without
his wife's consent, even as he cannot receive orders or vow
continence without her consent.
Objection 3: Further, if a man, whether slave or free, knowingly
marry a bondwoman, he cannot put her away on account of her
different condition. Since, then, the husband, when he married an
unbeliever, knew that she was an unbeliever, it would seem that in
like manner he cannot put her away on account of her unbelief.
Objection 4: Further, a father is in duty bound to work for the
salvation of his children. But if he were to leave his unbelieving wife,
the children of their union would remain with the mother, because
"the offspring follows the womb," and thus their salvation would be
imperiled. Therefore he cannot lawfully put away his unbelieving
wife.
Objection 5: Further, an adulterous husband cannot put away an
adulterous wife, even after he has done penance for his adultery.
Therefore if an adulterous and an unbelieving husband are to be
judged alike, neither can the believer put aside the unbeliever, even
after his conversion to the faith.
On the contrary, are the words of the Apostle (1 Cor. 7:15,16).