Secondly, he proposes that otherness is properly the principle of plurality, because,
except for it, understanding of plurality is impossible; and according to this principle is the
Catholic explanation of divine unity: for if a proper cause is taken away, so also is the effect. If,

therefore, in the three Persons there is no otherness of Deity, there will be no plurality, but unity.

Next, he proves what was supposed, namely, that otherness is the proper principle of
plurality, when he says, "In fact, the difference between three or more things." And the reason is
that in all things that differ in genus or species or number, there is some otherness or difference
which is the cause of plurality or, diversity. But all plural things, whether three or more, are
diverse either generically, specifically, or numerically; therefore some kind of otherness is the
principle of all plurality.

In explaining this, he does three things. First, he states the minor; secondly its proof,
beginning, "In as many ways as things are the same, in the same number of ways they are said to
be diverse." This is [the demonstration of] the proof: In as many ways as things are said to be the
same, in the same number of ways they are said to be diverse. But things are said to be the same
in three ways, namely, in genus, species, and number. Therefore things are said to be diverse in
the same number of ways. The first is supposed from what is stated in I Topic., that as much is
said of one of two opposites as is said of the other: and from the saying of X Metaph., that the
same and different are opposites.

The second is made clear by examples and supposes what is said in I Topic.

Thirdly, he proves the major in regard to that point which might be held in doubt, saying:
"But a variety of accidents brings about numerical difference." That the diversity of those things
which are diverse according to genus or species must have as principle some otherness, is
evident from the name itself. For from the fact that things are of different genera it is evident that
a different, or other, genus belongs to each; and if they differ in species, it is because they are
contained under other species. But in the case of things which are said to be diverse numerically,
it is not evident from the name itself that otherness is the principle of plurality. Furthermore, it
might rather appear to be the converse according to the name and that plurality, which is
designated by number, might be the principle of diversity, since things numerically different are
different according to the same name employed when difference is by genus or species:
Therefore, to prove the major of his syllogism, he shows that this difference by which things are
said to differ numerically is produced by a certain kind of otherness or variety. He proves this by
the fact that in three men who agree in genus and species, but who differ numerically, there is
found accidental otherness, just as between man and ox there is specific otherness and between
man and stone generic otherness. Wherefore, as man and ox differ specifically, so two men differ
accidentally.