that we are to be punished without end for sinning a short time here? How, I ask,
is it that in this world, those who in a short moment of time have done one
murder, are condemned to constant punishment in the mines? "But it is not God
that does this," it may be said. How then came He to keep the man with a palsy
for thirty and eight years in so great punishments? For that it was for sins that He
punished him, hear what He says, "Behold, you are made whole, sin no more."
[John 5:14] Still it is said, he found a release. But the case is not so with the
other life. For that there, there will never be any release, hear from His own
mouth, "Their worm will not die, nor their fire be quenched." [Mark 9:44] And
"these shall go into everlasting life, but these into everlasting punishment."
[Matthew 25:46] Now if the life be eternal, the punishment is eternal. Do you
see not how severely He threatened the Jews? Then have the things threatened
come to pass, or were those that were told them a mere talk? "One stone shall
not remain upon another." [Luke 21:6] And has it remained? But what, when He
says, "There shall be tribulation such as has not been?" [Matthew 24:21] Has it
not come then? Read the history of Josephus, and you will not be able to draw
your breath even, at only hearing what they suffered for their doings. This I say,
not that I may pain you, but that I may make you secure, and lest by having
humored you overmuch, I should but make a way for the endurance of sorer
punishments. For why, pray, do you not deem it right you should be punished for
sinning? Hath He not told you all beforehand? Hath He not threatened you? Not
come to your aid? not done things even without number for your salvation's
sake? Gave He you not the laver of Regeneration, and forgave He not all your
former sins? Hath He not after this forgiveness, and the laver, also given you the
succor of repentance if you sin? Hath He not made the way to forgiveness of
sins, even after all this, easy to you? Hear then what He has enjoined: "If you
forgive your neighbor, I also will forgive you" [Matthew 6:14], He says. What
hardship is there in this? "If you judge the cause of the fatherless, and see that
the widow have right, come and let us converse together," He says, "and if your
sins be as purple, I will make them white as snow." [Isaiah 1:17-18] What labor

is there here? "Tell your sins, that you may be justified." [Isaiah 43:26,
Septuagint] What hardship is there in this? "Redeem your sins with alms."
[Daniel 4:24] What toilsomeness is there in this? The Publican said, "Be merciful
to me a sinner," and "went down home justified." [Luke 18:13-14] What labor is
it to imitate the Publican? And will you not be persuaded even after this that
there is punishment and vengeance? At that rate you will deny that even the
devil is punished. For, "Depart," He says, "into the fire prepared for the devil
and his angels." [Matthew 25:41] Now if there be no hell, then neither is he
punished. But if he is punished, it is plain that we shall also. For we also have
disobeyed, even if it be not in the same way. And how do you come not to be
afraid to speak such daring things? For when you say that God is merciful, and
does not punish, if He should punish he will be found in your case to be no
longer merciful. See then unto what language the devil leads you? And what are
the monks that have taken up with the mountains, and yield examples of such
manifold self-denial, to go away without their crown? For if the wicked are not
to be punished, and there is no recompense made to any one, some one else will
say, perhaps, that neither are the good crowned. Nay, it will be said, For this is
suitable with God, that there should be a kingdom only, and not a hell. Well then,
shall the whoremonger, and the adulterer, and the man who has done evils
unnumbered, enjoy the same advantages with the man who has exhibited
soberness and holiness, and Paul is to stand with Nero, or rather even the devil
with Paul? For if there be no hell and yet there will be a Resurrection of all, then
the wicked will attain to the same good things! And who would say this? Who
even of men that were quite crazed? Or rather, which of the devils even would
say this? For even they confess that there is a hell. Wherefore also they cried out
and said, "Have You come hither to torment us before the time?" [Matthew 8:29]
How then do you come not to fear and tremble, when even the devils
confess what yourself art denying? Or how is it that thou dost not see who is the
teacher of these evil doctrines? For he who deceived the first man, and under the
pretext of greater hopes, threw them out even of the blessings they had in