proceeds.
Ver. 23. "And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the first-fruits of
the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves."
That is, having had a taste of the things to come. For even if any should be
quite stone hard, he means what has been given already is enough to raise him
up, and draw him off from things present, and to wing him after things to come
in two ways, both by the greatness of the things that are given, and by the fact
that, great and numerous as they are, they are but first-fruits. For if the first-fruits
be so great that we are thereby freed even from our sins, and attain to
righteousness and sanctification, and that those of that time both drove out
devils, and raised the dead by their shadow [Acts 5:15], or garments [Acts
19:12], consider how great the whole must be. And if the creation, devoid as it is
of mind and reason, and though in ignorance of these things, yet groans, much
more should we. Next, that he may give the heretics no handle, or seem to be
disparaging our present world, we groan, he says, not as finding fault with the
present system, but through a desire of those greater things. And this he shows in
the words, "Waiting for the adoption." What do you say, let me hear? You
insisted on it at every turn, and cried aloud, that we were already made sons, and
now do you place this good thing among hopes, writing that we must needs wait
for it? Now it is to set this right by the sequel that he says, "to wit, the
redemption of our body." That is, the perfect glory. Our lot indeed is at present
uncertainty to our last breath, since many of us that were sons have become dogs
and prisoners. But if we decease with a good hope, then is the gift unmovable,
and clearer, and greater, having no longer any change to fear from death and sin.
Then therefore will the grace be secure, when our body shall be freed from death
and its countless ailments (or passions). For this is full redemption ([ἀ]
[πολύτρωσις]), not a redemption only, but such, that we shall never again return
to our former captivity. For that you may not be perplexed at hearing so much of
glory without getting any distinct knowledge of it, he partially exposes to your
view the things to come, setting before you the change of your body (Gr.

changing your body), and along with it the change of the whole creation. And
this he has put in a clearer light in another passage, where he says, "Who shall
change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like His glorious Body."
[Philippians 3:21] And in another place again he writes and says, "But when this
mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying
that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory." [1 Corinthians 15:54] But to
show, that with the corruption of the body the constitution of the things of this
life will also come to an end, he wrote again elsewhere, "For the fashion of this
world passes away." [1 Corinthians 7:31]
Ver. 24. "For we are saved by hope," he says.
Now since he had dwelt upon the promise of the things to come, and this
seemed to pain the weaker hearer, if the blessings are all matter of hope; after
proving before that they are surer than things present and visible, and
discoursing at large on the gifts already given, and showing that we have
received the first fruits of those good things, lest we should seek our all in this
world, and be traitors to the nobility that faith gives us, he says, "For we are (Gr.
were) saved by hope." And this is about what he means. We are not to seek our
all in this life, but to have hope also. For this is the only gift that we brought in
to God, believing Him in what He promised shall come, and it was by this way
alone we were saved. If then we lose this hope, we have lost all that was of our
own contributing. For I put you this question, he would say, Were you not liable
for countless sins? Were you not in despair? Were you not under sentence? Were
not all out of heart about your salvation? What then saved you? It was your
hoping in God alone, and trusting to Him about His promises and gifts, and
nothing besides had you to bring in. If it was this then that saved you, hold it fast
now also. For that which afforded you so great blessings, to a certainty will not
deceive you in regard to things to come. For in that it found you dead, and
ruined, and a prisoner, and an enemy, and yet made you a friend, and a son, and a
freeman, and righteous, and a joint-heir, and yielded such great things as no one
ever expected even, how, after such munificence and attachment, will it betray