FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.2.

establishes the mean between passions.
Reply to Objection 2: If by vice we understand a habit of doing evil
deeds, it is evident that no passion is a vice. But if vice is taken to
mean sin which is a vicious act, nothing hinders a passion from
being a vice, or, on the other hand, from concurring in an act of
virtue; in so far as a passion is either opposed to reason or in
accordance with reason.
Reply to Objection 3: Pity is said to be a virtue, i.e. an act of virtue, in
so far as "that movement of the soul is obedient to reason"; viz.
"when pity is bestowed without violating right, as when the poor are
relieved, or the penitent forgiven," as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix,
5). But if by pity we understand a habit perfecting man so that he
bestows pity reasonably, nothing hinders pity, in this sense, from
being a virtue. The same applies to similar passions.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.59, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there can be moral virtue with passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtue cannot be with passion.
For the Philosopher says (Topic. iv) that "a gentle man is one who is
not passionate; but a patient man is one who is passionate but does
not give way." The same applies to all the moral virtues. Therefore all
moral virtues are without passion.
Objection 2: Further, virtue is a right affection of the soul, as health
is to the body, as stated Phys. vii, text. 17: wherefore "virtue is a kind
of health of the soul," as Cicero says (Quaest. Tusc. iv). But the
soul's passions are "the soul's diseases," as he says in the same
book. Now health is incompatible with disease. Therefore neither is
passion compatible with virtue.
Objection 3: Further, moral virtue requires perfect use of reason
even in particular matters. But the passions are an obstacle to this:
for the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "pleasures destroy the
judgment of prudence": and Sallust says (Catilin.) that "when they," i.
e. the soul's passions, "interfere, it is not easy for the mind to grasp
the truth." Therefore passion is incompatible with moral virtue.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 6): "If the will is
perverse, these movements," viz. the passions, "are perverse also:
but if it is upright, they are not only blameless, but even
praiseworthy." But nothing praiseworthy is incompatible with moral
virtue. Therefore moral virtue does not exclude the passions, but is
consistent with them.
I answer that, The Stoics and Peripatetics disagreed on this point, as
Augustine relates (De Civ. Dei ix, 4). For the Stoics held that the
soul's passions cannot be in a wise or virtuous man: whereas the
Peripatetics, who were founded by Aristotle, as Augustine says (De
Civ. Dei ix, 4), maintained that the passions are compatible with
moral virtue, if they be reduced to the mean.
This difference, as Augustine observes (De Civ. Dei ix, 4), was one of
words rather than of opinions. Because the Stoics, through not
discriminating between the intellective appetite, i.e. the will, and the
sensitive appetite, which is divided into irascible and concupiscible,
did not, as the Peripatetics did, distinguish the passions from the