THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.11.

according to the measure of the giving of Christ"---or "as regards
power," by reason of a man having the help of grace for all that
belongs to his office or state, as the Apostle says (Eph. 3:8): "To me,
the least of all the saints, is given this grace . . . to enlighten all
men." And this fulness of grace is not proper to Christ, but is
communicated to others by Christ.
Reply to Objection 1: The Blessed Virgin is said to be full of grace,
not on the part of grace itself---since she had not grace in its
greatest possible excellence---nor for all the effects of grace; but she
is said to be full of grace in reference to herself, i.e. inasmuch as she
had sufficient grace for the state to which God had chosen her, i.e. to
be the mother of His Only-begotten. So, too, Stephen is said to be
full of grace, since he had sufficient grace to be a fit minister and
witness of God, to which office he had been called. And the same
must be said of others. Of these fulnesses one is greater than
another, according as one is divinely pre-ordained to a higher or
lower state.
Reply to Objection 2: The Apostle is there speaking of that fulness
which has reference to the subject, in comparison with what man is
divinely pre-ordained to; and this is either something in common, to
which all the saints are pre-ordained, or something special, which
pertains to the pre-eminence of some. And in this manner a certain
fulness of grace is common to all the saints, viz. to have grace
enough to merit eternal life, which consists in the enjoyment of God.
And this is the fulness of grace which the Apostle desires for the
faithful to whom he writes.
Reply to Objection 3: These gifts which are in common in heaven,
viz.: vision, possession and fruition, and the like, have certain gifts
corresponding to them in this life which are also common to all the
saints. Yet there are certain prerogatives of saints, both in heaven
and on earth, which are not possessed by all.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether the grace of Christ is infinite?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's grace is infinite. For
everything immeasurable is infinite. But the grace of Christ is
immeasurable; since it is written (Jn. 3:34): "For God doth not give
the Spirit by measure to His Son, namely Christ." Therefore the grace
of Christ is infinite.
Objection 2: Further, an infinite effect betokens an infinite power
which can only spring from an infinite essence. But the effect of
Christ's grace is infinite, since it extends to the salvation of the
whole human race; for He is the propitiation for our sins . . . and for
those of the whole world, as is said (1 Jn. 2:2). Therefore the grace of
Christ is infinite.
Objection 3: Further, every finite thing by addition can attain to the
quantity of any other finite thing. Therefore if the grace of Christ is
finite the grace of any other man could increase to such an extent as
to reach to an equality with Christ's grace, against what is written
(Job 28:17): "Gold nor crystal cannot equal it," as Gregory expounds
it (Moral. xviii). Therefore the grace of Christ is infinite.
On the contrary, Grace is something created in the soul. But every
created thing is finite, according to Wis. 11:21: "Thou hast ordered
all things in measure and number and weight." Therefore the grace
of Christ is not infinite.
I answer that, As was made clear above (Question 2, Article 10), a
twofold grace may be considered in Christ; the first being the grace
of union, which, as was said (Question 6, Article 6), is for Him to be
personally united to the Son of God, which union has been bestowed
gratis on the human nature; and it is clear that this grace is infinite,
as the Person of God is infinite. The second is habitual grace; which
may be taken in two ways: first as a being, and in this way it must be
a finite being, since it is in the soul of Christ, as in a subject, and
Christ's soul is a creature having a finite capacity; hence the being of
grace cannot be infinite, since it cannot exceed its subject. Secondly
it may be viewed in its specific nature of grace; and thus the grace of
Christ can be termed infinite, since it is not limited, i.e. it has
whatsoever can pertain to the nature of grace, and what pertains to
the nature of grace is not bestowed on Him in a fixed measure;