John 18:35
"Am I a Jew? Your own nation and the chief priests have delivered you unto me;
what have you done?"
Here desiring to clear himself of the matter. Then because he had said, "Are
you the King?" Jesus reproving him answers, "This you have heard from the
Jews. Why do you not make accurate enquiry? They have said that I am a
malefactor; ask them what evil I have done. But this you do not, but art simply
framing charges against Me." "Jesus answered him, Do you say this thing of
yourself," or from others? Pilate then cannot at once say that he had heard it, but
simply goes along with the people, saying, "They have delivered you unto me."
"I must needs therefore ask you what you have done." What then says Christ?

John 18:36
"My Kingdom is not of this world."
He leads upwards Pilate who was not a very wicked man, nor after their
fashion, and desires to show that He is not a mere man, but God and the Son of
God. And what says He?
"If My Kingdom were of this world, then would My servants fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews."
He undoes that which Pilate for a while had feared, namely, the suspicion of
seizing kingly power, "Is then His kingdom not of this world also?" Certainly it
is. "How then says He it 'is not'?" Not because He does not rule here, but
because He has his empire from above, and because it is not human, but far
greater than this and more splendid. "If then it be greater, how was He made
captive by the other?" By consenting, and giving Himself up. But He does not at
present reveal this, but what says He? "If I had been of this world, 'My servants
would fight, that I should not be delivered.'" Here He shows the weakness of
kingship among us, that its strength lies in servants; but that which is above is
sufficient for itself, needing nothing. From this the heretics taking occasion say,
that He is different from the Creator. What then, when it says, "He came to His
own"? [John 1:11] What, when Himself says, "They are not of this world, as I
am not of this world"? [John 17:14] So also He says that His kingdom is not
from hence, not depriving the world of His providence and superintendence, but
showing, as I said, that His power was not human or perishable. What then said
Pilate?

John 18:37
"Are you a king then? Jesus answered, You say that I am a King. To this end was
I born."
If then He was born a king, all His other attributes are by Generation, and
He has nothing which He received in addition. So that when you hear that, "As
the Father has life in Himself, so has He given to the Son also to have life" [John
5:26], deem of nothing else but His generation, and so of the rest.
"And for this cause came I, that I should bear witness unto the truth."
That is, "that I should speak this very thing, and teach it, and persuade all
men."
5. But do thou, O man, when you hear these things, and see your Lord
bound and led about, deem present things to be nought. For how can it be
otherwise than strange, if Christ bore such things for your sake, and thou often
canst not endure even words? He is spit upon, and do you deck yourself with
garments and rings, and, if you gain not good report from all, think life
unbearable? He is insulted, bears mockings, and scornful blows upon the cheek;
and do you wish everywhere to be honored, and do you not bear the reproaching
of Christ? Do you not hear Paul saying, "Be imitators of me, even as I also am of
Christ"? [1 Corinthians 11:1] When therefore any one makes a jest of you,
remember your Lord, that in mockery they bowed the knee before Him, and
worried Him both by words and deeds, and treated Him with much irony; but He
not only did not defend Himself, but even repaid them with the contraries, with
mildness and gentleness. Him now let us emulate; so shall we be enabled even to
be delivered from all insult. For it is not the insulter that gives effect to acts of
insult, and makes them biting, but he who is little of soul, and is pained by them.
If you are not pained, you have not been insulted; for the suffering from injuries
depends not on those who inflict, but on those who undergo them. Why do you
grieve at all? If a man has insulted you unjustly, in this case surely you ought not