1 Corinthians 6:11
9. "And such were some of you: but you were washed, but you were
sanctified."
In a way to abash them exceedingly, he adds this: as if he said, Consider
from what evils God delivered us; how great an experiment and demonstration
of loving-kindness He afforded us! He did not limit His redemption to mere
deliverance, but greatly extended the benefit: for He also made you clean. Was
this then all? Nay: but He also "sanctified." Nor even is this all: He also
"justified." Yet even bare deliverance from our sins were a great gift: but now He
also filled you with countless blessing. And this He has done, "In the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ;" not in this name or in that: yea also, "In the Spirit of our
God."
Knowing therefore these things, beloved, and bearing in mind the greatness
of the blessing which has been wrought, let us both continue to live soberly,
being pure from all things that have been enumerated; and let us avoid the
tribunals which are in the forums of the Gentiles; and the noble birth which God
has freely given us, the same let us preserve to the end. For think how full of
shame it is that a Greek should take his seat and deal out justice to you.
But you will say, what if he that is within judge contrary to the law? Why
should he? Tell me. For I would know by what kind of laws the Greek
administers justice, and by what the Christian? Is it not quite plain that the laws
of men are the rule of the Greek, but those of God, of the Christian? Surely then
with the latter there is greater chance of justice, seeing that these laws are even
sent from heaven. For in regard to those without, besides what has been said,
there are many other things also to suspect; talent in speakers and corruption in
magistrates and many other things which are the ruin of justice. But with us,
nothing of this sort.

"What then," you will say, if the adversary be one in high place? Well, for
this reason more than all one ought to go to law in Christian courts: for in the
courts without he will get the better of you at all events. "But what if he
acquiesce not, but both despise those within and forcibly drag the course
without?" Better were it to submit willingly to what you are likely to endure by
compulsion, and not go to law, that you may have also a reward. For, [Matthew
5:40] "If any one will go to law with you, and take away your coat, you shall let
him have your cloak also:" and, [Matthew 5:25] "Agree with your adversary
quickly, while you are with him in the way." And why need I speak of our rules?
For even the pleaders in the heathen courts very often tell us this, saying, "it
were better to make up matters out of court." But, O wealth, or rather, O the
absurd love of wealth! It subverts all things and casts them down; and all things
are to the many an idle tale and fables because of money! Now that those who
give trouble to courts of laws should be worldly men is no marvel: but that many
of those who have bid farewell to the world should do the very same, this is a
thing from which all pardon is cut off. For if you choose to see how far you
should keep from this sort of need, I mean that of the tribunals, by rule of the
Scripture, and to learn for whom the laws are appointed, hear what Paul says; [1
Timothy 1:9] "For a righteous man law is not made, but for the lawless, and
unruly." And if he says these things about the Mosaic Law, much more about the
laws of the heathen.
10. Now then, if you commit injustice, it is plain that you cannot be
righteous: but if you are injured and bear it, (for this is a special mark of a
righteous man,) you have no need of the laws which are without. "How then,"
say you, "shall I be able to bear it when injured?" And yet Christ has
commanded something even more than this. For not only has he commanded
you when injured to bear it, but even to give abundantly more to the wrong-doer;
and in your zeal for suffering ill to surpass his eagerness for doing it. For he said
not, "to him that will sue you at law, and take away your coat, give your coat,"
but, "together with that give also your cloak." But I bid you overcome him, says