SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: Certitude of knowledge varies in various
natures, according to the various conditions of each nature. Because
man forms a sure judgment about a truth by the discursive process
of his reason: and so human knowledge is acquired by means of
demonstrative reasoning. On the other hand, in God, there is a sure
judgment of truth, without any discursive process, by simple
intuition, as was stated in the FP, Question 14, Article 7; wherefore
God's knowledge is not discursive, or argumentative, but absolute
and simple, to which that knowledge is likened which is a gift of the
Holy Ghost, since it is a participated likeness thereof.
Reply to Objection 2: A twofold knowledge may be had about
matters of belief. One is the knowledge of what one ought to believe
by discerning things to be believed from things not to be believe: in
this way knowledge is a gift and is common to all holy persons. The
other is a knowledge about matters of belief, whereby one knows not
only what one ought to believe, but also how to make the faith
known, how to induce others to believe, and confute those who deny
the faith. This knowledge is numbered among the gratuitous graces,
which are not given to all, but to some. Hence Augustine, after the
words quoted, adds: "It is one thing for a man merely to know what
he ought to believe, and another to know how to dispense what he
believes to the godly, and to defend it against the ungodly."
Reply to Objection 3: The gifts are more perfect than the moral and
intellectual virtues; but they are not more perfect than the
theological virtues; rather are all the gifts ordained to the perfection
of the theological virtues, as to their end. Hence it is not
unreasonable if several gifts are ordained to one theological virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the gift of knowledge is about Divine

things?
Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of knowledge is about Divine
things. For Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1) that "knowledge begets,
nourishes and strengthens faith." Now faith is about Divine things,
because its object is the First Truth, as stated above (Question 1,
Article 1). Therefore the gift of knowledge also is about Divine
things.
Objection 2: Further, the gift of knowledge is more excellent than
acquired knowledge. But there is an acquired knowledge about
Divine things, for instance, the science of metaphysics. Much more
therefore is the gift of knowledge about Divine things.
Objection 3: Further, according to Rm. 1:20, "the invisible things of
God . . . are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made." If therefore there is knowledge about created things, it seems
that there is also knowledge of Divine things.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1): "The knowledge of
Divine things may be properly called wisdom, and the knowledge of
human affairs may properly receive the name of knowledge."
I answer that, A sure judgment about a thing formed chiefly from its
cause, and so the order of judgments should be according to the
order of causes. For just as the first cause is the cause of the
second, so ought the judgment about the second cause to be formed
through the first cause: nor is it possible to judge of the first cause
through any other cause; wherefore the judgment which is formed
through the first cause, is the first and most perfect judgment.
Now in those things where we find something most perfect, the
common name of the genus is appropriated for those things which
fall short of the most perfect, and some special name is adapted to
the most perfect thing, as is the case in Logic. For in the genus of
convertible terms, that which signifies "what a thing is," is given the
special name of "definition," but the convertible terms which fall
short of this, retain the common name, and are called "proper"
terms.