something, and this is called merit of "condignity." The second is an
act the result of which is that there is a duty of giving in the giver by
reason of fittingness, wherefore it is called merit of "congruity." Now
since in all gratuitous givings, the primary reason of the giving is
love, it is impossible for anyone, properly speaking, to lay claim to a
gift, if he lack friendship. Wherefore, as all things, whether temporal
or eternal, are bestowed on us by the bounty of God, no one can
acquire a claim to any of them, save through charity towards God: so
that works done without charity are not condignly meritorious of any
good from God either eternal or temporal. But since it is befitting the
goodness of God, that wherever He finds a disposition He should
grant the perfection, a man is said to merit congruously some good
by means of good works done without charity. Accordingly suchlike
works avail for a threefold good, acquisition of temporal goods,
disposition to grace, habituation to good works. Since, however, this
is not merit properly so called, we should grant that such works are
not meritorious of any good, rather than that they are.
Reply to Objection 1: As the Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 14), since
no matter what a son may do, he can never give back to his father
the equal of what he has received from him a father can never
become his son's debtor: and much less can man make God his
debtor on account of equivalence of work. Consequently no work of
ours can merit a reward by reason of its measure of goodness, but it
can by reason of charity, which makes friends hold their
possessions in common. Therefore, no matter how good a work may
be, if it be done without charity, it does not give man a claim to
receive anything from God. On the other hand, an evil deed deserves
an equivalent punishment according to the measure of its malice,
because no evil has been done to us on the part of God, like the
good which He has done. Therefore, although an evil deed deserves
condign punishment, nevertheless a good deed without charity does
not merit condign reward.
Reply to Objection 2:and 3: These arguments consider merit of
congruity; while the other arguments consider merit of condignity.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the aforesaid works avail for the

mitigation of the pains of hell?
Objection 1: It would seem that the aforesaid works do not avail for
the mitigation of the pains of hell. For the measure of punishment in
hell will answer to the measure of guilt. But works done without
charity do not diminish the measure of guilt. Neither, therefore, do
they lessen the pains of hell.
Objection 2: Further, the pain of hell, though infinite in duration, is
nevertheless finite in intensity. Now anything finite is done away with
by finite subtraction. If therefore works done without charity
canceled any of the punishment due for sins, those works might be
so numerous, that the pain of hell would be done away with
altogether: which is false.
Objection 3: Further, the suffrages of the Church are more
efficacious than works done without charity. But, according to
Augustine (Enchiridion cx), "the suffrages of the Church do not
profit the damned in hell." Much less therefore are those pains
mitigated by works done without charity.
On the contrary, Augustine also says (Enchiridion cx): "Whomsoever
they profit, either receive a full pardon, or at least find damnation
itself more tolerable."
Further, it is a greater thing to do a good deed than to omit an evil
deed. But the omission of an evil deed always avoids a punishment,
even in one who lacks charity. Much more, therefore, do good deeds
void punishment.
I answer that, Mitigation of the pains of hell can be understood in two
ways: first, as though one were delivered from the punishment which
he already deserved, and thus, since no one is delivered from
punishment unless he be absolved from guilt, (for an effect is not
diminished or taken away unless its cause be diminished or taken
away), the pain of hell cannot be mitigated by works done without
charity, since they are unable to remove or diminish guilt. Secondly,
so that the demerit of punishment is hindered; and thus the
aforesaid works diminish the pain of hell---first because he who does
such works escapes being guilty of omitting them---secondly,