## On the Priesthood — Book I
1. I had many genuine and true friends, men who understood the laws of
friendship, and faithfully observed them; but out of this large number there was
one who excelled all the rest in his attachment to me, striving to outstrip them as
much as they themselves outstripped ordinary acquaintance. He was one of those
who were constantly at my side; for we were engaged in the same studies, and
employed the same teachers. We had the same eagerness and zeal about the
studies at which we worked, and a passionate desire produced by the same
circumstances was equally strong in both of us. For not only when we were
attending school, but after we had left it, when it became necessary to consider
what course of life it would be best for us to adopt, we found ourselves to be of
the same mind.
2. And in addition to these, there were other things also which preserved
and maintained this concord unbroken and secure. For as regarded the greatness
of our fatherland neither had one cause to vaunt himself over the other, nor was I
burdened with riches, and he pinched by poverty, but our means corresponded as
closely as our tastes. Our families also were of equal rank, and thus everything
concurred with our disposition.
3. But when it became our duty to pursue the blessed life of monks, and the
true philosophy, our balance was no longer even, but his scale mounted high,
while I, still entangled in the lusts of this world, dragged mine down and kept it
low, weighting it with those fancies in which youths are apt to indulge. For the
future our friendship indeed remained as firm as it was before, but our
intercourse was interrupted; for it was impossible for persons who were not
interested about the same things to spend much time together. But as soon as I
also began to emerge a little from the flood of worldliness, he received me with
open arms; yet not even thus could we maintain our former equality: for having

got the start of me in time, and having displayed great earnestness, he rose again
above my level, and soared to a great height.
4. Being a good man, however, and placing a high value on my friendship,
he separated himself from all the rest (of the brethren), and spent the whole of
his time with me, which he had desired to do before, but had been prevented as I
was saying by my frivolity. For it was impossible for a man who attended the
law-courts, and was in a flutter of excitement about the pleasures of the stage, to
be often in the company of one who was nailed to his books, and never set foot
in the market place. Consequently when the hindrances were removed, and he
had brought me into the same condition of life as himself, he gave free vent to
the desire with which he had long been laboring. He could not bear leaving me
even for a moment, and he persistently urged that we should each of us abandon
our own home and share a common dwelling:— in fact he persuaded me, and the
affair was taken in hand.
5. But the continual lamentations of my mother hindered me from granting
him the favor, or rather from receiving this boon at his hands. For when she
perceived that I was meditating this step, she took me into her own private
chamber, and, sitting near me on the bed where she had given birth to me, she
shed torrents of tears, to which she added words yet more pitiable than her
weeping, in the following lamentable strain: My child, it was not the will of
Heaven that I should long enjoy the benefit of your father's virtue. For his death
soon followed the pangs which I endured at your birth, leaving you an orphan
and me a widow before my time to face all the horrors of widowhood, which
only those who have experienced them can fairly understand. For no words are
adequate to describe the tempest-tossed condition of a young woman who,
having but lately left her paternal home, and being inexperienced in business, is
suddenly racked by an overwhelming sorrow, and compelled to support a load of
care too great for her age and sex. For she has to correct the laziness of servants,
and to be on the watch for their rogueries, to repel the designs of relations, to
bear bravely the threats of those who collect the public taxes, and harshness in