However, it must be borne in mind that this "matter" whence genus is derived has in itself both
form and matter. While the logician considers genus only according to its formal aspect, his
definitions are said to be formal; but the natural philosopher considers genus from both aspects.
Hence it sometimes happens that a thing shares in a logical genus in which it would not be
classed according to the natural philosopher. Now, this happens when something by way of
similitude to First Act is found in a material thing, and again in one without matter, and again in a
being altogether different in matter. Thus it is evident that a stone which is in matter in such a
way as to be potential to being, attains to something of similitude to First Act by being
subsistent, and the sun also attains to the same similitude, though being in matter which is

potential to place, but not any longer to being (having subsistent existence); and an angel
likewise, although lacking any kind of matter. Hence the logician, finding in all these beings that
from which a genus derives, places them all in the genus of substance; but the natural
philosopher and the metaphysician, who considers the principles of things, not finding these all
to be in material agreement, says that they differ in genus; as is said in X Metaph.: that
corruptible and incorruptible differ generically and that those beings agree in genus whose matter
is one and among which there is mutual generation.

Thus therefore it is evident in what way matter produces diversity in genus, and form produces
diversity in species. But among individuals of the same species diversity should be considered,
according to that laid down by the Philosopher (VII Metaph.); namely, that just as parts of genus
and species are matter and form, so the parts of the individual are this matter and this form.
Therefore, just as diversity of matter causes diversity in genus, or diversity of form causes
diversity in species, absolutely, so this form and this matter produce diversity in number: but no
form, as such, is of itself. I say, however, "no form, as such," because of the rational soul, which
in a manner is this something of itself, but not merely inasmuch as it is a form. Intellect, in truth,
since it is a form capable of being received into anythingÑas its matter, or as its subjectÑcan
naturally be attributed to many; a thing which is contrary to the nature of that which is this
something; hence it is, made a form by the fact that it is received in matter. But since matter,
considered in itself, is indistinct, it is not possible that it would individuate a form received into it,
except as it is distinguishable. For no form is individuated by the fact that it is received
into'matter, except in so far as it is received into this matter, or it is this distinct form, determined
to this, and at this time.