Reply. In seed are virtually contained all things that do not transcend corporeal power,
as grass, stalk, knots, and the like: from which there is no concluding that the special
element in man which transcends the whole range of corporeal power is virtually
contained in the seed.
Arg. 9. Things that have the same development and the same consummation must
have the same first origin. But in the generation of man we find the same development
and the same consummation: for as the configuration and growth of the limbs
advances, the activities of the soul show themselves more and more: for first appears
the activity of the sentient soul, and last of all, when the body is complete, the activity of
the intelligent soul. Therefore body and soul have the same origin. But the first origin of
the body is in the emission of the male semen: such therefore also is the origin of the
soul.
Reply. All that this shows is that a certain arrangement of the parts of the body is
necessary for the activity of the soul.
Arg. 10. What is conformed to a thing, is set up according to the plan of that to which it
is conformed, as wax takes the impress of a seal. But the body of man and of every
animal is conformed to its own soul, having such disposition of organs as suits the
activities of the power to be exercised through those organs. The body then is formed
by the action of the soul: hence also Aristotle says that the soul is the efficient cause of
the body. This could not be, if the soul were not in the male semen: for the body is
formed by the power that is in that semen: therefore the soul has its origin in that
emission of it.
Reply. That the body is conformed and fashioned according to the soul, and that
therefore the soul prepares a body like unto itself, is a statement partly true and partly
false. Understood of the soul of the generator, it is true: understood of the soul of the
generated, it is false. The formation of the body in its prime and principal parts is not
due to the soul of the generated, but to the soul of the generator, as has been shown.
Arg. 11. Nothing lives except by a soul. But the male semen is alive, of which fact there
are three indications. In the first place, the semen is cut off and detached from a living
being: secondly, there appears in it vital heat and activity: thirdly, the seeds of plants,
committed to earth, could never warm to life from the lifeless earth, had they not life in
themselves.
Reply. The semen is not alive actually, but potentially, and has a soul, not actually, but
virtually. In the process of generation the embryo comes to have a vegetative and
a sentient soul by the virtue of the semen, which souls do not endure, but pass away
and are succeeded by a rational soul.
Arg. 12. If the soul is not before the body (Chap.LXXXIII), nor begins with the
liberation of the semen, it follows that the body is first formed, and afterwards there is