Harvey refers to the cabbalistic books in explanation of this and the following names, but their meanings are very uncertain.

hence he attained to the knowledge of him that is above all. Invincible power was also conferred
on him by the virgin spirit; and all things then rested in him, to sing praises to the great Æon. Hence
also they declare were manifested the mother, the father, the son; while from Anthropos and Gnosis
that Tree was produced which they also style Gnosis itself.
4. Next they maintain, that from the first angel, who stands by the side of Monogenes, the Holy
Spirit has been sent forth, whom they also term Sophia and Prunicus. He then, perceiving that
all the others had consorts, while he himself was destitute of one, searched after a being to whom
he might be united; and not finding one, he exerted and extended himself to the uttermost and
looked down into the lower regions, in the expectation of there finding a consort; and still not
meeting with one, he leaped forth [from his place] in a state of great impatience, [which had come
upon him] because he had made his attempt without the good-will of his father. Afterwards, under
the influence of simplicity and kindness, he produced a work in which were to be found ignorance
and audacity. This work of his they declare to be Protarchontes, the former of this [lower] creation.
But they relate that a mighty power carried him away from his mother, and that he settled far away
from her in the lower regions, and formed the firmament of heaven, in which also they affirm that
he dwells. And in his ignorance he formed those powers which are inferior to himself—angels, and
firmaments, and all things earthly. They affirm that he, being united to Authadia (audacity), produced
Kakia (wickedness), Zelos (emulation), Phthonos (envy), Erinnys (fury), and Epithymia (lust).
When these were generated, the mother Sophia deeply grieved, fled away, departed into the upper
regions, and became the last of the Ogdoad, reckoning it downwards. On her thus departing, he
imagined he was the only being in existence; and on this account declared, "I am a jealous God,
and besides me there is no one." Such are the falsehoods which these people invent.

### Chapter XXX.—Doctrines of the Ophites and Sethians.
1. Others, again, portentously declare that there exists, in the power of Bythus, a certain primary
light, blessed, incorruptible, and infinite: this is the Father of all, and is styled the first man. They
also maintain that his EnnÏa, going forth from him, produced a son, and that this is the son of
man—the second man. Below these, again, is the Holy Spirit, and under this superior spirit the
elements were separated from each other, viz., water, darkness, the abyss, chaos, above which they
declare the Spirit was borne, calling him the first woman. Afterwards, they maintain, the first man,
with his son, delighting over the beauty of the Spirit—that is, of the woman—and shedding light
upon her, begat by her an incorruptible light, the third male, whom they call Christ,—the son of
the first and second man, and of the Holy Spirit, the first woman.