captured malefactors under the law, show their authority to be great, and prevent
them even against their will from following their own devices: but in our case
the wrong-doer must be made better, not by force, but by persuasion. For neither
has authority of this kind for the restraint of sinners been given us by law, nor, if
it had been given, should we have any field for the exercise of our power,
inasmuch as God rewards those who abstain from evil by their own choice, not
of necessity. Consequently much skill is required that our patients may be
induced to submit willingly to the treatment prescribed by the physicians, and
not only this, but that they may be grateful also for the cure. For if any one when
he is bound becomes restive (which it is in his power to be), he makes the
mischief worse; and if he should pay no heed to the words which cut like steel,
he inflicts another wound by means of this contempt, and the intention to heal
only becomes the occasion of a worse disorder. For it is not possible for any one
to cure a man by compulsion against his will.
4. What then is one to do? For if you deal too gently with him who needs a
severe application of the knife, and do not strike deep into one who requires such
treatment, you remove one part of the sore but leave the other: and if on the
other hand you make the requisite incision unsparingly, the patient, driven to
desperation by his sufferings, will often fling everything away at once, both the
remedy and the bandage, and throw himself down headlong, "breaking the yoke
and bursting the band." I could tell of many who have run into extreme evils
because the due penalty of their sins was exacted. For we ought not, in applying
punishment, merely to proportion it to the scale of the offense, but rather to keep
in view the disposition of the sinner, lest while wishing to mend what is torn,
you make the rent worse, and in your zealous endeavors to restore what is fallen,
you make the ruin greater. For weak and careless characters, addicted for the
most part to the pleasures of the world, and having occasion to be proud on
account of birth and position, may yet, if gently and gradually brought to repent
of their errors, be delivered, partially at least, if not perfectly, from the evils by
which they are possessed: but if any one were to inflict the discipline all at once,

he would deprive them of this slight chance of amendment. For when once the
soul has been forced to put off shame it lapses into a callous condition, and
neither yields to kindly words nor bends to threats, nor is susceptible of
gratitude, but becomes far worse than that city which the prophet reproached,
saying, "you had the face of a harlot, refusing to be ashamed before all men."
[Jeremiah 3:3] Therefore the pastor has need of much discretion, and of a myriad
eyes to observe on every side the habit of the soul. For as many are uplifted to
pride, and then sink into despair of their salvation, from inability to endure
severe remedies, so are there some, who from paying no penalty equivalent to
their sins, fall into negligence, and become far worse, and are impelled to greater
sins. It behooves the priest therefore to leave none of these things unexamined,
but, after a thorough inquiry into all of them, to apply such remedies as he has
appositely to each case, lest his zeal prove to be in vain. And not in this matter
only, but also in the work of knitting together the severed members of the
Church, one can see that he has much to do. For the pastor of sheep has his flock
following him, wherever he may lead them: and if any should stray out of the
straight path, and, deserting the good pasture, feed in unproductive or rugged
places, a loud shout suffices to collect them and bring back to the fold those who
have been parted from it: but if a human being wanders away from the right
faith, great exertion, perseverance and patience are required; for he cannot be
dragged back by force, nor constrained by fear, but must be led back by
persuasion to the truth from which he originally swerved. The pastor therefore
ought to be of a noble spirit, so as not to despond, or to despair of the salvation
of wanderers from the fold, but continually to reason with himself and say,
"Peradventure God will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth,
and that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil."
[2 Timothy 2:25] Therefore the Lord, when addressing His disciples, said, "Who
then is the faithful and wise servant?" [Matthew 24:45] For he indeed who
disciplines himself compasses only his own advantage, but the benefit of the
pastoral function extends to the whole people. And one who dispenses money to