as long as it remains here, it can judge right; but when it departs elsewhere, and
is seized by the fever, and is engaged in the pleasure of the thing, it has not its
perception clear, it has not its tribunal uncorrupt. Christ says, "Whosoever he be
of you that renounces not all that he has, he cannot be My disciple" [Luke
14:33]; Mammon says, "Take the bread from the hungry." Christ says, "Cover
the naked" [Isaiah 58:7]; the other says, "Strip the naked." Christ says, "You
shall not hide yourself from your own flesh," [Isaiah 58:7] and those of your own
house; Mammon says, "You shall not pity those of your own seed; though you
see your mother or your father in want, despise them." Why say I father or
mother? "Even your own soul," he says, "destroy it also." And he is obeyed!
Alas! He who commands us cruel, and mad, and brutal things, is listened to
rather than He who bids us gentle and healthful things! For this is hell appointed;
for this, fire; for this, a river of fire; for this, a worm that dies not.
I know that many hear me say these things with pain, and indeed it is not
without pain I say them. But why need I say these things? I could wish the things
concerning the kingdom to be ever my discourse, of the rest, of the waters of
rest, of the green pastures, as the Scripture says, "He makes me to lie down in
green pastures, He leads me beside the still waters" [Psalm 23:2], there He
makes me to dwell. I could wish to speak of the place, whence "sorrow and
sighing shall flee away." [Isaiah 51:11]
I could wish to discourse of the pleasures of being with Christ, though they
pass all expression and all understanding. Yet would I speak of these things
according to my power. But what shall I do? It is not possible to speak
concerning a kingdom to one that is diseased and in fever; then we must needs
speak of health. It is not possible to speak of honor to one that is brought to trial,
for at that time his desire is that he be freed from judgment, and penalty, and
punishment. If this be not effected, how shall the other be? It is for this cause
that I am continually speaking of these things, that we may the sooner pass over
to those other. For this cause does God threaten hell, that none may fall into hell,
that we all may obtain the kingdom; for this cause we too make mention

continually of hell, that we may thrust you onward towards the kingdom, that
when we have softened your minds by fear, we may bring you to act worthily of
the kingdom. Be not then displeased at the heaviness of our words, for the
heaviness of these words lightens our souls from sin. Iron is heavy, and the
hammer is heavy, but it forms vessels fit for use, both of gold and silver, and
straightens things which are crooked; and if it were not heavy, it would have no
power to straighten the distorted substance. Thus too our heavy speech has
power to bring the soul into its proper tone. Let us not then flee from heaviness
of speech, nor the strokes it gives; the stroke is not given that it may break in
pieces or tear the soul, but to straighten it. We know how we strike, how by the
grace of God we inflict the stroke, so as not to crush the vessel, but to polish it,
to render it straight, and meet for the Master's use, to offer it glittering in
soundness, skillfully wrought against that Day of the river of fire, to offer it
having no need of that burning pile. For if we expose not ourselves to fire here,
we must needs be burned there, it cannot be otherwise; "For the day of the Lord
is revealed by fire." [1 Corinthians 3:13] Better is it that you be burned for a little
space by our words, than for ever in that flame. That this will indeed be so, is
plain, and I have ofttimes given you reasons which cannot be gainsaid. We ought
truly to be persuaded from the Scriptures, but forasmuch as some are
contentious, we have also brought forward many arguments from reason.
Nothing hinders that I now mention them, and what were they? God is just. We
all acknowledge this, both Greeks and Jews, and Heretics, and Christians. But
many sinners have had their departure without punishment, many righteous men
have had their departure after suffering ten thousand grievous things. If then God
be just, where will He reward their good to the one, and their punishment to the
other, if there be no hell, if there be no resurrection? This reason then do ye
constantly repeat to them and to yourselves, and it will not suffer you to
disbelieve the resurrection, and whoso disbelieves not the resurrection will take
care to live with all heed so as to obtain eternal happiness, of which may we all
be counted worthy, by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,