FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.5.

Two other beatitudes belong to the works of active happiness, which
are the works of virtues directing man in his relations to his
neighbor: from which operations some men withdraw through
inordinate love of their own good. Hence Our Lord assigns to these
beatitudes rewards in correspondence with the motives for which
men recede from them. For there are some who recede from acts of
justice, and instead of rendering what is due, lay hands on what is
not theirs, that they may abound in temporal goods. Wherefore Our
Lord promised those who hunger after justice, that they shall have
their fill. Some, again, recede from works of mercy, lest they be
busied with other people's misery. Hence Our Lord promised the
merciful that they should obtain mercy, and be delivered from all
misery.
The last two beatitudes belong to contemplative happiness or
beatitude: hence the rewards are assigned in correspondence with
the dispositions included in the merit. For cleanness of the eye
disposes one to see clearly: hence the clean of heart are promised
that they shall see God. Again, to make peace either in oneself or
among others, shows a man to be a follower of God, Who is the God
of unity and peace. Hence, as a reward, he is promised the glory of
the Divine sonship, consisting in perfect union with God through
consummate wisdom.
Reply to Objection 1: As Chrysostom says (Hom. xv in Matth.), all
these rewards are one in reality, viz. eternal happiness, which the
human intellect cannot grasp. Hence it was necessary to describe it
by means of various boons known to us, while observing due
proportion to the merits to which those rewards are assigned.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as the eighth beatitude is a confirmation
of all the beatitudes, so it deserves all the rewards of the beatitudes.
Hence it returns to the first, that we may understand all the other
rewards to be attributed to it in consequence. Or else, according to
Ambrose (Super Luc. v), the kingdom of heaven is promised to the
poor in spirit, as regards the glory of the soul; but to those who
suffer persecution in their bodies, it is promised as regards the glory
of the body.
Reply to Objection 3: The rewards are also arranged in ascending
order. For it is more to possess the land of the heavenly kingdom
than simply to have it: since we have many things without

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.5.

possessing them firmly and peacefully. Again, it is more to be
comforted in the kingdom than to have and possess it, for there are
many things the possession of which is accompanied by sorrow.
Again, it is more to have one's fill than simply to be comforted,
because fulness implies abundance of comfort. And mercy
surpasses satiety, for thereby man receives more than he merited or
was able to desire. And yet more is it to see God, even as he is a
greater man who not only dines at court, but also sees the king's
countenance. Lastly, the highest place in the royal palace belongs to
the king's son.