The divine messenger says to her: "Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with
God. And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his
name Jesus. He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High" (Lk. 1:30-32).
And when the Virgin, disturbed by that extraordinary greeting, asks: "How shall this be,
since I have no husband?" she receives from the angel the confirmation and explanation

of the preceding words. Gabriel says to her: "The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and
the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the child to be born will be
called holy, the Son of God" (Lk. 1:35).

The Annunciation, therefore, is the revelation of the mystery of the Incarnation at the
very beginning of its fulfillment on earth. God's salvific giving of himself and his life, in
some way to all creation but directly to man, reaches one of its high points in the mystery
of the Incarnation. This is indeed a high point among all the gifts of grace conferred in
the history of man and of the universe: Mary is "full of grace," because it is precisely in
her that the Incarnation of the Word, the hypostatic union of the Son of God with human
nature, is accomplished and fulfilled. As the Council says, Mary is "the Mother of the
Son of God. As a result she is also the favorite daughter of the Father and the temple of
the Holy Spirit. Because of this gift of sublime grace, she far surpasses all other creatures,
both in heaven and on earth."

10. The Letter to the Ephesians, speaking of the "glory of grace" that "God, the
Father...has bestowed on us in his beloved Son," adds: "In him we have redemption
through his blood" (Eph. 1:7). According to the belief formulated in solemn documents of
the Church, this "glory of grace" is manifested in the Mother of God through the fact that
she has been "redeemed in a more sublime manner." By virtue of the richness of the
grace of the beloved Son, by reason of the redemptive merits of him who willed to
become her Son, Mary was preserved from the inheritance of original sin. In this way,
from the first moment of her conception- which is to say of her existence-she belonged to
Christ, sharing in the salvific and sanctifying grace and in that love which has its
beginning in the "Beloved," the Son of the Eternal Father, who through the Incarnation
became her own Son. Consequently, through the power of the Holy Spirit, in the order of
grace, which is a participation in the divine nature, Mary receives life from him to whom
she herself, in the order of earthly generation, gave life as a mother. The liturgy does not
hesitate to call her "mother of her Creator" and to hail her with the words which Dante
Alighieri places on the lips of St. Bernard: "daughter of your Son." And since Mary
receives this "new life" with a fullness corresponding to the Son's love for the Mother,
and thus corresponding to the dignity of the divine motherhood, the angel at the
Annunciation calls her "full of grace."