Homiletic resources

156. Some people think they can be good preachers because they know what ought to be said,
but they pay no attention to how it should be said, that is, the concrete way of constructing a
sermon. They complain when people do not listen to or appreciate them, but perhaps they have
never taken the trouble to find the proper way of presenting their message. Let us remember that
“the obvious importance of the content of evangelization must not overshadow the importance of
its ways and means”. Concern for the way we preach is likewise a profoundly spiritual
concern. It entails responding to the love of God by putting all our talents and creativity at the
service of the mission which he has given us; at the same time, it shows a fine, active love of
neighbour by refusing to offer others a product of poor quality. In the Bible, for example, we can
find advice on how to prepare a homily so as to best to reach people: “Speak concisely, say much
in few words” (Sir 32:8).

157. Simply using a few examples, let us recall some practical resources which can enrich our
preaching and make it more attractive. One of the most important things is to learn how to use
images in preaching, how to appeal to imagery. Sometimes examples are used to clarify a certain
point, but these examples usually appeal only to the mind; images, on the other hand, help people
better to appreciate and accept the message we wish to communicate. An attractive image makes
the message seem familiar, close to home, practical and related to everyday life. A successful
image can make people savour the message, awaken a desire and move the will towards the
Gospel. A good homily, an old teacher once told me, should have “an idea, a sentiment, an
image.”

158. Paul VI said that “the faithful… expect much from preaching, and will greatly benefit from it,
provided that it is simple, clear, direct, well-adapted”. Simplicity has to do with the language
we use. It must be one that people understand, lest we risk speaking to a void. Preachers often
use words learned during their studies and in specialized settings which are not part of the
ordinary language of their hearers. These are words that are suitable in theology or catechesis,
but whose meaning is incomprehensible to the majority of Christians. The greatest risk for a
preacher is that he becomes so accustomed to his own language that he thinks that everyone else
naturally understands and uses it. If we wish to adapt to people’s language and to reach them with
God’s word, we need to share in their lives and pay loving attention to them. Simplicity and clarity
are two different things. Our language may be simple but our preaching not very clear. It can end
up being incomprehensible because it is disorganized, lacks logical progression or tries to deal
with too many things at one time. We need to ensure, then, that the homily has thematic unity,
clear order and correlation between sentences, so that people can follow the preacher easily and
grasp his line of argument.