who understands them, will doubtless not be much moved by any of the
many arguments which they have found out against the discovery of
truth. For whereas there are two kinds of knowable things,—one, of those
things which the mind perceives by the bodily senses; the other, of those
which it perceives by itself,—these philosophers have babbled much
against the bodily senses, but have never been able to throw doubt upon
those most certain perceptions of things true, which the mind knows by
itself, such as is that which I have mentioned, I know that I am alive. But
far be it from us to doubt the truth of what we have learned by the bodily
senses; since by them we have learned to know the heaven and the earth,
and those things in them which are known to us, so far as He who created
both us and them has willed them to be within our knowledge. Far be it
from us too to deny, that we know what we have learned by the testimony
of others: otherwise we know not that there is an ocean; we know not that
the lands and cities exist which most copious report commends to us; we
know not that those men were, and their works, which we have learned
by reading history; we know not the news that is daily brought us from
this quarter or that, and confirmed by consistent and conspiring
evidence; lastly, we know not at what place or from whom we have been
born: since in all these things we have believed the testimony of others.
And if it is most absurd to say this, then we must confess, that not only
our own senses, but those of other persons also, have added very much
indeed to our knowledge.
22. All these things, then, both those which the human mind knows by
itself, and those which it knows by the bodily senses, and those which it
has received and knows by the testimony of others, are laid up and
retained in the storehouse of the memory; and from these is begotten a
word that is true, when we speak what we know, but a word that is before
all sound, before all thought of a sound. For the word is then most like to
the thing known, from which also its image is begotten, since the sight of
thinking arises from the sight of knowledge; when it is a word belonging
to no tongue, but is a true word concerning a true thing, having nothing
of its own, but wholly derived from that knowledge from which it is born.
Nor does it signify when he learned it, who speaks what he knows; for
sometimes he says it immediately upon learning it; provided only that the
word is true, i.e. sprung from things that are known.

### CHAP. 13.—STILL FURTHER OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE KNOWLEDGE AND WORD OF OUR MIND, AND THE KNOWLEDGE AND WORD OF GOD

But is it so, that God the Father, from whom is born the Word that is God
of God,—is it so, then, that God the Father, in respect to that wisdom
which He is to Himself, has learned some things by His bodily senses,
and others by Himself? Who could say this, who thinks of God, not as a
rational animal, but as One above the rational soul? So far at least as He
can be thought of, by those who place Him above all animals and all
souls, although they see Him by conjecture through a glass and in an
enigma, not yet face to face as He is. Is it that God the Father has learned
those very things which He knows, not by the body, for He has none, but
by Himself, from elsewhere from some one? or has stood in need of
messengers or witnesses that He might know them? Certainly not; since
His own perfection enables Him to know all things that He knows. No
doubt He has messengers, viz. the angels; but not to announce to Him
things that He knows not, for there is nothing He does not know. But
their good lies in consulting the truth about their own works. And This it
is which is meant by saying that they bring Him word of some things, not
that He may learn of them, but they of Him by His word without bodily
sound. They bring Him word, too, of that which He wills, being sent by
Him to whomever He wills, and hearing all from Him by that word of His,
i.e. finding in His truth what themselves are to do: what, to whom, and
when, they are to bring word. For we too pray to Him, yet do not inform
Him what our necessities are. "For your Father knoweth," says His Word,
"what things ye have need of, before you ask Him." Nor did He become
acquainted with them, so as to know them, at any definite time; but He
knew beforehand, without any beginning, all things to come in time, and
among them also both what we should ask of Him, and when; and to
whom He would either listen or not listen, and on what subjects. And
with respect to all His creatures, both spiritual and corporeal, He does
not know them because they are, but they are because He knows them.
For He was not ignorant of what He was about to create; therefore He
created because He knew; He did not know because He created. Nor did
He know them when created in any other way than He knew them when
still to be created, for nothing accrued to His wisdom from them; but that