it proper to say that `Christ,' `the Lord of glory,' `the Saint of saints,' or even `the Son of
God,' was `born of a virgin,' 'suffered,' `died,' and `was buried.' Therefore they say that
the Blessed Virgin should not be called `mother of God,' or `of the Word of God,' but
`mother of Christ.'
1. Any thoughtful person may see that this theory cannot stand with the truth of the
Incarnation. The theory holds that the Word of God was united with the Man Christ only
by the indwelling of grace and consequent union of wills. But the indwelling of the Word
of God in man does not mean the Word of God being Incarnate: for the Word of God
and God Himself dwelt in all the saints from the beginning of the world, according to the
text: Ye are the temple of the living God, as God says: I will dwell in them (2 Cor vi, 16:
Levit. xxvi, 12). But this indwelling cannot be called an incarnation: otherwise God must
have become incarnate frequently from the beginning of the world. Nor is it enough to
constitute an incarnation, if the Word of God and God dwelt in the Man Christ with more
abundant grace: for greater and less do not make a difference of species in point of
union.
3. Everything that is made anything is that which it is made, as what is made man is
man, and what is made white is white. But the Word of God has been made man (John
i, 14). Therefore the Word of God is man. But, of two things differing in person, or
suppositum, the one cannot possibly be predicated of the other. When it is said
`Man is an animal,' that self-same being which is an animal is man. When it is said,
`Man is white,' some particular man himself is pointed at as being white, although
whiteness is beyond the essential notion of humanity. But in no way can it be said that
Socrates is Plato, or any other of the individuals either of the same or of a different
species. If then the Word has been made flesh, that is, man, it is impossible for there to
be two persons, one of the Word, the other of the Man.
4. No one would say, `I am running,' when some one else was running, except perhaps
figuratively, meaning that another was running in his place. But that man who is called
Jesus (John ix, 11) says of Himself, Before Abraham was, I am (John viii, 58); I and the
Father are one (John x, 30); and sundry other phrases, manifestly proper to the divinity
of the Word. Therefore the person of that Man speaking is the person of the Son of
God.
6. To ascend into heaven is clearly an attribute of Christ as man, who in their sight was
taken up (Acts i, 9). And to descend from heaven is an attribute of the Word of God. But
he who descended, the same is he that hath ascended (Eph. iv, 10).
11. Though a man be called `Lord' by participation in the divine dominion, still no man,
nor any creature whatever, can be called `the Lord of glory': because the glory of
happiness to come is something which God alone by nature possesses, others only by
the gift of grace: hence it is said: The Lord of mighty deeds, he is the king of glory (Ps.
xxiii, 10). But, had they known, never could they have crucified the Lord of glory (1 Cor.
ii, 8). It is true then to say that God was crucified.