we ought, and take heed to our ways, we shall be thought worthy of those high
rewards, which that we may all obtain, God grant through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.

## Homily 6 on First Timothy

1 Timothy 2:1-4
"I exhort therefore that, first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men; for kings, and for all that are in
authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth."
[R.V.: who wills that all men should be saved, etc.]
The Priest is the common father, as it were, of all the world; it is proper
therefore that he should care for all, even as God, Whom he serves. For this
reason he says, "I exhort therefore that, first of all, supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men." From this, two
advantages result. First, hatred towards those who are without is done away; for
no one can feel hatred towards those for whom he prays: and they again are
made better by the prayers that are offered for them, and by losing their
ferocious disposition towards us. For nothing is so apt to draw men under
teaching, as to love, and be loved. Think what it was for those who persecuted,
scourged, banished, and slaughtered the Christians, to hear that those whom they
treated so barbarously offered fervent prayers to God for them. Observe how he
wishes a Christian to be superior to all ill-treatment. As a father who was struck
on the face by a little child which he was carrying, would not lose anything of
his affection for it; so we ought not to abate in our good will towards those who
are without, even when we are stricken by them. What is "first of all"? It means
in the daily Service; and the initiated know how this is done every day both in
the evening and the morning, how we offer prayers for the whole world, for
kings and all that are in authority. But some one perhaps will say, he meant not
for all men, but for all the faithful. How then does he speak of kings? For kings

were not then worshipers of God, for there was a long succession of ungodly
princes. And that he might not seem to flatter them, he says first, "for all men,"
then "for kings"; for if he had only mentioned kings, that might have been
suspected. And then since the soul of some Christians might be slow at hearing
this, and reject the exhortation, if at the celebration of the holy Mysteries it was
necessary to offer prayers for a heathen king, he shows them the advantage of it,
thus at least to reconcile them to the advice, "that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life"; as much as to say, Their safety is a security to us; as also in his
Epistle to the Romans, he exhorts them to obey their rulers, "not for wrath but
for conscience' sake." [Romans 13:5] For God has appointed government for the
public good. When therefore they make war for this end, and stand on guard for
our security, were it not unreasonable that we should not offer prayers for their
safety in wars and dangers? It is not therefore flattery, but agreeable to the rules
of justice. For if they were not preserved, and prospered in their wars, our affairs
must necessarily be involved in confusion and trouble; and if they were cut off,
we must either serve ourselves, or be scattered up and down as fugitives. For
they are a sort of bulwarks thrown up before us, within which those who are
inclosed are in peace and safety.
He says, "supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks." For
we must give thanks to God for the good that befalls others, as that He makes the
sun to shine upon the evil and the good, and sends His rain both upon the just
and the unjust. Observe how he would unite and bind us together, not only by
prayer but by thanksgiving. For he who is urged to thank God for his neighbor's
good, is also bound to love him, and be kindly disposed towards him. And if we
must give thanks for our neighbor's good, much more for what happens to
ourselves, and for what is unknown, and even for things against our will, and
such as appear grievous to us, since God dispenses all things for our good.
Moral. Let every prayer of ours, then, be accompanied with thanksgiving.
And if we are commanded to pray for our neighbors, not only for the faithful,
but for the unbelieving also, consider how wrong it is to pray against your