children. On the other hand, if it be in the state where it is hindered
from receiving its final reward, this is either on account of a defect of
the person, and thus we have purgatory where souls are detained
from receiving their reward at once on account of the sins they have
committed, or else it is on account of a defect of nature, and thus we
have the limbo of the Fathers, where the Fathers were detained from
obtaining glory on account of the guilt of human nature which could
not yet be expiated.
Reply to Objection 1: Good happens in one way, but evil in many
ways, according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv) and the Philosopher
(Ethic. ii, 6): wherefore it is not unfitting if there be one place of
blissful reward and several places of punishment.
Reply to Objection 2: The state of meriting and demeriting is one
state, since the same person is able to merit and demerit: wherefore
it is fitting that one place should be assigned to all: whereas of those
who receive according to their merits there are various states, and
consequently the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 3: One may be punished in two ways for original
sin, as stated above, either in reference to the person, or in reference
to nature only. Consequently there is a twofold limbo corresponding
to that sin.
Reply to Objection 4: This darksome air is assigned to the demons,
not as the place where they receive retribution for their merits, but as
a place befitting their office, in so far as they are appointed to try us.
Hence it is not reckoned among the abodes of which we are treating
now: since hell fire is assigned to them in the first place (Mt. 25).
Reply to Objection 5: The earthly paradise belongs to the state of the
wayfarer rather than to the state of those who receive for their
merits; and consequently it is not reckoned among the abodes
whereof we are treating now.
Reply to Objection 6: This supposition is impossible [FS, Question
89, Article 6]. If, however, it were possible, such a one would be
punished in hell eternally: for it is accidental to venial sin that it be
punished temporally in purgatory, through its having grace annexed
to it: wherefore if it be annexed to a mortal sin, which is without
grace, it will be punished eternally in hell. And since this one who

dies in original sin has a venial sin without grace, it is not unfitting to
suppose that he be punished eternally.
Reply to Objection 7: Diversity of degrees in punishments or rewards
does not diversify the state, and it is according to the diversity of
state that we distinguish various abodes. Hence the argument does
not prove.
Reply to Objection 8: Although separated souls are sometimes
punished in the place where we dwell, it does not follow that this is
their proper place of punishment: but this is done for our instruction,
that seeing their punishment we may be deterred from sin. That
souls while yet in the flesh are punished here for their sins has
nothing to do with the question, because a punishment of this kind
does not place a man outside the state of meriting or demeriting:
whereas we are treating now of the abodes to which souls are
assigned after the state of merit or demerit.
Reply to Objection 9: It is impossible for evil to be pure and without
the admixture of good, just as the supreme good is without any
admixture of evil. Consequently those who are to be conveyed to
beatitude which is a supreme good must be cleansed of all evil.
wherefore there must needs be a place where such persons are
cleansed if they go hence without being perfectly clean. But those
who will be thrust into hell will not be free from all good: and
consequently the comparison fails, since those who are in hell can
receive the reward of their goods, in so far as their past goods avail
for the mitigation of their punishment.
Reply to Objection 1:: The essential reward consists in the glory of
the soul, but the body's glory, since it overflows from the soul, is
entirely founded as it were on the soul: and consequently lack of the
soul's glory causes a difference of state, whereas lack of the body's
glory does not. For this reason, too, the same place, namely the
empyrean, is assigned to the holy souls separated from their bodies
and united to glorious bodies: whereas the same place was not
assigned to the souls of the Fathers both before and after the
glorification of souls.