to fear for; or should he be forced to have the care of others they are easily
counted: and if they be many, yet they are less than those in our Churches, and
they give him who is set over them much lighter anxiety about them, not only on
account of their fewness, but because they are all free from worldly concerns,
and have neither wife nor children, nor any such thing to care about; and this
makes them very deferential to their rulers, and allows them to share the same
abode with them, so that they are able to take in their failings accurately at a
glance and correct them, seeing that the constant supervision of a teacher is no
little help towards advance in virtue.
4. But of those who are subject to the Priest, the greater number are
hampered with the cares of this life, and this makes them the slower in the
performance of spiritual duties. Whence it is necessary for the teacher to sow
every day (so to speak), in order that by its frequency at least, the word of
doctrine may be able to be grasped by those who hear. For excessive wealth, and
an abundance of power, and sloth the offspring of luxury, and many other things
beside these, choke the seeds which have been let fall. Often too the thick
growth of thorns does not suffer the seed to drop even upon the surface of the
soil. Again, excess of trouble, stress of poverty, constant insults, and other such
things, the reverse of the foregoing, take the mind away from anxiety about
things divine; and of their people's sins, not even the smallest part can become
apparent; for how should it, in the case of those the majority of whom they do
not know even by sight?
The Priest's relations with his people involve thus much difficulty. But if
any inquire about his relations with God, he will find the others to be as nothing,
since these require a greater and more thorough earnestness. For he who acts as
an ambassador on behalf of the whole city— but why do I say the city? On
behalf of the whole world indeed— prays that God would be merciful to the sins
of all, not only of the living, but also of the departed. What manner of man ought
he to be? For my part I think that the boldness of speech of Moses and Elias, is
insufficient for such supplication. For as though he were entrusted with the

whole world and were himself the father of all men, he draws near to God,
beseeching that wars may be extinguished everywhere, that tumults may be
quelled; asking for peace and plenty, and a swift deliverance from all the ills that
beset each one, publicly and privately; and he ought as much to excel in every
respect all those on whose behalf he prays, as rulers should excel their subjects.
And whenever he invokes the Holy Spirit, and offers the most dread
sacrifice, and constantly handles the common Lord of all, tell me what rank shall
we give him? What great purity and what real piety must we demand of him?
For consider what manner of hands they ought to be which minister in these
things, and of what kind his tongue which utters such words, and ought not the
soul which receives so great a spirit to be purer and holier than anything in the
world? At such a time angels stand by the Priest; and the whole sanctuary, and
the space round about the altar, is filled with the powers of heaven, in honor of
Him who lies thereon. For this, indeed, is capable of being proved from the very
rites which are being then celebrated. I myself, moreover, have heard some one
once relate, that a certain aged, venerable man, accustomed to see revelations,
used to tell him, that he being thought worthy of a vision of this kind, at such a
time, saw, on a sudden, so far as was possible for him, a multitude of angels,
clothed in shining robes, and encircling the altar, and bending down, as one
might see soldiers in the presence of their King, and for my part I believe it.
Moreover another told me, without learning it from some one else, but as being
himself thought worthy to be both an ear and eye witness of it, that, in the case
of those who are about to depart hence, if they happen to be partakers of the
mysteries, with a pure conscience, when they are about to breathe their last,
angels keep guard over them for the sake of what they have received, and bear
them hence. And do you not yet tremble to introduce a soul into so sacred a
mystery of this kind, and to advance to the dignity of the Priesthood, one robed
in filthy raiment, whom Christ has shut out from the rest of the band of guests?
[Matthew 22:13] The soul of the Priest should shine like a light beaming over
the whole world. But mine has so great darkness overhanging it, because of my