suspicion, and speaks clearly in behalf of the character of the writers.
But if there be anything touching times or places, which they have related
differently, this nothing injures the truth of what they have said. And these things
too, so far as God shall enable us, we will endeavor, as we proceed, to point out;
requiring you, together with what we have mentioned, to observe, that in the
chief heads, those which constitute our life and furnish out our doctrine, nowhere
is any of them found to have disagreed, no not ever so little.
But what are these points? Such as follow: That God became man, that He
wrought miracles, that He was crucified, that He was buried, that He rose again,
that He ascended, that He will judge, that He has given commandments tending
to salvation, that He has brought in a law not contrary to the Old Testament, that
He is a Son, that He is only-begotten, that He is a true Son, that He is of the
same substance with the Father, and as many things as are like these; for
touching these we shall find that there is in them a full agreement.
And if among the miracles they have not all of them mentioned all, but one
these, the other those, let not this trouble you. For if on the one hand one had
spoken of all, the number of the rest would have been superfluous; and if again
all had written fresh things, and different one from another, the proof of their
agreement would not have been manifest. For this cause they have both treated
of many in common, and each of them has also received and declared something
of his own; that, on the one hand, he might not seem superfluous, and cast on the
heap to no purpose; on the other, he might make our test of the truth of their
affirmations perfect.
7. Now Luke tells us also the cause wherefore he proceeds to write: "that
you may hold," says he, "the certainty of the words wherein you have been
instructed;" [Luke 1:4] that is, that being continually reminded you may hold to
the certainty, and abide in certainty.
But as to John, he has himself kept silence touching the cause; yet, (as a
tradition says, which has come down to us from the first, even from the Fathers,)
neither did he come to write without purpose; but forasmuch as it had been the

care of the three to dwell upon the account of the dispensation, and the doctrines
of the Godhead were near being left in silence, he, moved by Christ, then and not
till then set himself to compose his Gospel. And this is manifest both from the
history itself, and from the opening of his Gospel. For he does not begin like the
rest from beneath, but from above, from the same point, at which he was aiming,
and it was with a view to this that he composed the whole book. And not in the
beginning only, but throughout all the Gospel, he is more lofty than the rest.
Of Matthew again it is said, that when those who from among the Jews had
believed came to him, and besought him to leave to them in writing those same
things, which he had spoken to them by word, he also composed his Gospel in
the language of the Hebrews. And Mark too, in Egypt, is said to have done this
self-same thing at the entreaty of the disciples.
For this cause then Matthew, as writing to Hebrews, sought to show nothing
more, than that He was from Abraham, and David; but Luke, as discoursing to
all in general, traces up the account higher, going on even to Adam. And the one
begins with His generation, because nothing was so soothing to the Jew as to be
told that Christ was the offspring of Abraham and David: the other does not so,
but mentions many other things, and then proceeds to the genealogy.
8. But the harmony between them we will establish, both by the whole
world, which has received their statements, and by the very enemies of the truth.
For many sects have had birth, since their time, holding opinions opposed to
their words; whereof some have received all that they have said, while some
have cut off from the rest certain portions of their statements, and so retain them
for themselves. But if there were any hostility in their statements, neither would
the sects, who maintain the contrary part, have received all, but only so much as
seemed to harmonize with themselves; nor would those, which have parted off a
portion, be utterly refuted by that portion; so that the very fragments cannot be
hid, but declare aloud their connection with the whole body. And like as if you
should take any part from the side of an animal, even in that part you would find
all the things out of which the whole is composed—nerves and veins, bones,