John 6:46
"Not that any man has seen God, save He which is of God, He has seen the
Father."
"How then," says some one, "does the Father draw?" This the Prophet
explained of old, when he proclaimed beforehand, and said,

John 6:45
"They shall all be taught of God." [Isaiah 54:13]
Do you see the dignity of faith, and that not of men nor by man, but by God
Himself they shall learn this? And to make this assertion credible, He referred
them to their prophets. "If then 'all shall be taught of God,' how is it that some
shall not believe?" Because the words are spoken of the greater number. Besides,
the prophecy means not absolutely all, but all that have the will. For the teacher
sits ready to impart what he has to all, and pouring forth his instruction unto all.

John 6:44
"And I will raise him up in the last day."
Not slight here is the authority of the Son, if so be that the Father leads, He
raises up. He distinguishes not His working from that of the Father, (how could
that be?) but shows equality of power. As, therefore, after saying in that other
place, "The Father which has sent Me bears witness of Me," He then, that they
might not be over-curious about the utterance, referred them to the Scriptures; so
here, that they may not entertain similar suspicions, He referrs them to the
Prophets, whom He continually and everywhere quotes, to show that He is not
opposed to the Father.
"But what of those," says some one, "who were before His time? Were not
they taught of God? Why then the special application of the words here?"
Because of old they learned the things of God by the hands of men, but now by
the Only-begotten Son of God, and by the Holy Ghost. Then He adds, "Not that
any man has seen the Father, save He which is of God," using this expression
here not with reference to the cause, but to the manner of being. Since had He
spoken in the former sense, we are all "of God." And where then would be the
special and distinct nature of the Son? "But wherefore," says some one, "did He
not put this more clearly?" Because of their weakness. For if when He said, "I
have come down from heaven," they were so offended, what would they have felt
had He added this?

John 6:48
"The bread of life."
He calls Himself, "the bread of life," because He maintains our life both
which is and which is to be, and says, "Whosoever shall eat of this bread shall
live for ever." By "bread" He means here either His saving doctrines and the
faith which is in Him, or His own Body; for both nerve the soul. Yet in another
place He said, "If a man hear My saying, he shall never taste of death." [John
8:51] And they were offended; here they had no such feeling perhaps, because
they yet respected Him on account of the loaves which had been made.
2. And observe how He distinguishes between His bread and the manna, by
causing them to hear the result of each kind of food. For to show that the manna
afforded them no unusual advantage, He added,