THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.3.

is disposed to good in a higher way than is common to all. Hence it
is not hereby proved that Christ had not the virtues, but that He had
them most perfectly beyond the common mode. In this sense
Plotinus gave to a certain sublime degree of virtue the name of
"virtue of the purified soul" (cf. FS, Question 61, Article 5).
Reply to Objection 3: Liberality and magnificence are praiseworthy in
regard to riches, inasmuch as anyone does not esteem wealth to the
extent of wishing to retain it, so as to forego what ought to be done.
But he esteems them least who wholly despises them, and casts
them aside for love of perfection. And hence by altogether
contemning all riches, Christ showed the highest kind of liberality
and magnificence; although He also performed the act of liberality,
as far as it became Him, by causing to be distributed to the poor
what was given to Himself. Hence, when our Lord said to Judas (Jn.
13:21), "That which thou dost do quickly," the disciples understood
our Lord to have ordered him to give something to the poor. But
Christ had no evil desires whatever, as will be shown (Question 15,
Articles 1,2); yet He was not thereby prevented from having
temperance, which is the more perfect in man, as he is without evil
desires. Hence, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 9), the
temperate man differs from the continent in this---that the temperate
has not the evil desires which the continent suffers. Hence, taking
continence in this sense, as the Philosopher takes it, Christ, from the
very fact that He had all virtue, had not continence, since it is not a
virtue, but something less than virtue.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether in Christ there was faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was faith in Christ. For faith is a
nobler virtue than the moral virtues, e.g. temperance and liberality.
Now these were in Christ, as stated above (Article 2). Much more,
therefore, was there faith in Him.
Objection 2: Further, Christ did not teach virtues which He had not
Himself, according to Acts 1:1: "Jesus began to do and to teach."
But of Christ it is said (Heb. 12:2) that He is "the author and finisher
of our faith." Therefore there was faith in Him before all others.
Objection 3: Further, everything imperfect is excluded from the
blessed. But in the blessed there is faith; for on Rm. 1:17, "the
justice of God is revealed therein from faith to faith," a gloss says:
"From the faith of words and hope to the faith of things and sight."
Therefore it would seem that in Christ also there was faith, since it
implies nothing imperfect.
On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 11:1): "Faith is the evidence of
things that appear not." But there was nothing that did not appear to
Christ, according to what Peter said to Him (Jn. 21:17): "Thou
knowest all things." Therefore there was no faith in Christ.
I answer that, As was said above (SS, Question 1, Article 4), the
object of faith is a Divine thing not seen. Now the habit of virtue, as
every other habit, takes its species from the object. Hence, if we
deny that the Divine thing was not seen, we exclude the very
essence of faith. Now from the first moment of His conception Christ
saw God's Essence fully, as will be made clear (Question 34, Article
1). Hence there could be no faith in Him.
Reply to Objection 1: Faith is a nobler virtue than the moral virtues,
seeing that it has to do with nobler matter; nevertheless, it implies a
certain defect with regard to that matter; and this defect was not in
Christ. And hence there could be no faith in Him, although the moral
virtues were in Him, since in their nature they imply no defect with
regard to their matter.
Reply to Objection 2: The merit of faith consists in this---that man
through obedience assents to what things he does not see,