places which are indivisible; because between every two points that
are infinite intermediate points, since no two points follow one
another without a middle, as is proved in Phys. vi, text. 1. And the
same must of necessity be said of divisible places: and this is shown
from the continuous movement of a body. For a body is not moved
from place to place except in time. But in the whole time which
measures the movement of a body, there are not two "nows" in
which the body moved is not in one place and in another; for if it
were in one and the same place in two "nows," it would follow that it
would be at rest there; since to be at rest is nothing else than to be
in the same place now and previously. Therefore since there are
infinite "nows" between the first and the last "now" of the time which
measures the movement, there must be infinite places between the
first from which the movement begins, and the last where the
movement ceases. This again is made evident from sensible
experience. Let there be a body of a palm's length, and let there be a
plane measuring two palms, along which it travels; it is evident that
the first place from which the movement starts is that of the one
palm; and the place wherein the movement ends is that of the other
palm. Now it is clear that when it begins to move, it gradually quits
the first palm and enters the second. According, then, as the
magnitude of the palm is divided, even so are the intermediate
places multiplied; because every distinct point in the magnitude of
the first palm is the beginning of a place, and a distinct point in the
magnitude of the other palm is the limit of the same. Accordingly,
since magnitude is infinitely divisible and the points in every
magnitude are likewise infinite in potentiality, it follows that between
every two places there are infinite intermediate places.
Now a movable body only exhausts the infinity of the intermediate
places by the continuity of its movement; because, as the
intermediate places are infinite in potentiality, so likewise must there
be reckoned some infinitudes in movement which is continuous.
Consequently, if the movement be not continuous, then all the parts
of the movement will be actually numbered. If, therefore, any
movable body be moved, but not by continuous movement, it
follows, either that it does not pass through all the intermediate
places, or else that it actually numbers infinite places: which is not
possible. Accordingly, then, as the angel's movement is not
continuous, he does not pass through all intermediate places.
Now, the actual passing from one extreme to the other, without going
through the mid-space, is quite in keeping with an angel's nature;

but not with that of a body, because a body is measured by and
contained under a place; hence it is bound to follow the laws of
place in its movement. But an angel's substance is not subject to
place as contained thereby, but is above it as containing it: hence it
is under his control to apply himself to a place just as he wills, either
through or without the intervening place.
Reply to Objection 1: The place of an angel is not taken as equal to
him according to magnitude, but according to contact of power: and
so the angel's place can be divisible, and is not always a mere point.
Yet even the intermediate divisible places are infinite, as was said
above: but they are consumed by the continuity of the movement, as
is evident from the foregoing.
Reply to Objection 2: While an angel is moved locally, his essence is
applied to various places: but the soul's essence is not applied to
the things thought of, but rather the things thought of are in it. So
there is no comparison.
Reply to Objection 3: In continuous movement the actual change is
not a part of the movement, but its conclusion; hence movement
must precede change. Accordingly such movement is through the
mid-space. But in movement which is not continuous, the change is
a part, as a unit is a part of number: hence the succession of the
various places, even without the mid-space, constitutes such
movement.