Homily 17 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts VII. 35
"This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made you a ruler and a judge
over us? The same did God send to be a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the
Angel which appeared to him in the bush."
This is very suitable to the matter in hand. "This Moses," he says. "This,"
the man who had been in danger of losing his life; the man who had been set at
naught by them; "this" the man whom they had declined: "this" same, God
having raised up, sent unto them. "Whom they refused, saying, Who made you a
ruler?" just as they themselves (the hearers) said, "We have no king, but Cæsar."
[John 19:15] He here shows also, that what was then done, was done by Christ.
"The same did God send by the hand of the Angel," who said unto him, "I am the
God of Abraham." "This" same Moses, he says—and observe how he points to
his renown— "this" same Moses, he says, "brought them out, after that he had
showed wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the
wilderness forty years. This is that Moses, which said unto the children of Israel,
A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like me"
(v. 36, 37): set at naught like me. Him, likewise, Herod wished to kill, and in
Egypt He found preservation just as it was with the former, even when He was a
babe, He was aimed at for destruction. "This is he, that was in the Church in the
wilderness with the Angel which spoke to him in the mount Sina, and with our
fathers: who received the lively oracles to give unto us." [Acts 7:38] Again no
mention of temple, none of sacrifice. "With the Angel," it says, "he received the
lively oracles to give unto the fathers." It shows, that he not only wrought
miracles, but also gave a law, as Christ did. Just as Christ first works miracles,
and then legislates: so did Moses. But they did not hear him, keeping their
disobedience, even after the miracles: "To whom," he says, "our fathers would

not obey:" [Acts 7:39] after the wonders done in those forty years. And not only
so, but just the contrary: "but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned
back again into Egypt. Saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us; for as
for this Moses, which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has
become of him. And they made a calf in those days, and offered sacrifice unto the
idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands. Then God turned, and gave
them up to worship the host of heaven; as it is written in the book of the
Prophets, O you house of Israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices
by the space of forty years in the wilderness? Yea, you took up the tabernacle of
Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, figures which you made to worship
them: and I will carry you away beyond Babylon." (v. 40, 43.) The expression,
"gave them up," means, He suffered. "Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness
in the wilderness, as he had appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should
make it according to the fashion he had seen." [Acts 7:44] Even when there was
a Tabernacle, yet there were no sacrifices. "Did ye offer unto Me slain beasts and
sacrifices?" [Amos 5:25] There was "the tabernacle of witness," and yet it
profited them nothing, but they were consumed. But neither before, nor
afterwards, did the miracles profit them anything. "Which also, our fathers that
came after brought in." Do you see, how the holy place is there wherever God
may be? For to this end also he says, "in the wilderness," to compare place with
place. Then the benefit (conferred upon them): And our fathers that came after
brought it in with Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God drove out
before the face of our fathers, unto the days of David; who found favor before
God, and desired to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. (v. 45, 46.) David
"desired to find favor:" and he built not, he, the wonderful, the great; but the
castaway, Solomon. "But Solomon," it says, "built Him an house. Howbeit the
Most High dwells not in (places) made with hands." [Acts 7:47-50] This was
shown indeed already by what had been before said: but it is shown also by the
voice of a prophet; "What house will you build for Me? Says the Lord God. As
says the prophet, Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what house