supports the body of the earth! But if you believe not what I now say, believe
what you behold, for even in another element it is possible to find this admirable
workmanship. For it is the nature of fire to tend upwards, and to be always
mounting aloft; and although you force and constrain it never so much, it cannot
submit to have its course directed downwards. For often, when we are carrying a
lighted torch, although we incline its head downwards, we cannot compel the
force of the flame to direct itself to the ground; but still it turns upward, and
passes from below toward that which is above. But with respect to the sun, God
has made it quite the contrary. For He has turned his beams toward the earth, and
made his light to direct itself downward, all but saying to him by the very shape
(of the heavens), "Look downward.— Shine upon men, for thou were made for
them!" The light, indeed, of a candle cannot be made to submit to this; but this
star, great and marvellous as it is, bends downward, and looks toward the earth,
which is contrary to the nature of fire; owing to the power of Him who has
commanded it. Would you have me speak of another thing of the like kind?
Waters embrace the back of the visible heaven on all parts; and yet they neither
flow down, nor are moved out of their place, although the nature of water is not
of this kind. For it easily runs together into what is concave; but when the body
is of a convex form, it glides away on all sides; and not even a small portion is
capable of standing upon such a figure. But, lo! This wonder is found to exist in
the heavens; and the prophet, again, to intimate this very circumstance, observes,
"Praise the Lord, you waters that are above the heavens." Besides, the water has
not quenched the sun; nor has the sun, which has gone on his way beneath for so
long a time, dried up the water that lies above.
9. Do you desire that we should lead you down again to the earth, and point
out the marvel? Do you see not this sea abounding with waves, and fierce winds;
yet this sea, spacious, and large, and furious as it is, is walled in with a feeble
sand! Mark also the wisdom of God, He permitted it not to be at rest, nor
tranquil, lest you should suppose its good order to be of mere natural regulation;
but remaining within its limits, it lifts up its voice, and is in tumult, and roars

aloud, and raises its waves to a prodigious height. But when it comes to the
shores, and beholds the sand, it breaks up, and returns back again within itself;
teaching you, by both these things, that it is not the work of nature that it remains
within its boundaries, but the work of Him whose power restrains it! For this
cause accordingly He has made the wall feeble; and has not encompassed these
shores with wood, or stone, or mountains, lest you should impute the regulation
of the elements to such things. And, therefore, God Himself, upbraiding the Jews
with this very circumstance, said, "Fear ye not Me, which have placed the sand
for the bound of the sea that it cannot pass it." [Jeremiah 5:22] But the
marvellous thing is not this only, that He has made a great and admirable world;
and that He has compacted it in a way above the usual course of nature; but that
He has also constituted it out of opposite things; such as hot and cold, dry and
moist, fire and water, earth and air, and that these contrary elements, of which
this whole universe consists, though continually at strife one with another, are
not consumed of one another. The fire has not overrun and burnt up all things;
the water has not overflowed and drowned the whole earth. With respect to our
bodies, however, these effects really take place; and upon the increase of the
bile, fever is generated; and the whole animal frame sustains an injury; and when
there is a superabundance of phlegm, many diseases are produced which destroy
the animal. But in the case of the universe, nothing of this kind happens; but
each thing remains held as it were by a kind of bridle and band; preserving, by
the will of the Creator, its own boundaries; and their strife becomes a source of
peace to the whole. Are not these things evident even to a blind man? And are
not even the simple easily able to comprehend, that they were made, and are
upheld, by some Providence? For who is so silly and senseless, that beholding
such a mass of substances, such beauty, such combination, the continual strife of
such vast elements, their opposition, and yet durability, would not reason with
himself and say, If there were not some Providence to uphold the mass of these
bodies, not permitting the universe to fall to pieces, it could not remain; it could
not have been lasting. So perfect is the order of the seasons, such the harmony of