101. Let us ask the Lord to help us understand the law of love. How good it is to have this law!
How much good it does us to love one another, in spite of everything. Yes, in spite of everything!
Saint Paul’s exhortation is directed to each of us: “Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil
with good” (Rom 12:21). And again: “Let us not grow weary in doing what is right” (Gal 6:9). We all
have our likes and dislikes, and perhaps at this very moment we are angry with someone. At least
let us say to the Lord: “Lord, I am angry with this person, with that person. I pray to you for him
and for her”. To pray for a person with whom I am irritated is a beautiful step forward in love, and
an act of evangelization. Let us do it today! Let us not allow ourselves to be robbed of the ideal of
fraternal love!

Other ecclesial challenges

102. Lay people are, put simply, the vast majority of the people of God. The minority – ordained
ministers – are at their service. There has been a growing awareness of the identity and mission of
the laity in the Church. We can count on many lay persons, although still not nearly enough, who
have a deeply-rooted sense of community and great fidelity to the tasks of charity, catechesis and
the celebration of the faith. At the same time, a clear awareness of this responsibility of the laity,
grounded in their baptism and confirmation, does not appear in the same way in all places. In
some cases, it is because lay persons have not been given the formation needed to take on
important responsibilities. In others, it is because in their particular Churches room has not been
made for them to speak and to act, due to an excessive clericalism which keeps them away from
decision-making. Even if many are now involved in the lay ministries, this involvement is not
reflected in a greater penetration of Christian values in the social, political and economic sectors. It
often remains tied to tasks within the Church, without a real commitment to applying the Gospel to

the transformation of society. The formation of the laity and the evangelization of professional and
intellectual life represent a significant pastoral challenge.

103. The Church acknowledges the indispensable contribution which women make to society
through the sensitivity, intuition and other distinctive skill sets which they, more than men, tend to
possess. I think, for example, of the special concern which women show to others, which finds a
particular, even if not exclusive, expression in motherhood. I readily acknowledge that many
women share pastoral responsibilities with priests, helping to guide people, families and groups
and offering new contributions to theological reflection. But we need to create still broader
opportunities for a more incisive female presence in the Church. Because “the feminine genius is
needed in all expressions in the life of society, the presence of women must also be guaranteed in
the workplace” and in the various other settings where important decisions are made, both in
the Church and in social structures.