5. Accordingly they do not seem to me to advance a probable opinion,
who lay it down that a trinity of the image of God in three persons, so far
as regards human nature, can so be discovered as to be completed in the
marriage of male and female and in their offspring; in that the man
himself, as it were, indicates the person of the Father, but that which has
so proceeded from him as to be born, that of the Son; and so the third
person as of the Spirit, is, they say, the woman, who has so proceeded
from the man as not herself to be either son or daughter, although it was
by her conception that the offspring was born. For the Lord hath said of
the Holy Spirit that He proceedeth from the Father,3 and yet he is not a
son. In this erroneous opinion, then, the only point probably alleged, and
indeed sufficiently shown according to the faith of the Holy Scripture, is
this,—in the account of the original creation of the woman,—that what so
comes into existence from some person as to make another person,

cannot in every case be called a son; since the person of the woman came
into existence from the person of the man, and yet she is not called his
daughter. All the rest of this opinion is in truth so absurd, nay indeed so
false, that it is most easy to refute it. For I pass over such a thing, as to
think the Holy Spirit to be the mother of the Son of God, and the wife of
the Father; since perhaps it may be answered that these things offend us
in carnal things, because we think of bodily conceptions and births.
Although these very things themselves are most chastely thought of by
the pure, to whom all things are pure; but to the defiled and unbelieving,
of whom both the mind and conscience are polluted, nothing is pure; so
that even Christ, born of a virgin according to the flesh, is a stumblingblock to some of them. But yet in the case of those supreme spiritual
things, after the likeness of which those kinds of the inferior creature also
are made although most remotely, and where there is nothing that can be
injured and nothing corruptible, nothing born in time, nothing formed
from that which is formless, or whatever like expressions there may be;
yet they ought not to disturb the sober prudence of any one, lest in
avoiding empty disgust he run into pernicious error. Let him accustom
himself so to find in corporeal things the traces of things spiritual, that
when he begins to ascend upwards from thence, under the guidance of
reason, in order to attain to the unchangeable truth itself through which
these things were made, he may not draw with himself to things above
what he despises in things below. For no one ever blushed to choose for
himself wisdom as a wife, because the name of wife puts into a man's
thoughts the corruptible connection which consists in begetting children;
or because in truth wisdom itself is a woman in sex, since it is expressed
in both Greek and Latin tongues by a word of the feminine gender.