2 Corinthians 4:5
3. "For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as
your servants for Jesus' sake."
And what is the nature of the connection there? What has this in common
with what has been said? He either hints at them as exalting themselves, and
persuading the disciples to name themselves after them: as he said in the former
Epistle, "I am of Paul and I of Apollos;" or else another thing of the gravest
character. What then is this? Seeing that they waged fierce war against them, and
plotted against them on every side; 'Is it,' he says, 'with us ye fight and war?
[Nay but] with Him that is preached by us, "for we preach not ourselves." I am a
servant, I am [but] a minister even of those who receive the Gospel, transacting
every thing for Another, and for His glory doing whatsover I do. So that in
warring against me you throw down what is His. For so far am I from turning to
my own personal advantage any part of the Gospel, that I will not refuse to be
even your servant for Christ's sake; seeing it seemed good to Him so to honor
you, seeing He so loved you and did all things for you.' Wherefore also he says,
"and ourselves your servants for Christ's sake." Do you see a soul pure from
glory? 'For in truth,' says he, 'we not only do not take to ourselves anything of
our Master's, but even to you we submit ourselves for His sake.'

2 Corinthians 4:6
"Seeing it is God that said, Light shall shine out of darkness, who shined in
your hearts."
Do you see how again to those who were desirous of seeing that surpassing
glory, I mean that of Moses, he shows it flashing with added lustre ? 'As upon
the face of Moses, so also has it shined unto your hearts,' he says. And first, he
puts them in mind of what was made in the beginning of the Creation, sensible
light and darkness sensible, showing that this creation is greater. And where
commanded He light to shine out of darkness? In the beginning and in prelude to
the Creation; for, says he, "Darkness was upon the face of the deep. And God
said, Let there be light, and there was light." Howbeit then indeed He said, "Let
it be, and it was:" but now He said nothing, but Himself became Light for us.
For he said not, 'has also now commanded,' but "has" Himself "shined."
Therefore neither do we see sensible objects by the shining of this Light, but
God Himself through Christ. Do you see the invariableness in the Trinity? For of
the Spirit, he says, "But we all with unveiled face reflecting in a mirror the glory
of the Lord, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory even as
from the Lord the Spirit." [2 Corinthians 3:18] And of the Son; "That the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, Who is the Image of God, should not dawn upon
them." [2 Corinthians 4:4] And of the Father; "He that said Light shall shine out
of darkness shined in your hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Christ." For as when he had said, "Of the Gospel of the
glory of Christ," he added, "Who is the Image of God," showing that they were
deprived of His glory also; So after saying, "the knowledge of God," he added, in
the face of Christ,' to show that through Him we know the Father, even as
through the Spirit also we are brought unto Him.