strike each other, so also, on that occasion, he bade them strike and slay each
other. And again, having given them as it were lessons to learn, then asking for
them, and finding they had not learned them, he would punish them. For
instance. What writings were those that denoted the power of God? The events
in Egypt? Yes, says one, but these writings represented the plagues, that He
punishes His enemies. And to them it was a school. For what else was the
punishment of your enemies but your benefit? And in other respects too, He
benefited you. And it was the same as if one should say he knew his letters, but
when asked up and down, should be at fault, and be beaten. So they also said
indeed that they knew the power of God, but when asked their knowledge up and
down, they could not give it, and therefore were beaten. Have you seen water?
You ought to be reminded of the water in Egypt. For He that of water made
blood, will be also of power to do this. As we also say often to the children,
"when in a book you see the letter A, remember that you had it in your tablet."
Have you seen famine? Remember that it was He that destroyed the crops! Have
you seen wars? Remember the drowning! Have you seen that they are mighty
who inhabit the land? But not mightier than the Egyptians. He who took you out
of the midst of them, will He not much more save you when out? But they knew
not how to answer their letters out of order, and therefore they were beaten.
"They ate," and drank, "and kicked." [Deuteronomy 32:15] When fed with their
manna they ought not to have asked for luxury, seeing they had known the evils
which proceed from it. And they acted precisely as if a free child, when sent to
school, should ask to be reckoned with the slaves, and to wait on them—so did
these also in seeking Egypt— and when receiving all needful sustenance, and
such as becomes a free person, and sitting at his father's table, should have a
longing for the ill-savored and noisy one of the servants. And they said to
Moses, "Yea, Lord, all that you have spoken will we do, and be obedient."
[Exodus 24:7] And as it happens in the case of desperately bad children, that
when the father would put them to death, the schoolmaster perseveringly entreats
for them, the same was the case at that time also.

Why have we said these things? Because we differ in nothing from
children. Will you hear their doctrines also, that they are those of children? "Eye
for eye," it is said, "and tooth for tooth." [Leviticus 24:20] For nothing is so
eager to revenge as a childish mind. For seeing it is a passion of irrationality, and
there is much irrationality, and great lack of consideration in that age, no wonder
the child is tyrannized over by anger; and so great is the tyranny, that ofttimes
after stumbling and getting up again, they will smite their knee for passion, or
overturn the footstool, and so will allay their pain, and quench their rage. In
some such way as this did God also deal with them, when He allowed them to
strike out "Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth," and destroyed the Egyptians and the
Amalekites that had grieved them. And He promised such things; as if to one
who said, "Father, such and such an one has beaten me," the father should then
reply, "Such and such an one is a bad man, and let us hate him." So also does
God say, "I will be their enemy that are your enemies, and I will hate them that
hate you." [Exodus 23:22] And again, when Balaam prayed, the condescension
which was used towards them was childish. For as with children, when having
been frightened at anything not frightful, such as either a lock of wool, or any
other thing of like sort, they are suddenly alarmed; that their fear may not
continue in them, we bring the thing up to their hands, and make their nurses
show it them: so also did God; seeing that the Prophet was a terror to them, he
turned the terror of him into confidence. And as children who are under weaning
have all manner of things in little baskets, so also did He give them everything,
and dainties in abundance. Still the child longs for the breast; so did these also
for Egypt and the flesh that was there.
So that one would not be wrong in calling Moses both a teacher, and a
nursing-father, and a conductor [Exodus 16:3; Numbers 11:4-5]; the man's
wisdom was great. Howbeit it is not the same thing to guide men who are
already philosophers, and to rule unreasoning children. And, if you are inclined
to hear yet another particular; as the nurse says to the child, When you ease
yourself, take up your garments, and for as long as you sit, so also did Moses.