the contract of marriage, but does not annul it after it is contracted."
I answer that, A thing ceases to be in one man's power from the fact
that it passes into the power of another. Now the promise of a thing
does not transfer it into the power of the person to whom it is
promised, wherefore a thing does not cease to be in a person's
power for the reason that he has promised it. Since then a simple
vow contains merely a simple promise of one's body to the effect of
keeping continence for God's sake, a man still retains power over his
own body after a simple vow, and consequently can surrender it to
another, namely his wife; and in this surrender consists the
sacrament of matrimony, which is indissoluble. Therefore although a
simple vow is an impediment to the contracting of a marriage, since
it is a sin to marry after taking a simple vow of continence, yet since
the contract is valid, the marriage cannot be annulled on that
account.
Reply to Objection 1: A vow is a stronger tie than matrimony, as
regards that to which man is tied, and the obligation under which he
lies. because by marriage a man is tied to his wife, with the
obligation of paying the debt, whereas by a vow a man is tied to God,
with the obligation of remaining continent. But as to the manner in
which he is tied marriage is a stronger tie than a simple vow, since
by marriage a man surrenders himself actually to the power of his
wife, but not by a simple vow as explained above: and the possessor
is always in the stronger position. In this respect a simple vow binds
in the same way as a betrothal; wherefore a betrothal must be
annulled on account of a simple vow.
Reply to Objection 2: The contracting of a marriage between blood
relations is annulled by the commandment forbidding such
marriages, not precisely because it is a commandment of God or of
the Church, but because it makes it impossible for the body of a
kinswoman to be transferred into the power of her kinsman: whereas
the commandment forbidding marriage after a simple vow has not
this effect, as already stated. Hence the argument is void for it
assigns as a cause that which is not cause.
Reply to Objection 3: If after taking a simple vow a man contract
marriage by words of the present, he cannot know his wife without
mortal sin, because until the marriage is consummated he is still in a
position to fulfill the vow of continence. But after the marriage has
been consummated, thenceforth through his fault it is unlawful for

him not to pay the debt when his wife asks: wherefore this is not
covered by his obligation to his vow, as explained above (ad 1).
Nevertheless he should atone for not keeping continence, by his
tears of repentance.
Reply to Objection 4: After contracting marriage he is still bound to
keep his vow of continence in those matters wherein he is not
rendered unable to do so. Hence if his wife die he is bound to
continence altogether. And since the marriage tie does not bind him
to ask for the debt, he cannot ask for it without sin, although he can
pay the debt without sin on being asked, when once he has incurred
this obligation through the carnal intercourse that has already
occurred. And this holds whether the wife ask expressly or
interpretively, as when she is ashamed and her husband feels that
she desires him to pay the debt, for then he may pay it without sin.
This is especially the case if he fears to endanger her chastity: nor
does it matter that they are equal in the marriage act, since everyone
may renounce what is his own. Some say, however, that he may both
ask and pay lest the marriage become too burdensome to the wife
who has always to ask; but if this be looked into aright, it is the same
as asking interpretively.