when they asked, but when Christ had reproved them, and had said they should
not enjoy the first honors, unless they showed themselves worthy of these.
4. Do you see how they were all in an imperfect state, when both these were
lifting themselves up above the ten, and those envying the two? But, as I said,
show me them after these things, and you will see them delivered from all these
passions. Hear at least how this same John, he who now came to Him for these
things, everywhere gives up the first place to Peter, both in addressing the
people, and in working miracles, in the Acts of the Apostles.
And he conceals not Peter's good deeds, but relates both the confession,
which he openly made when all were silent, [John 6:68-69] and his entering into
the tomb, [John 20:6] and puts the apostle before himself. For, because both
continued with Him at His crucifixion, taking away the ground of his own
commendation, he says, "That disciple was known unto the high priest."
[John 18:15]
But James survived not a long time, but from the beginning he was so
greatly filled with warmth, and so forsook all the things of men, and mounted up
to an height unutterable, as straightway to be slain. Thus, in all respects, they
after these things became excellent.
But then, "they were moved with indignation." What then says Christ? "He
called them unto Him, and said, The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion
over them." For, as they were disturbed and troubled, He soothes them by His
call before His word, and by drawing them near Him. For the two having
separated themselves from the company of the ten, had stood nearer Him,
pleading their own interests. Therefore He brings near Him these also, by this
very act, and by exposing and revealing it before the rest, soothing the passion
both of the one and of the other.
And not as before, so now also does He check them. For whereas before He
brings little children into the midst, and commands to imitate their simplicity and
lowliness; here He reproves them in a sharper way from the contrary side,
saying, "The princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and their great

ones exercise authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you; but he that
will be great among you, let this man be minister to all; and he that will be first,
let him be last of all;" showing that such a feeling as this is that of heathens, I
mean, to love the first place. For the passion is tyrannical, and is continually
hindering even great men; therefore also it needs a severer stripe. Whence He
too strikes deeper into them, by comparison with the Gentiles shaming their
inflamed soul, and removes the envy of the one and the arrogance of the other,
all but saying, "Be not moved with indignation, as insulted. For they harm and
disgrace themselves most, who on this wise seek the first places, for they are
among the last. For matters with us are not like matters without. 'For the princes
of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them,' but with me the last, even he is
first."
"And in proof that I say not these things without cause, by the things which
I do and suffer, receive the proof of my sayings. For I have myself done
something even more. For being King of the powers above, I was willing to
become man, and I submitted to be despised, and despitefully entreated. And not
even with these things was I satisfied, but even unto death did I come.
Therefore," He says,
"Even as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give His life a ransom for many." [Matthew 20:28] "For not even at this
did I stop," says He, "but even my life did I give a ransom; and for whom? For
enemies. But thou if you are abused, it is for yourself, but I for you."
Be not then afraid, as though your honor were plucked down. For however
much you humble yourself, you cannot descend so much as your Lord. And yet
His descent has become the ascent of all, and has made His own glory shine
forth. For before He was made man, He was known among angels only; but after
He was made man and was crucified, so far from lessening that glory, He
acquired other besides, even that from the knowledge of the world.
Fear not then, as though your honor were put down, if you should abase
yourself, for in this way is your glory more exalted, in this way it becomes