SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.180, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the active life remains after this life?

Objection 1: It would seem that the active life remains after this life.
For the acts of the moral virtues belong to the active life, as stated
above (Article 1). But the moral virtues endure after this life
according to Augustine (De Trin. xiv, 9). Therefore the active life
remains after this life.
Objection 2: Further, teaching others belongs to the active life, as
stated above (Article 3). But in the life to come when "we shall be like
the angels," teaching will be possible: even as apparently it is in the
angels of whom one "enlightens, cleanses, and perfects" [Coel. Hier.
iii, viii] another, which refers to the "receiving of knowledge,"
according to Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii). Therefore it would seem that
the active life remains after this life.
Objection 3: Further, the more lasting a thing is in itself, the more is
it able to endure after this life. But the active life is seemingly more
lasting in itself: for Gregory says (Hom. v in Ezech.) that "we can
remain fixed in the active life, whereas we are nowise able to
maintain an attentive mind in the contemplative life." Therefore the
active life is much more able than the contemplative to endure after
this life.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. xiv in Ezech.): "The active life
ends with this world, but the contemplative life begins here, to be
perfected in our heavenly home."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the active life has its end in
external actions: and if these be referred to the quiet of
contemplation, for that very reason they belong to the contemplative
life. But in the future life of the blessed the occupation of external
actions will cease, and if there be any external actions at all, these
will be referred to contemplation as their end. For, as Augustine says
at the end of De Civitate Dei xxii, 30, "there we shall rest and we shall
see, we shall see and love, we shall love and praise." And he had
said before (De Civ. Dei xxii, 30) that "there God will be seen without
end, loved without wearying, praised without tiring: such will be the
occupation of all, the common love, the universal activity."
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 136, Article 1, ad 1),

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.180, C.5.

the moral virtues will remain not as to those actions which are about
the means, but as to the actions which are about the end. Such acts
are those that conduce to the quiet of contemplation, which in the
words quoted above Augustine denotes by "rest," and this rest
excludes not only outward disturbances but also the inward
disturbance of the passions.
Reply to Objection 2: The contemplative life, as stated above
(Question 180, Article 4), consists chiefly in the contemplation of
God, and as to this, one angel does not teach another, since
according to Mt. 18:10, "the little ones' angels," who belong to the
lower order, "always see the face of the Father"; and so, in the life to
come, no man will teach another of God, but "we shall" all "see Him
as He is" (1 Jn. 3:2). This is in keeping with the saying of Jeremias
31:34: "They shall teach no more every man his neighbor . . . saying:
Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least of them even to
the greatest."
But as regards things pertaining to the "dispensation of the
mysteries of God," one angel teaches another by cleansing,
enlightening, and perfecting him: and thus they have something of
the active life so long as the world lasts, from the fact that they are
occupied in administering to the creatures below them. This is
signified by the fact that Jacob saw angels "ascending" the ladder--which refers to contemplation---and "descending" ---which refers to
action. Nevertheless, as Gregory remarks (Moral. ii, 3), "they do not
wander abroad from the Divine vision, so as to be deprived of the
joys of inward contemplation." Hence in them the active life does not
differ from the contemplative life as it does in us for whom the works
of the active life are a hindrance to contemplation.
Nor is the likeness to the angels promised to us as regards the
administering to lower creatures, for this is competent to us not by
reason of our natural order, as it is to the angels, but by reason of
our seeing God.
Reply to Objection 3: That the durability of the active life in the
present state surpasses the durability of the contemplative life arises
not from any property of either life considered in itself, but from our
own deficiency, since we are withheld from the heights of
contemplation by the weight of the body. Hence Gregory adds
(Moral. ii, 3) that "the mind through its very weakness being repelled
from that immense height recoils on itself."