put them, He would no more reign. Neither do they perceive that this is
said in the same way as that other text, "His heart is established: He shall
not be afraid, until He see His desire upon His enemies." For He will not
then be afraid when He has seen it. What then means, "When He shall
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father," as though God
and the Father has not the kingdom now? But because He is hereafter to
bring all the just, over whom now, living by faith, the Mediator between
God and men, the man Christ Jesus, reigns, to that sight which the same
apostle calls "face to face;" therefore the words, "When He shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father," are as much as to say,
When He shall have brought believers to the contemplation of God, even
the Father. For He says, "All things are delivered unto me of my Father:
and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man
the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal
Him." The Father will then be revealed by the Son, "when He shall have
put down all rule, and all authority, and all power;" that is, in such wise
that there shall be no more need of any economy of similitudes, by means
of angelic rulers, and authorities, and powers. Of whom that is not unfitly
understood, which is said in the Song of Songs to the bride, "We will
make thee borders of gold, with studs of silver, while the King sitteth at
His table;" that is, as long as Christ is in His secret place: since "your life
is hid with Christ in God; when Christ, who is our2 life, shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with Him in glory." Before which time, "we see now
through a glass, in an enigma," that is, in similitudes, "but then face to
face."
17. For this contemplation is held forth to us as the end of all actions, and
the everlasting fullness of joy. For "we are the sons of God; and it doth
not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when He shall appear,
we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is." For that which He
said to His servant Moses, "I am that I am; thus shalt thou say to the
children of Israel, I Am hath sent me to you;" this it is which we shall
contemplate when we shall live in eternity. For so it is said, "And this is
life eternal, that they might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom Thou hast sent." This shall be when the Lord shall have
come, and "shall have brought to light the hidden things of darkness;"
when the darkness of this present mortality and corruption shall have

passed away. Then will be our morning, which is spoken of in the Psalm,
"In the morning will I direct my prayer unto Thee, and will contemplate
Thee." Of this contemplation I understand it to be said, "When He shall
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father;" that is, when He
shall have brought the just, over whom now, living by faith, the Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, reigns, to the
contemplation of God, even the Father. If herein I am foolish, let him who
knows better correct me; to me at least the case seems as I have said.
For we shall not seek anything else, when we shall have come to the
contemplation of Him. But that contemplation is not yet, so long as our
joy is in hope. For "hope that is seen is not hope: for what a man seeth,
why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we
with patience wait for it," viz. "as long as the King sitteth at His table."
Then will take place that which is written, "In Thy presence is fullness of
joy." Nothing more than that joy will be required; because there will be
nothing more than can be required. For the Father will be manifested to
us, and that will suffice for us. And this much Philip had well understood,
so that he said to the Lord, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us." But
he had not yet understood that he himself was able to say this very same
thing in this way also: Lord, show Thyself to us, and it sufficeth us. For,
that he might understand this, the Lord replied to him, "Have I been so
long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath
seen me hath seen the Father." But because He intended him, before he
could see this, to live by faith, He went on to say, "Believest thou not that
I am in the Father, and the Father in me?" For "while we are at home in
the body, we are absent from the Lord: for we walk by faith, not by
sight." For contemplation is the recompense of faith, for which
recompense our hearts are purified by faith; as it is written, "Purifying
their hearts by faith." And that our hearts are to be purified for this
contemplation, is proved above all by this text, "Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God." And that this is life eternal, God says in
the Psalm, "With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation."
Whether, therefore, we hear, Show us the Son; or whether we hear, Show
us the Father; it is even all one, since neither can be manifested without
the other. For they are one, as He also Himself says, "My Father and I are
one." Finally, on account of this very indivisibility, it suffices that
sometimes the Father alone, or the Son alone, should be named, as