reform you; and seek not for money, but pursue that which makes men of more
cheerful countenance than thousands of money, philosophy and virtue. For
where indeed these are, there is no harm in poverty; and where these are not
there is no good in money. For tell me, what good is it when men are rich indeed,
but have beggarly souls? Thou dost not bewail yourself, so much as that rich
man himself, because he has not the wealth of all. And if he does not weep as
you do, yet lay open his conscience, and you will see his wailings and
lamentations.
Will you that I show you your own riches, that you may cease to count them
happy that are rich in money? Do you see this heaven here, the sun, this bright
and far shining star, and that gladdens our eyes, is not this too set out common to
all? And do not all enjoy it equally, both poor and rich? And the wreath of the
stars and the orb of the moon, are they not left equally to all? Yea, rather, if I
must speak somewhat marvellous, we poor enjoy these more than they. For they
indeed being for the most part steeped in drunkenness, and passing their time in
revellings and deep sleep, do not even perceive these things, being always under
cover and reared in the shade : but the poor do more than any enjoy the luxury of
these elements. And further, if you will look into the air which is every where
diffused, you will see the poor man enjoying it in greater both freshness and
abundance. For wayfarers and husbandmen enjoy these luxuries more than the
inhabitants of the city; and again, of those same inhabitants of the city, the
handicraftsmen more than those who are drunken all the day. What too of the
earth, is not this left common to all? 'No,' he says. How do you say so? Tell me.
'Because the rich man, even in the city, having gotten himself several plethra,
raises up long fences round them; and in the country cuts off for himself many
portions.' What then? When he cuts them off, does he alone enjoy them? By no
means, though he should contend for it ever so earnestly. For the produce he is
compelled to distribute among all, and for you he cultivates grain, and wine, and
oil, and every where ministers unto you. And those long fences and buildings,
after his untold expense and his toils and drudgery he is preparing for your use,

receiving from you only a small piece of silver for so great a service. And in
baths and every where, one may see the same thing obtaining; the rich of it all
with perfect ease. And his enjoyment of the earth is no more than yours; for sure
he fills not ten stomachs, and thou only one. 'But he partakes of costlier meats?'
Truly, this is no mighty superiority; howbeit, even here, we shall find you to
have the advantage. For this costliness is therefore thought by you a matter of
envy because the pleasure with it is greater. Yet this is greater in the poor man's
case; yet not pleasure only, but health also; and in this alone is the advantage
with the rich, that he makes his constitution feebler and collects more abundant
fountains of disease. For the poor man's diet is all ordered according to nature,
but his through its excess results in corruption and disease.
6. But if you will, let us also look at this same thing in an example. For if it
were requisite to light a furnace, and then one man were to throw in silken
garments and fine linens, many and numberless, and so kindle it; and another
logs of oak and pine, what advantage would this man have over that? None, but
even disadvantage. But what? (for there is nothing to prevent our turning the
same illustration round after another manner,) if one were to throw in logs, and
another were to light his fire under bodies, by which furnace would you like to
stand, that with the logs, or that with the bodies? Very plainly that with the logs.
For that burns naturally and is a pleasant spectacle to the beholders: while this
with the steam, and juices, and smoke, and the stench of the bones would drive
every one away. Did you shudder at the hearing, and loathe that furnace? Like it
are the bellies of the rich. For in them one would find more rottenness than in
that furnace, and stinking vapors, and filthy humors, because that, all over in
every part, indigestion abounds in consequence of their surfeiting. For the
natural heat not sufficing for the digestion of the whole but being smothered
under them, they lie smoking above, and the unpleasantness produced is great.
To what then should one compare those stomachs of theirs? Yet do not be
offended at what I say, but if I do not say true things, refute me. To what then
should one compare them? For even what has been said is not enough to show