of this sort should be the basis for the division of the parts of philosophy rather than those
mentioned here.

9. Again, that science on which others depend must be prior to them. Now all the other sciences
depend on divine science because it is its business to prove their principles. Therefore Boethius
should have placed divine science before the others.

10. Again, mathematics should be studied before natural science, for the young can easily learn
mathematics, but only the more advanced natural science, as is said in the Ethics. This is why the
ancients are said to have observed the following order in learning the sciences: first logic, then
mathematics, then natural science, after that moral science, and finally men studied divine science.
Therefore, Boethius should have placed mathematics before natural science. And so it seems that
this division is unsuitable.

On the contrary, the Philosopher proves the appropriateness of this division in the
Metaphysics, where he says, "There will be three philosophical and theoretical sciences,
mathematics, physics, and theology. Moreover, in the Physics three methods of the sciences are
proposed which indeed seem to belong to these three. Moreover, Ptolemy also uses this division
in the beginning of his Almagest.

Reply: The theoretical or speculative intellect is properly distinguished from the operative or
practical intellect by the fact that the speculative intellect has for its end the truth that it
contemplates, while the practical intellect directs the truth under consideration to activity as to an
end. So the Philosopher says in the De Anima that they differ from each other by their ends; and
in the Metaphysics he states that "the end of speculative knowledge is truth, but the end of
practical knowledge is action." Now, since matter must be proportionate to the end, the subjectmatter of the practical sciences must be things that can be made or done by us, so that we can
direct the knowledge of them to activity as to an end.

On the other hand, the subject-matter of the speculative sciences must be things that cannot be
made or done by us, so that our knowledge of them cannot be directed to activity as to an end.
And the speculative sciences must differ according to the distinctions among these things. Now
we must realize that when habits or powers are differentiated by their objects they do not differ
according to just any distinction among these objects, but according to the distinctions that are
essential to the objects as objects. For example, it is incidental to a sense object as such whether it
be an animal or a plant. Accordingly, the distinction between the senses is not based upon this
difference but rather upon the difference between color and sound. So the speculative sciences
must be divided according to differences between objects of speculation, considered precisely as
such. Now an object of this kind ! namely, an object of a speculative power ! derives one
characteristic from the side of the power of intellect and another from the side of the habit of
science that perfects the intellect. From the side of the intellect it has the fact that it is immaterial,
because the intellect itself is immaterial. From the side of habit of science it has the fact that it is
necessary, for science treats of necessary matters, as is shown in the Posterior Analytics. Now
everything that is necessary is, as such, immobile, because everything changeable is, as such,
able to be or not to be, either absolutely or in a certain respect, as is said in the Metaphysics.
Consequently, separation from matter and motion, or connection with them, essentially belongs
to an object of speculation, which is the object of speculative science. As a result, the speculative
sciences are differentiated according to their degree of separation from matter and motion.