the faults of others, than that he should abstain from the management, and then
have to dread being called to account for things which other men have done.
Moreover, he who does these things by himself, gets through them all with great
ease; but he who is compelled to do it by converting every one's opinion does
not get relief by being saved from working single-handed, equivalent to the
trouble and turmoil which he experiences through those who oppose him and
combat his decisions. However, I could not enumerate all the anxieties
concerned with the care of virgins; for when they have to be entered on the list,
they occasion no small trouble to him who is entrusted with this business.
Again, the judicial department of the bishop's office involves innumerable
vexations, great consumption of time, and difficulties exceeding those
experienced by men who sit to judge secular affairs; for it is a labor to discover
exact justice, and when it is found, it is difficult to avoid destroying it. And not
only loss of time and difficulty are incurred, but also no small danger. For ere
now, some of the weaker brethren having plunged into business, because they
have not obtained patronage have made shipwreck concerning the faith. For
many of those who have suffered wrong, no less than those who have inflicted
wrong, hate those who do not assist them, and they will not take into account
either the intricacy of the matters in question, or the difficulty of the times, or the
limits of sacerdotal authority, or anything of that kind; but they are merciless
judges, recognizing only one kind of defence— release from the evils which
oppress them. And he who is unable to furnish this, although he may allege
innumerable excuses, will never escape their condemnation.
And talking of patronage, let me disclose another pretext for fault-finding.
For if the bishop does not pay a round of visits every day, more even than the
idle men about town, unspeakable offense ensues. For not only the sick, but also
the whole, desire to be looked after, not that piety prompts them to this, but
rather that in most cases they pretend claims to honor and distinction. And if he
should ever happen to visit more constantly one of the richer and more powerful
men, under the pressure of some necessity, with a view to the common benefit of

the Church, he is immediately stigmatized with a character for fawning and
flattery. But why do I speak of patronage and visiting? For merely from their
mode of accosting persons, bishops have to endure such a load of reproaches as
to be often oppressed and overwhelmed by despondency; in fact, they have also
to undergo a scrutiny of the way in which they use their eyes. For the public
rigorously criticize their simplest actions, taking note of the tone of their voice,
the cast of their countenance, and the degree of their laughter. He laughed
heartily to such a man, one will say, and accosted him with a beaming face, and a
clear voice, whereas to me he addressed only a slight and passing remark. And in
a large assembly, if he does not turn his eyes in every direction when he is
conversing, the majority declare that his conduct is insulting.
Who, then, unless he is exceedingly strong, could cope with so many
accusers, so as either to avoid being indited altogether, or, if he is indited, to
escape? For he must either be without any accusers, or, if this is impossible,
purge himself of the accusations which are brought against him; and if this again
is not an easy matter, as some men delight in making vain and wanton charges,
he must make a brave stand against the dejection produced by these complaints.
He, indeed, who is justly accused, may easily tolerate the accuser, for there is no
bitterer accuser than conscience; wherefore, if we are caught first by this most
terrible adversary, we can readily endure the milder ones who are external to us.
But he who has no evil thing upon his conscience, when he is subjected to an
empty charge, is speedily excited to wrath, and easily sinks into dejection, unless
he happens to have practised beforehand how to put up with the follies of the
multitude. For it is utterly impossible for one who is falsely accused without
cause, and condemned, to avoid feeling some vexation and annoyance at such
great injustice.
And how can one speak of the distress which bishops undergo, whenever it
is necessary to cut some one off from the full communion of the Church? Would
indeed that the evil went no further than distress! But in fact the mischief is not
trifling. For there is a fear lest the man, if he has been punished beyond what he