From all these lines it is evident that in matters of faith it is not lawful to employ philosophical
reasoning.

2. On that line (Is. 15:1), "Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste," the gloss says: "Ar,
that is, the adversary, namely, secular science, which is the adversary of God"; therefore, etc.

3. Ambrose says: "The deepest mysteries of faith are free from the reasonings of the
philosophers"; therefore, when a matter of faith is dealt with, the reasonings and words of the
philosophers ought not to be used.

4. Jerome relates in a letter to Eustochium that in vision he was beaten, according to divine
justice, because he had read the books of Cicero, and that those standing by besought that
leniency might be granted on account of his youth, and that afterward the extreme penalty should
be exacted if he read again the books of the Gentiles; wherefore, calling upon the name of God,
he exclaimed: "If ever I shall possess secular books, if ever I read them, I shall have denied
You"; therefore it is not lawful to use them in treating of divine things.

5. In Scripture, secular wisdom is often represented by water, but divine wisdom by wine. Now,
according to Is., chap. 1, the innkeepers are upbraided for mixing water with wine; therefore the
doctors are blameworthy for their mingling of philosophical doctrine with sacred Scripture.

6. Jerome says, in his gloss on Hosea, chap. 2, "With heretics we ought not to have even names

in common." But heretics use the arguments of philosophers to destroy faith, as is maintained in
the gloss on Prov., chap, 7 and Is., chap. 15; therefore Catholics ought not to use such in their
discussions.

7. Every science has its proper principles, and thus also sacred doctrine has those that belong to
it, namely, the articles of faith; but in other sciences the process is not valid if principles are saken
from a different science, but each ought to proceed from its own principles, according to the
teaching of the Philosopher (I Poster.); therefore the method is not permissible in sacred
doctrine.

8. If the doctrine of anyone is repudiated in any respect, the authority of his teaching will not be
valid in proving anything; wherefore Augustine says that, if in sacred doctrine we discover some
falsity, the authority of that teaching is destroyed for confirming anything in regard to faith; but
sacred doctrine repudiates the doctrine of the philosophers in many ways, because many errors
are found among them; therefore their authority has no efficacy in proving anything (regarding
sacred doctrine).

#### Sed contra

But on the contrary, the Apostle (Titus 1: 12) makes use of a verse from the poet Epimenides,
saying, "The Cretans are always liars, evil beasts," etc.; and (1 Cor. 15:33) he employs the words
of Menander: "Evil communications corrupt good manners"; and in Acts 17:28 are the words of
Aratus, "For we are also his (i.e., God's) offspring." Therefore it is licit for other doctors of
divine Scripture also to make use of the arguments of the philosophers.