fruit, then appeared the tares also;" which kind of thing these men also do. For
at the beginning they disguise themselves; but when they have gained much
confidence, and some one imparts to them the teaching of the word, then they
pour out their poison.
But wherefore does He bring in the servants, telling what has been done?
That He may pronounce it wrong to slay them.
And He calls him "an enemy," because of his harm done to men. For
although the despite is against us, in its origin it sprang from his enmity, not to
us, but to God. Whence it is manifest, that God loves us more than we love
ourselves.
And see from another thing also, the malicious craft of the devil. For he did
not sow before this, because he had nothing to destroy, but when all had been
fulfilled, that he might defeat the diligence of the Husbandman; in such enmity
against Him did he constantly act.
And mark also the affection of the servants. I mean, what haste they are in
at once to root up the tares, even though they do it indiscreetly; which shows
their anxiety for the crop, and that they are looking to one thing only, not to the
punishment of that enemy, but to the preservation of the seed sown. For of
course this other is not the urgent consideration.
Wherefore how they may for the present extirpate the mischief, this is their
object. And not even this do they seek absolutely, for they trust not themselves
with it, but await the Master's decision, saying, "Will You?"
What then does the Master? He forbids them, saying, "Lest haply ye root up
the wheat with them." And this He said, to hinder wars from arising, and blood
and slaughter. For it is not right to put a heretic to death, since an implacable war
would be brought into the world. By these two reasons then He restrains them;
one, that the wheat be not hurt; another, that punishment will surely overtake
them, if incurably diseased. Wherefore, if you would have them punished, yet
without harm to the wheat, I bid you wait for the proper season.
But what means, "Lest ye root up the wheat with them?" Either He means

this, If you are to take up arms, and to kill the heretics, many of the saints also
must needs be overthrown with them; or that of the very tares it is likely that
many may change and become wheat. If therefore ye root them up beforehand,
you injure that which is to become wheat, slaying some, in whom there is yet
room for change and improvement. He does not therefore forbid our checking
heretics, and stopping their mouths, and taking away their freedom of speech,
and breaking up their assemblies and confederacies, but our killing and slaying
them.
But mark thou His gentleness, how He not only gives sentence and forbids,
but sets down reasons.
What then, if the tares should remain until the end? "Then I will say to the
reapers, Gather together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them."
[Matthew 13:30] He again reminds them of John's words, [Matthew 3:12]
introducing Him as judge; and He says, So long as they stand by the wheat, we
must spare them, for it is possible for them even to become wheat but when they
have departed, having profited nothing, then of necessity the inexorable
punishment will overtake them. "For I will say to the reapers," says He, "Gather
ye together first the tares." Why, "first?" That these may not be alarmed, as
though the wheat were carried off with them. "And bind them in bundles to burn
them, but gather the wheat into my barn."
2. "Another parable put He forth unto them, saying, The Kingdom of
Heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed."
That is, since He had said, that of the crop three parts are lost, and but one
saved, and in the very part again which is saved so great damage ensues; lest
they should say, "And who, and how many will be the faithful?" this fear again
He removes, by the parable of the mustard seed leading them on to belief, and
signifying that in any case the gospel shall be spread abroad.
Therefore He brought forward the similitude of this herb, which has a very
strong resemblance to the subject in hand; "Which indeed is the least," He says,
"of all seeds, but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becomes a