on purpose that Moses might not be suspected to be a magician: He let them
teach all men to what length magic can go in making a fantastic show: beyond
this point they deceived not, but themselves confessed their defeat. Impostors do
us no harm, rather do us good, if we will apply our mind to the matter. What
then, you will say, if we are partners with them in common estimation? The
estimation is not among us, but with those who have no judgment. Let not us
greatly care for the estimation of the many, nor mind it more than needs. To God
we live, not to men: in heaven we have our conversation, not on earth: there lie
the awards and the prizes of our labors, thence we look for our praises, thence
for our crowns. Thus far let us trouble ourselves about men— that we do not
give and afford them a handle against us. But if, though we afford none, those
choose to accuse us thoughtlessly and without discrimination, let us laugh, not
weep. "Provide" thou "things honest before the Lord and before men" [2
Corinthians 8:21]: if, though thou provide things honest, that man derides, give
yourself no more concern (for that). You have your patterns in the Scriptures.
For, says he, "do I now persuade men or God?" [Galatians 1:10] and again, "We
persuade men, but we are made manifest unto God." [2 Corinthians 5:11] And
Christ (spoke) thus of them that take offense: "Let them alone, they be blind
guides of the blind" [Matthew 15:14]; and again, "Woe unto you, when all men
speak well of you" [Luke 6:26]: and again, "Let your works shine, that men may
see, and glorify your Father which is in heaven." [Matthew 5:16] And, "Whoso
shall offend one of these little ones, it were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and he were drowned in the depths of the sea." [Matthew
18:6]
These sayings are not contrary, nay, they are exceedingly in accord. For
when the offense is with us, then woe unto us, but when not with us, not so. And
again, Woe to (that man) through whom "the name of God is blasphemed."
[Romans 2:24] How then if I do what is right in anything, but another
blasphemes? That is nothing to me, but only to him: for through him (God) was
blasphemed. "And how is it possible to do what is right in anything, and yet give

a handle to the rest?" Whence will you that I bring examples— from present, or
from old times? Not to be easily scared ([ψοφοδεεἵς]), shall we speak to the very
point now in hand? Paul judaized in Jerusalem, but in Antioch not so: he
judaized, and they were offended (p. 282, note 3), but those had no right to be
offended. He is said to have saluted both Nero's cupbearer and his concubine:
what, think ye, must they have said against him because of this? But they had no
right to do so. Since, if he drew them to him for loose living or any wicked acts,
one might well be offended: but if in order to right living, what is there to be
offended at? Let me mention something that happened to one of my
acquaintance. The wrath of God once fell upon (a city), and he being very young
(was) in the order of deacon. The bishop was absent at the time, and of the
presbyters none took thought for the matter, but indiscriminately they caused in
one night immense numbers of people to be baptized all at once, and they did
indiscriminately receive baptism, all of them ignorant of everything: these he
took apart by a hundred or two hundred together, and discoursed to them, not
upon any other subject, but only on the sacraments, so that the unbaptized also
were not allowed to be present. Many thought he did this because he coveted
rule. But he cared not for that: neither however did he continue the thing for a
(longer) time, but immediately desisted. When then? Was he the cause of the
scandal? I think not. For if indeed he had done this without cause, they might
with reason have ascribed it to him: and so again, if he had continued to do so.
For when anything of what is pleasing to God is hindered by another's taking
offense, it is right to take no notice: but then is the time to mind it, when we are
not forced because of him to offend God. For, say, if, while we are discoursing
and putting drunkards to shame ([σκωπτόντων]), any one take offense— am I to
give over speaking? Hear Christ say, "Will ye also go away?" [John 6:67] So
then, the right thing is, neither to take no notice, nor to take too much, of the
weakness of the many. Do we not see the physicians acting thus: how, when it
may be done, they humor the whims of their patients, but when the gratification
does harm, then they will not spare? Always it is good to know the right mean.