## Homily 13 on the Statues
A further thanksgiving to God for the change in the late melancholy
aspect of affairs. Reminiscence of those who were dragged away, and
punished because of the sedition. Exposition on the subject of the creation of
man, and of his having received a natural law. Of the complete
accomplishment of abstinence from oaths.
1. With the same introduction and prelude that I began yesterday and the
day before, I shall begin today. Now again I will say, "Blessed be God!" What a
day did we see last Wednesday! and what in the present! On that day how heavy
was the gloom! How bright the calm of the present! That was the day when that
fearful tribunal was set in the city, and shook the hearts of all, and made the day
to seem no better than night; not because the beams of the sun were
extinguished, but because that despondency and fear darkened your eyes.
Wherefore, that we may reap the more pleasure, I wish to relate a few of the
circumstances which then occurred; for I perceive that a narrative of these things
will be serviceable to you, and to all who shall come afterwards. Besides, to
those who have been delivered from shipwreck, it is sweet to remember the
waves, and the tempest, and the winds, when they have come into port. And to
those who have fallen into sickness, it is an agreeable thing, when the sickness is
over, to talk over with others the fevers by which they were nearly brought to the
grave. When terrors have passed away, there is a pleasure in relating those
terrors; the soul no longer fearing them, but deriving therefrom more
cheerfulness. The remembrance of past evils always makes the present
prosperity to appear more strikingly.
2. When the greater portion of the city had taken refuge from the fear and
danger of that occasion, in secret places, in deserts, and in hollows; terror
besetting them in all directions; and the houses were empty of women, and the

forum of men, and scarce two or three appeared walking together across it, and
even these going about as if they had been animated corpses: at this period, I
proceeded to the tribunal of justice, for the purpose of seeing the end of these
transactions; and there, beholding the fragments of the city collected together, I
marvelled most of all at this, that although a multitude was around the doors,
there was the profoundest silence, as though there had been no man there, all
looking upon one another; not one daring to enquire of his neighbour, nor to hear
anything from him; for each regarded his neighbour with suspicion; since many
already, having been dragged away, beyond all expectation, from the midst of the
forum, were now confined within. Thus we all alike looked up to heaven, and
stretched out our hands in silence, expecting help from above, and beseeching
God to stand by those who were brought to judgment, to soften the hearts of the
judges, and to make their sentence a merciful one. And just as when some
persons on land, beholding others suffering shipwreck, cannot indeed go near to
them, and reach out the hand, and relieve their distress, being kept back from
them by the waves; yet away on the shore, with outstretched hands and tears,
they supplicate God that He may help the drowning; so there in like manner, did
all silently and mentally call upon God, pleading for those at the tribunal, as for
men surrounded by the waves, that He would stretch out His hand, and not suffer
the vessel to be overwhelmed, nor the judgment of those under trial to end in an
utter wreck. Such was the state of things in front of the doors; but when I entered
within the court, other sights I saw which were still more awful; soldiers armed
with swords and clubs, and strictly keeping the peace for the judges within. For
since all the relatives of those under trial, whether wives, or mothers, or
daughters, or fathers, stood before the doors of the seat of justice; in order that if
any one happened to be led away to execution, yet no one inflamed at the sight
of the calamity might raise any tumult or disturbance; the soldiers drove them all
afar off; thus preoccupying their mind with fear.
3. One sight there was, more pitiable than all; a mother, and a sister of a
certain person, who was among those under trial within, sat at the very vestibule