cannot at the present time go through all that relates to them; but when you have
learned some points from those (instances) which I shall set before you, you will
know the others also.
Will you then that we begin with the Passion itself? What then says the
type? "Take a lamb for an house, and kill it, and do as he commanded and
ordained." [Exodus 12:3] But it is not so with Christ. He does not command this
to be done, but Himself becomes It, by offering Himself a Sacrifice and Oblation
to His Father.
4. See how the type was "given by Moses," but the "Truth came by Jesus
Christ." [Exodus 17:12]
Again, when the Amalekites warred in Mount Sinai, the hands of Moses
were supported, being stayed up by Aaron and Hur standing on either side of
him [Exodus 17:12]; but when Christ came, He of Himself stretched forth His
Hands upon the Cross. Have you observed how the type "was given," but "the
Truth came"?
Again, the Law said, "Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
that are written in this book." [Deuteronomy 27:26, Septuagint] But what says
grace? "Come unto Me, all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest" [Matthew 11:28]; and Paul, "Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law, being made a curse for us." [Galatians 3:13]
Since then we have enjoyed such "grace" and "truth," I exhort you that we
be not more slothful by reason of the greatness of the gift; for the greater the
honor of which we have been deemed worthy, the greater our debt of excellence;
for one who has received but small benefits, even though he makes but small
returns, does not deserve the same condemnation; but he who has been raised to
the highest summit of honor, and yet manifests groveling and mean dispositions,
will be worthy of much greater punishment. May I never have to suspect this of
you. For we trust in the Lord that you have winged your souls for heaven, that
you have removed from earth, that being in the world you handle not the things
of the world; yet though so persuaded, we do not cease thus continually to exhort

you. In the games of the heathen, they whom all the spectators encourage are not
those who have fallen and lie supine, but those who are exerting themselves and
running still; of the others, (since they would be doing what would be of no use,
and would not be able to raise up by their encouragements men once for all
severed from victory,) they cease to take any notice. But in this case some good
may be expected, not only of you who are sober, but even of those who have
fallen, if they would but be converted. Wherefore we use every means,
exhorting, reproving, encouraging, praising, in order that we may bring about
your salvation. Be not then offended by our continual admonishing concerning
the Christian conversation, for the words are not the words of one accusing you
of sloth, but of one who has very excellent hopes respecting you. And not to you
alone, but to ourselves who speak them, are these words said, yea, and shall be
said, for we too need the same teaching; so though they be spoken by us, yet
nothing hinders their being spoken to us, (for the Word, when it finds a man in
fault, amends him, when clear and free, sets him as far off from it as possible,)
and we ourselves are not pure from transgressions. The course of healing is the
same for all, the medicines are set forth for all, only the application is not the
same, but is made according to the choice of those who use the medicines; for
one who will handle the remedy as he ought, gains some benefit from the
application, while he who does not place it upon the wound, makes the evil
greater, and brings it to the most painful end. Let us then not fret when we are
being healed, but much rather rejoice, even though the system of discipline bring
bitter pains, for hereafter it will show to us fruit sweeter than any. Let us then do
all to this end, that we may depart to that world, cleared of the wounds and
strokes which the teeth of sin make in the soul, so that having become worthy to
behold the countenance of Christ, we may be delivered in that day, not to the
avenging and cruel powers, but to those who are able to bring us to that
inheritance of the heavens which is prepared for them that love Him; to which
may it come to pass that we all attain, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.