husbandry, and other departments of this life, when some plan is proposed, the
husbandman will not undertake to navigate the ship, nor the soldier to till the
ground, nor the pilot to lead an army, under pain of ten thousand deaths? Is it not
plainly this? That each foresees the danger which would attend his
incompetence? Well, where the loss is concerned with trifles shall we use so
much forethought, and refuse to yield to the pressure of compulsion, but where
the punishment is eternal, as it is for those who know not how to handle the
Priesthood, shall we want only and inconsiderately run into so great danger, and
then advance, as our excuse, the pressing entreaties of others? But He who one
day will judge us will entertain no such plea as this. For we ought to show far
more caution in spiritual matters than in carnal. But now we are not found
exhibiting as much caution. For tell me: if supposing a man to be an artificer,
when he is not so, we invited him to do a piece of work, and he were to respond
to the call, and then having set his hand to the material prepared for the building,
were to spoil the wood and spoil the stone, and so to build the house that it
straightway fell to pieces, would it be sufficient excuse for him to allege that he
had been urged by others and did not come of his own accord? In no wise; and
very reasonably and justly so. For he ought to have refused even at the call of
others. So for the man who only spoils wood and stone, there will be no escape
from paying the penalty, and is he who destroys souls, and builds the temple of
God carelessly, to think that the compulsion of others is his warrant for escaping
punishment? Is not this very absurd? For I omit the fact as yet that no one is able
to compel the man who is unwilling. But be it that he was subjected to excessive
pressure and various artful devices, and then fell into a snare; will this therefore
rescue him from punishment? I beseech you, let us not deceive ourselves, and
pretend that we know not what is obvious to a mere child. For surely this
pretence of ignorance will not be able to profit in the day of reckoning. You were
not ambitious, you say, of receiving this high office, conscious of your own
weakness. Well and good. Then you ought, with the same mind, to have declined
the solicitation of others; or, when no one called you, were you weak and

incapable, but when those were found ready to offer you this dignity, did you
suddenly become competent? What ludicrous nonsense! Worthy of the extremest
punishment. For this reason also the Lord counsels the man who wishes to build
a tower, not to lay the foundation before he has taken his own ability to build
into account, lest he should give the passers by innumerable opportunities of
mocking at him. But in his case the penalty only consists in becoming a
laughing-stock; while in that before us the punishment is that of fire
unquenchable, and of an undying worm, [Isaiah 66:24] gnashing of teeth, outer
darkness, and being cut asunder, and having a portion with the hypocrites.
But my accusers are unwilling to consider any of these things. For
otherwise they would cease to blame a person who is unwilling to perish without
cause. It is not the management of grain and barley, oxen or sheep, that is now
under our consideration, nor any such like matters, but the very Body of Jesus.
For the Church of Christ, according to St. Paul, is Christ's Body, and he who is
entrusted with its care ought to train it up to a state of healthiness, and beauty
unspeakable, and to look everywhere, lest any spot or wrinkle, [Ephesians 5:27]
or other like blemish should mar its vigor and comeliness. For what is this but to
make it appear worthy, so far as human power can, of the incorruptible and everblessed Head which is set over it? If they who are ambitious of reaching an
athletic condition of body need the help of physicians and trainers, and exact
diet, and constant exercise, and a thousand other rules (for the omission of the
merest trifle upsets and spoils the whole), how shall they to whose lot falls the
care of the body, which has its conflict not against flesh and blood, but against
powers unseen, be able to keep it sound and healthy, unless they far surpass
ordinary human virtue, and are versed in all healing proper for the soul?
3. Pray, are you not aware that that body is subject to more diseases and
assaults than this flesh of ours, is more quickly corrupted, and more slow to
recover? And by those who have the healing of these bodies, various medicines
have been discovered, and an apparatus of different instruments, and diet
suitable for the sick; and often the condition of the atmosphere is of itself enough