was said in the Gospel, that "the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." Wherefore he again
exclaims in his Epistle, "Every one that believeth that Jesus is the Christ, has been born of God;"
knowing Jesus Christ to be one and the same, to whom the gates of heaven were opened, because
of His taking upon Him flesh: who shall also come in the same flesh in which He suffered, revealing
the glory of the Father.
9. Concurring with these statements, Paul, speaking to the Romans, declares: "Much more they
who receive abundance of grace and righteousness for [eternal] life, shall reign by one, Christ
Jesus." It follows from this, that he knew nothing of that Christ who flew away from Jesus; nor
did he of the Saviour above, whom they hold to be impassible. For if, in truth, the one suffered,
and the other remained incapable of suffering, and the one was born, but the other descended upon
him who was born, and left him again, it is not one, but two, that are shown forth. But that the
apostle did know Him as one, both who was born and who suffered, namely Christ Jesus, he again
says in the same Epistle: "Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized in Christ Jesus were
baptized in His death? that like as Christ rose from the dead, so should we also walk in newness
of life." But again, showing that Christ did suffer, and was Himself the Son of God, who died
for us, and redeemed us with His blood at the time appointed beforehand, he says: "For how is it,
that Christ, when we were yet without strength, in due time died for the ungodly? But God
commendeth His love towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more,
then, being now justified by His blood, we shall be saved from wrath through Him. For if, when
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of His Son; much more, being reconciled,
we shall be saved by His life." He declares in the plainest manner, that the same Being who was
laid hold of, and underwent suffering, and shed His blood for us, was both Christ and the Son of
God, who did also rise again, and was taken up into heaven, as he himself [Paul] says: "But at the
same time, [it, is] Christ [that] died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God." And again, "Knowing that Christ, rising from the dead, dieth no more:" for, as himself
foreseeing, through the Spirit, the subdivisions of evil teachers [with regard to the Lord's person],
and being desirous of cutting away from them all occasion of cavil, he says what has been already
stated, [and also declares:] "But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in
!"# $%&', which exactly agrees with Origen's quotation, and very nearly with that of Irenæus, now before us. Polycarp (Ep., c.
vii.) seems to allude to the passage as we have it now, and so does Ignatius (Ep. Smyr., c. v.). See the question discussed by
Burton, in his Ante-Nicene Testimonies [to the Div. of Christ. Another work of Burton has a similar name. See British Critic,
vol. ii. (of 1827), p. 265].