for you; for if you hang up the Gospel and do nothing, it will do you no such
great good. But if you have this little coffer, you have a defence against the
devil, you give wings to your prayer, you make your house holy, having meat for
the King [Matthew 25:34] there laid up in store. And for this reason let the little
coffer be placed also near the bed , and the night will not be troubled with
fantasies. Only let nothing be cast into it, which is the fruit of injustice. For this
thing is charity; and it cannot be that charity should ever spring out of
hardheartedness.
Will you have mention also of the resources out of which you should make
your deposits, so as in this respect also to make this kind of contribution easy?
The handicraft man, for instance, the sandal-maker, or the leather-cutter, or the
brass-founder, or any other artificer—when he sells any article of his trade, let
him give the first-fruits of its price unto God: let him cast in a small portion here,
and assign something to God out of his portion, though it be rather scanty. For
neither do I ask any great thing; but so much as the childish ones among the
Jews , full as they are of innumerable evils, just so much let us cast in, we who
look forward to heaven. And this I say not as laying down a law, neither as
forbidding more, but as recommending a deposit of not less than a tenth part.
And this also do thou practise not in selling only, but also in buying and
receiving a recompense. Let those also who possess land observe this law in
regard to their rents: yea, let it be a law for all who gather their incomes in an
honest way. For with those who demand usury I have no concern, neither with
soldiers who do violence to others and turn to their own advantage their
neighbors' calamities. Since from that quarter God will accept nothing. But these
things I say to those who gather their substance by righteous labor.
Yea, and if we establish ourselves in this kind of habit, we are ever after
stung by our conscience if ever we omit this rule; and after a while we shall not
even think it a hard thing; and by degrees we shall arrive at the greater things,
and by practising how to despise wealth, and by pulling up the root of evils, we
shall both pass the present life in peace, and obtain the life to come; which may

it be the portion of us all to attain unto, etc. etc.

## Homily 44 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 16:10
Now if Timothy come to you , see that he be with you without fear.
Perhaps some one may think there is something unworthy of Timothy's
courage in this piece of advice. But not on Timothy's account is this said, but for
the hearers' sake: lest by their design against him they should hurt themselves:
since he for his part had his station always in the way of dangers.
"For as a child serves a father," says he, "so he served with me in
furtherance of the Gospel." [Philippians 2:22] But lest from boldness towards
the disciple they should proceed also to the teacher, and become worse, he
checks them from afar off, saying, "that he may be with you without fear;" that
is, that none of those desperate persons rise up against him. For he intended
perhaps to rebuke them about the things concerning which Paul also had written:
and indeed Paul professed to send him for this very reason. "For I have sent
Timothy unto you," says he, [1 Corinthians 4:17] "who shall put you in
remembrance of my ways in Christ even as I teach every where in every
Church." In order then that they might not through confidence in their high birth
and wealth, and the support of the people, and the wisdom from without, attack
him and spit upon him and plot against him, being grieved at the reproofs which
came from him; or lest in revenge for the teacher's rebuke they should demand
satisfaction of him, so punishing the other; therefore he says, "that he be without
fear with you." As if he had said, "Tell me not of those who are without, the
Gentiles and unbelievers. It is your part that I require, you for whom also the
whole Epistle was composed," the persons also whom in the beginning and the
outset he had frightened. Wherefore he says, "with you."
Then in virtue of his ministry he sets him forth as a person to be fully