John 11:40
"Said I not unto you, that if you would believe, you should see the glory of God?"
3. A great blessing truly is faith, great, and one which makes great those
who hold it rightly with (good) living. By this men (are enabled) to do the things
of God in His name. And well did Christ say, "If you have faith you shall say
unto this mountain, Remove, and it shall remove" [Matthew 17:20]; and again,
"He that believes in Me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater works
than these shall he do." [John 14:12] What means He by "greater"? Those which
the disciples are seen after this to work. For even the shadow of Peter raised a
dead man; and so the power of Christ was the more proclaimed. Since it was not
so wonderful that He while alive should work miracles, as that when He was
dead others should be enabled to work in His name greater than He wrought.
This was an indisputable proof of the Resurrection; nor if (that Resurrection) had
been seen by all, would it have been equally believed. For men might have said
that it was an appearance, but one who saw that by His name alone greater
miracles were wrought than when He conversed with men, could not disbelieve
unless he were very senseless. A great blessing then is faith when it arises from
glowing feelings, great love, and a fervent soul; it makes us truly wise, it hides
our human meanness, and leaving reasonings beneath, it philosophizes about
things in heaven; or rather what the wisdom of men cannot discover, it
abundantly comprehends and succeeds in. Let us then cling to this, and not
commit to reasonings what concerns ourselves. For tell me, why have not the
Greeks been able to find out anything? Did they not know all the wisdom of the
heathen? Why then could they not prevail against fishermen and tentmakers, and
unlearned persons? Was it not because the one committed all to argument, the
others to faith? And so these last were victorious over Plato and Pythagoras, in
short, over all that had gone astray; and they surpass those whose lives had been
worn out in astrology and geometry, mathematics and arithmetic, and who had

been thoroughly instructed in every sort of learning, and were as much superior
to them as true and real philosophers are superior to those who are by nature
foolish and out of their senses. For observe, these men asserted that the soul was
immortal, or rather, they did not merely assert this, but persuaded others of it.
The Greeks, on the contrary, did not at first know what manner of thing the soul
was, and when they had found out, and had distinguished it from the body, they
were again in the same case, the one asserting that it was incorporeal, the other
that it was corporeal and was dissolved with the body. Concerning heaven again,
the one said that it had life and was a god, but the fishermen both taught and
persuaded that it was the work and device of God. Now that the Greeks should
use reasonings is nothing wonderful, but that those who seem to be believers,
that "they" should be found carnal, this is what may justly be lamented. And on
this account they have gone astray, some saying that they know God as He
knows Himself, a thing which not even any of those Greeks have dared to assert;
others that God cannot beget without passion, not even allowing Him any
superiority over men; others again, that a righteous life and exact conversation
avail nothing. But it is not the time to refute these things now. 4. Yet that a right
faith avails nothing if the life be corrupt, both Christ and Paul declare, having
taken the more care for this latter part; Christ when He teaches, "Not every one
that says unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven" [Matthew
7:21]; and again, "Many will say unto Me in that day, Lord, have we not
prophesied in Your Name? And I will profess unto them, I never knew you;
depart from Me, you that work iniquity" [Matthew 22:23]; (for they who take not
heed to themselves, easily slip away into wickedness, even though they have a
right faith;) and Paul, when in his letter to the Hebrews he thus speaks and
exhorts them; "Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord." [Hebrews 12:14] By "holiness," meaning chastity, so that it
behooved each to be content with his own wife, and not have to do with any
other woman; for it is impossible that one not so contented should be saved; he
must assuredly perish though he have ten thousand right actions, since with