swear by your head." [Matthew 5:36] But thou so despisest Him as to swear
even by His glory. "But what shall I do," says one, "with those who impose
necessity on me?" What kind of necessity can there be, O man? Let all men
understand that you will choose to suffer anything rather than transgress the law
of God; and they will abstain from compelling you. For as a proof that it is not
an oath which renders a man worthy of credit, but the testimony of his life, the
uprightness of his conversation, and his good reputation, many have often split
their throats with swearing, and yet have been able to convince no one; whereas
others by a mere expression of assent, have been esteemed more deserving of
belief than they who swore never so much. Knowing, therefore, all these things,
and placing before our eyes the punishment that is in store for those who swear,
as well as for those who swear falsely, let us abstain from this evil custom, that
advancing from hence to the correction of what remains, we may enjoy the
blessedness of the life to come, which God grant that we may all be found
worthy to obtain, by the grace and love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through Whom and with Whom to the Father with the Holy Ghost be glory, and
power, and honour, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 8 on the Statues
An exhortation to virtue— and particularly upon the passage, "God
was walking in Paradise in the cool of the day:"— and again on the subject
of abstaining from oaths.
You have lately heard, how all Scripture brings consolation and comfort,
although it be an historical narrative. For instance, "In the beginning, God
created the heaven and the earth," [Genesis 1:1] was an historical declaration;
but it was shown in our discourse, that this sentence was one pregnant with
comfort; as, for example, that God made us a twofold table, by spreading out the
sea and the land at the same time; by kindling above the twofold lights, the sun
and moon; by determining the twofold seasons of their course, the day and night,
the one for labour, and the other for rest. For the night ministers to us no less
benefit than the day. But as I said with reference to trees, those which are barren,
rival in their utility those which bear fruit; since we are thus not necessitated to
touch those trees which are pleasant for food, for the purposes of building. The
wild and untamed animals are also subservient to our need, in no less a degree
than the tame animals; by driving us together, through the fear of them, into
cities; making us more cautious, and binding us to one another; and by
exercising the strength of some, and freeing others from their sicknesses; for the
physicians concoct many medicines out of these; and by reminding us of our
ancient sin. For when I hear it said, "The fear of you, and the dread of you, shall
be upon all the wild beasts of the earth:" [Genesis 9:2] and then observe, that
this honour was afterwards curtailed, I am reminded of sin, which has dissipated
the fear of us, and undermined our authority. Thus I become a better and a wiser
man, while I learn the harm that sin has occasioned us. As then, what I said was,
that the things alluded to, and others of a similar kind, which God, who is the
Maker, knows of, contribute not a little to our present life; so now also I say, that