SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.9.

priesthood, and the abbot under whose authority he fights for Christ
his King, ask that he be made a priest, the bishop shall take him and
ordain him in such place as he shall choose fitting." And Jerome
says (Ad Rustic. Monach., Ep. cxxv): "In the monastery so live as to
deserve to be a clerk." Therefore parish priests and archdeacons are
more perfect than religious.
Objection 5: Further, bishops are in a more perfect state than
religious, as shown above (Article 7). But parish priests and
archdeacons. through having cure of souls, are more like bishops
than religious are. Therefore they are more perfect.
Objection 6: Further, virtue "is concerned with the difficult and the
good" (Ethic. ii, 3). Now it is more difficult to lead a good life in the
office of parish priest or archdeacon than in the religious state.
Therefore parish priests and archdeacons have more perfect virtue
than religious.
On the contrary, It is stated (XIX, qu. ii, cap. Duce): "If a man while
governing the people in his church under the bishop and leading a
secular life is inspired by the Holy Ghost to desire to work out his
salvation in a monastery or under some canonical rule, since he is
led by a private law, there is no reason why he should be
constrained by a public law." Now a man is not led by the law of the
Holy Ghost, which is here called a "private law," except to something
more perfect. Therefore it would seem that religious are more perfect
than archdeacons or parish priests.
I answer that, When we compare things in the point of supereminence, we look not at that in which they agree, but at that
wherein they differ. Now in parish priests and archdeacons three
things may be considered, their state, their order, and their office. It
belongs to their state that they are seculars, to their order that they
are priests or deacons, to their office that they have the cure of souls
committed to them.
Accordingly, if we compare these with one who is a religious by
state, a deacon or priest by order, having the cure of souls by office,
as many monks and canons regular have, this one will excel in the
first point, and in the other points he will be equal. But if the latter
differ from the former in state and office, but agree in order, such as
religious priests and deacons not having the cure of souls, it is

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.183, C.9.

evident that the latter will be more excellent than the former in state,
less excellent in office, and equal in order.
We must therefore consider which is the greater, preeminence of
state or of office; and here, seemingly, we should take note of two
things, goodness and difficulty. Accordingly, if we make the
comparison with a view to goodness, the religious state surpasses
the office of parish priest or archdeacon, because a religious
pledges his whole life to the quest of perfection, whereas the parish
priest or archdeacon does not pledge his whole life to the cure of
souls, as a bishop does, nor is it competent to him, as it is to a
bishop, to exercise the cure of souls in chief, but only in certain
particulars regarding the cure of souls committed to his charge, as
stated above (Article 6, ad 2). Wherefore the comparison of their
religious state with their office is like the comparisons of the
universal with the particular, and of a holocaust with a sacrifice
which is less than a holocaust according to Gregory (Hom. xx in
Ezech.). Hence it is said (XIX, qu. i, can. Clerici qui monachorum.):
"Clerics who wish to take the monastic vows through being desirous
of a better life must be allowed by their bishops the free entrance
into the monastery."
This comparison, however, must be considered as regarding the
genus of the deed; for as regards the charity of the doer it happens
sometimes that a deed which is of less account in its genus is of
greater merit if it be done out of greater charity.
On the other hand, if we consider the difficulty of leading a good life
in religion, and in the office of one having the cure of souls, in this
way it is more difficult to lead a good life together with the exercise
of the cure of souls, on account of outward dangers: although the
religious life is more difficult as regards the genus of the deed, by
reason of the strictness of religious observance. If, however, the
religious is also without orders, as in the case of religious lay
brethren, then it is evident that the pre-eminence of order excels in
the point of dignity, since by holy orders a man is appointed to the
most august ministry of serving Christ Himself in the sacrament of
the altar. For this requires a greater inward holiness than that which
is requisite for the religious state, since as Dionysius says (Eccl.
Hier. vi) the monastic order must follow the priestly orders, and
ascend to Divine things in imitation of them. Hence, other things
being equal, a cleric who is in holy orders, sins more grievously if he
do something contrary to holiness than a religious who is not in holy