the fuel of passion.
Let us then bind the horse, that we may subdue the rider; let us clip the
wings of our wrath, so the evil shall no more rise to a height. A keen passion is
anger, keen, and skillful to steal our souls; therefore we must on all sides guard
against its entrance. It were strange that we should be able to tame wild beasts,
and yet should neglect our own savage minds. Wrath is a fierce fire, it devours
all things; it harms the body, it destroys the soul, it makes a man deformed and
ugly to look upon; and if it were possible for an angry person to be visible to
himself at the time of his anger, he would need no other admonition, for nothing
is more displeasing than an angry countenance. Anger is a kind of drunkenness,
or rather it is more grievous than drunkenness, and more pitiable than
(possession of) a dæmon. But if we be careful not to be loud in speech, we shall
find this the best path to sobriety of conduct. And therefore Paul would take
away clamor as well as anger, when he says, "Let all anger and clamor be put
away from you." [Ephesians 4:31] Let us then obey this teacher of all wisdom,
and when we are angry with our servants, let us consider our own trespasses, and
be ashamed at their forbearance. For when you are insolent, and your servant
bears your insults in silence, when you act unseemly, he like a wise man, take
this instead of any other warning. Though he is your servant, he is still a man,
has an immortal soul, and has been honored with the same gifts as you by your
common Lord. And if he who is our equal in more important and more spiritual
things, on account of some poor and trifling human superiority so meekly bears
our injuries, what pardon can we deserve, what excuse can we make, who
cannot, or rather will not, be as wise through fear of God, as he is through fear of
us? Considering then all these things, and calling to mind our own
transgressions, and the common nature of man, let us be careful at all times to
speak gently, that being humble in heart we may find rest for our souls, both that
which now is, and that which is to come; which may we all attain, by the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 27 on the Gospel of John
John 3:12-13
"If I have told you earthly things, and you believe not, how shall you believe, if I
tell you of heavenly things? And no man has ascended up to heaven, but He that
came down from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven."
1. What I have often said I shall now repeat, and shall not cease to say.
What is that? It is that Jesus, when about to touch on sublime doctrines, often
contains Himself by reason of the infirmity of His hearers, and dwells not for a
continuance on subjects worthy of His greatness, but rather on those which
partake of condescension. For the sublime and great, being but once uttered, is
sufficient to establish that character, as far as we are able to hear it; but unless
more lowly sayings, and such as are near to the comprehension of the hearers,
were continually uttered, the more sublime would not readily take hold on a
groveling listener. And therefore of the sayings of Christ more are lowly than
sublime. But yet that this again may not work another mischief, by detaining the
disciple here below, He does not merely set before men His inferior sayings
without first telling them why He utters them; as, in fact, He has done in this
place. For when He had said what He did concerning Baptism, and the
Generation by grace which takes place on earth, being desirous to admit them to
that His own mysterious and incomprehensible Generation, He holds it in
suspense for a while, and admits them not, and then tells them His reason for not
admitting them. What is that? It is, the dullness and infirmity of His hearers. And
referring to this He added the words, "If I have told you earthly things, and you
believe not, how shall you believe if I tell you of heavenly things?" so that
wherever He says anything ordinary and humble, we must attribute this to the
infirmity of His audience.
The expression "earthly things," some say is here used of the wind; that is,