SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.4.

of work, whereby a man may lawfully gain a livelihood.
In so far as manual labor is directed to the removal of idleness, or
the affliction of the body, it does not come under a necessity of
precept if we consider it in itself, since there are many other means
besides manual labor of afflicting the body or of removing idleness:
for the flesh is afflicted by fastings and watchings, and idleness is
removed by meditation on the Holy Scriptures and by the divine
praises. Hence a gloss on Ps. 118:82, "My eyes have failed for Thy
word," says: "He is not idle who meditates only on God's word; nor
is he who works abroad any better than he who devotes himself to
the study of knowing the truth." Consequently for these reasons
religious are not bound to manual labor, as neither are seculars,
except when they are so bound by the statutes of their order. Thus
Jerome says (Ep. cxxv ad Rustic Monach.): "The Egyptian
monasteries are wont to admit none unless they work or labor, not
so much for the necessities of life, as for the welfare of the soul, lest
it be led astray by wicked thoughts." But in so far as manual labor is
directed to almsgiving, it does not come under the necessity of
precept, save perchance in some particular case, when a man is
under an obligation to give alms, and has no other means of having
the wherewithal to assist the poor: for in such a case religious would
be bound as well as seculars to do manual labor.
Reply to Objection 1: This command of the Apostle is of natural law:
wherefore a gloss on 2 Thess. 3:6, "That you withdraw yourselves
from every brother walking disorderly," says, "otherwise than the
natural order requires," and he is speaking of those who abstained
from manual labor. Hence nature has provided man with hands
instead of arms and clothes, with which she has provided other
animals, in order that with his hands he may obtain these and all
other necessaries. Hence it is clear that this precept, even as all the
precepts of the natural law, is binding on both religious and seculars
alike. Yet not everyone sins that works not with his hands, because
those precepts of the natural law which regard the good of the many
are not binding on each individual, but it suffices that one person
apply himself to this business and another to that; for instance, that
some be craftsmen, others husbandmen, others judges, and others
teachers, and so forth, according to the words of the Apostle (1 Cor.
12:17), "If the whole body were the eye, where would be the hearing?
If the whole were the hearing, where would be the smelling?"
Reply to Objection 2: This gloss is taken from Augustine's De

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.4.

operibus Monachorum, cap. 21, where he speaks against certain
monks who declared it to be unlawful for the servants of God to work
with their hands, on account of our Lord's saying (Mt. 6:25): "Be not
solicitous for your life, what you shall eat." Nevertheless his words
do not imply that religious are bound to work with their hands, if they
have other means of livelihood. This is clear from his adding: "He
wishes the servants of God to make a living by working with their
bodies." Now this does not apply to religious any more than to
seculars, which is evident for two reasons. First, on account of the
way in which the Apostle expresses himself, by saying: "That you
withdraw yourselves from every brother walking disorderly." For he
calls all Christians brothers, since at that time religious orders were
not as yet founded. Secondly, because religious have no other
obligations than what seculars have, except as required by the rule
they profess: wherefore if their rule contain nothing about manual
labor, religious are not otherwise bound to manual labor than
seculars are.
Reply to Objection 3: A man may devote himself in two ways to all
the spiritual works mentioned by Augustine in the passage quoted:
in one way with a view to the common good, in another with a view
to his private advantage. Accordingly those who devote themselves
publicly to the aforesaid spiritual works are thereby exempt from
manual labor for two reasons: first, because it behooves them to be
occupied exclusively with such like works; secondly, because those
who devote themselves to such works have a claim to be supported
by those for whose advantage they work.
On the other hand, those who devote themselves to such works not
publicly but privately as it were, ought not on that account to be
exempt from manual labor, nor have they a claim to be supported by
the offerings of the faithful, and it is of these that Augustine is
speaking. For when he says: "They can sing hymns to God even
while working with their hands; like the craftsmen who give tongue
to fable telling without withdrawing their hands from their work," it is
clear that he cannot refer to those who sing the canonical hours in
the church, but to those who tell psalms or hymns as private
prayers. Likewise what he says of reading and prayer is to be
referred to the private prayer and reading which even lay people do
at times, and not to those who perform public prayers in the church,
or give public lectures in the schools. Hence he does not say:
"Those who say they are occupied in teaching and instructing," but:
"Those who say they are occupied in reading." Again he speaks of