THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.4.

doctors; so as to say that a man was assumed, inasmuch as his
nature was assumed; and because the assumption terminated in
this---that the Son of God is man.
Reply to Objection 2: The word "man" signifies human nature in the
concrete, inasmuch as it is in a suppositum; and hence, since we
cannot say a suppositum was assumed, so we cannot say a man
was assumed.
Reply to Objection 3: The Son of God is not the man whom He
assumed, but the man whose nature He assumed.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Son of God ought to have assumed

human nature abstracted from all individuals?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Son of God ought to have
assumed human nature abstracted from all individuals. For the
assumption of human nature took place for the common salvation of
all men; hence it is said of Christ (1 Tim. 4:10) that He is "the Saviour
of all men, especially of the faithful." But nature as it is in individuals
withdraws from its universality. Therefore the Son of God ought to
have assumed human nature as it is abstracted from all individuals.
Objection 2: Further, what is noblest in all things ought to be
attributed to God. But in every genus what is of itself is best.
Therefore the Son of God ought to have assumed self-existing [per
se] man, which, according to Platonists, is human nature abstracted
from its individuals. Therefore the Son of God ought to have
assumed this.
Objection 3: Further, human nature was not assumed by the Son of
God in the concrete as is signified by the word "man," as was said
above (Article 3). Now in this way it signifies human nature as it is in
individuals, as is plain from what has been said (Article 3). Therefore
the Son of God assumed human nature as it is separated from
individuals.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 11): "God the
Word Incarnate did not assume a nature which exists in pure
thought; for this would have been no Incarnation, but a false and
fictitious Incarnation." But human nature as it is separated or
abstracted from individuals is "taken to be a pure conception, since
it does not exist in itself," as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 11).
Therefore the Son of God did not assume human nature, as it is
separated from individuals.
I answer that, The nature of man or of any other sensible thing,
beyond the being which it has in individuals, may be taken in two
ways: first, as if it had being of itself, away from matter, as the
Platonists held; secondly, as existing in an intellect either human or
Divine. Now it cannot subsist of itself, as the Philosopher proves
(Metaph. vii, 26,27,29,51), because sensible matter belongs to the
specific nature of sensible things, and is placed in its definition, as