Him according to your law." [John 18:31] And there were many things that
might have held back him and those men, the signs and the miracles, and the
great patience of Him, who was suffering these things, and above all His untold
silence. For since both by His defense of Himself, and by His prayers, He had
shown His humanity, again He shows His exaltedness and the greatness of His
nature, both by His silence, and by His contemning what is said; by all leading
them on to marvel at Himself. But to none of these things did they give way.
3. For when once the reasoning powers are overwhelmed as it were by
intoxication or some wild insanity, it would be hard for the sinking soul to rise
again, if it be not very noble.
For it is fearful, it is fearful to give place to these wicked passions,
wherefore it were fit in every way to ward off and repel their entering in. For
when they have laid hold of the soul, and got the dominion over it, like as fire
lighting upon a wood, so do they kindle the flame to a blaze.
Wherefore I entreat you to do all things so as to fence off their entrance;
and not by comforting yourselves with this heartless reasoning to bring in upon
yourselves all wickedness, saying, what of this? What of that? For countless ills
have their birth from hence. For the devil, being depraved, makes use of much
craft, and exertion, and self-abasement for the ruin of men, and begins his attack
on them with things of a more trifling nature.
And mark it, he desired to bring Saul into superstition of witchcraft. But if
he had counselled this at the beginning, the other would not have given heed; for
how should he, who was even driving them out? Therefore gently and little by
little he leads him on to it. For when he had disobeyed Samuel, and had caused
the burnt-offering to be offered, when he was not present, being blamed for it, he
says, "The compulsion from the enemy was too great," and when he ought to
have bewailed, he felt as though he had done nothing.
Again God gave him the commands about the Amalekites, but he
transgressed these too. Thence he proceeded to his crimes about David, and thus
slipping easily and little by little he stayed not, until he came unto the very pit of

destruction, and cast himself in. So likewise in the case of Cain, he did not at
once urge him to slay his brother, since he would not have persuaded him, but
first wrought upon him to offer things more or less vile, saying, "This is no sin:"
in the second place he kindled envy and jealousy, saying, neither is there
anything in this; thirdly, he persuaded him to slay and to deny his murder; and
did not leave him before he had put on him the crowning act of evil.
Wherefore it is necessary for us to resist the beginning. For at any rate, even
if the first sins stopped at themselves, not even so were it right to despise the
first sins; but now they go on also to what is greater, when the mind is careless.
Wherefore we ought to do all things to remove the beginnings of them.
For look not now at the nature of the sin, that it is little, but that it becomes
a root of great sin when neglected. For if one may say something marvellous,
great sins need not so much earnestness, as such as are little, and of small
account. For the former the very nature of the sin causes us to abhor, but the little
sins by this very thing cast us into remissness; and allow us not to rouse
ourselves heartily for their removal. Wherefore also they quickly become great,
while we sleep. This one may see happening in bodies also.
So likewise in the instance of Judas, that great wickedness had its birth. For
if it had not seemed to him a little thing to steal the money of the poor, he would
not have been led on to this treachery. Unless it had seemed to the Jews a little
thing to be taken captive by vainglory, they would not have run on the rock of
becoming Christ's murderers. And indeed all evils we may see arise from this.
For no one quickly and at once rushes out into vices. For the soul has, yea it
has a shame implanted in us, and a reverence for right things; and it would not at
once become so shameless as in one act to cast away everything, but slowly, and
little by little does it perish, when it is careless. Thus also did idolatry enter in,
men being honored beyond measure, both the living and the departed; thus also
were idols worshipped; thus too did whoredom prevail, and the other evils.
And see. One man laughed unseasonably; another blamed him; a third took
away the fear, by saying, nothing comes of this. "For what is laughing? What