natural things. For if an agent is not the cause of a form as such,
neither will it be directly the cause of "being" which results from that
form; but it will be the cause of the effect, in its "becoming" only.
Now it is clear that of two things in the same species one cannot
directly cause the other's form as such, since it would then be the
cause of its own form, which is essentially the same as the form of
the other; but it can be the cause of this form for as much as it is in
matter---in other words, it may be the cause that "this matter"
receives "this form." And this is to be the cause of "becoming," as
when man begets man, and fire causes fire. Thus whenever a natural
effect is such that it has an aptitude to receive from its active cause
an impression specifically the same as in that active cause, then the
"becoming" of the effect, but not its "being," depends on the agent.
Sometimes, however, the effect has not this aptitude to receive the
impression of its cause, in the same way as it exists in the agent: as
may be seen clearly in all agents which do not produce an effect of
the same species as themselves: thus the heavenly bodies cause the
generation of inferior bodies which differ from them in species. Such
an agent can be the cause of a form as such, and not merely as
existing in this matter, consequently it is not merely the cause of
"becoming" but also the cause of "being."
Therefore as the becoming of a thing cannot continue when that
action of the agent ceases which causes the "becoming" of the
effect: so neither can the "being" of a thing continue after that action
of the agent has ceased, which is the cause of the effect not only in
"becoming" but also in "being." This is why hot water retains heat
after the cessation of the fire's action; while, on the contrary, the air
does not continue to be lit up, even for a moment, when the sun
ceases to act upon it, because water is a matter susceptive of the
fire's heat in the same way as it exists in the fire. Wherefore if it were
to be reduced to the perfect form of fire, it would retain that form
always; whereas if it has the form of fire imperfectly and inchoately,
the heat will remain for a time only, by reason of the imperfect
participation of the principle of heat. On the other hand, air is not of
such a nature as to receive light in the same way as it exists in the
sun, which is the principle of light. Therefore, since it has not root in
the air, the light ceases with the action of the sun.
Now every creature may be compared to God, as the air is to the sun
which enlightens it. For as the sun possesses light by its nature, and

as the air is enlightened by sharing the sun's nature; so God alone is
Being in virtue of His own Essence, since His Essence is His
existence; whereas every creature has being by participation, so that
its essence is not its existence. Therefore, as Augustine says (Gen.
ad lit. iv, 12): "If the ruling power of God were withdrawn from His
creatures, their nature would at once cease, and all nature would
collapse." In the same work (Gen. ad lit. viii, 12) he says: "As the air
becomes light by the presence of the sun, so is man enlightened by
the presence of God, and in His absence returns at once to
darkness."
Reply to Objection 1: "Being" naturally results from the form of a
creature, given the influence of the Divine action; just as light results
from the diaphanous nature of the air, given the action of the sun.
Wherefore the potentiality to not-being in spiritual creatures and
heavenly bodies is rather something in God, Who can withdraw His
influence, than in the form or matter of those creatures.
Reply to Objection 2: God cannot grant to a creature to be preserved
in being after the cessation of the Divine influence: as neither can He
make it not to have received its being from Himself. For the creature
needs to be preserved by God in so far as the being of an effect
depends on the cause of its being. So that there is no comparison
with an agent that is not the cause of 'being' but only of "becoming."
Reply to Objection 3: This argument holds in regard to that
preservation which consists in the removal of corruption: but all
creatures do not need to be preserved thus, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 4: The preservation of things by God is a
continuation of that action whereby He gives existence, which action
is without either motion or time; so also the preservation of light in
the air is by the continual influence of the sun.