SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.5.

kill or sell it, he shall restore five oxen for one ox and four sheep for
one sheep." Thirdly retaliation is transferred to voluntary
commutations, where action and passion are on both sides,
although voluntariness detracts from the nature of passion, as
stated above (Question 59, Article 3).
In all these cases, however, repayment must be made on a basis of
equality according to the requirements of commutative justice,
namely that the meed of passion be equal to the action. Now there
would not always be equality if passion were in the same species as
the action. Because, in the first place, when a person injures the
person of one who is greater, the action surpasses any passion of
the same species that he might undergo, wherefore he that strikes a
prince, is not only struck back, but is much more severely punished.
In like manner when a man despoils another of his property against
the latter's will, the action surpasses the passion if he be merely
deprived of that thing, because the man who caused another's loss,
himself would lose nothing, and so he is punished by making
restitution several times over, because not only did he injure a
private individual, but also the common weal, the security of whose
protection he has infringed. Nor again would there be equality of
passion in voluntary commutations, were one always to exchange
one's chattel for another man's, because it might happen that the
other man's chattel is much greater than our own: so that it becomes
necessary to equalize passion and action in commutations
according to a certain proportionate commensuration, for which
purpose money was invented. Hence retaliation is in accordance
with commutative justice: but there is no place for it in distributive
justice, because in distributive justice we do not consider the
equality between thing and thing or between passion and action
(whence the expression 'contrapassum'), but according to
proportion between things and persons, as stated above (Article 2).
Reply to Objection 1: This form of the Divine judgment is in
accordance with the conditions of commutative justice, in so far as
rewards are apportioned to merits, and punishments to sins.
Reply to Objection 2: When a man who has served the community is
paid for his services, this is to be referred to commutative, not
distributive, justice. Because distributive justice considers the
equality, not between the thing received and the thing done, but
between the thing received by one person and the thing received by
another according to the respective conditions of those persons.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.5.

Reply to Objection 3: When the injurious action is voluntary, the
injury is aggravated and consequently is considered as a greater
thing. Hence it requires a greater punishment in repayment, by
reason of a difference, not on part, but on the part of the thing.