THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.6.

manifest that it was not fitting for God to become incarnate at the
beginning of the human race before sin. For medicine is given only
to the sick. Hence our Lord Himself says (Mt. 9:12,13): "They that are
in health need not a physician, but they that are ill . . . For I am not
come to call the just, but sinners."
Nor was it fitting that God should become incarnate immediately
after sin. First, on account of the manner of man's sin, which had
come of pride; hence man was to be liberated in such a manner that
he might be humbled, and see how he stood in need of a deliverer.
Hence on the words in Gal. 3:19, "Being ordained by angels in the
hand of a mediator," a gloss says: "With great wisdom was it so
ordered that the Son of Man should not be sent immediately after
man's fall. For first of all God left man under the natural law, with the
freedom of his will, in order that he might know his natural strength;
and when he failed in it, he received the law; whereupon, by the fault,
not of the law, but of his nature, the disease gained strength; so that
having recognized his infirmity he might cry out for a physician, and
beseech the aid of grace."
Secondly, on account of the order of furtherance in good, whereby
we proceed from imperfection to perfection. Hence the Apostle says
(1 Cor. 15:46,47): "Yet that was not first which is spiritual, but that
which is natural; afterwards that which is spiritual . . . The first man
was of the earth, earthy; the second man from heaven, heavenly."
Thirdly, on account of the dignity of the incarnate Word, for on the
words (Gal. 4:4), "But when the fulness of the time was come," a
gloss says: "The greater the judge who was coming, the more
numerous was the band of heralds who ought to have preceded
him."
Fourthly, lest the fervor of faith should cool by the length of time, for
the charity of many will grow cold at the end of the world. Hence (Lk.
18:8) it is written: "But yet the Son of Man, when He cometh, shall He
find think you, faith on earth?"
Reply to Objection 1: Charity does not put off bringing assistance to
a friend: always bearing in mind the circumstances as well as the
state of the persons. For if the physician were to give the medicine at
the very outset of the ailment, it would do less good, and would hurt
rather than benefit. And hence the Lord did not bestow upon the

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.6.

human race the remedy of the Incarnation in the beginning, lest they
should despise it through pride, if they did not already recognize
their disease.
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine replies to this (De Sex Quest.
Pagan., Ep. cii), saying (Question 2) that "Christ wished to appear to
man and to have His doctrine preached to them when and where He
knew those were who would believe in Him. But in such times and
places as His Gospel was not preached He foresaw that not all,
indeed, but many would so bear themselves towards His preaching
as not to believe in His corporeal presence, even were He to raise the
dead." But the same Augustine, taking exception to this reply in his
book (De Perseverantia ix), says: "How can we say the inhabitants of
Tyre and Sidon would not believe when such great wonders were
wrought in their midst, or would not have believed had they been
wrought, when God Himself bears witness that they would have
done penance with great humility if these signs of Divine power had
been wrought in their midst?" And he adds in answer (De
Perseverantia xi): "Hence, as the Apostle says (Rm. 9:16), 'it is not of
him that willeth nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy'; Who (succors whom He will of) those who, as He foresaw,
would believe in His miracles if wrought amongst them, (while
others) He succors not, having judged them in His predestination
secretly yet justly. Therefore let us unshrinkingly believe His mercy
to be with those who are set free, and His truth with those who are
condemned."
Reply to Objection 3: Perfection is prior to imperfection, both in time
and nature, in things that are different (for what brings others to
perfection must itself be perfect); but in one and the same,
imperfection is prior in time though posterior in nature. And thus the
eternal perfection of God precedes in duration the imperfection of
human nature; but the latter's ultimate perfection in union with God
follows.