1 Corinthians 16:20
4. "All the brethren salute you. Salute one another with an holy kiss." This
addition of the "holy kiss" he makes only here. What may the reason be? They
had been widely at variance with one another on account of their saying, "I am
of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ;" on account of "one
being hungry, and another drunken;" on account of their having contentions and
jealousies and suits. And from the gifts there was much envying and great pride.
Having then knit them together by his exhortation, he naturally bids them use the
holy kiss also as a means of union: for this unites, and produces one body. This
is holy, when free from deceit and hypocrisy.

1 Corinthians 16:21
"The salutation of me Paul with my own hand;" intimates that the Epistle
was composed with great seriousness; and therefore he added,

1 Corinthians 16:22
"If any man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema."
By this one word he strikes fear into all: those who made their members the
members of an harlot; those who put stumbling blocks in the way of their
brethren by the things offered in sacrifice unto idols; those who named
themselves after men; those who refuse to believe the resurrection. And he not
only strikes fear, but also points out the way of virtue and the fountain of vice,
viz. that as when our love towards Him has become intense, there is no kind of
sin but is extinguished and cast out thereby; so when it is too weak, it causes the
same to spring up.
" Maran atha." For what reason is this word used? And wherefore too in
the Hebrew-tongue? Seeing that arrogance was the cause of all the evils, and this
arrogance the wisdom from without produced, and this was the sum and
substance of all the evils, a thing which especially distracted Corinth; in
repressing their arrogance he did not even use the Greek tongue, but the Hebrew:
signifying that so far from being ashamed of that sort of simplicity, he even
embraces it with much warmth.
But what is the meaning of " Maran atha?" "Our Lord has come." For what
reason then does he use this phrase in particular? To confirm the doctrine of the
Economy: out of which class of topics more than any other he has put together
those arguments which are the seeds of the Resurrection. And not only this, but
also to rebuke them; as if he had said, "The common Lord of all has
condescended to come down thus far, and are you in the same state, and do ye
abide in your sins? Are ye not thrilled with the excess of His love, the crown of
His blessings? Yea, consider but this one thing," says he, "and it will suffice you
for progress in all virtue, and you shall be able to extinguish all sin."

1 Corinthians 16:23
"The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you."
This is like a teacher, to help not only with advice, but also with prayers.