were let go in peace. [Acts 15:33]
No more faction. On this occasion, I suppose, it was that they received the
right hand, as he says himself, "They gave to me and Barnabas right hands of
fellowship." [Galatians 2:9] There he says, "They added nothing to me."
[Galatians 2:6] For they confirmed his view: they praised and admired it.— It
shows that even from human reasonings it is possible to see this, not to say from
the Holy Ghost only, that they sinned a sin not easy to be corrected. For such
things need not the Spirit.— It shows that the rest are not necessary, but
superfluous, seeing these things are necessary. "From which if you keep
yourselves," it says, "you shall do well." It shows that nothing is lacking to them,
but this is sufficient. For it might have been done also without letters, but that
there may be a law in writing (they send this Epistle): again, that they may obey
the law (the Apostles), also told those men (the same things), and they did this,
"and confirmed them, and having tarried a space were let go in peace."
Let us not then be offended on account of the heretics. For look, here at the
very outset of the preaching, how many offenses there were: I speak not of those
which arose from them that were without; for these were nothing: but of the
offenses which were within. For instance, first Ananias, then the "murmuring,"
then Simon the sorcerer; afterwards they that accused Peter on account of
Cornelius, next the famine, lastly this very thing, the chief of the evils. For
indeed it is impossible when any good thing has taken place, that some evil
should not also subsist along with it. Let us not then be disturbed, if certain are
offended, but let us thank God even for this, because it makes us more approved.
For not tribulations only, but even temptations also render us more illustrious. A
man is no such great lover of the truth, only for holding to it when there is none
to lead him astray from it: to hold fast to the truth when many are drawing him
away, this makes the proved man. What then? Is this why offenses come? I am
not speaking as if God were the author of them: God forbid! But I mean, that
even out of their wickedness He works good to us: it was never His wish that
they should arise: "Grant to them," He says, "that they may be one" [John

17:21]: but since offenses do come, they are no hurt, to these, but even a benefit:
just as the persecutors unwillingly benefit the Martyrs by dragging them to
martyrdom, and yet they are not driven to this by God; just so is it here. Let us
not look (only at this), that men are offended: this very thing is itself a proof of
the excellence of the doctrine— that many stimulate and counterfeit it: for it
would not be so, if it were not good. And this I will now show, and make on all
hands plain to you. Of perfumes, the fragrant spices are they which people
adulterate and counterfeit; as, for instance, the amomum leaf. For because these
are rare and of necessary use, therefore there come to be spurious imitations
likewise. Nobody would care to counterfeit any common article. The pure life
gets many a false pretender to it: no man would care to counterfeit the man of
vicious life; no, but the man of monastic life.— What then shall we say to the
heathen? There comes a heathen and says, "I wish to become a Christian, but I
know not whom to join: there is much fighting and faction among you, much
confusion: which doctrine am I to choose?" How shall we answer him? "Each of
you" (says he) "asserts, ' I speak the truth.'" (b) No doubt: this is in our favor.
For if we told you to be persuaded by arguments, you might well be perplexed:
but if we bid you believe the Scriptures, and these are simple and true, the
decision is easy for you. If any agree with the Scriptures, he is the Christian; if
any fight against them, he is far from this rule. (a) "But which am I to believe,
knowing as I do nothing at all of the Scriptures? The others also allege the same
thing for themselves. What then (c)if the other come, and say that the Scripture
has this, and you that it has something different, and you interpret the Scriptures
diversely, dragging their sense (each his own way)?" And you then, I ask, have
you no understanding, no judgment? "And how should I be able (to decide),"
says he, "I who do not even know how to judge of your doctrines? I wish to
become a learner, and you are making me immediately a teacher." If he say this,
what, say you, are we to answer him? How shall we persuade him? Let us ask
whether all this be not mere pretence and subterfuge. Let us ask whether he has
decided ([κατέγνωκε]) against the heathen (that they are wrong). The fact he will