his own person carrying on the discourse.
2. But what means, "With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged
of you or of man's day?" ([ἡμέρας]) "I judge myself unworthy," says he, "of
being judged by you." And why say I, "by you?" I will add, "by ([καὶ τὸ] [[τοῦ]])
any one else." Howbeit, let no one condemn Paul of arrogance; though he says
that no man is worthy to pass sentence concerning him. For first, he says these
things not for his own sake, but wishing to rescue others from the odium which
they had incurred from the Corinthians. And in the next place, he limits not the
matter to the Corinthians merely, but himself also he deposes from this right of
judging; saying, that to decree such things was a matter beyond his decision. At
least he adds, "I judge not my own self."
But besides what has been said, we must search out the ground upon which
these expressions were uttered. For he knew well in many cases how to speak
with high spirit: and that, not of pride or arrogance, but of a certain excellent
management [[οἰκονομίας ἀρίστης]] seeing that in the present case also he says
this, not as lifting up himself, but as taking down other men's sails, and earnestly
seeking to invest the saints with due honor. For in proof that he was one of the
very humble, hear what he says, bringing forward the testimony of his enemies
on this point; His bodily presence is weak, and his speech of no account; [2
Corinthians 10:10] and again, "Last of all, as to one born out of due time, He
appeared unto me also." [2 Corinthians 15:8] But notwithstanding, see this
lowly man, when the time called on him, to what a pitch he raises the spirit of
the disciples, not teaching pride but instilling a wholesome courage. For with
these same discoursing he says, And if the world shall be judged by you, are you
unworthy to judge the smallest matters? 1 Cor. vi. 2. For as the Christian ought
to be far removed from arrogance, so also from flattery and a mean spirit. Thus,
if any one says, "I count money as nothing, but all things here are to me as a
shadow, and a dream, and child's play;" we are not at all to charge him as
arrogant; since in this way we shall have to accuse Solomon himself of
arrogance, for speaking austerely ([φιλοσοφοῦντα]) on these things, saying

"Vanity of vanities [Ecclesiastes 1:2] all is vanity." But God forbid that we
should call the strict rule of life by the name of arrogance. Wherefore to despise
these things is not haughtiness, but greatness of soul; albeit we see kings, and
rulers, and potentates, making much of them. But many a poor man, leading a
strict life despises them; and we are not therefore to call him arrogant but
highminded: just as, on the other hand, if any be extremely addicted to them, we
do not call him lowly of heart and moderate, but weak, and poor spirited, and
ignoble. For so, should a son despise the pursuits which become his father and
affect slavish ways, we should not commend him as lowly of heart, but as base
and servile we should reproach him. What we should admire in him would be,
his despising those meaner things and making much account of what came to
him from his father. For this is arrogance, to think one's self better than one's
fellow-servants: but to pass the true sentence on things comes not of boasting,
but of strictness of life.
On this account Paul also, not to exalt himself, but to humble others, and to
keep down those who were rising up out of their places, and to persuade them to
be modest, said, "With me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you
or of man's day." Observe how he soothes the other party also. For whosoever is
told that he looks down on all alike, and deigns not to be judged of any one, will
not thenceforth any more feel pain, as though himself were the only one
excluded. For if he had said, "Of you," only, and so held his peace; this were
enough to gall them as if treated contemptuously. But now, by introducing, "nor
yet of man's day," he brought alleviation to the blow; giving them partners in the
contempt. Nay, he even softens this point again, saying, "not even do I judge
myself." Mark the expression, how entirely free from arrogance: in that not even
he himself, he says, is capable of so great exactness.
3. Then because this saying also seemed to be that of one extolling himself
greatly, this too he corrects, saying, "Yet am I not hereby justified." What then?
Ought we not to judge ourselves and our own misdeeds? Yes surely: there is
great need to do this when we sin. But Paul said not this, "For I know nothing,"