FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: The craving for wisdom, or other spiritual
goods, is sometimes called concupiscence; either by reason of a
certain likeness; or on account of the craving in the higher part of
the soul being so vehement that it overflows into the lower appetite,
so that the latter also, in its own way, tends to the spiritual good,
following the lead of the higher appetite, the result being that the
body itself renders its service in spiritual matters, according to Ps.
83:3: "My heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the living God."
Reply to Objection 2: Properly speaking, desire may be not only in
the lower, but also in the higher appetite. For it does not imply
fellowship in craving, as concupiscence does; but simply movement
towards the thing desired.
Reply to Objection 3: It belongs to each power of the soul to seek its
proper good by the natural appetite, which does not arise from
apprehension. But the craving for good, by the animal appetite,
which arises from apprehension, belongs to the appetitive power
alone. And to crave a thing under the aspect of something delightful
to the senses, wherein concupiscence properly consists, belongs to
the concupiscible power.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.30, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether concupiscence is a specific passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that concupiscence is not a specific
passion of the concupiscible power. For passions are distinguished
by their objects. But the object of the concupiscible power is
something delightful to the senses; and this is also the object of
concupiscence, as the Philosopher declares (Rhet. i, 11). Therefore
concupiscence is not a specific passion of the concupiscible faculty.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Questions. 83, qu. 33) that
"covetousness is the love of transitory things": so that it is not
distinct from love. But all specific passions are distinct from one
another. Therefore concupiscence is not a specific passion in the
concupiscible faculty.
Objection 3: Further, to each passion of the concupiscible faculty
there is a specific contrary passion in that faculty, as stated above
(Question 23, Article 4). But no specific passion of the concupiscible
faculty is contrary to concupiscence. For Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. ii, 12) that "good when desired gives rise to concupiscence;
when present, it gives joy: in like manner, the evil we apprehend
makes us fear, the evil that is present makes us sad": from which we
gather that as sadness is contrary to joy, so is fear contrary to
concupiscence. But fear is not in the concupiscible, but in the
irascible part. Therefore concupiscence is not a specific passion of
the concupiscible faculty.
On the contrary, Concupiscence is caused by love, and tends to
pleasure, both of which are passions of the concupiscible faculty.
Hence it is distinguished from the other concupiscible passions, as a
specific passion.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1; Question 23, Article 1), the
good which gives pleasure to the senses is the common object of
the concupiscible faculty. Hence the various concupiscible passions
are distinguished according to the differences of that good. Now the
diversity of this object can arise from the very nature of the object,
or from a diversity in its active power. The diversity, derived from the
nature of the active object, causes a material difference of passions:
while the difference in regard to its active power causes a formal
diversity of passions, in respect of which the passions differ