FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.113, C.2.

speaking" (Ethic. v, 11). Now this justice may be in man in two ways:
first, by simple generation, which is from privation to form; and thus
justification may belong even to such as are not in sin, when they
receive this justice from God, as Adam is said to have received
original justice. Secondly, this justice may be brought about in man
by a movement from one contrary to the other, and thus justification
implies a transmutation from the state of injustice to the aforesaid
state of justice. And it is thus we are now speaking of the
justification of the ungodly, according to the Apostle (Rm. 4:5): "But
to him that worketh not, yet believeth in Him that justifieth the
ungodly," etc. And because movement is named after its term
"whereto" rather than from its term "whence," the transmutation
whereby anyone is changed by the remission of sins from the state
of ungodliness to the state of justice, borrows its name from its term
"whereto," and is called "justification of the ungodly."
Reply to Objection 1: Every sin, inasmuch as it implies the disorder
of a mind not subject to God, may be called injustice, as being
contrary to the aforesaid justice, according to 1 Jn. 3:4: "Whosoever
committeth sin, committeth also iniquity; and sin is iniquity." And
thus the removal of any sin is called the justification of the ungodly.
Reply to Objection 2: Faith and charity imply a special directing of
the human mind to God by the intellect and will; whereas justice
implies a general rectitude of order. Hence this transmutation is
named after justice rather than after charity or faith.
Reply to Objection 3: Being called refers to God's help moving and
exciting our mind to give up sin, and this motion of God is not the
remission of sins, but its cause.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.113, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the infusion of grace is required for the

remission of guilt, i.e. for the justification of the ungodly?
Objection 1: It would seem that for the remission of guilt, which is
the justification of the ungodly, no infusion of grace is required. For
anyone may be moved from one contrary without being led to the
other, if the contraries are not immediate. Now the state of guilt and
the state of grace are not immediate contraries; for there is the
middle state of innocence wherein a man has neither grace nor guilt.
Hence a man may be pardoned his guilt without his being brought to
a state of grace.
Objection 2: Further, the remission of guilt consists in the Divine
imputation, according to Ps. 31:2: "Blessed is the man to whom the
Lord hath not imputed sin." Now the infusion of grace puts
something into our soul, as stated above (Question 110, Article 1).
Hence the infusion of grace is not required for the remission of guilt.
Objection 3: Further, no one can be subject to two contraries at
once. Now some sins are contraries, as wastefulness and
miserliness. Hence whoever is subject to the sin of wastefulness is
not simultaneously subject to the sin of miserliness, yet it may
happen that he has been subject to it hitherto. Hence by sinning with
the vice of wastefulness he is freed from the sin of miserliness. And
thus a sin is remitted without grace.
On the contrary, It is written (Rm. 3:24): "Justified freely by His
grace."
I answer that, by sinning a man offends God as stated above
(Question 71, Article 5). Now an offense is remitted to anyone, only
when the soul of the offender is at peace with the offended. Hence
sin is remitted to us, when God is at peace with us, and this peace
consists in the love whereby God loves us. Now God's love,
considered on the part of the Divine act, is eternal and
unchangeable; whereas, as regards the effect it imprints on us, it is
sometimes interrupted, inasmuch as we sometimes fall short of it
and once more require it. Now the effect of the Divine love in us,
which is taken away by sin, is grace, whereby a man is made worthy
of eternal life, from which sin shuts him out. Hence we could not
conceive the remission of guilt, without the infusion of grace.