them that He suffers all these things willingly. And mark thou, I pray you, the
accuracy of the prophet, how he foretold all things. And some things David,
some things Zechariah, had proclaimed beforehand. Let us also do likewise, and
let us sing hymns, and give up our garments to them that bear Him. For what
should we deserve, when some clothe the ass on which He was set, and others
strew the garments even under her feet; but we, seeing him naked, and not being
even commanded to strip ourselves, but to spend of what is laid by, not even so
are liberal? And when they indeed attend upon Him before and behind, but we,
when He comes unto us, send Him away, and thrust Him off and insult Him.
How sore a punishment do these things deserve, how great vengeance! Your
Lord comes unto you in need, and you are not willing so much as to listen to His
entreaty, but you blame and rebukest Him, and this, when you have heard such
words as these. But if in giving one loaf, and a little money, you are so mean,
and haughty, and backward; if you had to empty out all, what would you
become?
Do you see not those that show their magnificence in the theatre, how much
they give away to the harlots? But you give not so much as the half, nay often
not the smallest part. But the devil is exhorting to give to whom it may chance,
procuring us hell, and you give; but Christ to the needy, promising a kingdom,
and thou, far from giving, dost rather insult them, and you choose rather to obey
the devil, that you might be punished, than to submit to Christ, and be saved.
And what could be worse than this frenzy? One procures hell, the other a
kingdom, and you leave the latter, and run unto the former. And this ye send
away, when He comes unto you, that when he is far off, you call unto you. And
what you do is the same as if a king bearing a royal robe, and offering a diadem,
did not win your choice, but a robber brandishing a sword at you, and
threatening death, were to win it.
Considering these things then, beloved, let us discern the truth at length
though late, and let us grow sober. For I am now ashamed of speaking of
almsgiving, because that having often spoken on this subject, I have effected

nothing worth the exhortation. For some increase indeed has there been, but not
so much as I wished. For I see you sowing, but not with a liberal hand.
Wherefore I fear too lest ye also "reap sparingly." [2 Corinthians 9:6]
For in proof that we do sow sparingly, let us inquire, if it seem good, which
are more numerous in the city, poor or rich; and which they, who are neither poor
nor rich, but have a middle place. As, for instance, a tenth part is of rich, and a
tenth of the poor that have nothing at all, and the rest of the middle sort.
Let us distribute then among the poor the whole multitude of the city, and
you will see the disgrace how great it is. For the very rich indeed are but few, but
those that come next to them are many; again, the poor are much fewer than
these. Nevertheless, although there are so many that are able to feed the hungry,
many go to sleep in their hunger, not because those that have are not able with
ease to succor them, but because of their great barbarity and inhumanity. For if
both the wealthy, and those next to them, were to distribute among themselves
those who are in need of bread and raiment, scarcely would one poor person fall
to the share of fifty men or even a hundred. Yet nevertheless, though in such
great abundance of persons to assist them, they are wailing every day. And that
you may learn the inhumanity of the others, when the church is possessed of a
revenue of one of the lowest among the wealthy, and not of the very rich,
consider how many widows it succors every day, how many virgins; for indeed
the list of them has already reached unto the number of three thousand. Together
with these, she succors them that dwell in the prison, the sick in the caravansera,
the healthy, those that are absent from their home, those that are maimed in their
bodies, those that wait upon the altar; and with respect to food and raiment, them
that casually come every day; and her substance is in no respect diminished. So
that if ten men only were thus willing to spend, there would be no poor.
4. And what, it will be said, are our children to inherit? The principal
remains, and the income again has become more abundant, the goods being
stored up for them in Heaven.
But are you not willing to do this? At least do it by the half, at least by the