at all, or say any thing great or small in reply? Moreover, as to the vainglorious
feelings we allow in our prayers, our fastings, our almsgiving, were we to
scrutinize, them—I do not say, were God, but were we ourselves, who are the
sinners, to do this—should we be able to lift up our eyes toward heaven? Then,
as to the deceits which we devise one against another— praising a brother now,
while he is present, and discoursing as with a friend; and when he is absent,
reviling him; can we endure the punishments of all these? Then what of the
oaths? Or what of the lying? What of the perjuries? What of the unjust anger,
and of the envy with which we too often regard men when honoured, not
enemies only, but also friends? Furthermore, what of the fact, that we are pleased
when others suffer evil, and account the misfortunes of others a consolation for
our own distress?
5. But suppose the penalty were exacted for our listlessness in our solemn
assemblies what would our condition be? For this ye cannot but know, that often
while God Himself is addressing us all by His prophet, we are holding frequent
and long conversations with those near us, about matters which in no way
concern us. Passing by, then, all the rest, should He choose to exact of us the
penalty due for this sin only, what hope of salvation will there be? For do not
suppose that this offense is a small one, but if you would be aware of its
magnitude, examine how this very thing is regarded among men, and then you
will perceive the enormity of the sin. Just venture, when some magistrate is
talking to you, or rather some friend who is of somewhat superior dignity, to turn
from him, and enter into conversation with your servant; and you will then
perceive, what you venture on in dealing thus with God! For if he be any one of
the more distinguished classes, he will even demand reparation of you for such
an insult. Yet God, while He is treated with as great, and still greater contempt
than this, every day; and that not by one, or two, or three persons, but by almost
all of us; is still forbearing and longsuffering, not in regard to this alone, but to
other things which are far more grievous. For these things are what must be
admitted, and what are obvious to all, and by almost all men they are daringly

practised. But there are yet others, which the conscience of those who commit
them is privy to. Surely, if we were to think of all this; if we were to reason with
ourselves, supposing even that we were the cruelest and harshest of men, yet
upon taking a survey of the multitude of our sins, we should for very fear and
agony be unable to remember the injury done by others towards ourselves. Bear
in mind the river of fire; the envenomed worm; the fearful Judgment, where all
things shall be naked and open! Reflect, that what are now hidden things, are
then to be brought to light! But should you pardon your neighbour all these sins
which till then await their disclosure are done away with here; and when you
shall depart this life, you will not drag after you any of that chain of
transgressions; so that you receive greater things than you give. For many such
transgressions, indeed, we have often committed, which no other person knows;
and when we think, that on That Day these our sins shall lie exposed to the eyes
of all, upon the public theatre of the universe, we are in pain beyond any
punishment, being choked and strangled by our conscience. Yet this shame, great
as it is; these sins, these punishments, great as they are; there is a possibility of
purging away through forgiveness exercised toward our neighbour.
6. For indeed there is nothing equal to this virtue. Would you learn the
power of this virtue? "Though Moses and Samuel stood before Me," says God,
"my soul would not regard them." [Jeremiah 15:1] Nevertheless, those whom
Moses and Samuel were not able to snatch away from God's wrath, this precept
when observed was able to snatch away. Hence it is, that He continually exhorts
those to whom He had spoken these things, saying, "Let none of you revengefully
imagine [Jeremiah 15:1] evil against his brother in your heart," and "let none of
you think of his neighbour's malice." It is not said merely, forego wrath; but
retain it not in your mind; think not of it; part with all your resentment; do away
the sore. For you suppose that you are paying him back the injury; but you are
first tormenting yourself, and setting up your rage as an executioner within you
in every part, and tearing up your own bowels. For what can be more wretched
than a man perpetually angry? And just as maniacs, who never enjoy tranquility,