they endure: to such a degree, as I have already remarked, are they ever stung by
the good works done to their neighbors, and nothing grieves them so much as the
salvation of men. And yet He had actually retired, and had given room for their
passion to subside; but the evil was again rekindled, because a benefit was again
conferred; and the evil spirit was not so indignant as they. For he indeed departed
from the body, and gave place and fled away, uttering no sound; but these were
endeavoring now to slay, now to defame Him. That is, their first aim not
succeeding, they would fain hurt His good name.
Such a thing is envy, than which no worse evil can exist. For the adulterer
indeed enjoys some pleasure, such as it is, and in a short time accomplishes his
proper sin; but the envious man punishes himself, and takes vengeance upon
himself more than on the person whom he envies, and never ceases from his sin,
but is continually engaged in the commission thereof. For as a sow in mire, and
evil spirits in our hurt, so also does he delight in his neighbor's ills; and if
anything painful take place, then is he refreshed, and takes breath; accounting
the calamities of others his own joys, and the blessings of others his own ills;
and he considers not what pleasure may accrue to himself, but what pain to his
neighbor. These men therefore were it not meet to stone and beat to death, like
mad dogs, like destroying demons, like the very furies?
For as beetles feed on dung, so do these men on the calamities of others,
being a sort of common foes and enemies of our nature. And whereas the rest of
mankind pity even a brute when it is killed, do you, on seeing a man receive
benefits, become like a wild beast, tremble, and turn pale? Why, what can be
worse than this madness? Therefore, you see, whoremongers and publicans were
able to enter into the kingdom, but the envious, being within it, went out: For
"the children of the kingdom," it is said, "shall be cast out." And the former,
once freed from their present wickedness, attained to things which they never
looked for, while these latter lost even the good things which they had; and very
reasonably. For this turns a man into a devil, this renders one a savage demon.
Thus did the first murder arise; thus was nature forgotten; thus the earth defiled;

thus afterwards did it open its mouth, to receive yet living, and utterly destroy,
Dathan, and Korah, and Abiram, and all that multitude.
4. But to declaim against envy, one may say, is easy; but we ought to
consider also how men are to be freed from the disease. How then are we to be
rid of this wickedness? If we bear in mind, that as he who has committed
fornication cannot lawfully enter the church, so neither he that envies; nay, and
much less the latter than the former. For as things are, it is accounted even an
indifferent thing; wherefore also it is little thought of; but if its real badness be
made evident, we should easily refrain from it.
Weep then, and groan; lament, and entreat God. Learn to feel and to repent
for it, as for a grievous sin. And if you be of this mind, you will quickly be rid of
the disease.
And who knows not, one may say, that envy is an evil thing? No one indeed
is ignorant of it: yet they have not the same estimation of this passion as of
adultery and fornication. When, at least, did any one condemn himself bitterly
for having envied? When did he entreat God concerning this pest, that He would
be merciful to him? No man at any time: but if he shall fast and give a little
money to a poor man, though he be envious to the thousandth degree, he counts
himself to have done nothing horrid, held as he is in subjection by the most
accursed passion of all. Whence, for example, did Cain become such as he was?
Whence Esau? Whence the children of Laban? Whence the sons of Jacob?
Whence Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their company? Whence Miriam?
Whence Aaron? Whence the devil himself?
Herewith consider this also; that you injure not him whom you envy, but
into yourself you are thrusting the sword. For wherein did Cain injure Abel? Did
he not even against his own will send him the more quickly into the kingdom?
But himself he pierced through with innumerable evils. Wherein did Esau harm
Jacob? Did not Jacob grow wealthy, and enjoy unnumbered blessings; while he
himself both became an outcast from his father's house, and wandered in a
strange land, after that plot of his? And wherein did Jacob's sons again make