SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.6.

exceeding the virtue, and another, by falling short of the virtue.
Secondly, the diversity of vices opposed to one virtue may be
considered in respect of the corruption of the various conditions
required for that virtue. In this way an infinite number of vices are
opposed to one virtue, e.g. temperance or fortitude, according to the
infinite number of ways in which the various circumstances of a
virtue may be corrupted, so that the rectitude of virtue is forsaken.
For this reason the Pythagoreans held evil to be infinite.
Accordingly we must say that if unbelief be considered in
comparison to faith, there are several species of unbelief,
determinate in number. For, since the sin of unbelief consists in
resisting the faith, this may happen in two ways: either the faith is
resisted before it has been accepted, and such is the unbelief of
pagans or heathens; or the Christian faith is resisted after it has
been accepted, and this either in the figure, and such is the unbelief
of the Jews, or in the very manifestation of truth, and such is the
unbelief of heretics. Hence we may, in a general way, reckon these
three as species of unbelief.
If, however, the species of unbelief be distinguished according to the
various errors that occur in matters of faith, there are not
determinate species of unbelief: for errors can be multiplied
indefinitely, as Augustine observes (De Haeresibus).
Reply to Objection 1: The formal aspect of a sin can be considered in
two ways. First, according to the intention of the sinner, in which
case the thing to which the sinner turns is the formal object of his
sin, and determines the various species of that sin. Secondly, it may
be considered as an evil, and in this case the good which is forsaken
is the formal object of the sin; which however does not derive its
species from this point of view, in fact it is a privation. We must
therefore reply that the object of unbelief is the First Truth
considered as that which unbelief forsakes, but its formal aspect,
considered as that to which unbelief turns, is the false opinion that it
follows: and it is from this point of view that unbelief derives its
various species. Hence, even as charity is one, because it adheres to
the Sovereign Good, while there are various species of vice opposed
to charity, which turn away from the Sovereign Good by turning to
various temporal goods, and also in respect of various inordinate
relations to God, so too, faith is one virtue through adhering to the
one First Truth, yet there are many species of unbelief, because
unbelievers follow many false opinions.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.6.

Reply to Objection 2: This argument considers the various species
of unbelief according to various points in which errors occur.
Reply to Objection 3: Since faith is one because it believes in many
things in relation to one, so may unbelief, although it errs in many
things, be one in so far as all those things are related to one. Yet
nothing hinders one man from erring in various species of unbelief,
even as one man may be subject to various vices, and to various
bodily diseases.