Ex defluxu, corresponding to !" #$%&'%()* in the Greek.
(!"#$%&'() is the rabbinical abstract term, Godhead.
the latter occurred in the sacred text. The former might therefore be styled nameable.
Daleth would give "to the scarcely articulate ( a more decidedly guttural character;" but the sense is extremely doubtful.
definition of Addonai.
seems clearly to betray his ignorance of that language. The term Sabaoth is never written with an Omicron, either in the LXX.

it is spelled by a Greek Omega in the last syllable [Saba th], denotes "a voluntary agent;" but when
it is spelled with a Greek Omicron —as, for instance, Saba th—it expresses "the first heaven." In
the same way, too, the word Ja th, when the last syllable is made long and aspirated, denotes
"a predetermined measure;" but when it is written shortly by the Greek letter Omicron, namely
Ja th, it signifies "one who puts evils to flight." All the other expressions likewise bring out the
title of one and the same Being; as, for example (in English), The Lord of Powers, The Father
of all, God Almighty, The Most High, The Creator, The Maker, and such like. These are not the
names and titles of a succession of different beings, but of one and the same, by means of which
the one God and Father is revealed, He who contains all things, and grants to all the boon of
existence.
4. Now, that the preaching of the apostles, the authoritative teaching of the Lord, the
announcements of the prophets, the dictated utterances of the apostles, and the ministration of
the law—all of which praise one and the same Being, the God and Father of all, and not many
diverse beings, nor one deriving his substance from different gods or powers, but [declare] that all
things [were formed] by one and the same Father (who nevertheless adapts [His works] to the
natures and tendencies of the materials dealt with), things visible and invisible, and, in short, all
things that have been made [were created] neither by angels, nor by any other power, but by God
alone, the Father—are all in harmony with our statements, has, I think, been sufficiently proved,
while by these weighty arguments it has been shown that there is but one God, the Maker of all
things. But that I may not be thought to avoid that series of proofs which may be derived from the
Scriptures of the Lord (since, indeed, these Scriptures do much more evidently and clearly proclaim
this very point), I shall, for the benefit of those at least who do not bring a depraved mind to bear
upon them, devote a special book to the Scriptures referred to, which shall fairly follow them out
[and explain them], and I shall plainly set forth from these divine Scriptures proofs to [satisfy] all
the lovers of truth.
or by the Greek Fathers, but always with an Omega (!"#"$%). Although Harvey remarks in his preface, that "It is hoped the
Hebrew attainments of Irenæus will no longer be denied," there appears enough, in the etymologies and explanations of Hebrew
terms given in this chapter by the venerable Father, to prevent such a conclusion; and Massuet's observation on the passage
seems not improbable, when he says, "Sciolus quispiam Irenæo nostro, in Hebraicis haud satis perito, hic fucum ecisse videtur."