extended to money, to reputation, to being driven from place to place. Christ
however shed His blood for you, while you have not [done it] for yourselves. He
contended for the Truth even unto death fighting for you; while you have not yet
entered upon dangers that threaten death.
"And you have forgotten the exhortation." That is, And you have slackened
your hands, you have become faint. "You have not yet," he said, "resisted unto
blood, striving against sin." Here he indicates that sin is both very vigorous, and
is itself armed. For the [expression] "You have resisted [stood firm against]," is
used with reference to those who stand firm.
2. "Which" (he says) "speaks unto you as unto sons, My son, despise not
thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when you are rebuked of Him." He has
drawn his encouragement from the facts themselves; over and above he adds
also that which is drawn from arguments, from this testimony.
"Faint not" (he says) "when you are rebuked of Him." It follows that these
things are of God. For this too is no small matter of consolation, when we learn
that it is God's work that such things have power, He allowing [them]; even as
also Paul says; "He said unto me, My grace is sufficient for you: for My strength
is made perfect in weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:9] He it is who allows [them].
"For whom the Lord loves He chastens, and scourges every son whom He
receives." You can not say that any righteous man is without affliction: even if he
appear to be so, yet we know not his other afflictions. So that of necessity every
righteous man must pass through affliction. For it is a declaration of Christ, that
the wide and broad way leads to destruction, but the strait and narrow one to life.
[Matthew 7:13-14] If then it is possible to enter into life by that means, and is
not by any other, then all have entered in by the narrow [way], as many as have
departed unto life.

Hebrews 12:7
"You endure chastisement" (he says); not for punishment, nor for
vengeance, nor for suffering. See, from that from which they supposed they had
been deserted [of God], from these he says they may be confident, that they have
not been deserted. It is as if he had said, Because you have suffered so many
evils, do you suppose that God has left you and hates you? If you did not suffer,
then it were right to suppose this. For if "He scourges every son whom He
receives," he who is not scourged, perhaps is not a son. What then, you say, do
not bad men suffer distress? They suffer indeed; how then? He did not say,
Every one who is scourged is a son, but every son is scourged. For in all cases
He scourges His son: what is wanted then is to show, whether any son is not
scourged. But you would not be able to say: there are many wicked men also
who are scourged, such as murderers, robbers, sorcerers, plunderers of tombs.
These however are paying the penalty of their own wickedness, and are not
scourged as sons, but punished as wicked: but you as sons.