added, "to them that walk not after the flesh." For lest, after hearing that Christ
has delivered you from the war of sin, and that the requisition ([δικαίωμα]) of
the Law is fulfilled in you, by sin having been "condemned in the flesh," you
should break up all your defences; therefore, in that place also, after saying,
"there is therefore no condemnation," he added, "to them that walk not after the
flesh;" and here also, "that the requisition of the Law might be fulfilled in us," he
proceeds with the very same thing; or rather, not with it only, but even with a
much stronger thing. For after saying, "that the righteousness of the Law might
be fulfilled in us that walk not after the flesh," he proceeds, "but after the Spirit."
So showing, that it is not only binding upon us to keep ourselves from evil
deeds, but also to be adorned ([κομᾅν]) with good. For to give you the crown is
His; but it is yours to hold it fast when given. For the righteousness of the Law,
that one should not become liable to its curse, Christ has accomplished for you.
Be not a traitor then to so great a gift, but keep guarding this goodly treasure. For
in this passage he shows that the Font will not suffice to save us, unless, after
coming from it, we display a life worthy of the Gift. And so he again advocates
the Law in saying what he does. For when we have once become obedient to
Christ, we must use all ways and plans so that its righteousness, which Christ
fulfilled, may abide in us, and not come to naught.
Ver. 5. "For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh."
Yet even this is no disparaging of the flesh. For so long as it keeps its own
place, nothing amiss comes to pass. But when we let it have its own will in
everything, and it passes over its proper bounds, and rises up against the soul,
then it destroys and corrupts everything, yet not owing to its own nature, but to
its being out of proportion, and the disorder thereupon ensuing. "But they that
are after the Spirit do mind the things of the Spirit."
Ver. 6. "For to be carnally minded is death." He does not speak of the
nature of the flesh, or the essence of the body, but of being carnally "minded,"
which may be set right again, and abolished. And in saying thus, he does not
ascribe to the flesh any reasoning power of its own. Far from it. But to set forth

the grosser motion of the mind, and giving this a name from the inferior part,
and in the same way as he often is in the habit of calling man in his entireness,
and viewed as possessed of a soul, flesh. "But to be spiritually minded." Here
again he speaks of the spiritual mind, in the same way as he says further on, "But
He that searches the hearts knows what is the mind of the spirit" [Romans 8:27];
and he points out many blessings resulting from this, both in the present life, and
in that which is to come. For as the evils which being carnally minded
introduces, are far outnumbered by those blessings which a spiritual mind
affords. And this he points out in the words "life and peace." The one is in
contraposition to the first— for death is what he says to be carnally minded is.
And the other in contraposition to the following. For after mentioning peace, he
goes on,
Ver. 7. "Because the carnal mind is enmity against God:" and this is worse
than death. Then to show how it is at once death and enmity; "for it is not subject
to the Law of God," he says, "neither indeed can be." But be not troubled at
hearing the "neither indeed can be." For this difficulty admits of an easy
solution. For what he here names "carnal mindedness" is the reasoning (or "way
of thinking," [λογισμὸν]) that is earthly, gross, and eager-hearted after the things
of this life and its wicked doings. It is of this he says "neither yet can" it "be
subject" to God. And what hope of salvation is there left, if it be impossible for
one who is bad to become good? This is not what he says. Else how would Paul
have become such as he was? How would the (penitent) thief, or Manasses, or
the Ninevites, or how would David after falling have recovered himself? How
would Peter after the denial have raised himself up? [1 Corinthians 5:5] How
could he that had lived in fornication have been enlisted among Christ's fold? [2
Corinthians 2:6-11] How could the Galatians who had "fallen from grace"
[Galatians 5:4], have attained their former dignity again? What he says then is
not that it is impossible for a man that is wicked to become good, but that it is
impossible for one who continues wicked to be subject to God. Yet for a man to
be changed, and so become good, and subject to Him, is easy. For he does not