greater than he:" but now He says plainly, "John baptized with water, but you
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost." [Matthew 11:11] And he no longer uses
the testimony, but merely adverts to the person of John, reminding the disciples
of what he had said, and shows them that they are now become greater than
John; seeing they too are to baptize with the Spirit. Again, He did not say, I
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, but, "You shall be baptized:" teaching us
humility. For this was plain enough from the testimonyof John, that it was Christ
Himself Who should baptize: "He it is that shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost
and with fire" [Luke 3:16]; wherefore also He made mention of John.
The Gospels, then, are a history of what Christ did and said; but the Acts, of
what that "other Comforter" said and did. Not but that the Spirit did many things
in the Gospels also; even as Christ here in the Acts still works in men as He did
in the Gospels: only then the Spirit wrought through the Temple, now through
the Apostles: then, He came into the Virgin's womb, and fashioned the Temple;
now, into Apostolic souls: then in the likeness of a dove; now, in the likeness of
fire. And wherefore? Showing there the gentleness of the Lord, but here His
taking vengeance also, He now puts them in mind of the judgment likewise. For,
when need was to forgive, need was there of much gentleness; but now we have
obtained the gift, it is henceforth a time for judgment and examination.
But why does Christ say, "You shall be baptized," when in fact there was no
water in the upper room? Because the more essential part of Baptism is the
Spirit, through Whom indeed the water has its operation; in the same manner our
Lord also is said to be anointed, not that He had ever been anointed with oil, but
because He had received the Spirit. Besides, we do in fact find them receiving a
baptism with water [and a baptism with the Spirit], and these at different
moments. In our case both take place under one act, but then they were divided.
For in the beginning they were baptized by John; since, if harlots and publicans
went to that baptism, much rather would they who thereafter were to be baptized
by the Holy Ghost. Then, that the Apostles might not say, that they were always
having it held out to them in promises [John 14:15-16], (for indeed Christ had

already discoursed much to them concerning the Spirit, that they should not
imagine It to be an impersonal Energy or Operation, ([ἐ] [νέργειαν
ἀνυπόστατον]) that they might not say this, then, He adds, "not many days
hence." And He did not explain when, that they might always watch: but, that it
would soon take place, He told them, that they might not faint; yet the exact time
He refrained from adding, that they might always be vigilant. Nor does He
assure them by this alone; I mean, by the shortness of the time, but withal by
saying, "The promise which you have heard of Me." For this is not, says He, the
only time I have told you, but already I have promised what I shall certainly
perform. What wonder then that He does not signify the day of the final
consummation, when this day which was so near He did not choose to reveal?
And with good reason; to the end they may be ever wakeful, and in a state of
expectation and earnest heed.
For it cannot, it cannot be, that a man should enjoy the benefit of grace
except he watch. Do you see not what Elias says to his disciple? "If you see me
when I am taken up" [2 Kings 2:10], this that you ask shall be done for you.
Christ also was ever wont to say unto those that came unto Him, "Believest
thou?" For if we be not appropriated and made over to the thing given, neither
do we greatly feel the benefit. So it was also in the case of Paul; grace did not
come to him immediately, but three days intervened, during which he was blind;
purified the while, and prepared by fear. For as those who dye the purple first
season with other ingredients the cloth that is to receive the dye, that the bloom
may not be fleeting; so in this instance God first takes order that the soul shall be
thoroughly in earnest, and then pours forth His grace. On this account also,
neither did He immediately send the Spirit, but on the fiftieth day. Now if any
one ask, why we also do not baptize at that season of Pentecost? We may answer,
that grace is the same now as then; but the mind becomes more elevated now, by
being prepared through fasting. And the season too of Pentecost furnishes a not
unlikely reason. What may that be? Our fathers held Baptism to be just the
proper curb upon evil concupiscence, and a powerful lesson for teaching to be