perpetual watchfulness concerning his manner of life, lest some one discovering
an exposed and neglected spot should inflict a deadly wound: for all who
surround him are ready to smite and overthrow him: not enemies only and
adversaries, but many even of those who profess friendship.
The souls therefore of men elected to the priesthood ought to be endued
with such power as the grace of God bestowed on the bodies of those saints who
were cast into the Babylonian furnace. [Daniel 3] Faggot and pitch and tow are
not the fuel of this fire, but things far more dreadful: for it is no material fire to
which they are subjected, but the all-devouring flame of envy encompasses
them, rising up on every side, and assailing them, and putting their life to a more
searching test than the fire then was to the bodies of those young men. When
then it finds a little trace of stubble, it speedily fastens upon it; and this unsound
part it entirely consumes, but all the rest of the fabric, even if it be brighter than
the sunbeams, is scorched and blackened by the smoke. For as long as the life of
the priest is well regulated in every direction, it is invulnerable to plots; but if he
happens to overlook some trifle, as is natural in a human being, traversing the
treacherous ocean of this life, none of his other good deeds are of any avail in
enabling him to escape the mouths of his accusers; but that little blunder
overshadows all the rest. And all men are ready to pass judgment on the priest as
if he was not a being clothed with flesh, or one who inherited a human nature,
but like an angel, and emancipated from every species of infirmity. And just as
all men fear and flatter a tyrant as long as he is strong, because they cannot put
him down, but when they see his affairs going adversely, those who were his
friends a short time before abandon their hypocritical respect, and suddenly
become his enemies and antagonists, and having discovered all his weak points,
make an attack upon him, and depose him from the government; so is it also in
the case of priests. Those who honored him and paid court to him a short time
before, while he was strong, as soon as they have found some little handle
eagerly prepare to depose him, not as a tyrant only, but something far more
dreadful than that. And as the tyrant fears his body guards, so also does the priest

dread most of all his neighbours and fellow-ministers. For no others covet his
dignity so much, or know his affairs so well as these; and if anything occurs,
being near at hand, they perceive it before others, and even if they slander him,
can easily command belief, and, by magnifying trifles, take their victim captive.
For the apostolic saying is reversed, "whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it; or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with
it;" [1 Corinthians 12:26] unless indeed a man should be able by his great
discretion to stand his ground against everything.
Are you then for sending me forth into so great a warfare? And did you
think that my soul would be equal to a contest so various in character and shape?
Whence did you learn this, and from whom? If God certified this to you, show
me the oracle, and I obey; but if you cannot, and form your judgment from
human opinion only, please to set yourself free from this delusion. For in what
concerns my own affairs it is fairer to trust me than others; inasmuch as "no man
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him."
[1 Corinthians 2:11] That I should have made myself and my electors ridiculous,
had I accepted this office, and should with great loss have returned to this
condition of life in which I now am, I trust I have now convinced you by these
remarks, if not before. For not malice only, but something much stronger— the
lust after this dignity— is wont to arm many against one who possesses it. And
just as avaricious children are oppressed by the old age of their parents, so some
of these, when they see the priestly office held by any one for a protracted time
— since it would be wickedness to destroy him— hasten to depose him from it,
being all desirous to take his place, and each expecting that the dignity will be
transferred to himself.
15. Would you like me to show you yet another phase of this strife, charged
with innumerable dangers? Come, then, and take a peep at the public festivals
when it is generally the custom for elections to be made to ecclesiastical
dignities, and you will then see the priest assailed with accusations as numerous
as the people whom he rules. For all who have the privilege of conferring the