in comparison with the happiness of heaven.
Reply to Objection 2: He who keeps the counsels and the
commandments always merits more than he who keeps the
commandments only, if we gather the notion of merit in works from
the very genus of those works; but not always if we gauge the merit
from its root, charity: since sometimes a man keeps the
commandments alone out of greater charity than one who keeps
both commandments and counsels. For the most part, however, the
contrary happens, because the "proof of love is in the performance
of deeds," as Gregory says (Hom. xxx in Evang.). Wherefore it is not
the more excellent essential reward that is called an aureole, but that
which is added to the essential reward without reference to the
essential reward of the possessor of an aureole being greater, or
less than, or equal to the essential reward of one who has no
aureole.
Reply to Objection 3: Charity is the first principle of merit: but our
actions are the instruments, so to speak, whereby we merit. Now in
order to obtain an effect there is requisite not only a due disposition
in the first mover, but also a right disposition in the instrument.
Hence something principal results in the effect with reference to the
first mover, and something secondary with reference to the
instrument. Wherefore in the reward also there is something on the
part of charity, namely the "aurea," and something on the part of the
kind of work, namely the "aureole."
Reply to Objection 4: All the angels merited their beatitude by the
same kind of act namely by turning to God: and consequently no
particular reward is found in anyone which another has not in some
way. But men merit beatitude by different kinds of acts: and so the
comparison fails.
Nevertheless among men what one seems to have specially, all have
in common in some way, in so far as each one, by charity, deems
another's good his own. Yet this joy whereby one shares another's
joy cannot be called an aureole, because it is not given him as a
reward for his victory, but regards more the victory of another:
whereas a crown is awarded the victors themselves and not to those
who rejoice with them in the victory.
Reply to Objection 5: The merit arising from charity is more excellent

than that which arises from the kind of action: just as the end to
which charity directs us is more excellent than the things directed to
that end, and with which our actions are concerned. Wherefore the
reward corresponding to merit by reason of charity, however little it
may be, is greater than any reward corresponding to an action by
reason of its genus. Hence "aureole" is used as a diminutive in
comparison with "aurea."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the aureole differs from the fruit?

Objection 1: It would seem that the aureole does not differ from the
fruit. For different rewards are not due to the same merit. Now the
aureole and the hundredfold fruit correspond to the same merit,
according to a gloss on Mt. 13:8, "Some a hundredfold." Therefore
the aureole is the same as the fruit.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Virgin xlv) that the
"hundredfold fruit is due to the martyrs, and also to virgins."
Therefore the fruit is a reward common to virgins and martyrs. But
the aureole also is due to them. Therefore the aureole is the same as
the fruit.
Objection 3: Further, there are only two rewards in beatitude, namely
the essential, and the accidental which is added to the essential.
Now that which is added to the essential reward is called an aureole,
as evidenced by the statement (Ex. 25:25) that the little crown
[aureola] is added to the crown. But the fruit is not the essential
reward, for in that case it would be due to all the blessed. Therefore
it is the same as the aureole.
On the contrary, Things which are not divided in the same way are
not of the same nature. Now fruit and aureole are not divided in the
same way, since aureole is divided into the aureole of virgins, of
martyrs, and of doctors: whereas fruit is divided into the fruit of the
married, of widows, and of virgins. Therefore fruit and aureole are
not the same.
Further, if fruit and aureole were the same, the aureole would be due
to whomsoever the fruit is due. But this is manifestly untrue, since a
fruit is due to widowhood, while an aureole is not. Therefore, etc.
I answer that, Metaphorical expressions can be taken in various
ways, according as we find resemblances to the various properties
of the thing from which the comparison is taken. Now since fruit,
properly speaking, is applied to material things born of the earth, we
employ it variously in a spiritual sense, with reference to the various
conditions that obtain in material fruits. For the material fruit has
sweetness whereby it refreshes so far as it is used by man: again it
is the last thing to which the operation of nature attains: moreover it