others? For if he was justified and crowned while in uncircumcision, the Jews
came in afterwards, Abraham is then the father first of the uncircumcised, which
through faith appertain to him, and then of those in the circumcision. For he is a
forefather of two lines. See you faith lightening up? For till it came the patriarch
was not justified. See you the uncircumcision offering no hindrance? For he was
uncircumcised, yet was not hindered from being justified. The circumcision
therefore is behind the faith. And why wonder that it is behind the faith, when it
is even behind the uncircumcision. Nor is it behind faith only, but very far
inferior to it, even so far as the sign is to the reality of which it is the sign; for
instance, as the seal is to the soldier. (See Hom. iii. on 2 Cor. at the end.) And
why, he says, did he want a seal then? He did not want it himself. For what
purpose then did he receive it? With a view to his being the father alike of them
that believe in uncircumcision and in circumcision. But not of those in
circumcision absolutely: wherefore he goes on to say, "To them who are not of
the circumcision only." For if to the uncircumcised, it is not in that he is
uncircumcised that he is their father, although justified in uncircumcision; but in
that they imitated his faith; much less is it owing to circumcision that he is the
forefather of those in the state of circumcision, unless faith also be added. For he
says that the reason of his receiving circumcision was that either of us two
parties might have him for a forefather, and that those in the uncircumcision
might not thrust aside those in the circumcision. See how the former had him for
their forefather first. Now if the circumcision be of dignity owing to its
preaching righteousness, the uncircumcision even has no small preeminence in
having received it before the circumcision. Then will you be able to have him as
a forefather when you walk in the steps of that faith, and art not contentious, nor
a causer of division in bringing in the Law. What faith? Tell me.
Ver. 12. "Which he had being yet uncircumcised."
Here again he lays low the lofty spirit of the Jews by reminding them of the
time of the justification. And he well says, "the steps," that you as well as
Abraham may believe in the resurrection of bodies that are dead. For he also

displayed his faith upon this point. And so if you reject the uncircumcision, be
informed for certain that the circumcision is of no more use unto you. For if you
follow not in the steps of his faith, though you were ten thousand times in a state
of circumcision, you will not be Abraham's offspring. For even he received the
circumcision for this end, that the man in a state of uncircumcision might not
cast you off. Do not then demand this of him too. For it was you whom the thing
was to be an assistance to, not he. But he calls it a sign of the righteousness. And
this also was for your sake, since now it is not even this: for thou then were in
need of bodily signs, but now there is no need of them. "And was it not
possible," one might say, "from his faith to learn the goodness of his soul?" Yes,
it was possible but you stood in need of this addition also. For since thou did not
imitate the goodness of his soul, and were not able to see it, a sensible
circumcision was given you, that, after having become accustomed to this of the
body, you might little by little be led on to the true love of wisdom in the soul
also, and that having with much seriousness received it as a very great privilege,
you might be instructed to imitate and revere your ancestor. This object then had
God not only in the circumcision, but in all the other rites, the sacrifices, I mean,
and the sabbath, and feasts. Now that it was for your sake that he received the
circumcision, learn from the sequel. For after saying that he received a sign and
a seal, he gives the reason also as follows. That he might be the father of the
circumcision— to those who received the spiritual circumcision also, since if
you have only this (i.e. the carnal), no farther good will come to you. For this is
then a sign, when the reality of which it is the sign is found with you, that is,
faith; since if you have not this, the sign to you has no longer the power of a
sign, for what is it to be the sign of? Or what the seal of, when there is nothing to
be sealed? Much as if you were to show one a purse with a seal to it, when there
was nothing laid up within. And so the circumcision is ridiculous if there be no
faith within. For if it be a sign of righteousness, but you have not righteousness,
then you have no sign either. For the reason of your receiving a sign was that
you might seek diligently for that reality whereof you have the sign: so that if