And when the divine nature shall be perfectly known, then it will be apparent that especially
according to His human nature He is subject to the divine nature; but not with such a subjection
as that which certain heretics claim who say that the very human nature which was assumed by
the divine nature is transmuted into it, but rather that He is less than the Father by reason of His
humanity. This is made especially clear by the fact that He will deliver His kingdom, that is, the
faithful, to the Father, not claiming them for Himself, but leading them to the vision of the Father,
a vision in which His own Divinity also will be seen.

3. It may be answered: According to Augustine (III De Trinitate), inasmuch as the Son prays He
is less than the Father; but inasmuch as He obtains hearing with the Father, He is the equal of the
Father.

But the Holy Spirit is said to intercede for us inasmuch as He causes us to make intercession and
renders our prayers efficacious.

4. It may be said: According to Augustine (VI De Trinitate), the statement that there is one only
true God must not be interpreted to refer to the Father alone, but as including Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost simultaneously; and they are said to be, the one true God because no being outside
the Trinity is true God. Wherefore, it must be in this way that one understands: "That they may
know You, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom You have sent" (John 17:3). For there is
one only true God, and no mention is here made of the Holy Spirit, because, since He is the
nexus of the other two Persons, He is understood by mention of the other two.

5. It may be answered: According to Augustine (I De Trinitate), this saying is not to be
understood of the Person of the Father alone, but of the entire Trinity. For the whole Trinity is
blessed and powerful, and the whole Trinity shows forth the Son. Even if He did say: "He shall
show, who is the Blessed and only Mighty," etc., this would not indicate that the Son is separate
from the Father, or that the Father is considered as being separated from the Son, because it is
said in Sirach 24:8, in the person of the Son, who is the Wisdom of God, "I alone have
compassed the circuit of heaven." This is said, therefore, because in those things which pertain to
the essence of God, Father and Son are altogether one, and hence what is said of one of them by
diction which may be exclusive does not imply any mutual separation, but only their separation
from creatures.

6. It may be said: The Son knows "that day and hour," not only according to His divine nature,
but even according to His human nature, since His soul knows all things. Hence He is said not to
know that day, as Augustine explains in I De Trinitate, because He does not make it known to
us; wherefore He said to those questioning Him: "It is not for you to know the times," etc. (Acts
1:7). And in the same way the Apostle says in 1 Cor. 2:2, "I judged not myself to know anything
among you," because he was unwilling to disclose lofty things to them since they lacked capacity
to understand.