principles are related to the conclusion to which we assent on
account of the principles: just as, in appetitive matters, the end is
related to the means, which is desired on account of the end.
Wherefore it is evident that as the intellect is to reason, so is the will
to the power of choice, which is free-will. But it has been shown
above (Question 79, Article 8) that it belongs to the same power both
to understand and to reason, even as it belongs to the same power
to be at rest and to be in movement. Wherefore it belongs also to the
same power to will and to choose: and on this account the will and
the free-will are not two powers, but one.
Reply to Objection 1: Boulesis is distinct from thelesis on account of
a distinction, not of powers, but of acts.
Reply to Objection 2: Choice and will---that is, the act of willing ---are
different acts: yet they belong to the same power, as also to
understand and to reason, as we have said.
Reply to Objection 3: The intellect is compared to the will as moving
the will. And therefore there is no need to distinguish in the will an
active and a passive will.

## QUESTION 84 — HOW THE SOUL WHILE UNITED TO THE BODY

UNDERSTANDS CORPOREAL THINGS BENEATH IT

Prologue
We now have to consider the acts of the soul in regard to the
intellectual and the appetitive powers: for the other powers of the
soul do not come directly under the consideration of the theologian.
Furthermore, the acts of the appetitive part of the soul come under
the consideration of the science of morals; wherefore we shall treat
of them in the second part of this work, to which the consideration of
moral matters belongs. But of the acts of the intellectual part we
shall treat now.
In treating of these acts we shall proceed in the following order:
First, we shall inquire how the soul understands when united to the
body; secondly, how it understands when separated therefrom.
The former of these inquiries will be threefold: (1) How the soul
understands bodies which are beneath it; (2) How it understands
itself and things contained in itself; (3) How it understands
immaterial substances, which are above it.
In treating of the knowledge of corporeal things there are three
points to be considered: (1) Through what does the soul know them?
(2) How and in what order does it know them? (3) What does it know
in them?
Under the first head there are eight points of inquiry:
(1) Whether the soul knows bodies through the intellect?
(2) Whether it understands them through its essence, or through any
species?
(3) If through some species, whether the species of all things

intelligible are naturally innate in the soul?
(4) Whether these species are derived by the soul from certain
separate immaterial forms?
(5) Whether our soul sees in the eternal ideas all that it understands?
(6) Whether it acquires intellectual knowledge from the senses?
(7) Whether the intellect can, through the species of which it is
possessed, actually understand, without turning to the phantasms?
(8) Whether the judgment of the intellect is hindered by an obstacle
in the sensitive powers?