John 9:25
"He answered and said, Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not; one thing I
know, that, whereas I was blind, now I see."
Surely the blind man was not terrified? That be far from him. How then
does he who said, "He is a Prophet" [John 9:17], now say, "Whether he be a
sinner, I know not"? He said so, not as being in such a state of mind, nor as
having persuaded himself of this thing, but desiring to clear Him from their
charges by the testimony of the fact, not by his own declaration, and to make the
defense credible, when the testimony of the good deed done should decide the
matter against them. Since if after many words when the blind man said, "Except
this were a righteous man he could not do such miracles" [John 9:33], they were
so enraged as to reply, "You were altogether born in sin, and do you teach us?"
what would they not have said, if he had spoken so from the beginning; what
would they not have done? "Whether he be a sinner or not, I know not"; as
though he had said, "I say nothing in this man's favor, I make no declaration at
present, yet this I certainly know and would affirm, that if he were a sinner he
could not have done such things." Thus he kept himself free from suspicion, and
his testimony uncorrupted, as not speaking from partiality, but as bearing witness
according to the fact. When therefore they could neither upset nor remove what
had been done, they again return to their former plan, making trifling enquiries
about the manner of the cure, like men who search on every side about a prey
which is before them, and cannot be hurt, hastening round now in one direction,
now in another; and they recur to the man's former assertions, in order now to
make them unsound by continual questions, and say,

John 9:26
"What did he to you? How opened he your eyes?"
What was his reply? Having conquered and cast them down, he no longer
speaks to them submissly. As long as the matter needed enquiry and arguments
he spoke guardedly, while he supplied the proof; but when he had conquered and
gained a splendid victory, he then takes courage, and tramples upon them. What
says he?

John 9:27
"I have told you once, and you did not hear; wherefore would ye hear it again?"
Do you see the bold-speaking of a beggar towards Scribes and Pharisees?
So strong is truth, so weak is falsehood. Truth, though she take hold but of
ordinary men, makes them to appear glorious; the other, even though it be with
the strong, shows them weak. What he says is of this kind: "You give no heed to
my words, therefore I will no longer speak or answer you continually, who
question me to no purpose, and who do not desire to hear in order to learn, but
that you may insult over my words."
"Will ye also be His disciples?"
3. Now he has ranked himself among the band of disciples, for the "will you
also?" is the expression of one who is declaring himself to be a disciple. Then he
mocked and annoyed them abundantly. For since he knew that this struck them
hard, he said it, wishing to upbraid them with exceeding severity; the act of a
soul courageous, soaring on high and despising their madness, pointing out the
greatness of this dignity, in which he was very confident, and showing that they
insulted him who was a man worthy to be admired, but that he took not the insult
to himself, but grasped as an honor what they offered as a reproach.