of the Only-Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." For we admire Him
not only on account of the miracles, but also by reason of the sufferings; as that
He was nailed upon the Cross, that He was scourged, that He was buffeted, that
He was spit upon, that He received blows on the cheek from those to whom He
had done good. For even of those very things which seem to be shameful, it is
proper to repeat the same expression, since He Himself called that action
"glory." For what then took place was (proof) not only of kindness and love, but
also of unspeakable power. At that time death was abolished, the curse was
loosed, devils were shamed and led in triumph and made a show of, and the
handwriting of our sins was nailed to the Cross. And then, since these wonders
were doing invisibly, others took place visibly, showing that He was of a truth
the Only-Begotten Son of God, the Lord of all creation. For while yet that
blessed Body hung upon the tree, the sun turned away his rays, the whole earth
was troubled and became dark, the graves were opened, the ground quaked, and
an innumerable multitude of dead leaped forth, and went into the city. And while
the stones of His tomb were fastened upon the vault, and the seals yet upon
them, the Dead arose, the Crucified, the nail-pierced One, and having filled His
eleven disciples with His mighty power, He sent them to men throughout all the
world, to be the common healers of all their kind, to correct their way of living,
to spread through every part of the earth the knowledge of their heavenly
doctrines, to break down the tyranny of devils, to teach those great and ineffable
blessings, to bring to us the glad tidings of the soul's immortality, and the eternal
life of the body, and rewards which are beyond conception, and shall never have
an end. These things then, and yet more than these, the blessed Evangelist
having in mind, things which though he knew, he was not able to write, because
the world could not have contained them (for if all things "should be written
every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that
should be written" [John 21:25]), reflecting therefore on all these, he cries out,
"We beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth."

It behooves therefore those who have been deemed worthy to see and to
hear such things, and who have enjoyed so great a gift, to display also a life
worthy of the doctrines, that they may enjoy also the good things which are (laid
up) there. For our Lord Jesus Christ came, not only that we might behold His
glory here, but also that which shall be. For therefore He says, "I will that these
also be with Me where I am, that they may behold My glory." [John 17:24] Now
if the glory here was so bright and splendid, what can one say of that (which
shall be)? For it shall appear not on this corruptible earth, nor while we are in
perishable bodies, but in a creation which is imperishable, and waxes not old,
and with such brightness as it is not possible even to represent in words. O
blessed, thrice blessed, yea many times so, they who are deemed worthy to be
beholders of that glory! It is concerning this that the prophet says, "Let the
unrighteous be taken away, that he behold not the glory of the Lord." [Isaiah
26:10, Septuagint] God grant that not one of us be taken away nor excluded ever
from beholding it. For if we shall not hereafter enjoy it, then it is time to say of
ourselves, "Good were it for" us, "if" we "had never been born." For why do we
live and breathe? What are we, if we fail of that spectacle, if no one grant us then
to behold our Lord? If those who see not the light of the sun endure a life more
bitter than any death, what is it likely that they who are deprived of that light
must suffer? For in the one case the loss is confined to this one privation; but in
the other it does not rest here, (though if this were the only thing to be dreaded,
even then the degrees of punishment would not be equal, but one would be as
much severer than the other, as that sun is incomparably superior to this,) but
now we must look also for other vengeance; for he who beholds not that light
must not only be led into darkness, but must be burned continually, and waste
away, and gnash his teeth, and suffer ten thousand other dreadful things. Let us
then not permit ourselves by making this brief time a time of carelessness and
remissness, to fall into everlasting punishment, but let us watch and be sober, let
us do all things, and make it all our business to attain to that felicity, and to keep
far from that river of fire, which rushes with a loud roaring before the terrible