THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.32, C.2.

of the nature assumed. Because we are thus given to understand
that human nature was assumed by the Son of God into the unity of
Person, not by reason of its merits, but through grace alone; which
is attributed to the Holy Ghost, according to 1 Cor. 12:4: "There are
diversities of graces, but the same Spirit." Wherefore Augustine says
(Enchiridion xl): "The manner in which Christ was born of the Holy
Ghost . . . suggests to us the grace of God, whereby man, without
any merits going before, in the very beginning of his nature when he
began to exist was joined to God the Word, into so great unity of
Person, that He Himself should be the Son of God."
Thirdly, because this is befitting the term of the Incarnation. For the
term of the Incarnation was that that man, who was being conceived,
should be the Holy one and the Son of God. Now, both of these are
attributed to the Holy Ghost. For by Him men are made to be sons of
God, according to Gal. 4:6: "Because you are sons, God hath sent
the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying: Abba, Father." Again,
He is the "Spirit of sanctification," according to Rm. 1:4. Therefore,
just as other men are sanctified spiritually by the Holy Ghost; so as
to be the adopted sons of God, so was Christ conceived in sanctity
by the Holy Ghost, so as to be the natural Son of God. Hence,
according to a gloss on Rm. 1:4, the words, "Who was predestinated
the Son of God, in power," are explained by what immediately
follows: "According to the Spirit of sanctification, i.e. through being
conceived of the Holy Ghost." And the Angel of the Annunciation
himself, after saying, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee," draws
the conclusion: "Therefore also the Holy which shall be born of thee
shall be called the Son of God."
Reply to Objection 1: The work of the conception is indeed common
to the whole Trinity; yet in some way it is attributed to each of the
Persons. For to the Father is attributed authority in regard to the
Person of the Son, who by this conception took to Himself (human
nature). The taking itself (of human nature) is attributed to the Son:
but the formation of the body taken by the Son is attributed to the
Holy Ghost. For the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Son, according to
Gal. 4:6: "God sent the Spirit of His Son." For just as the power of
the soul which is in the semen, through the spirit enclosed therein,
fashions the body in the generation of other men, so the Power of
God, which is the Son Himself, according to 1 Cor. 1:24: "Christ, the
Power of God," through the Holy Ghost formed the body which He
assumed. This is also shown by the words of the angel: "The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee," as it were, in order to prepare and

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.32, C.2.