after having been chastened a little while, we shall enjoy the blessings to come
without fear, being as if in a sort of school in the present life, under instruction
by means of disease, tribulation, temptations, and poverty, and the other apparent
evils, with a view to our becoming fit for the reception of the blessings of the
world to come.
Ver. 20. "Moreover the Law entered: that the offense might abound."
Since then he had shown that the world was condemned from Adam, but
from Christ was saved and freed from condemnation, he now seasonably enters
upon the discussion of the Law, here again undermining the high notions of it.
For it was so far from doing any good, he means, or from being any way helpful,
but the disorder was only increased by its having come in. But the particle "that"
again does not assign the cause, but the result. For the purpose of its being given
was not "in order that" it might abound, for it was given to diminish and destroy
the offense. But it resulted the opposite way, not owing to the nature of the Law,
but owing to the listlessness of those who received it. But why did he not say the
Law was given, but "the Law entered by the way?" It was to show that the need
of it was temporary, and not absolute or imperative. And this he says also to the
Galatians, showing the very same thing another way. "For before faith came," he
says, "we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith which should
afterwards be revealed." And so it was not for itself, but for another, that it kept
the flock. For since the Jews were somewhat gross-minded, and enervated, and
indifferent to the gifts themselves, this was why the Law was given, that it might
convict them the more, and clearly teach them their own condition, and by
increasing the accusation might the more repress them. But be not thou afraid,
for it was not that the punishment might be greater that this was done, but that
the grace might be seen to be greater. And this is why he proceeds,
"But where sin abounded, grace did much more abound."
He does not say did abound, but "did much more abound." For it was not
remission from punishment only that He gave us, but that from sins, and life
also. As if any were not merely to free a man with a fever from his disease, but

to give him also beauty, and strength, and rank; or again, were not to give one an
hungered nourishment only, but were to put him in possession of great riches,
and were to set him in the highest authority. And how did sin abound? Some will
say. The Law gave countless commands. Now since they transgressed them all,
trangression became more abundant. Do you see what a great difference there is
between grace and the Law? For the one became an addition to the
condemnation, but the other, a further abundance of gifts. Having then
mentioned the unspeakable munificence, he again discusses the beginning and
the root both of death and of life. What then is the root of death? It is sin.
Wherefore also he says,
Ver. 21. "That as sin reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life, through our Lord Jesus Christ."
This he says to show that the latter ranks as a king, the former, death, as a
soldier, being marshalled under the latter, and armed by it. If then the latter (i.e.
sin) armed death, it is plain enough that the righteousness destructive hereof,
which by grace was introduced, not only disarms death, but even destroys it, and
undoes entirely the dominion thereof, in that it is the greatest of the two, as being
brought in not by man and the devil, but by God and grace, and leading our life
unto a goodlier estate, and to blessings unlimited. For of it there will never be
any end (to give you a view of its superiority from this also). For the other cast
us out of our present life, but grace, when it came, gave us not the present life,
but the immortal and eternal one. But for all these things Christ is our voucher.
Doubt not then for your life if you have righteousness, for righteousness is
greater than life as being mother of it.
Chap. vi. ver. 1. "What then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? God forbid."
He is again turning off to exhortation, yet introducing it not directly, lest he
should seem to many to be irksome and vexing, but as if it rose out of the
doctrines. For if, even so diversifying his address, he was afraid of their being
offended at what he said, and therefore said, "I have written the more boldly unto