1 Corinthians 14:12
"So also ye, since as you are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that you may
abound unto the edifying of the Church."
Do you see his aim every where, how he looks to one thing continually and
in all cases, the general utility, the profiting the Church; laying this down as a
kind of rule? And he did not say, "that you may obtain the gifts" but, "that you
may abound," i.e., that you may even possess them in great plenitude. Thus, so
far am I from wishing you not to possess them, that I even wish you to abound in
them, only so that you handle them with a view to the common advantage. And
how is this to be done? This he adds, saying,

1 Corinthians 14:13
"Wherefore let him that speaks in a tongue pray that he may interpret."

1 Corinthians 14:14
"For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is
unfruitful."

1 Corinthians 14:15
"What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also; I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also."
Here he shows that it is in their power to obtain the gift. For, "let him pray,"
says he, i.e., "let him contribute his own part," since if you ask diligently, you
will surely receive. Ask accordingly not to have the gift of tongue only, but also
of interpretation, that you may become useful unto all, and not shut up your gift
in yourself alone. "For if I pray in a tongue," says he, "my spirit prays, but my
understanding is unfruitful." Do you see how by degrees bringing his argument
to a point, he signifies that not to others only is such an one useless, but also to
himself; if at least "his understanding is unfruitful?" For if a man should speak
only in the Persian, or any other foreign tongue, and not understand what he
says, then of course to himself also will he be thenceforth a barbarian, not to
another only, from not knowing the meaning of the sound. For there were of old
many who had also a gift of prayer, together with a tongue; and they prayed, and
the tongue spoke, praying either in the Persian or Latin language , but their
understanding knew not what was spoken. Wherefore also he said, "If I pray in a
tongue, my spirit prays," i.e., the gift which is given me and which moves my
tongue, "but my understanding is unfruitful."
What then may that be which is best in itself, and does good? And how
ought one to act, or what request of God? To pray, "both with the spirit," i.e., the
gift, and "with the understanding." Wherefore also he said, "I will pray with the
spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing with the spirit, and
I will sing with the understanding also."
6. He signifies the same thing here also, that both the tongue may speak,
and the understanding may not be ignorant of the things spoken. For except this