FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.2.

Accordingly, the first-mentioned good of nature is neither destroyed
nor diminished by sin. The third good of nature was entirely
destroyed through the sin of our first parent. But the second good of
nature, viz. the natural inclination to virtue, is diminished by sin.
Because human acts produce an inclination to like acts, as stated
above (Question 50, Article 1). Now from the very fact that thing
becomes inclined to one of two contraries, its inclination to the other
contrary must needs be diminished. Wherefore as sin is opposed to
virtue, from the very fact that a man sins, there results a diminution
of that good of nature, which is the inclination to virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: Dionysius is speaking of the first-mentioned
good of nature, which consists in "being, living and understanding,"
as anyone may see who reads the context.
Reply to Objection 2: Although nature precedes the voluntary action,
it has an inclination to a certain voluntary action. Wherefore nature is
not changed in itself, through a change in the voluntary action: it is
the inclination that is changed in so far as it is directed to its term.
Reply to Objection 3: A voluntary action proceeds from various
powers, active and passive. The result is that through voluntary
actions something is caused or taken away in the man who acts, as
we have stated when treating of the production of habits (Question
51, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 4: An accident does not act effectively on its
subject, but it acts on it formally, in the same sense as when we say
that whiteness makes a thing white. In this way there is nothing to
hinder sin from diminishing the good of nature; but only in so far as
sin is itself a diminution of the good of nature, through being an
inordinateness of action. But as regards the inordinateness of the
agent, we must say that such like inordinateness is caused by the
fact that in the acts of the soul, there is an active, and a passive
element: thus the sensible object moves the sensitive appetite, and
the sensitive appetite inclines the reason and will, as stated above
(Question 77, Articles 1, 2). The result of this is the inordinateness,
not as though an accident acted on its own subject, but in so far as
the object acts on the power, and one power acts on another and
puts it out of order.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.85, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the entire good of human nature can be

destroyed by sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that the entire good of human nature can
be destroyed by sin. For the good of human nature is finite, since
human nature itself is finite. Now any finite thing is entirely taken
away, if the subtraction be continuous. Since therefore the good of
nature can be continually diminished by sin, it seems that in the end
it can be entirely taken away.
Objection 2: Further, in a thing of one nature, the whole and the parts
are uniform, as is evidently the case with air, water, flesh and all
bodies with similar parts. But the good of nature is wholly uniform.
Since therefore a part thereof can be taken away by sin, it seems that
the whole can also be taken away by sin.
Objection 3: Further, the good of nature, that is weakened by sin, is
aptitude for virtue. Now this aptitude is destroyed entirely in some
on account of sin: thus the lost cannot be restored to virtue any
more than the blind can to sight. Therefore sin can take away the
good of nature entirely.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchiridion xiv) that "evil does not
exist except in some good." But the evil of sin cannot be in the good
of virtue or of grace, because they are contrary to it. Therefore it
must be in the good of nature, and consequently it does not destroy
it entirely.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the good of nature, that is
diminished by sin, is the natural inclination to virtue, which is
befitting to man from the very fact that he is a rational being; for it is
due to this that he performs actions in accord with reason, which is
to act virtuously. Now sin cannot entirely take away from man the
fact that he is a rational being, for then he would no longer be
capable of sin. Wherefore it is not possible for this good of nature to
be destroyed entirely.
Since, however, this same good of nature may be continually
diminished by sin, some, in order to illustrate this, have made use of
the example of a finite thing being diminished indefinitely, without
being entirely destroyed. For the Philosopher says (Phys. i, text. 37)