ourselves." But nevertheless, after such a state of desperation, God dispelled the
tempest, and removed the cloud, and snatched us from the very gates of death.
And afterwards, for the purpose of showing that his being permitted to fall into
this danger also was the result of much tender care for him, he mentions the
advantage which resulted from the temptations, which was, that he might
continually look to Him, and be neither high-minded, nor confident. Therefore
having said this, "We had the sentence of death in ourselves;" [2 Corinthians 1:9]
he adds also the reason; "That we should not trust in ourselves, but in God which
quickens the dead." For it is in the nature of trials to arouse us when we are
dozing, or falling down, and to stir us up, and make us more religious. When,
therefore, O beloved! You see a trial at one time extinguished, and at another
time kindled again, be not cast down! Do not despond, but retain a favourable
hope, reasoning thus with yourself, that God does not deliver us into the hands of
our enemies either because He hates or abandons us, but because He is desirous
to make us more in earnest, and more intimate with Himself.
2. Let us not then be desponding; nor let us despair of a change for the
better; but let us hope that speedily there will be a calm; and, in short, casting the
issue of all the tumults which beset us upon God, let us again handle the
customary points; and again bring forward our usual topic of instruction. For I
am desirous to discourse to you further concerning the same subject, to the end
that we may radically extirpate from your souls the wicked practice of oaths.
Wherefore it is necessary for me again to have recourse to the same entreaty that
I made before. For lately I besought you, that each one taking the head of John,
just cut off, and the warm blood yet dripping from it, you would thus go home,
and think that you saw it before your eyes, while it emitted a voice, and said,
"Abhor my murderer, the oath!" What a rebuke did not effect, this an oath
effected; what a tyrant's wrath was insufficient for, this the necessity of keeping
an oath brought about! And when the tyrant was publicly rebuked in the hearing
of all, he bore the censure nobly; but when he had thrown himself into the fatal
necessity caused by oaths, then he cut off that blessed head. This same thing,

therefore, I entreat; and cease not entreating, that wherever we go, we go bearing
this head; and that we show it to all, crying aloud, as it does, and denouncing
oaths. For although we were never so listless and remiss, yet beholding the eyes
of that head fearfully glaring upon us, and threatening us if we swear, we should
be more powerfully kept in check by this terror, than by any curb; and be easily
able to restrain and avert the tongue from its inclination toward oaths.
3. There is not only this great evil in an oath, that it punishes those who are
guilty of it, both when violated, and when kept; a thing we do not see take place
with any other sin; but there is another equally great evil attending it. And what
is that? Why that ofttimes it is utterly impossible even for those who are
desirous, and even make a point of it, to keep their oath. For, in the first place, he
who is continually swearing, whether willingly or unwillingly; knowingly or
unknowingly; in jest or in earnest; being frequently carried away by anger and
by many other things, will most surely become perjured. And no one can gainsay
this; so evident and generally allowed is the fact, that the man who swears
frequently, must also be a perjurer. Secondly, I affirm, that although he were not
carried away by passion, and did not become the victim of perjury unwillingly
and unwittingly, yet by the very nature of the case he will assuredly be
necessitated both consciously and voluntarily to perjure himself. Thus,
oftentimes when we are dining at home, and one of the servants happens to do
amiss, the wife swears that he shall be flogged, and then the husband swears the
contrary, resisting, and not permitting it. In this case, whatever they may do,
perjury must in any case be the result; for however much they may wish and
endeavour to keep their oaths, it is no longer possible; but whatever happens,
one or other of these will be ensnared in perjury; or rather both in any case.
4. And how, I will explain; for this is the paradox. He who has sworn that
he would flog the man-servant or maid-servant, yet has afterwards been
prohibited from this, has perjured himself, not having done what he has sworn to
do: and also, he has involved in the crime of perjury the party forbidding and
hindering the oath from being kept. For not only they who take a false oath, but