is sufficient for us to understand with. But that the intellectual light connatural to our soul
is sufficient to produce the action of the active intellect, will be clear to any one who
considers the necessity for positing such an intellect. Our soul is found to be in
potentiality to intelligible objects as sense to sensible objects: for as we are not always
having sensations, so we are not always understanding. These intelligible objects
Plato assumed to exist by themselves, calling them `Ideas': hence it was not necessary
for him to posit any `active intellect' rendering objects intelligible. But if this
Platonic position were true, the absolutely better objects of intelligence should be better
also relatively to us, and be better understood by us, which is manifestly not the case:
for things are more intelligible to us which are nigher to sense, though in themselves
they are less excellent objects of understanding. Hence Aristotle was moved to lay
down the doctrine, that the things which are intelligible to us are not any self-existent
objects of understanding, but are gathered from objects of sense. Hence he had to posit
some faculty to do this work of making terms of understanding: that faculty is the active
intellect. The active intellect therefore is posited to make terms of understanding
proportionate to our capacity. Such work does not transcend the measure of intellectual
light connatural to us. Hence there is no difficulty in attributing the action of the active
intellect to the native light of our soul, especially as Aristotle compares the active
intellect to light (De anima, III, v, 2).

## CHAPTER LXXVIII--That it was not the opinion of Aristotle that the Active Intellect is a
separately Subsistent Intelligence, but rather that it is a part of the Soul

world over it is not prior even in time), he is misled by his Latin translation, qui vero
secundum potentiam, as though the Greek had been ho de kata dunamin nous. He
takes it for a question of priority in time between the potential intellect and the concrete,
actually thinking mind (intellectus in actu). The error is not serious. 7. Coming to ouch
hote men noei, hote de ou noei (it does not at one time think, and at another time not
think), he says that this is spoken of the actually thinking mind, to mark it off from the
potential intellect. His conclusion is: "The mind comes to be actually thinking by being
identified with the objects of thought: hence it is not open to it at times to think and at
times not to think." This may mean -- as undoubtedly it is Aristotle's meaning: `There
must be thinking so long as there are things: but there are always things: therefore there
is always thinking.' Then the question comes: `Yes, but whose thinking?' -- to which St
Thomas gives no answer. To interpret with Silvester Maurus, `so long as the mind is
actually thinking, it thinks unceasingly,' is to father no very profound truth upon the
Philosopher. 8. Upon choristheis de esti monon touth' hoper esti (when separated, it is
only that which it is) St. Thomas is altogether thrown out by his Latin, separatum hoc
solum quod vere est (that alone is separate which truly is), as though choristheis
(separatum) were the predicate. He takes the meaning to be that the actually thinking
mind in man, inclusive at once of potential and active intellect, is `separate' in the sense
of not operating through a bodily organ. On touto monon athanaton kai aidion (this
alone is mortal and everlasting), all his comment is "as being independent of the body,
since it is separate." On the last sentence, ou mnemoneuomen de k.t.l., he makes no
comment whatever in this place, but see Chap.LXXX, arg. 5. No one can seriously
contend that, working under such disadvantages, St Thomas has succeeded in
adequately interpreting this, one of the most difficult chapters in Aristotle. I recommend
the reader to study it in G. Rodier's masterly work, Aristote, Trait de l'me, 2 vols., text,
translation, and notes (Leroux, Paris, 1900). I offer these few final remarks. (a) From aei
gar to oude chrono, is a parenthesis; as Philoponus says, touto en meso erripsen. The
meaning is, as St Thomas well indicates, that though in the individual mind knowledge
is first potential, then actual, yet somewhere in the range of being there is an actual
knowledge prior to all potential. This is only carrying out the Aristotelian principle that
ultimately the actual always precedes the potential: esti gar ex enelecheia ontos panta
ta gignomena (De anima, III, vii, 1), a principle well put forward by Rodier, vol. II, p. 490.
What actually thinking mind precedes all potentiality of thought, Aristotle does not tell us
in this chapter. (b) The words, all' ouch hote men noei, ote de ou noei, are to be taken in
close connexion with te ousia on energeia, the whole meaning: `this mind, ever
essentially active, thinks continually, and not merely at intervals.' Whether this refers to
the mind of the race, Aristotle agreeing with Averroes that mankind have existed from
eternity, or whether it points to some superhuman intelligence, is a question which will
be debated as long as Aristotle continues to be read. (c) choristheis d'esti monon touth'
hoper esti, "when separated from the body [in death, as Rodier rightly explains], it is its
proper self, and nothing else," -- pure nous, apart from phantasy and sensation and
bodily organism; and this pure nous is, in some undefined way, "immortal and
everlasting." In esti touth' hoper esti I think we may further recognise some slight
influence of a familiar idiom, by which a Greek says that a thing `is what it is,' when he is
either unable or reluctant to enter into further detail. (d) The concluding words mean:
`We have no memory [after death, of the transactions of our earthly existence], because