FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

prescription in regard to both (Lev. 25).
Reply to Objection 4: As stated above (ad 1), the purpose of the Law
was to accustom men to its precepts, so as to be ready to come to
one another's assistance: because this is a very great incentive to
friendship. The Law granted these facilities for helping others in the
matter not only of gratuitous and absolute donations, but also of
mutual transfers: because the latter kind of succor is more frequent
and benefits the greater number: and it granted facilities for this
purpose in many ways. First of all by prescribing that men should be
ready to lend, and that they should not be less inclined to do so as
the year of remission drew nigh, as stated in Dt. 15:7, seqq.
Secondly, by forbidding them to burden a man to whom they might
grant a loan, either by exacting usury, or by accepting necessities of
life in security; and by prescribing that when this had been done
they should be restored at once. For it is written (Dt. 23:19): "Thou
shalt not lend to thy brother money to usury": and (Dt. 24:6): "Thou
shalt not take the nether nor the upper millstone to pledge; for he
hath pledged his life to thee": and (Ex. 22:26): "If thou take of thy
neighbor a garment in pledge, thou shalt give it him again before
sunset." Thirdly, by forbidding them to be importunate in exacting
payment. Hence it is written (Ex. 22:25): "If thou lend money to any of
my people that is poor that dwelleth with thee, thou shalt not be hard
upon them as an extortioner." For this reason, too, it is enacted (Dt.
24:10,11): "When thou shalt demand of thy neighbor anything that he
oweth thee, thou shalt not go into his house to take away a pledge,
but thou shalt stand without, and he shall bring out to thee what he
hath": both because a man's house is his surest refuge, wherefore it
is offensive to a man to be set upon in his own house; and because
the Law does not allow the creditor to take away whatever he likes in
security, but rather permits the debtor to give what he needs least.
Fourthly, the Law prescribed that debts should cease together after
the lapse of seven years. For it was probable that those who could
conveniently pay their debts, would do so before the seventh year,
and would not defraud the lender without cause. But if they were
altogether insolvent, there was the same reason for remitting the
debt from love for them, as there was for renewing the loan on
account of their need.
As regards animals granted in loan, the Law enacted that if, through
the neglect of the person to whom they were lent, they perished or
deteriorated in his absence, he was bound to make restitution. But if
they perished or deteriorated while he was present and taking proper

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.