SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.5.

temporal good, such as life of the body, worldly possessions, good
repute, ecclesiastical or secular dignity, for we are not bound by
charity to wish others this good, except in relation to the eternal
salvation of them and of others. Hence if the presence of one of
these goods in one individual might be an obstacle to eternal
salvation in many, we are not bound out of charity to wish such a
good to that person, rather should we desire him to be without it,
both because eternal salvation takes precedence of temporal good,
and because the good of the many is to be preferred to the good of
one. Now if heretics were always received on their return, in order to
save their lives and other temporal goods, this might be prejudicial
to the salvation of others, both because they would infect others if
they relapsed again, and because, if they escaped without
punishment, others would feel more assured in lapsing into heresy.
For it is written (Eccles. 8:11): "For because sentence is not speedily
pronounced against the evil, the children of men commit evils
without any fear."
For this reason the Church not only admits to Penance those who
return from heresy for the first time, but also safeguards their lives,
and sometimes by dispensation, restores them to the ecclesiastical
dignities which they may have had before, should their conversion
appear to be sincere: we read of this as having frequently been done
for the good of peace. But when they fall again, after having been
received, this seems to prove them to be inconstant in faith,
wherefore when they return again, they are admitted to Penance, but
are not delivered from the pain of death.
Reply to Objection 1: In God's tribunal, those who return are always
received, because God is a searcher of hearts, and knows those who
return in sincerity. But the Church cannot imitate God in this, for she
presumes that those who relapse after being once received, are not
sincere in their return; hence she does not debar them from the way
of salvation, but neither does she protect them from the sentence of
death.
Reply to Objection 2: Our Lord was speaking to Peter of sins
committed against oneself, for one should always forgive such
offenses and spare our brother when he repents. These words are
not to be applied to sins committed against one's neighbor or
against God, for it is not left to our discretion to forgive such
offenses, as Jerome says on Mt. 18:15, "If thy brother shall offend
against thee." Yet even in this matter the law prescribes limits

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.5.

according as God's honor or our neighbor's good demands.
Reply to Objection 3: When other unbelievers, who have never
received the faith are converted, they do not as yet show signs of
inconstancy in faith, as relapsed heretics do; hence the comparison
fails.