Objection 1:: Further, eternal action postulates an eternal effect. But
the action of God is His substance, which is eternal. Therefore the
world is eternal.
On the contrary, It is said (Jn. 17:5), "Glorify Me, O Father, with
Thyself with the glory which I had before the world was"; and (Prov.
8:22), "The Lord possessed Me in the beginning of His ways, before
He made anything from the beginning."
I answer that, Nothing except God can be eternal. And this statement
is far from impossible to uphold: for it has been shown above
(Question 19, Article 4) that the will of God is the cause of things.
Therefore things are necessary, according as it is necessary for God
to will them, since the necessity of the effect depends on the
necessity of the cause (Metaph. v, text 6). Now it was shown above
(Question 19, Article 3), that, absolutely speaking, it is not necessary
that God should will anything except Himself. It is not therefore
necessary for God to will that the world should always exist; but the
world exists forasmuch as God wills it to exist, since the being of the
world depends on the will of God, as on its cause. It is not therefore
necessary for the world to be always; and hence it cannot be proved
by demonstration.
Nor are Aristotle's reasons (Phys. viii) simply, but relatively,
demonstrative---viz. in order to contradict the reasons of some of the
ancients who asserted that the world began to exist in some quite
impossible manner. This appears in three ways. Firstly, because,
both in Phys. viii and in De Coelo i, text 101, he premises some
opinions, as those of Anaxagoras, Empedocles and Plato, and brings
forward reasons to refute them. Secondly, because wherever he
speaks of this subject, he quotes the testimony of the ancients,
which is not the way of a demonstrator, but of one persuading of
what is probable. Thirdly, because he expressly says (Topic. i, 9),
that there are dialectical problems, about which we have nothing to
say from reason, as, "whether the world is eternal."
Reply to Objection 1: Before the world existed it was possible for the
world to be, not, indeed, according to a passive power which is
matter, but according to the active power of God; and also,
according as a thing is called absolutely possible, not in relation to
any power, but from the sole habitude of the terms which are not
repugnant to each other; in which sense possible is opposed to

impossible, as appears from the Philosopher (Metaph. v, text 17).
Reply to Objection 2: Whatever has power always to be, from the fact
of having that power, cannot sometimes be and sometimes not be;
but before it received that power, it did not exist.
Hence this reason which is given by Aristotle (De Coelo i, text 120)
does not prove simply that incorruptible things never began to exist;
but that they did not begin by the natural mode whereby things
generated and corruptible begin.
Reply to Objection 3: Aristotle (Phys. i, text 82) proves that matter is
unbegotten from the fact that it has not a subject from which to
derive its existence; and (De Coelo et Mundo i, text 20) he proves
that heaven is ungenerated, forasmuch as it has no contrary from
which to be generated. Hence it appears that no conclusion follows
either way, except that matter and heaven did not begin by
generation, as some said, especially about heaven. But we say that
matter and heaven were produced into being by creation, as appears
above (Question 44, Article 1, ad 2).
Reply to Objection 4: The notion of a vacuum is not only "in which is
nothing," but also implies a space capable of holding a body and in
which there is not a body, as appears from Aristotle (Phys. iv, text
60). Whereas we hold that there was no place or space before the
world was.
Reply to Objection 5: The first mover was always in the same state:
but the first movable thing was not always so, because it began to be
whereas hitherto it was not. This, however, was not through change,
but by creation, which is not change, as said above (Question 45,
Article 2, as 2). Hence it is evident that this reason, which Aristotle
gives (Phys. viii), is valid against those who admitted the existence
of eternal movable things, but not eternal movement, as appears
from the opinions of Anaxagoras and Empedocles. But we hold that
from the moment that movable things began to exist movement also
existed.
Reply to Objection 6: The first agent is a voluntary agent. And
although He had the eternal will to produce some effect, yet He did
not produce an eternal effect. Nor is it necessary for some change to
be presupposed, not even on account of imaginary time. For we