## CHAPTER XCII--That the Souls of the Saints after Death have their Will immutably fixed
on Good
SO long as a soul can change from good to evil, or from evil to good, it is in a state of
combat and warfare: it has to be careful in resisting evil, not to be overcome by it, or in
endeavouring to set itself free from it. But so soon as the soul is separated from the
body, it will be no longer in the state of warfare or combat, but of receiving reward or
punishment, according as it has lawfully fought or unlawfully.
3. Naturally the rational creature desires to be happy: hence it cannot will not to be
happy: still its will may turn aside from that in which true happiness consists, or, in other
words, it may have a perverse will: this comes of the object of true happiness not being
apprehended as such, but some other object in its stead, and to this the will
inordinately turns, and makes a last end of it: thus he who makes bodily pleasures the
end of his existence, counts them best of good things, which is the idea of happiness.
But they who are already blessed in heaven apprehend the object of true happiness as
making their happiness and last end: otherwise their desire would not be set at rest in
that object, and they would not be blessed and happy. The will of the blessed therefore
cannot swerve from the object of true happiness.
4. Whoever has enough in what he has, seeks nothing else beyond. But whoever is
finally blessed has enough in the object of true happiness, and therefore seeks nothing
that is not in keeping with that object. Now the only way in which the will can be
perverse is by willing something inconsistent with the object of true happiness.
5. Sin never befalls the will without some ignorance in the understanding [cf. B. III,
Chap.X]: hence it is said, They are mistaken who do evil (Prov. xiv, 22); and the
Philosopher says that every evil man is ignorant. But the soul that is truly blessed
can in no way be ignorant, since in God it sees all things that appertain to its perfect
well-being. In no way then can it have an evil will, especially since that vision of God is
always actual.
6. Our soul can err about conclusions before it is brought back to first principles. When
the knowledge of conclusions is carried back to first principles, we have scientific
knowledge which cannot be false. Now as the principle of demonstration is in
abstract sciences, so is the scope, end and aim, in matters of desire. So long then as
our will does not attain its final end, it may be perverted, but not after it has arrived at
the enjoyment of its final end, which is desirable for its own sake, as the principles of
demonstration are self-evident. .

probations must end somewhere. And then?" (Ethics and Natural Law, p. 166.) "All this
speculation, be it understood, lies apart from revelation" (ib. p. 165). St Thomas
however presently (Chap. XCV) argues the notion of any probation at all in the next
world to be an a priori impossibility.