FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.2.

and sex; nor fear and daring about dangers of death; nor
distributions and commutations of things employed in this present
life. But, as regards the formal element, they will remain most
perfect, after this life, in the Blessed, in as much as each one's
reason will have most perfect rectitude in regard to things
concerning him in respect of that state of life: and his appetitive
power will be moved entirely according to the order of reason, in
things pertaining to that same state. Hence Augustine says (De Trin.
xiv, 9) that "prudence will be there without any danger of error;
fortitude, without the anxiety of bearing with evil; temperance,
without the rebellion of the desires: so that prudence will neither
prefer nor equal any good to God; fortitude will adhere to Him most
steadfastly; and temperance will delight in Him Who knows no
imperfection." As to justice, it is yet more evident what will be its act
in that life, viz. "to be subject to God": because even in this life
subjection to a superior is part of justice.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher is speaking there of these
moral virtues, as to their material element; thus he speaks of justice,
as regards "commutations and distributions"; of fortitude, as to
"matters of terror and danger"; of temperance, in respect of "lewd
desires."
The same applies to the Second Objection. For those things that
concern the active life, belong to the material element of the virtues.
Reply to Objection 3: There is a twofold state after this life; one
before the resurrection, during which the soul will be separate from
the body; the other, after the resurrection, when the souls will be
reunited to their bodies. In this state of resurrection, the irrational
powers will be in the bodily organs, just as they now are. Hence it
will be possible for fortitude to be in the irascible, and temperance in
the concupiscible part, in so far as each power will be perfectly
disposed to obey the reason. But in the state preceding the
resurrection, the irrational parts will not be in the soul actually, but
only radically in its essence, as stated in the FP, Question 77, Article
8. Wherefore neither will these virtues be actually, but only in their
root, i.e. in the reason and will, wherein are certain nurseries of these
virtues, as stated above (Question 63, Article 1). Justice, however,
will remain because it is in the will. Hence of justice it is specially
said that it is "perpetual and immortal"; both by reason of its subject,
since the will is incorruptible; and because its act will not change, as
stated.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the intellectual virtues remain after this

life?
Objection 1: It would seem that the intellectual virtues do not remain
after this life. For the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:8,9) that "knowledge
shall be destroyed," and he states the reason to be because "we
know in part." Now just as the knowledge of science is in part, i.e.
imperfect; so also is the knowledge of the other intellectual virtues,
as long as this life lasts. Therefore all the intellectual virtues will
cease after this life.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Categor. vi) that since
science is a habit, it is a quality difficult to remove: for it is not easily
lost, except by reason of some great change or sickness. But no
bodily change is so great as that of death. Therefore science and the
other intellectual virtues do not remain after death.
Objection 3: Further, the intellectual virtues perfect the intellect so
that it may perform its proper act well. Now there seems to be no act
of the intellect after this life, since "the soul understands nothing
without a phantasm" (De Anima iii, text. 30); and, after this life, the
phantasms do not remain, since their only subject is an organ of the
body. Therefore the intellectual virtues do not remain after this life.
On the contrary, The knowledge of what is universal and necessary
is more constant than that of particular and contingent things. Now
the knowledge of contingent particulars remains in man after this
life; for instance, the knowledge of what one has done or suffered,
according to Lk. 16:25: "Son, remember that thou didst receive good
things in thy life-time, and likewise Lazarus evil things." Much more,
therefore, does the knowledge of universal and necessary things
remain, which belong to science and the other intellectual virtues.
I answer that, As stated in the FP, Question 79, Article 6, some have
held that the intelligible species do not remain in the passive
intellect except when it actually understands; and that so long as
actual consideration ceases, the species are not preserved save in
the sensitive powers which are acts of bodily organs, viz. in the
powers of imagination and memory. Now these powers cease when
the body is corrupted: and consequently, according to this opinion,
neither science nor any other intellectual virtue will remain after this