genera and species of things. But since Aristotle did not allow that
forms of natural things exist apart from matter, and as forms existing
in matter are not actually intelligible; it follows that the natures of
forms of the sensible things which we understand are not actually
intelligible. Now nothing is reduced from potentiality to act except by
something in act; as the senses as made actual by what is actually
sensible. We must therefore assign on the part of the intellect some
power to make things actually intelligible, by abstraction of the
species from material conditions. And such is the necessity for an
active intellect.
Reply to Objection 1: Sensible things are found in act outside the
soul; and hence there is no need for an active sense. Wherefore it is
clear that in the nutritive part all the powers are active, whereas in
the sensitive part all are passive: but in the intellectual part, there is
something active and something passive.
Reply to Objection 2: There are two opinions as to the effect of light.
For some say that light is required for sight, in order to make colors
actually visible. And according to this the active intellect is required
for understanding, in like manner and for the same reason as light is
required for seeing. But in the opinion of others, light is required for
sight; not for the colors to become actually visible; but in order that
the medium may become actually luminous, as the Commentator
says on De Anima ii. And according to this, Aristotle's comparison of
the active intellect to light is verified in this, that as it is required for
understanding, so is light required for seeing; but not for the same
reason.
Reply to Objection 3: If the agent pre-exist, it may well happen that
its likeness is received variously into various things, on account of
their dispositions. But if the agent does not pre-exist, the disposition
of the recipient has nothing to do with the matter. Now the intelligible
in act is not something existing in nature; if we consider the nature
of things sensible, which do not subsist apart from matter. And
therefore in order to understand them, the immaterial nature of the
passive intellect would not suffice but for the presence of the active
intellect which makes things actually intelligible by way of
abstraction.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the active intellect is something in the

soul?
Objection 1: It would seem that the active intellect is not something
in the soul. For the effect of the active intellect is to give light for the
purpose of understanding. But this is done by something higher than
the soul: according to Jn. 1:9, "He was the true light that
enlighteneth every man coming into this world." Therefore the active
intellect is not something in the soul.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher (De Anima iii, 5) says of the
active intellect, "that it does not sometimes understand and
sometimes not understand." But our soul does not always
understand: sometimes it understands, sometimes it does not
understand. Therefore the active intellect is not something in our
soul.
Objection 3: Further, agent and patient suffice for action. If,
therefore, the passive intellect, which is a passive power, is
something belonging to the soul; and also the active intellect, which
is an active power: it follows that a man would always be able to
understand when he wished, which is clearly false. Therefore the
active intellect is not something in our soul.
Objection 4: Further, the Philosopher (De Anima iii, 5) says that the
active intellect is a "substance in actual being." But nothing can be
in potentiality and in act with regard to the same thing. If, therefore,
the passive intellect, which is in potentiality to all things intelligible,
is something in the soul, it seems impossible for the active intellect
to be also something in our soul.
Objection 5: Further, if the active intellect is something in the soul, it
must be a power. For it is neither a passion nor a habit; since habits
and passions are not in the nature of agents in regard to the
passivity of the soul; but rather passion is the very action of the
passive power; while habit is something which results from acts. But
every power flows from the essence of the soul. It would therefore
follow that the active intellect flows from the essence of the soul.
And thus it would not be in the soul by way of participation from
some higher intellect: which is unfitting. Therefore the active
intellect is not something in our soul.