lay hold on his hearer from considerations of what was advantageous and easy;
for, says he, it is not laborious, and the gift it offers is greater. For if when
discoursing of Christ, he puts especially forward those things which are of His
lovingkindness, more than of our merit, and which are mutually connected,
much greater necessity is there for his doing so when treating of the covenant.
What then is the meaning of "the letter kills?" He had said tables of stone and
hearts of flesh: so far he seemed to mention no great difference. He added that
the former [covenant] was written with letters or ink, but this with the Spirit.
Neither did this rouse them thoroughly, He says at last what is indeed enough to
give them wings ; the one "kills," the other "gives life." And what does this
mean? In the Law, he that has sin is punished; here, he that has sins comes and is
baptized and is made righteous, and being made righteous, he lives, being
delivered from the death of sin. The Law, if it lay hold on a murderer, puts him
to death; the Gospel, if it lay hold on a murderer, enlightens, and gives him life.
And why do I instance a murderer? The Law laid hold on one that gathered
sticks on a sabbath day, and stoned him. [Numbers 15:32-36] This is the
meaning of, "the letter kills." The Gospel takes hold on thousands of homicides
and robbers, and baptizing delivers them from their former vices. This is the
meaning of, "the Spirit gives life." The former makes its captive dead from being
alive, the latter renders the man it has convicted alive from being dead. For,
"come unto me, you that labor and are heavy laden," [Matthew 11:28] and, He
said not, 'I will punish you,' but, "I will give you rest." For in Baptism the sins
are buried, the former things are blotted out, the man is made alive, the entire
grace written upon his heart as it were a table. Consider then how high is the
dignity of the Spirit, seeing that His tables are better than those former ones;
seeing that even a greater thing is shown forth than the resurrection itself. For
indeed, that state of death from which He delivers, is more irremediable than the
former one: as much more so, as soul is of more value than the body: and this
life is conferred by that, by that which the Spirit gives. But if It be able to bestow
this, much more then that which is less. For, that prophets wrought, but this they

could not: for none can remit sins but God only; nor did the prophets bestow that
life without the Spirit. But this is not the marvel only, that it gives life, but that it
enabled others also to do this. For He says, "Receive the Holy Ghost." [John
20:22] Wherefore? Because without the Spirit it might not be? [Yes,] but God, as
showing that It is of supreme authority, and of that Kingly Essence, and has the
same power [with Himself,] says this too. Whence also He adds, "Whosesoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are
retained." [John 20:23]
3. Since then It has given us life, let us remain living and not return again to
the former deadness: for "Christ dies no more; for the death that He died, He
died unto sin once:" [Romans 6:9-10] and He will not have us always saved by
grace: for so we shall be empty of all things. Wherefore He will have us
contribute something also from ourselves. Let us then contribute, and preserve to
the soul its life. And what is life in a soul, learn from the body. For the body too
we then affirm to live, when it moves with a healthy kind of motion; but when it
lies prostrate and powerless, or its motions are disorderly, though it retain the
semblance of life or motion, such a life is more grievous than any death: and
should it utter nothing sane but words of the crazy, and see one object instead of
another, such a man again is more pitiable than those who are dead. So also the
soul when it has no healthiness, though it retain a semblance of life, is dead:
when it does not see gold as gold but as something great and precious; when it
thinks not of the future but crawls upon the ground; when it does one thing in
place of another. For whence is it clear that we have a soul? Is it not from its
operations? When then it does not perform the things proper to it, is it not dead?
When, for instance, it has no care for virtue, but is rapacious and transgresses the
law; whence can I tell that you have a soul? Because you walk? But this belongs
to the irrational creatures as well. Because you eat and drinkest? But this too
belongs to wild beasts. Well then, because you stand upright on two feet? This
convinces me rather that you are a beast in human form. For when you resemble
one in all other respects, but not in its manner of erecting itself, thou dost the