that hence too he may render them more serious. For being anxious about his
coming, they would correct the error. For the sojourning of Paul in any place was
no ordinary thing: and to signify this he said, "some are puffed up, as though I
would not come to you;" [1 Corinthians 4:18] and elsewhere again, "not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling." [Philippians 2:12] And therefore neither did he merely
promise that he would come, lest they should disbelieve him and become more
negligent; but he also states a necessary cause for his sojourning with them,
saying, the rest I will set in order when I come; which implies, that the
correction of the things that remained, even had he not in any case been desirous,
would have drawn him there.
4. Hearing therefore all these things, let us both take great care of the poor,
and restrain our appetite, and rid ourselves of drunkenness, and be careful
worthily to partake of the Mysteries; and whatsoever we suffer, let us not take it
bitterly, neither for ourselves nor for others; as when untimely death happen or
long diseases. For this is deliverance from punishment, this is correction, this is
most excellent admonition. Who says this? He that has Christ speaking in him.
But nevertheless even after this many of our women are so foolishly
disposed as even to go beyond the unbelievers in the excess of their grief. And
some do this blinded by their passion, but others for ostentation, and to avoid the
censures of them that are without: who most of all are deprived of excuse, to my
mind. For, "lest such a one accuse me," says she, "let God be my accuser: lest
men more senseless than the brute beasts condemn me, let the law of the King of
all be trampled under foot." Why, how many thunderbolts do not these sayings
deserve?
Again; If any one invite you to a funeral supper after your affliction there is
no one to say any thing against it, because there is a law of men which enjoins
such things: but when God by His law forbids your mourning, all thus contradict
it. Does not Job come into your mind, O woman? Rememberest thou not his
words at the misfortune of his children, which adorned that holy head more than

ten thousand crowns, and made proclamation louder than many trumpets? Do
you make no account of the greatness of his misfortunes, of that unprecedented
shipwreck, and that strange and portentous tragedy? For thou possibly hast lost
one, or a second, or third: but he so many sons and daughters: and he that had
many children suddenly became childless. And not even by degrees were his
bowels wasted away: but at one sweep all the fruit of his body was snatched
from him. Nor was it by the common law of nature, when they had come to old
age, but by a death both untimely and violent: and all together, and when he was
not present nor sitting by them, that at least by hearing their last words he might
have some consolation for so bitter an end of theirs: but contrary to all
expectation and without his knowing any thing of what took place, they were all
at once overwhelmed, and their house became their grave and their snare.
And not only their untimely death, but many things besides there were to
grieve him; such as their being all in the flower of their age, all virtuous and
loving, all together, that not one of either sex was left, that it befell them not by
the common law of nature, that it came after so great a loss, that when he was
unconscious of any sin on his own part or on theirs, he suffered these things. For
each of these circumstances is enough even by itself to disturb the mind: but
when we find them even concurring together, imagine the height of those waves,
how great the excess of that storm. And what in particular is greater and worse
than his bereavement, he did not even know wherefore all these things happened.
On this account then, having no cause to assign for the misfortune, he ascends to
the good pleasure of God, and says, "The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away:"
as it pleased the Lord, even so it happened; "blessed be the name of the Lord for
ever." [Job 2:21] And these things he said, when he saw himself who had
followed after all virtue in the last extremity; but evil men and impostors,
prospering, luxurious, revelling on all sides. And he uttered no such word as it is
likely that some of the weaker sort would have uttered, "Was it for this that I
brought up my children and trained them with all exactness? For this did I open
my house to all that passed by, that after those many courses run in behalf of the