SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.3.

we must be careful, as in all other human actions, to conform
ourselves to persons, time, and place, and take due account of other
circumstances, so that our fun "befit the hour and the man," as Tully
says (De Offic. i, 29).
Now these things are directed according to the rule of reason: and a
habit that operates according to reason is virtue. Therefore there can
be a virtue about games. The Philosopher gives it the name of
wittiness (eutrapelia), and a man is said to be pleasant through
having a happy turn of mind, whereby he gives his words and deeds
a cheerful turn: and inasmuch as this virtue restrains a man from
immoderate fun, it is comprised under modesty.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above, fun should fit with business
and persons; wherefore Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. i, 17) that "when
the audience is weary, it will be useful for the speaker to try
something novel or amusing, provided that joking be not
incompatible with the gravity of the subject." Now the sacred
doctrine is concerned with things of the greatest moment, according
to Prov. 8:6, "Hear, for I will speak of great things." Wherefore
Ambrose does not altogether exclude fun from human speech, but
from the sacred doctrine; hence he begins by saying: "Although
jokes are at times fitting and pleasant, nevertheless they are
incompatible with the ecclesiastical rule; since how can we have
recourse to things which are not to be found in Holy Writ?"
Reply to Objection 2: This saying of Chrysostom refers to the
inordinate use of fun, especially by those who make the pleasure of
games their end; of whom it is written (Wis. 15:12): "They have
accounted our life a pastime." Against these Tully says (De Offic. i,
29): "We are so begotten by nature that we appear to be made not for
play and fun, but rather for hardships, and for occupations of greater
gravity and moment."
Reply to Objection 3: Playful actions themselves considered in their
species are not directed to an end: but the pleasure derived from
such actions is directed to the recreation and rest of the soul, and
accordingly if this be done with moderation, it is lawful to make use
of fun. Hence Tully says (De Offic. i, 29): "It is indeed lawful to make
use of play and fun, but in the same way as we have recourse to
sleep and other kinds of rest, then only when we have done our duty
by grave and serious matters."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there can be sin in the excess of play?

Objection 1: It would seem that there cannot be sin in the excess of
play. For that which is an excuse for sin is not held to be sinful. Now
play is sometimes an excuse for sin, for many things would be grave
sins if they were done seriously, whereas if they be done in fun, are
either no sin or but slightly sinful. Therefore it seems that there is no
sin in excessive play.
Objection 2: Further, all other vices are reducible to the seven capital
vices, as Gregory states (Moral. xxxi, 17). But excess of play does
not seem reducible to any of the capital vices. Therefore it would
seem not to be a sin.
Objection 3: Further, comedians especially would seem to exceed in
play, since they direct their whole life to playing. Therefore if excess
of play were a sin, all actors would be in a state of sin; moreover all
those who employ them, as well as those who make them any
payment, would sin as accomplices of their sin. But this would seem
untrue; for it is related in the Lives of the Fathers (ii. 16; viii. 63) that
is was revealed to the Blessed Paphnutius that a certain jester would
be with him in the life to come.
On the contrary, A gloss on Prov. 14:13, "Laughter shall be mingled
with sorrow and mourning taketh hold of the end of joy," remarks: "A
mourning that will last for ever." Now there is inordinate laughter and
inordinate joy in excessive play. Therefore there is mortal sin
therein, since mortal sin alone is deserving of everlasting mourning.
I answer that, In all things dirigible according to reason, the
excessive is that which goes beyond, and the deficient is that which
falls short of the rule of reason. Now it has been stated (Article 2)
that playful or jesting words or deeds are dirigible according to
reason. Wherefore excessive play is that which goes beyond the rule
of reason: and this happens in two ways. First, on account of the
very species of the acts employed for the purpose of fun, and this
kind of jesting, according to Tully (De Offic. i, 29), is stated to be
"discourteous, insolent, scandalous, and obscene," when to wit a
man, for the purpose of jesting, employs indecent words or deeds, or
such as are injurious to his neighbor, these being of themselves
mortal sins. And thus it is evident that excessive play is a mortal sin.