made in themselves, but only in the composite, as we have explained
(Question 65, Article 4); and because the agent must be like its
effect, it is not fitting that a pure form, not existing in matter, should
produce a form which is in matter, and which form is only made by
the fact that the composite is made. So a form which is in matter can
only be the cause of another form that is in matter, according as
composite is made by composite. Now God, though He is absolutely
immaterial, can alone by His own power produce matter by creation:
wherefore He alone can produce a form in matter, without the aid of
any preceding material form. For this reason the angels cannot
transform a body except by making use of something in the nature of
a seed, as Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 19). Therefore as no preexisting body has been formed whereby another body of the same
species could be generated, the first human body was of necessity
made immediately by God.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the angels are the ministers of God,
as regards what He does in bodies, yet God does something in
bodies beyond the angels' power, as, for instance, raising the dead,
or giving sight to the blind: and by this power He formed the body of
the first man from the slime of the earth. Nevertheless the angels
could act as ministers in the formation of the body of the first man,
in the same way as they will do at the last resurrection by collecting
the dust.
Reply to Objection 2: Perfect animals, produced from seed, cannot
be made by the sole power of a heavenly body, as Avicenna
imagined; although the power of a heavenly body may assist by cooperation in the work of natural generation, as the Philosopher says
(Phys. ii, 26), "man and the sun beget man from matter." For this
reason, a place of moderate temperature is required for the
production of man and other animals. But the power of heavenly
bodies suffices for the production of some imperfect animals from
properly disposed matter: for it is clear that more conditions are
required to produce a perfect than an imperfect thing.
Reply to Objection 3: The movement of the heavens causes natural
changes; but not changes that surpass the order of nature, and are
caused by the Divine Power alone, as for the dead to be raised to life,
or the blind to see: like to which also is the making of man from the
slime of the earth.
Reply to Objection 4: An effect may be said to pre-exist in the causal

virtues of creatures, in two ways. First, both in active and in passive
potentiality, so that not only can it be produced out of pre-existing
matter, but also that some pre-existing creature can produce it.
Secondly, in passive potentiality only; that is, that out of pre-existing
matter it can be produced by God. In this sense, according to
Augustine, the human body pre-existed in the previous work in their
causal virtues.