according as they imitate Him, as far as He can be imitated; unlike,
according as an effect falls short of its cause." Now every good
existing in a creature is a participated likeness of the first good.
Wherefore from the very fact that man coveted a spiritual good
above his measure, as stated in the foregoing Article, it follows that
he coveted God's likeness inordinately.
It must, however, be observed that the proper object of the appetite
is a thing not possessed. Now spiritual good, in so far as the rational
creature participates in the Divine likeness, may be considered in
reference to three things. First, as to natural being: and this likeness
was imprinted from the very outset of their creation, both on man---of
whom it is written (Gn. 1:26) that God made man "to His image and
likeness"---and on the angel, of whom it is written (Ezech. 28:12):
"Thou wast the seal of resemblance." Secondly, as to knowledge:
and this likeness was bestowed on the angel at his creation,
wherefore immediately after the words just quoted, "Thou wast the
seal of resemblance," we read: "Full of wisdom." But the first man, at
his creation, had not yet received this likeness actually but only in
potentiality. Thirdly, as to the power of operation: and neither angel
nor man received this likeness actually at the very outset of his
creation, because to each there remained something to be done
whereby to obtain happiness.
Accordingly, while both (namely the devil and the first man) coveted
God's likeness inordinately, neither of them sinned by coveting a
likeness of nature. But the first man sinned chiefly by coveting God's
likeness as regards "knowledge of good and evil," according to the
serpent's instigation, namely that by his own natural power he might
decide what was good, and what was evil for him to do; or again that
he should of himself foreknow what good and what evil would befall
him. Secondarily he sinned by coveting God's likeness as regards
his own power of operation, namely that by his own natural power he
might act so as to obtain happiness. Hence Augustine says (Gen. ad
lit. xi, 30) that "the woman's mind was filled with love of her own
power." On the other hand, the devil sinned by coveting God's
likeness, as regards power. Wherefore Augustine says (De Vera
Relig. 13) that "he wished to enjoy his own power rather than God's."
Nevertheless both coveted somewhat to be equal to God, in so far as
each wished to rely on himself in contempt of the order of the Divine
rule.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.162, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: This argument considers the likeness of
nature: and man did not sin by coveting this, as stated.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not a sin to covet God's likeness as to
knowledge, absolutely; but to covet this likeness inordinately, that
is, above one's measure, this is a sin. Hence Augustine commenting
on Ps. 70:18, "O God, who is like Thee?" says: "He who desires to be
of himself, even as God is of no one, wishes wickedly to be like God.
Thus did the devil, who was unwilling to be subject to Him, and man
who refused to be, as a servant, bound by His command."
Reply to Objection 3: This argument considers the likeness of
equality.