THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.2.

road to nature," as the Philosopher states (Phys. ii): for the purpose
of nature is terminated in the form or nature of the species.
Reply to Objection 1: On account of the identity of nature and
hypostasis in God, nature fs sometimes put instead of person or
hypostasis. And in this sense Augustine says that the Divine Nature
was conceived and born, inasmuch as the Person of the Son was
conceived and born in the human nature.
Reply to Objection 2: No movement or change is denominated from
the subject moved, but from the terminus of the movement, whence
the subject has its species. For this reason nativity is not
denominated from the person born, but from nature, which is the
terminus of nativity.
Reply to Objection 3: Nature, properly speaking, does not begin to
exist: rather is it the person that begins to exist in some nature.
Because, as stated above, nature designates that by which
something is; whereas person designates something as having
subsistent being.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.35, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a temporal nativity should be attributed

to Christ?
Objection 1: It would seem that temporal nativity is not to be
attributed to Christ. For "to be born is a certain movement of a thing
that did not exist before it was born, which movement procures for it
the benefit of existence" [Augustine, De Unit. Trin. xii]. But Christ
was from all eternity. Therefore He could not be born in time.
Objection 2: Further, what is perfect in itself needs not to be born.
But the Person of the Son of God was perfect from eternity.
Therefore He needs not to be born in time. Therefore it seems that
He had no temporal birth.
Objection 3: Further, properly speaking, nativity regards the person.
But in Christ there is only one person. Therefore in Christ there is
but one nativity.
Objection 4: Further, what is born by two nativities is born twice. But
this proposition is false; "Christ was born twice": because the
nativity whereby He was born of the Father suffers no interruption;
since it is eternal. Whereas interruption is required to warrant the
use of the adverb "twice": for a man is said to run twice whose
running is interrupted. Therefore it seems that we should not admit a
double nativity in Christ.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): "We confess
two nativities in Christ: one of the Father---eternal; and one which
occurred in these latter times for our sake."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), nature is compared to
nativity, as the terminus to movement or change. Now, movement is
diversified according to the diversity of its termini, as the
Philosopher shows (Phys. v). But, in Christ there is a twofold nature:
one which He received of the Father from eternity, the other which
He received from His Mother in time. Therefore we must needs
attribute to Christ a twofold nativity: one by which He was born of
the Father from all eternity; one by which He was born of His Mother
in time.
Reply to Objection 1: This was the argument of a certain heretic,