them says, think it not strange and unaccountable, which is taking place. This is
the nature of the thing, that its power is not recognized by them that perish. For
they are beside themselves, and behave as madmen; and so they rail and are
disgusted at the medicines which bring health.
2. But what do you say, O man? Christ became a slave for you, "having
taken the form of a slave," [Philippians 2:7] and was crucified, and rose again.
And when you ought for this reason to adore Him risen and admire His loving
kindness; because what neither father, nor friend, nor son, did for you, all this the
Lord wrought for you, the enemy and offender— when, I say, you ought to
admire Him for these things, do you call that foolishness, which is full of so
great wisdom? Well, it is nothing wonderful; for it is a mark of them that perish
not to recognize the things which lead to salvation. Be not troubled, therefore,
for it is no strange nor unaccountable event, that things truly great are mocked at
by those who are beside themselves. Now such as are in this mind you cannot
convince by human wisdom. Nay, if you want so to convince them, you do but
the contrary. For the things which transcend reasoning require faith alone. Thus,
should we set about convincing men by reasonings, how God became man, and
entered into the Virgin's womb, and not commit the matter unto faith, they will
but deride the more. Therefore they who inquire by reasonings, it is they who
perish.
And why speak I of God? For in regard of created things, should we do this,
great derision will ensue. For suppose a man, wishing to make out all things by
reasoning; and let him try by your discourse to convince himself how we see the
light; and do thou try to convince him by reasoning. Nay, you can not: for if you
say that it suffices to see by opening the eyes, you have not expressed the
manner, but the fact. For "why see we not," one will say, "by our hearing, and
with our eyes hear? And why hear we not with the nostril, and with the hearing
smell?" If then, he being in doubt about these things, and we unable to give the
explanation of them, he is to begin laughing, shall not we rather laugh him to
scorn? "For since both have their origin from one brain, since the two members

are near neighbors to each other, why can they not do the same work?" Now we
shall not be able to state the cause nor the method of the unspeakable and
curious operation; and should we make the attempt, we should be laughed to
scorn. Wherefore, leaving this unto God's power and boundless wisdom, let us
be silent.
Just so with regard to the things of God; should we desire to explain them
by the wisdom which is from without, great derision will ensue, not from their
infirmity, but from the folly of men. For the great things of all no language can
explain.
3. Now observe: when I say, "He was crucified;" the Greek says, "And how
can this be reasonable? Himself He helped not when undergoing crucifixion and
sore trial at the moment of the Cross: how then after these things did He rise
again and help others? For if He had been able, before death was the proper
time." (For this the Jews actually said.) [Matthew 27:41-42] "But He who helped
not Himself, how helped he others? There is no reason in it," says he. True, O
man, for indeed it is above reason; and unspeakable is the power of the Cross.
For that being actually in the midst of horrors, He should have shown Himself
above all horrors; and being in the enemy's hold should have overcome; this
comes of Infinite Power. For as in the case of the Three Children, their not
entering the furnace would not have been so astonishing, as that having entered
in they trampled upon the fire—and in the case of Jonah, it was a greater thing
by far, after he had been swallowed by the fish, to suffer no harm from the
monster, than if he had not been swallowed at all—so also in regard of Christ;
His not dying would not have been so inconceivable, as that having died He
should loose the bands of death. Say not then, "why did He not help Himself on
the Cross?" for He was hastening on to close conflict with death himself. (See
Hooker, E. P. v. 48. 9.) He descended not from the Cross, not because He could
not, but because He would not. For Him Whom the tyranny of death restrained
not, how could the nails of the Cross restrain?
4. But these things, though known to us, are not so as yet to the unbelievers.