THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.54, C.3.

Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiii): "After the
Resurrection, our Saviour in spiritual but true flesh partook of meat
with the disciples, not from need of food, but because it lay in His
power." For as Bede says on Lk. 24:41: "The thirsty earth sucks in
the water, and the sun's burning ray absorbs it; the former from
need, the latter by its power." Hence after the Resurrection He ate,
"not as needing food, but in order thus to show the nature of His
risen body." Nor does it follow that His was an animal body that
stands in need of food.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.54, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether Christ's body rose again entire?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's body did not rise entire. For
flesh and blood belong to the integrity of the body: whereas Christ
seems not to have had both, for it is written (1 Cor. 15:50): "Flesh
and blood can not possess the kingdom of God." But Christ rose in
the glory of the kingdom of God. Therefore it seems that He did not
have flesh and blood.
Objection 2: Further, blood is one of the four humors. Consequently,
if Christ had blood, with equal reason He also had the other humors,
from which corruption is caused in animal bodies. It would follow,
then, that Christ's body was corruptible, which is unseemly.
Therefore Christ did not have flesh and blood.
Objection 3: Further, the body of Christ which rose, ascended to
heaven. But some of His blood is kept as relics in various churches.
Therefore Christ's body did not rise with the integrity of all its parts.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Lk. 24:39) while addressing His
disciples after the Resurrection: "A spirit hath not flesh and bones
as you see Me to have."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), Christ's body in the
Resurrection was "of the same nature, but differed in glory."
Accordingly, whatever goes with the nature of a human body, was
entirely in the body of Christ when He rose again. Now it is clear that
flesh, bones, blood, and other such things, are of the very nature of
the human body. Consequently, all these things were in Christ's
body when He rose again; and this also integrally, without any
diminution; otherwise it would not have been a complete
resurrection, if whatever was lost by death had not been restored.
Hence our Lord assured His faithful ones by saying (Mt. 10:30): "The
very hairs of your head are all numbered": and (Lk. 21:18): "A hair of
your head shall not perish."
But to say that Christ's body had neither flesh, nor bones, nor the
other natural parts of a human body, belongs to the error of
Eutyches, Bishop of Constantinople, who maintained that "our body
in that glory of the resurrection will be impalpable, and more subtle
than wind and air: and that our Lord, after the hearts of the disciples