perceived, [Exodus 18:14, etc.] much more in the Church may this happen. And
how then came it that what he that was an unbeliever perceived, he that was
spiritual perceived not? That all those of that time might understand that he was
a man; and though he divide the sea, though he cleave the rock, he needs the
influence of God, and that those acts were not of man's nature, but of God's
power. And so let another rise up and speak; and so now, if such and such an one
does not say expedient things, let another rise up and speak; though he be an
inferior, yet if he say somewhat to the purpose , confirm his opinion; and even if
he be of the very meanest, do not show him disrespect. For no one of these is at
so great a distance from his neighbor, as Moses' father-in-law was from him, yet
he disdained not to listen to him, but even admitted his opinion, and was
persuaded, and recorded it; and was not ashamed to hand down the
circumstances to history; casting down [so] the pride of the many. Wherefore
also he left this story to the world engraven as it were on a pillar, for he knew
that it would be useful to many. Let us then not overlook those who give us
behooveful counsel, even though they be of the meaner sort, nor insist that those
counsels prevail which we have ourselves introduced; but whatever shall appear
to be best, let that be approved by all. For many of duller sight have perceived
things sooner than those of acute vision, by means of diligence and attention.
And say not, "why do you call me to council, if you hearken not to what I say?"
These accusations are not a counsellor's, but a despot's. For the counsellor has
only power to speak his own opinion; but if something else appear more
profitable, and yet he will carry his own opinion into effect, he is no longer a
counsellor but a despot, as I said. Let us not, then, act in this manner; but having
freed our souls from all arrogancy and pride, let us consider, not how our
counsels only may stand, but how that opinion which is best may prevail, even
though it may not have been brought forward by us. For no light gain will be
ours, even though we should not have discovered what behooves, if ourselves
accepted what has been pointed out by others; and abundant is the reward we
shall receive from God, and so too shall we best attain to glory. For as he is wise

that speaks that which is behooveful, so shall we that have accepted it, ourselves
also reap the praise of prudence and of candor. Thus if both houses and states,
thus too if the Church be ordered, she will receive a larger increase ; and so too
shall we ourselves, having thus best ordered our present lives, receive the good
things to come: whereunto may we all attain, through the grace and love towards
men of our Lord Jesus Christ, to Whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.