FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.3.

knowledge, that is not requisite for the perfection of love. For
knowledge belongs to the reason, whose function it is to distinguish
things which in reality are united, and to unite together, after a
fashion, things that are distinct, by comparing one with another.
Consequently the perfection of knowledge requires that man should
know distinctly all that is in a thing, such as its parts, powers, and
properties. On the other hand, love is in the appetitive power, which
regards a thing as it is in itself: wherefore it suffices, for the
perfection of love, that a thing be loved according as it is known in
itself. Hence it is, therefore, that a thing is loved more than it is
known; since it can be loved perfectly, even without being perfectly
known. This is most evident in regard to the sciences, which some
love through having a certain general knowledge of them: for
instance, they know that rhetoric is a science that enables man to
persuade others; and this is what they love in rhetoric. The same
applies to the love of God.
Reply to Objection 3: Even natural love, which is in all things, is
caused by a kind of knowledge, not indeed existing in natural things
themselves, but in Him Who created their nature, as stated above
(Question 26, Article 1; cf. FP, Question 6, Article 1, ad 2).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether likeness is a cause of love?

Objection 1: It would seem that likeness is not a cause of love. For
the same thing is not the cause of contraries. But likeness is the
cause of hatred; for it is written (Prov. 13:10) that "among the proud
there are always contentions"; and the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii,
1) that "potters quarrel with one another." Therefore likeness is not a
cause of love.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Confess. iv, 14) that "a man
loves in another that which he would not be himself: thus he loves
an actor, but would not himself be an actor." But it would not be so,
if likeness were the proper cause of love; for in that case a man
would love in another, that which he possesses himself, or would
like to possess. Therefore likeness is not a cause of love.
Objection 3: Further, everyone loves that which he needs, even if he
have it not: thus a sick man loves health, and a poor man loves
riches. But in so far as he needs them and lacks them, he is unlike
them. Therefore not only likeness but also unlikeness is a cause of
love.
Objection 4: Further, the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 4) that "we love
those who bestow money and health on us; and also those who
retain their friendship for the dead." But all are not such. Therefore
likeness is not a cause of love.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 13:19): "Every beast loveth its
like."
I answer that, Likeness, properly speaking, is a cause of love. But it
must be observed that likeness between things is twofold. One kind
of likeness arises from each thing having the same quality actually:
for example, two things possessing the quality of whiteness are said
to be alike. Another kind of likeness arises from one thing having
potentially and by way of inclination, a quality which the other has
actually: thus we may say that a heavy body existing outside its
proper place is like another heavy body that exists in its proper
place: or again, according as potentiality bears a resemblance to its
act; since act is contained, in a manner, in the potentiality itself.