SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.2.

Consequently we must say that prophecy strictly so called cannot be
from nature, but only from Divine revelation.
Reply to Objection 1: When the soul is withdrawn from corporeal
things, it becomes more adapted to receive the influence of spiritual
substances [FP, Question 88, Article 4, ad 2], and also is more
inclined to receive the subtle motions which take place in the human
imagination through the impression of natural causes, whereas it is
hindered from receiving them while occupied with sensible things.
Hence Gregory says (Dial. iv, 26) that "the soul, at the approach of
death, foresees certain future things, by reason of the subtlety of its
nature," inasmuch as it is receptive even of slight impressions. Or
again, it knows future things by a revelation of the angels; but not by
its own power, because according to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii, 13),
"if this were so, it would be able to foreknow the future whenever it
willed," which is clearly false.
Objection 2: Knowledge of the future by means of dreams, comes
either from the revelation of spiritual substances, or from a corporeal
cause, as stated above (Question 95, Article 6), when we were
treating of divination. Now both these causes are more applicable to
a person while asleep than while awake, because, while awake, the
soul is occupied with external sensibles, so that it is less receptive
of the subtle impressions either of spiritual substances, or even of
natural causes; although as regards the perfection of judgment, the
reason is more alert in waking than in sleeping.
Reply to Objection 3: Even dumb animals have no foreknowledge of
future events, except as these are foreknown in their causes,
whereby their imagination is moved more than man's, because man's
imagination, especially in waking, is more disposed according to
reason than according to the impression of natural causes. Yet
reason effects much more amply in man, that which the impression
of natural causes effects in dumb animals; and Divine grace by
inspiring the prophecy assists man still more.
Reply to Objection 4: The prophetic light extends even to the
direction of human acts; and in this way prophecy is requisite for the
government of a people, especially in relation to Divine worship;
since for this nature is not sufficient, and grace is necessary.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.171, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether prophetic revelation comes through the

angels?
Objection 1: It would seem that prophetic revelation does not come
through the angels. For it is written (Wis. 7:27) that Divine wisdom
"conveyeth herself into holy souls," and "maketh the friends of God,
and the prophets." Now wisdom makes the friends of God
immediately. Therefore it also makes the prophets immediately, and
not through the medium of the angels.
Objection 2: Further, prophecy is reckoned among the gratuitous
graces. But the gratuitous graces are from the Holy Ghost, according
to 1 Cor. 12:4, "There are diversities of graces, but the same Spirit."
Therefore the prophetic revelation is not made by means of an angel.
Objection 3: Further, Cassiodorus [Prol. in Psalt. i] says that
prophecy is a "Divine revelation": whereas if it were conveyed by the
angels, it would be called an angelic revelation. Therefore prophecy
is not bestowed by means of the angels.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv): "Our glorious
fathers received Divine visions by means of the heavenly powers";
and he is speaking there of prophetic visions. Therefore prophetic
revelation is conveyed by means of the angels.
I answer that, As the Apostle says (Rm. 13:1), "Things that are of
God are well ordered." Now the Divine ordering, according to
Dionysius [Coel. Hier. iv; Eccl. Hier. v], is such that the lowest things
are directed by middle things. Now the angels hold a middle position
between God and men, in that they have a greater share in the
perfection of the Divine goodness than men have. Wherefore the
Divine enlightenments and revelations are conveyed from God to
men by the angels. Now prophetic knowledge is bestowed by Divine
enlightenment and revelation. Therefore it is evident that it is
conveyed by the angels.
Reply to Objection 1: Charity which makes man a friend of God, is a
perfection of the will, in which God alone can form an impression;
whereas prophecy is a perfection of the intellect, in which an angel
also can form an impression, as stated in the FP, Question 111,
Article 1, wherefore the comparison fails between the two.