FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.3.

know. Some of these we are under an obligation to know, those, to
wit, without the knowledge of which we are unable to accomplish a
due act rightly. Wherefore all are bound in common to know the
articles of faith, and the universal principles of right, and each
individual is bound to know matters regarding his duty or state.
Meanwhile there are other things which a man may have a natural
aptitude to know, yet he is not bound to know them, such as the
geometrical theorems, and contingent particulars, except in some
individual case. Now it is evident that whoever neglects to have or
do what he ought to have or do, commits a sin of omission.
Wherefore through negligence, ignorance of what one is bound to
know, is a sin; whereas it is not imputed as a sin to man, if he fails to
know what he is unable to know. Consequently ignorance of such
like things is called "invincible," because it cannot be overcome by
study. For this reason such like ignorance, not being voluntary,
since it is not in our power to be rid of it, is not a sin: wherefore it is
evident that no invincible ignorance is a sin. On the other hand,
vincible ignorance is a sin, if it be about matters one is bound to
know; but not, if it be about things one is not bound to know.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 71, Article 6, ad 1),
when we say that sin is a "word, deed or desire," we include the
opposite negations, by reason of which omissions have the
character of sin; so that negligence, in as much as ignorance is a
sin, is comprised in the above definition of sin; in so far as one omits
to say what one ought, or to do what one ought, or to desire what
one ought, in order to acquire the knowledge which we ought to
have.
Reply to Objection 2: Although privation of grace is not a sin in itself,
yet by reason of negligence in preparing oneself for grace, it may
have the character of sin, even as ignorance; nevertheless even here
there is a difference, since man can acquire knowledge by his acts,
whereas grace is not acquired by acts, but by God's favor.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as in a sin of transgression, the sin
consists not only in the act of the will, but also in the act willed,
which is commanded by the will; so in a sin of omission not only the
act of the will is a sin, but also the omission, in so far as it is in some
way voluntary; and accordingly, the neglect to know, or even lack of
consideration is a sin.
Reply to Objection 4: Although when the guilt has passed away

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.3.

through repentance, the ignorance remains, according as it is a
privation of knowledge, nevertheless the negligence does not
remain, by reason of which the ignorance is said to be a sin.
Reply to Objection 5: Just as in other sins of omission, man sins
actually only at the time at which the affirmative precept is binding,
so is it with the sin of ignorance. For the ignorant man sins actually
indeed, not continually, but only at the time for acquiring the
knowledge that he ought to have.