are that the larger part of the congregation is composed of unlearned people, and
that even the rest, who are clearer headed than they, fall as far short of being able
to criticize sermons as the remainder again fall short of them; so that only one or
two are seated there who possess this power; it follows, of necessity, that he who
preaches better than others carries away less applause, and possibly goes home
without being praised at all, and he must be prepared to meet such anomalies
nobly, and to pardon those who commit them in ignorance, and to weep for those
who acquiesce in them on account of envy as wretched and pitiable creatures,
and not to consider that his powers have become less on either of these accounts.
For if a man, being a pre-eminently good painter, and superior to all in his art,
sees the portrait which he has drawn with great accuracy held up to ridicule, he
ought not to be dejected, and to consider the picture poor, because of the
judgment of the ignorant; as he would not consider the drawing that is really
poor to be something wonderful and lovely, because of the astonishment of the
inartistic.
7. For let the best artificer be himself the critic of his own designs, and let
his performances be determined to be good or poor, according as the mind which
designed them gives sentence upon them. But let him not even consider the
opinion, so erroneous and inartistic, of the outside world. Let, therefore, the man
who undertakes the strain of teaching never give heed to the good opinion of the
outside world, nor be dejected in soul on account of such persons; but laboring at
his sermons so that he may please God, (For let this alone be his rule and
determination, in discharging this best kind of workmanship, not acclamation,
nor good opinions,) if, indeed, he be praised by men, let him not repudiate their
applause, and when his hearers do not offer this, let him not seek it, let him not
be grieved. For a sufficient consolation in his labors, and one greater than all, is
when he is able to be conscious of arranging and ordering his teaching with a
view to pleasing God.
8. For if he be first carried away with the desire for indiscriminate praise, he
will reap no advantage from his labors, or from his power in preaching, for the

mind being unable to bear the senseless censures of the multitude is dispirited,
and casts aside all earnestness about preaching. Therefore it is especially
necessary to be trained to be indifferent to all kinds of praise. For to know how
to preach is not enough for the preservation of that power, if this be not added:
and if any one would examine accurately the man who is destitute of this art, he
will find that he needs to be indifferent to praise no less than the other, for he
will be forced to do many wrong things in placing himself under the control of
popular opinion. For not having the energy to equal those who are in repute for
the quality of their preaching, he will not refrain from forming ill designs against
them, from envying them, and from blaming them without reason, and from
many such discreditable practices, but will venture everything, even if it be
needful to ruin his own soul, for the sake of bringing down their fame to the
level of his own insignificance. And in addition to this, he will leave off his
exertions about his work; a kind of numbness, as it were, spreading itself over
his mind. For much toil, rewarded by scanty praise, is sufficient to cast down a
man who cannot despise praise, and put him into a deep lethargy, since the
husbandman even when he spends time over some sorry piece of land, and is
forced to till a rock, quickly desists from his work, unless he is possessed of
much earnestness about the matter, or has a fear of famine impending over him.
For if they who are able to speak with considerable power, need such constant
exercise for the preservation of their talent, he who collects no materials at all,
but is forced in the midst of his efforts to meditate; what difficulty, what
confusion, what trouble will he experience, in order that he may be able at great
labor to collect a few ideas! And if any of those clergy who are under his
authority, and who are placed in the inferior order, be able in that position to
appear to better advantage than he; what a divine mind must he have, so as not to
be seized with envy or cast down by despondency. For, for one to be placed in a
station of higher dignity, and to be surpassed by his inferior in rank, and to bear
this nobly, would not be the part of any ordinary mind, nor of such as my own,
but of one as hard as adamant; and if, indeed, the man who is in greater repute be