soul in the midst of the storm as if he were in a calm, he is the man to be justly
applauded and admired of all, for he has shown sufficient proof of personal
manliness. Do not thou, therefore, for your part wonder if I, who avoid the
market-place and the haunts of the multitude, have not many to accuse me. For I
ought not to wonder, if I sinned not when asleep, nor fell when I did not wrestle,
nor was hit if I did not fight. For who, tell me, who will be able to speak against
me, and reveal my depravity? Can this roof or cell? Nay, they would not be able
to give tongue? Would my mother, who best of all knows my affairs? Well,
certainly with her I am neither in communication, nor have we ever come to a
quarrel, and if this had happened, no mother is so heartless and wanting in
affection for her child as to revile and accuse before all him whom she travailed
with, and brought forth, and reared, if there were no reason to constrain her, nor
any person to urge her to such an act. Nevertheless, if any one desires to make a
careful inspection of my mind, he will discover much which is corrupt there. Nor
are you unaware of this who art specially wont to extol me with praises before
all. Now that I do not say these things out of mere modesty, recollect how often I
said to you, when this subject was being discussed between us, If any one were
to give me my choice whether I would rather gain distinction in the oversight of
the Church, or in the life of the recluse, I would vote a thousand times over for
accepting the former. For I have never failed to congratulate those who have
been able to discharge this office well, and no one will gainsay that what I
counted blessed I would not have shunned were I able to take part in it fitly. But
what am I to do? There is nothing so prejudicial to the oversight of the Church as
this inactivity and negligence of mine, which others think to be a sort of selfdiscipline, but which I hold to be a veil as it were of my personal infirmity,
covering the greater number of my defects and not suffering them to appear. For
he who is accustomed to enjoy such great freedom from business, and to pass his
time in much repose, even if he be of a noble nature, is confused by his
inexperience, and is disturbed, and his inactivity deprives him of no small part of
his natural ability. But when, besides, he is of slow intellect, and ignorant also of

these severe trials, which I take it is my case, he will carry on this ministry
which he has received no better than a statue. Wherefore of those who have
come to such great trial, out of that school, few shine; and the greater part betray
themselves, and fall, and undergo much hardship and sufferings; and no wonder.
For the trials and the discipline are not concerned with the same things. The man
who is contending in no wise differs from those who are untrained. He who thus
enters this list should despise glory, be superior to anger, full of great discretion.
But for the exercise of these qualities there is no scope in his case who affects a
secluded life. For he does not have many to provoke him in order that he may
practise chastising, the force of his anger: nor admirers and applauders in order
that he may be trained to despise the praises of the multitudes. And of the
discretion which is required in the Church, there is no taking account in their
case. Whenever, therefore, they come to the trials of which they have never had
practical experience, they get bewildered, their heads are turned, they fall into a
state of helplessness, and besides adding nothing to their excellence, may have
often lost that which they brought with them.
8. Basil: What then? Shall we set over the administration of the Church
those who move in society, and who are careful about the concerns of this world,
who are adepts at wrangling and vituperation, are full of countless artifices, and
versed in luxurious ways?
Chrysostom: Hush, dear friend that you are! You should never entertain in
your thoughts such men as these, when the Priesthood is under discussion, but
only such as are able after mixing and associating with all, to keep their purity
undefiled, and their unworldliness, their holiness, constancy and sobriety
unshaken, and to possess all other virtues which belong to recluses, in a greater
degree than they. He who has many defects, but is able to hide them, by means
of his seclusion, and to make them ineffectual, because he does not associate
with any one, when he comes into society will gain nothing, but the position of a
laughing-stock, and will run greater risks still, which I was very nearly
experiencing myself, had not the providence of God quickly warded off such fire