THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.82, C.2.

likewise the power of consecrating this sacrament on Christ's behalf
is bestowed upon the priest at his ordination: for thereby he is put
upon a level with them to whom the Lord said (Lk. 22:19): "Do this
for a commemoration of Me." Therefore, it must be said that it
belongs to priests to accomplish this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: The sacramental power is in several things,
and not merely in one: thus the power of Baptism lies both in the
words and in the water. Accordingly the consecrating power is not
merely in the words, but likewise in the power delivered to the priest
in his consecration and ordination, when the bishop says to him:
"Receive the power of offering up the Sacrifice in the Church for the
living as well as for the dead." For instrumental power lies in several
instruments through which the chief agent acts.
Reply to Objection 2: A devout layman is united with Christ by
spiritual union through faith and charity, but not by sacramental
power: consequently he has a spiritual priesthood for offering
spiritual sacrifices, of which it is said (Ps. 1:19): "A sacrifice to God
is an afflicted spirit"; and (Rm. 12:1): "Present your bodies a living
sacrifice." Hence, too, it is written (1 Pt. 2:5): "A holy priesthood, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices."
Reply to Objection 3: The receiving of this sacrament is not of such
necessity as the receiving of Baptism, as is evident from what was
said above (Question 65, Articles 3,4; Question 80, Article 11, ad 2).
And therefore, although a layman can baptize in case of necessity,
he cannot perform this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 4: The bishop receives power to act on Christ's
behalf upon His mystical body, that is, upon the Church; but the
priest receives no such power in his consecration, although he may
have it by commission from the bishop. Consequently all such
things as do not belong to the mystical body are not reserved to the
bishop, such as the consecration of this sacrament. But it belongs to
the bishop to deliver, not only to the people, but likewise to priests,
such things as serve them in the fulfillment of their respective
duties. And because the blessing of the chrism, and of the holy oil,
and of the oil of the sick, and other consecrated things, such as
altars, churches, vestments, and sacred vessels, makes such things
fit for use in performing the sacraments which

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.82, C.2.

belong to the priestly duty, therefore such consecrations are
reserved to the bishop as the head of the whole ecclesiastical order.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.82, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether several priests can consecrate one and

the same host?
Objection 1: It seems that several priests cannot consecrate one and
the same host. For it was said above (Question 67, Article 6), that
several cannot at the same time baptize one individual. But the
power of a priest consecrating is not less than that of a man
baptizing. Therefore, several priests cannot consecrate one host at
the same time.
Objection 2: Further, what can be done by one, is superfluously done
by several. But there ought to be nothing superfluous in the
sacraments. Since, then, one is sufficient for consecrating, it seems
that several cannot consecrate one host.
Objection 3: Further, as Augustine says (Tract. xxvi in Joan.), this is
"the sacrament of unity." But multitude seems to be opposed to
unity. Therefore it seems inconsistent with the sacrament for several
priests to consecrate the same host.
On the contrary, It is the custom of some Churches for priests newly
ordained to co-celebrate with the bishop ordaining them.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), when a priest is ordained
he is placed on a level with those who received consecrating power
from our Lord at the Supper. And therefore, according to the custom
of some Churches, as the apostles supped when Christ supped, so
the newly ordained co-celebrate with the ordaining bishop. Nor is the
consecration, on that account, repeated over the same host, because
as Innocent III says (De Sacr. Alt. Myst. iv), the intention of all should
be directed to the same instant of the consecration.
Reply to Objection 1: We do not read of Christ baptizing with the
apostles when He committed to them the duty of baptizing;
consequently there is no parallel.
Reply to Objection 2: If each individual priest were acting in his own
power, then other celebrants would be superfluous, since one would
be sufficient. But whereas the priest does not consecrate except as
in Christ's stead; and since many are "one in Christ" (Gal. 3:28);
consequently it does not matter whether this sacrament be