"But your intercourse was a thing desirable and lovely." I too know it. But
if you will trust sound reason with this grief, and wilt consider with yourself who
has taken him away, and that by nobly bearing it you offer your mind as a
sacrifice to our God, even this wave will not be too strong for you to stem. And
that which time brings to pass, the same do thou by your self-command. But if
you shall yield to weakness, your emotion will cease indeed in time, but it will
bring you no reward.
And together with these reasons collect also examples, some in the present
life, some in the Holy Scriptures. Consider that Abraham slew his own son, and
neither shed a tear nor uttered a bitter word. "But he," you say, "was Abraham."
Nay, thou surely hast been called to a nobler field of action. And Job grieved
indeed, but so much as was proper for a father who loved his children and was
very solicitious for the departed; whereas what we now do, is surely the part of
haters and enemies. For if when a man was taken up to court and crowned, thou
were smiting yourself and lamenting, I should not say that you were a friend of
him who was crowned, but a great enemy and adversary. "Nay," say you, "not
even as it is do I mourn for him, but for myself." Well, but this is not the part of
an affectionate person, to wish for your own sake that he were still in the conflict
and subject to the uncertainty of the future, when he might be crowned and come
to anchor; or that he should be tossed in mid ocean, when he might have been in
port.
8. "But I know not whither he has gone," say you. Wherefore do you not
know, tell me? For according as he lived well or otherwise, it is evident whither
he will go. "Nay, on this very account I lament," say you, "because he departed
being a sinner. " This is a mere pretext and excuse. For if this were the reason of
your mourning for the departed, you ought to have formed and corrected him,
when he was alive. The fact is thou dost every where look to what concerns
yourself, not him.
But grant that he departed with sin upon him, even on this account one
ought to rejoice, that he was stopped short in his sins and added not to his

iniquity; and help him as far as possible, not by tears, but by prayers and
supplications and alms and offerings. For not unmeaningly have these things
been devised, nor do we in vain make mention of the departed in the course of
the divine mysteries, and approach God in their behalf, beseeching the Lamb
Who is before us, Who takes away the sin of the world—not in vain, but that
some refreshment may thereby ensue to them. Not in vain does he that stands by
the altar cry out when the tremendous mysteries are celebrated, "For all that
have fallen asleep in Christ, and for those who perform commemorations in their
behalf. " For if there were no commemorations for them, these things would not
have been spoken: since our service is not a mere stage show, God forbid! Yea, it
is by the ordinance of the Spirit that these things are done.
Let us then give them aid and perform commemoration for them. For if the
children of Job were purged by the sacrifice of their father, why do you doubt
that when we too offer for the departed, some consolation arises to them? Since
God is wont to grant the petitions of those who ask for others. And this Paul
signified saying, "that in a manifold Person your gift towards us bestowed by
many may be acknowledged with thanksgiving on your behalf." [2 Corinthians
1:11] Let us not then be weary in giving aid to the departed, both by offering on
their behalf and obtaining prayers for them: for the common Expiation of the
world is even before us. Therefore with boldness do we then intreat for the
whole world, and name their names with those of martyrs, of confessors, of
priests. For in truth one body are we all, though some members are more
glorious than others; and it is possible from every source to gather pardon for
them, from our prayers, from our gifts in their behalf, from those whose names
are named with theirs. Why therefore do you grieve? Why mourn, when it is in
your power to gather so much pardon for the departed?
9. Is it then that you have become desolate and hast lost a protector? Nay,
never mention this. For you have not surely lost your God. And so, as long as
you have Him, He will be better to you than husband and father and child and
kinsman: since even when they were alive, He it was who did all things.