SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.129, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether presumption is opposed to magnanimity

by excess?
Objection 1: It seems that presumption is not opposed to
magnanimity by excess. For presumption is accounted a species of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, as stated above (Question 14, Article
2; Question 21, Article 1). But the sin against the Holy Ghost is not
opposed to magnanimity, but to charity. Neither therefore is
presumption opposed to magnanimity.
Objection 2: Further, it belongs to magnanimity that one should
deem oneself worthy of great things. But a man is said to be
presumptuous even if he deem himself worthy of small things, if they
surpass his ability. Therefore presumption is not directly opposed to
magnanimity.
Objection 3: Further, the magnanimous man looks upon external
goods as little things. Now according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv,
3), "on account of external fortune the presumptuous disdain and
wrong others, because they deem external goods as something
great." Therefore presumption is opposed to magnanimity, not by
excess, but only by deficiency.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 7; iv, 3) that the
"vain man," i.e. a vaporer or a wind-bag, which with us denotes a
presumptuous man, "is opposed to the magnanimous man by
excess."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 129, Article 3, ad 1),
magnanimity observes the means, not as regards the quantity of that
to which it tends, but in proportion to our own ability: for it does not
tend to anything greater than is becoming to us.
Now the presumptuous man, as regards that to which he tends, does
not exceed the magnanimous, but sometimes falls far short of him:
but he does exceed in proportion to his own ability, whereas the
magnanimous man does not exceed his. It is in this way that
presumption is opposed to magnanimity by excess.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not every presumption that is accounted a
sin against the Holy Ghost, but that by which one contemns the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.129, C.3.

Divine justice through inordinate confidence in the Divine mercy.
The latter kind of presumption, by reason of its matter, inasmuch, to
wit, as it implies contempt of something Divine, is opposed to
charity, or rather to the gift of fear, whereby we revere God.
Nevertheless, in so far as this contempt exceeds the proportion to
one's own ability, it can be opposed to magnanimity.
Reply to Objection 2: Presumption, like magnanimity, seems to tend
to something great. For we are not, as a rule, wont to call a man
presumptuous for going beyond his powers in something small. If,
however, such a man be called presumptuous, this kind of
presumption is not opposed to magnanimity, but to that virtue which
is about ordinary honor, as stated above (Question 129, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 3: No one attempts what is above his ability,
except in so far as he deems his ability greater than it is. In this one
may err in two ways. First only as regards quantity, as when a man
thinks he has greater virtue, or knowledge, or the like, than he has.
Secondly, as regards the kind of thing, as when he thinks himself
great, and worthy of great things, by reason of something that does
not make him so, for instance by reason of riches or goods of
fortune. For, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3), "those who have
these things without virtue, neither justly deem themselves worthy of
great things, nor are rightly called magnanimous."
Again, the thing to which a man sometimes tends in excess of his
ability, is sometimes in very truth something great, simply as in the
case of Peter, whose intent was to suffer for Christ, which has
exceeded his power; while sometimes it is something great, not
simply, but only in the opinion of fools, such as wearing costly
clothes, despising and wronging others. This savors of an excess of
magnanimity, not in any truth, but in people's opinion. Hence Seneca
says (De Quat. Virtut.) that "when magnanimity exceeds its measure,
it makes a man high-handed, proud, haughty restless, and bent on
excelling in all things, whether in words or in deeds, without any
considerations of virtue." Thus it is evident that the presumptuous
man sometimes falls short of the magnanimous in reality, although
in appearance he surpasses him.