THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the debt of punishment remains after the

guilt has been forgiven through Penance?
Objection 1: It would seem that no debt of punishment remains after
the guilt has been forgiven through Penance. For when the cause is
removed, the effect is removed. But the guilt is the cause of the debt
of punishment: since a man deserves to be punished because he
has been guilty of a sin. Therefore when the sin has been forgiven,
no debt of punishment can remain.
Objection 2: Further, according to the Apostle (Rm. 5) the gift of
Christ is more effective than the sin of Adam. Now, by sinning, man
incurs at the same time guilt and the debt of punishment. Much more
therefore, by the gift of grace, is the guilt forgiven and at the same
time the debt of punishment remitted.
Objection 3: Further, the forgiveness of sins is effected in Penance
through the power of Christ's Passion, according to Rm. 3:25:
"Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in His
Blood . . . for the remission of former sins." Now Christ's Passion
made satisfaction sufficient for all sins, as stated above (Questions
48,49,79, Article 5). Therefore after the guilt has been pardoned, no
debt of punishment remains.
On the contrary, It is related (2 Kgs. 12:13) that when David penitent
had said to Nathan: "I have sinned against the Lord," Nathan said to
him: "The Lord also hath taken away thy sin, thou shalt not die.
Nevertheless . . . the child that is born to thee shall surely die," which
was to punish him for the sin he had committed, as stated in the
same place. Therefore a debt of some punishment remains after the
guilt has been forgiven.
I answer that, As stated in the FS, Question 87, Article 4, in mortal
sin there are two things, namely, a turning from the immutable Good,
and an inordinate turning to mutable good. Accordingly, in so far as
mortal sin turns away from the immutable Good, it induces a debt of
eternal punishment, so that whosoever sins against the eternal Good
should be punished eternally. Again, in so far as mortal sin turns
inordinately to a mutable good, it gives rise to a debt of some
punishment, because the disorder of guilt is not brought back to the
order of justice, except by punishment: since it is just that he who

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.86, C.5.

has been too indulgent to his will, should suffer something against
his will, for thus will equality be restored. Hence it is written (Apoc.
18:7): "As much as she hath glorified herself, and lived in delicacies,
so much torment and sorrow give ye to her."
Since, however, the turning to mutable good is finite, sin does not, in
this respect, induce a debt of eternal punishment. Wherefore, if man
turns inordinately to a mutable good, without turning from God, as
happens in venial sins, he incurs a debt, not of eternal but of
temporal punishment. Consequently when guilt is pardoned through
grace, the soul ceases to be turned away from God, through being
united to God by grace: so that at the same time, the debt of
punishment is taken away, albeit a debt of some temporal
punishment may yet remain.
Reply to Objection 1: Mortal sin both turns away from God and turns
to a created good. But, as stated in the FS, Question 71, Article 6, the
turning away from God is as its form while the turning to created
good is as its matter. Now if the formal element of anything be
removed, the species is taken away: thus, if you take away rational,
you take away the human species. Consequently mortal sin is said to
be pardoned from the very fact that, by means of grace, the aversion
of the mind from God is taken away together with the debt of eternal
punishment: and yet the material element remains, viz. the inordinate
turning to a created good, for which a debt of temporal punishment
is due.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated in the FS, Question 109, Articles 7,8;
FS, Question 111, Article 2, it belongs to grace to operate in man by
justifying him from sin, and to co-operate with man that his work
may be rightly done. Consequently the forgiveness of guilt and of
the debt of eternal punishment belongs to operating grace, while the
remission of the debt of temporal punishment belongs to cooperating grace, in so far as man, by bearing punishment patiently
with the help of Divine grace, is released also from the debt of
temporal punishment. Consequently just as the effect of operating
grace precedes the effect of co-operating grace, so too, the
remission of guilt and of eternal punishment precedes the complete
release from temporal punishment, since both are from grace, but
the former, from grace alone, the latter, from grace and free-will.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's Passion is of itself sufficient to remove
all debt of punishment, not only eternal, but also temporal; and man