FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.3.

if it commands acts of other virtues, this is only in so far as they
assume the nature of justice, as the Philosopher explains (Ethic. v,
1).
But the community for which the Divine law is ordained, is that of
men in relation to God, either in this life or in the life to come. And
therefore the Divine law proposes precepts about all those matters
whereby men are well ordered in their relations to God. Now man is
united to God by his reason or mind, in which is God's image.
Wherefore the Divine law proposes precepts about all those matters
whereby human reason is well ordered. But this is effected by the
acts of all the virtues: since the intellectual virtues set in good order
the acts of the reason in themselves: while the moral virtues set in
good order the acts of the reason in reference to the interior
passions and exterior actions. It is therefore evident that the Divine
law fittingly proposes precepts about the acts of all the virtues: yet
so that certain matters, without which the order of virtue, which is
the order of reason, cannot even exist, come under an obligation of
precept; while other matters, which pertain to the well-being of
perfect virtue, come under an admonition of counsel.
Reply to Objection 1: The fulfilment of the commandments of the
Law, even of those which are about the acts of the other virtues, has
the character of justification, inasmuch as it is just that man should
obey God: or again, inasmuch as it is just that all that belongs to
man should be subject to reason.
Reply to Objection 2: Justice properly so called regards the duty of
one man to another: but all the other virtues regard the duty of the
lower powers to reason. It is in relation to this latter duty that the
Philosopher speaks (Ethic. v, 11) of a kind of metaphorical justice.
The Reply to the Third Objection is clear from what has been said
about the different kinds of community.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether all the moral precepts of the Old Law are

reducible to the ten precepts of the decalogue?
Objection 1: It would seem that not all the moral precepts of the Old
Law are reducible to the ten precepts of the decalogue. For the first
and principal precepts of the Law are, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God," and "Thou shalt love thy neighbor," as stated in Mt. 22:37,39.
But these two are not contained in the precepts of the decalogue.
Therefore not all the moral precepts are contained in the precepts of
the decalogue.
Objection 2: Further, the moral precepts are not reducible to the
ceremonial precepts, but rather vice versa. But among the precepts
of the decalogue, one is ceremonial, viz. "Remember that thou keep
holy the Sabbath-day." Therefore the moral precepts are not
reducible to all the precepts of the decalogue.
Objection 3: Further, the moral precepts are about all the acts of
virtue. But among the precepts of the decalogue are only such as
regard acts of justice; as may be seen by going through them all.
Therefore the precepts of the decalogue do not include all the moral
precepts.
On the contrary, The gloss on Mt. 5:11: "Blessed are ye when they
shall revile you," etc. says that "Moses, after propounding the ten
precepts, set them out in detail." Therefore all the precepts of the
Law are so many parts of the precepts of the decalogue.
I answer that, The precepts of the decalogue differ from the other
precepts of the Law, in the fact that God Himself is said to have
given the precepts of the decalogue; whereas He gave the other
precepts to the people through Moses. Wherefore the decalogue
includes those precepts the knowledge of which man has
immediately from God. Such are those which with but slight
reflection can be gathered at once from the first general principles:
and those also which become known to man immediately through
divinely infused faith. Consequently two kinds of precepts are not
reckoned among the precepts of the decalogue: viz. first general
principles, for they need no further promulgation after being once
imprinted on the natural reason to which they are self-evident; as, for
instance, that one should do evil to no man, and other similar