FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.104, C.2.

position, in man, with regard to things that concern him, as a prince
or judge holds in the state. Nevertheless we must take note that,
since the relations of man to his neighbor are more subject to reason
than the relations of man to God, there are more precepts whereby
man is directed in his relations to his neighbor, than whereby he is
directed to God. For the same reason there had to be more
ceremonial than judicial precepts in the Law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.104, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the judicial precepts were figurative?

Objection 1: It would seem that the judicial precepts were not
figurative. Because it seems proper to the ceremonial precepts to be
instituted as figures of something else. Therefore, if the judicial
precepts are figurative, there will be no difference between the
judicial and ceremonial precepts.
Objection 2: Further, just as certain judicial precepts were given to
the Jewish people, so also were some given to other heathen
peoples. But the judicial precepts given to other peoples were not
figurative, but stated what had to be done. Therefore it seems that
neither were the judicial precepts of the Old Law figures of anything.
Objection 3: Further, those things which relate to the divine worship
had to be taught under certain figures, because the things of God are
above our reason, as stated above (Question 101, Article 2, ad 2). But
things concerning our neighbor are not above our reason. Therefore
the judicial precepts which direct us in relation to our neighbor
should not have been figurative.
On the contrary, The judicial precepts are expounded both in the
allegorical and in the moral sense (Ex. 21).
I answer that, A precept may be figurative in two ways. First,
primarily and in itself: because, to wit, it is instituted principally that
it may be the figure of something. In this way the ceremonial
precepts are figurative; since they were instituted for the very
purpose that they might foreshadow something relating to the
worship of God and the mystery of Christ. But some precepts are
figurative, not primarily and in themselves, but consequently. In this
way the judicial precepts of the Old Law are figurative. For they were
not instituted for the purpose of being figurative, but in order that
they might regulate the state of that people according to justice and
equity. Nevertheless they did foreshadow something consequently:
since, to wit, the entire state of that people, who were directed by
these precepts, was figurative, according to 1 Cor. 10:11: "All . . .
things happened to them in figure."
Reply to Objection 1: The ceremonial precepts are not figurative in
the same way as the judicial precepts, as explained above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.104, C.3.