first, and others to the second heaven; and then they strive to set forth the names, principles, angels,
and powers of the three hundred and sixty-five imagined heavens. They also affirm that the barbarous
name in which the Saviour ascended and descended, is Caulacau.
6. He, then, who has learned [these things], and known all the angels and their causes, is rendered
invisible and incomprehensible to the angels and all the powers, even as Caulacau also was. And
as the son was unknown to all, so must they also be known by no one; but while they know all, and
pass through all, they themselves remain invisible and unknown to all; for, "Do thou," they say,
"know all, but let nobody know thee." For this reason, persons of such a persuasion are also ready
to recant [their opinions], yea, rather, it is impossible that they should suffer on account of a mere
name, since they are like to all. The multitude, however, cannot understand these matters, but only
one out of a thousand, or two out of ten thousand. They declare that they are no longer Jews, and
that they are not yet Christians; and that it is not at all fitting to speak openly of their mysteries,
but right to keep them secret by preserving silence.
7. They make out the local position of the three hundred and sixty-five heavens in the same
way as do mathematicians. For, accepting the theorems of these latter, they have transferred them
to their own type of doctrine. They hold that their chief is Abraxas; and, on this account, that
word contains in itself the numbers amounting to three hundred and sixty-five.

### Chapter XXV.—Doctrines of Carpocrates.
1. Carpocrates, again, and his followers maintain that the world and the things which are therein
were created by angels greatly inferior to the unbegotten Father. They also hold that Jesus was the
son of Joseph, and was just like other men, with the exception that he differed from them in this
respect, that inasmuch as his soul was stedfast and pure, he perfectly remembered those things
which he had witnessed within the sphere of the unbegotten God. On this account, a power
descended upon him from the Father, that by means of it he might escape from the creators of the
world; and they say that it, after passing through them all, and remaining in all points free, ascended
again to him, and to the powers, which in the same way embraced like things to itself. They
further declare, that the soul of Jesus, although educated in the practices of the Jews, regarded these
tries to bring out of it something like the translation given above. [This name is manufactured from a curious abuse of (!"# !")
Isa. xxviii. 10—13, which is variously understood. See (Epiphanius ed. Oehler, vol. i.) Philastr., p. 38.]
[See Aug. (ed. Migne), vol. viii. p. 26.] It is doubtful to whom or what this word refers; probably to the heavens.