FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.3.

share of the Eternal Reason, whereby it has a natural inclination to
its proper act and end: and this participation of the eternal law in the
rational creature is called the natural law. Hence the Psalmist after
saying (Ps. 4:6): "Offer up the sacrifice of justice," as though
someone asked what the works of justice are, adds: "Many say, Who
showeth us good things?" in answer to which question he says:
"The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us": thus
implying that the light of natural reason, whereby we discern what is
good and what is evil, which is the function of the natural law, is
nothing else than an imprint on us of the Divine light. It is therefore
evident that the natural law is nothing else than the rational
creature's participation of the eternal law.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument would hold, if the natural law
were something different from the eternal law: whereas it is nothing
but a participation thereof, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Every act of reason and will in us is based on
that which is according to nature, as stated above (Question 10,
Article 1): for every act of reasoning is based on principles that are
known naturally, and every act of appetite in respect of the means is
derived from the natural appetite in respect of the last end.
Accordingly the first direction of our acts to their end must needs be
in virtue of the natural law.
Reply to Objection 3: Even irrational animals partake in their own
way of the Eternal Reason, just as the rational creature does. But
because the rational creature partakes thereof in an intellectual and
rational manner, therefore the participation of the eternal law in the
rational creature is properly called a law, since a law is something
pertaining to reason, as stated above (Question 90, Article 1).
Irrational creatures, however, do not partake thereof in a rational
manner, wherefore there is no participation of the eternal law in
them, except by way of similitude.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there is a human law?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is not a human law. For the
natural law is a participation of the eternal law, as stated above
(Article 2). Now through the eternal law "all things are most orderly,"
as Augustine states (De Lib. Arb. i, 6). Therefore the natural law
suffices for the ordering of all human affairs. Consequently there is
no need for a human law.
Objection 2: Further, a law bears the character of a measure, as
stated above (Question 90, Article 1). But human reason is not a
measure of things, but vice versa, as stated in Metaph. x, text. 5.
Therefore no law can emanate from human reason.
Objection 3: Further, a measure should be most certain, as stated in
Metaph. x, text. 3. But the dictates of human reason in matters of
conduct are uncertain, according to Wis. 9:14: "The thoughts of
mortal men are fearful, and our counsels uncertain." Therefore no
law can emanate from human reason.
On the contrary, Augustine (De Lib. Arb. i, 6) distinguishes two kinds
of law, the one eternal, the other temporal, which he calls human.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 90, Article 1, ad 2), a law is
a dictate of the practical reason. Now it is to be observed that the
same procedure takes place in the practical and in the speculative
reason: for each proceeds from principles to conclusions, as stated
above (De Lib. Arb. i, 6). Accordingly we conclude that just as, in the
speculative reason, from naturally known indemonstrable principles,
we draw the conclusions of the various sciences, the knowledge of
which is not imparted to us by nature, but acquired by the efforts of
reason, so too it is from the precepts of the natural law, as from
general and indemonstrable principles, that the human reason needs
to proceed to the more particular determination of certain matters.
These particular determinations, devised by human reason, are
called human laws, provided the other essential conditions of law be
observed, as stated above (Question 90, Articles 2,3,4). Wherefore
Tully says in his Rhetoric (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that "justice has its
source in nature; thence certain things came into custom by reason
of their utility; afterwards these things which emanated from nature
and were approved by custom, were sanctioned by fear and