Thus shall we lay hold on eternal life, through the grace and lovingkindness of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 81 on the Gospel of John
John 17:6
"I have manifested Your Name unto the men which You gave Me out of the
world; Yours they were, and You gave them Me, and they have kept Your word."
1. "'Messenger' of great counsel" [Isaiah 9:6, Septuagint], the Son of God is
called, because of the other things which He taught, and principally because He
announced the Father to men, as also now He says, "I have manifested Your
Name unto the men." For after having said, "I have finished Your work," He next
explains it in detail, telling what sort of work. Now the Name indeed was well
known. For Esaias said, "You shall swear by the true God." [Isaiah 65:16]. But
what I have often told you I tell you now, that though it was known, yet it was so
only to Jews, and not to all of these: but now He speaks concerning the Gentiles.
Nor does He declare this merely, but also that they knew Him as the Father. For
it is not the same thing to learn that He is Creator, and that He has a Son. But He
"manifested His Name" both by words and actions.
"Whom You gave Me out of the world." As He says above, "No man comes
unto Me except it be given him" [John 6:65]; and, "Except My Father draw him"
[John 6:64]; so here too, "Whom you gave Me." [John 14:6] Now He calls
Himself "the Way"; whence it is clear that He establishes two things by what is
said here, that He is not opposed to the Father, and that it is the Father's will to
entrust them to the Son.
"Yours they were, and You gave them Me." Here He desires to teach that He
is greatly loved by the Father. For that He needed not to receive them, is clear
from this, He made them, He cares for them continually. How then did He
receive them? This, as I said before, shows His unanimity with the Father. Now
if a man choose to enquire into the matter in a human manner, and as the words

are spoken, they will no longer belong to the Father. For if when the Father had
them, the Son had them not, it is evident that when He gave them to the Son, He
withdrew from His dominion over them. And again, there is a yet more
unseemly conclusion; for they will be found to have been imperfect while they
yet were with the Father, but to have become perfect when they came to the Son.
But it is mockery even to speak thus. What then does He declare by this? "That it
has seemed good to the Father also that they should believe in the Son."
"And they have kept Your word."

John 17:7
"Now they have known that all things whatsoever You have given Me are of
You."
How did they "keep Your word"? "By believing in Me, and giving no heed
to the Jews. For he that believes in Him, it says, 'has set to his seal that God is
true.'" [John 3:33] Some read, "Now I know that all things whatsoever You have
given Me are of You." But this would have no reason; for how would the Son be
ignorant of the things of the Father? No the words are spoken of the disciples.
"From the time," He says, "that I told them these things, they have learned that
all that You have given Me is from You; nothing is alien, nothing peculiar to Me,
with You." (For whatever is peculiar, puts most things in the condition of being
alien. "They therefore have known that all things, whatsoever I teach, are Your
doctrines and teachings." "And whence have they learned it?" From My words;
for so have I taught them. And not only this have I taught them, but also that "I
came out from You." For this He was anxious to prove through all the Gospel.