FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

which had not drawn a yoke, since it had done no sin; nor did it
plough the ground, i.e. it never knew the stain of revolt. The fact of
the heifer being killed in an uncultivated valley signified the despised
death of Christ, whereby all sins are washed away, and the devil is
shown to be the arch-murderer.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the judicial precepts regarding foreigners

were framed in a suitable manner?
Objection 1: It would seem that the judicial precepts regarding
foreigners were not suitably framed. For Peter said (Acts 10:34,35):
"In very deed I perceive that God is not a respecter of persons, but in
every nation, he that feareth Him and worketh justice is acceptable to
Him." But those who are acceptable to God should not be excluded
from the Church of God. Therefore it is unsuitably commanded (Dt.
23:3) that "the Ammonite and the Moabite, even after the tenth
generation, shall not enter into the church of the Lord for ever":
whereas, on the other hand, it is prescribed (Dt. 23:7) to be observed
with regard to certain other nations: "Thou shalt not abhor the
Edomite, because he is thy brother; nor the Egyptian because thou
wast a stranger in his land."
Objection 2: Further, we do not deserve to be punished for those
things which are not in our power. But it is not in man's power to be
an eunuch, or born of a prostitute. Therefore it is unsuitably
commanded (Dt. 23:1,2) that "an eunuch and one born of a prostitute
shalt not enter into the church of the Lord."
Objection 3: Further, the Old Law mercifully forbade strangers to be
molested: for it is written (Ex. 22:21): "Thou shalt not molest a
stranger, nor afflict him; for yourselves also were strangers in the
land of Egypt": and (Ex. 23:9): "Thou shalt not molest a stranger, for
you know the hearts of strangers, for you also were strangers in the
land of Egypt." But it is an affliction to be burdened with usury.
Therefore the Law unsuitably permitted them (Dt. 23:19,20) to lend
money to the stranger for usury.
Objection 4: Further, men are much more akin to us than trees. But
we should show greater care and love for these things that are
nearest to us, according to Ecclus. 13:19: "Every beast loveth its
like: so also every man him that is nearest to himself." Therefore the
Lord unsuitably commanded (Dt. 20:13-19) that all the inhabitants of
a captured hostile city were to be slain, but that the fruit-trees should
not be cut down.
Objection 5: Further, every one should prefer the common good of
virtue to the good of the individual. But the common good is sought

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.4.

in a war which men fight against their enemies. Therefore it is
unsuitably commanded (Dt. 20:5-7) that certain men should be sent
home, for instance a man that had built a new house, or who had
planted a vineyard, or who had married a wife.
Objection 6: Further, no man should profit by his own fault. But it is a
man's fault if he be timid or faint-hearted: since this is contrary to the
virtue of fortitude. Therefore the timid and faint-hearted are
unfittingly excused from the toil of battle (Dt. 20:8).
On the contrary, Divine Wisdom declares (Prov. 8:8): "All my words
are just, there is nothing wicked nor perverse in them."
I answer that, Man's relations with foreigners are twofold: peaceful,
and hostile: and in directing both kinds of relation the Law contained
suitable precepts. For the Jews were offered three opportunities of
peaceful relations with foreigners. First, when foreigners passed
through their land as travelers. Secondly, when they came to dwell in
their land as newcomers. And in both these respects the Law made
kind provision in its precepts: for it is written (Ex. 22:21): "Thou shalt
not molest a stranger [advenam]"; and again (Ex. 22:9): "Thou shalt
not molest a stranger [peregrino]." Thirdly, when any foreigners
wished to be admitted entirely to their fellowship and mode of
worship. With regard to these a certain order was observed. For they
were not at once admitted to citizenship: just as it was law with some
nations that no one was deemed a citizen except after two or three
generations, as the Philosopher says (Polit. iii, 1). The reason for this
was that if foreigners were allowed to meddle with the affairs of a
nation as soon as they settled down in its midst, many dangers
might occur, since the foreigners not yet having the common good
firmly at heart might attempt something hurtful to the people. Hence
it was that the Law prescribed in respect of certain nations that had
close relations with the Jews (viz., the Egyptians among whom they
were born and educated, and the Idumeans, the children of Esau,
Jacob's brother), that they should be admitted to the fellowship of
the people after the third generation; whereas others (with whom
their relations had been hostile, such as the Ammonites and
Moabites) were never to be admitted to citizenship; while the
Amalekites, who were yet more hostile to them, and had no
fellowship of kindred with them, were to be held as foes in
perpetuity: for it is written (Ex. 17:16): "The war of the Lord shall be
against Amalec from generation to generation."