heaven, which substance will remain. Wherefore it does not follow
that, when this movement ceases, the substance of the heaven will
lose something of its perfection.
Reply to Objection 5: All the elemental bodies will have in
themselves a certain clarity of glory. Hence though part of the
surface of the earth be not lit up by the sun, there will by no means
be any darkness there.
Reply to Objection 6: A gloss of Ambrose on Rm. 8:22, "Every
creature groaneth," etc. says explicitly that "all the elements labor to
fulfill their offices: thus the sun and moon fill the places appointed to
them not without work: this is for our sake, wherefore they will rest
when we are taken up to heaven." This work, in my opinion, does not
signify that any stress or passion occurs to these bodies from their
movement, since this movement is natural to them and nowise
violent, as is proved in De Coelo et Mundo i. But work here denotes a
defect in relation to the term to which a thing tends. Hence since this
movement is ordained by Divine providence to the completion of the
number of the elect, it follows that as long as the latter is incomplete,
this movement has not reached the term whereto it was ordained:
hence it is said metaphorically to labor, as a man who has not what
he intends to have. This defect will be removed from the heaven
when the number of the elect is complete. Or it may refer to the
desire of the future renewal which it awaits from the Divine disposal.
Reply to Objection 7: In a heavenly body there is no potentiality that
can be perfected by place, or that is made for this end which is to be
in such and such a place. But potentiality to situation in a place is
related to a heavenly body, as the craftsman's potentiality to
construct various houses of one kind: for if he construct one of
these he is not said to have the potentiality uselessly, and in like
manner in whatever situation a heavenly body be placed, its
potentiality to be in a place will not remain incomplete or without a
purpose.
Reply to Objection 8: Although a heavenly body, so far as regards its
nature, is equally inclined to every situation that it can possibly
occupy, nevertheless in comparison with things outside it, it is not
equally inclined to every situation: but in respect of one situation it
has a more noble disposition in comparison with certain things than
in respect of another situation; thus in our regard the sun has a more
noble disposition at daytime than at night-time. Hence it is probable,

since the entire renewal of the world is directed to man, that the
heaven will have in this renewal the most noble situation possible in
relation to our dwelling there. Or, according to some, the heaven will
rest in that situation wherein it was made, else one of its revolutions
would remain incomplete. But this argument seems improbable, for
since a revolution of the heaven takes no less than 36,000 years to
complete, it would follow that the world must last that length of time,
which does not seem probable. Moreover according to this it would
be possible to know when the world will come to an end. For we may
conclude with probability from astronomers in what position the
heavenly bodies were made, by taking into consideration the number
of years that have elapsed since the beginning of the world: and in
the same way it would be possible to know the exact number of
years it would take them to return to a like position: whereas the time
of the world's end is stated to be unknown.
Reply to Objection 9: Time will at length cease, when the heavenly
movement ceases. Yet that last "now" will not be the beginning of
the future. For the definition quoted applies to the "now" only as
continuous with the parts of time, not as terminating the whole of
time.
Reply to Objection 1:: The movement of the heaven is said to be
natural, not as though it were part of nature in the same way as we
speak of natural principles; but because it has its principle in the
nature of a body, not indeed its active but its receptive principle. Its
active principle is a spiritual substance, as the Commentator says on
De Coelo et Mundo; and consequently it is not unreasonable for this
movement to be done away by the renewal of glory, since the nature
of the heavenly body will not alter through the cessation of that
movement.
We grant the other objections which argue in the contrary sense,
namely the first three, because they conclude in due manner. But
since the remaining two seem to conclude that the movement of
heaven will cease naturally, we must reply to them. To the first, then,
we reply that movement ceases when its purpose is attained,
provided this is a sequel to, and does not accompany the movement.
Now the purpose of the heavenly movement, according to
philosophers, accompanies that movement, namely the imitation of
the Divine goodness in the causality of that movement with respect
to this lower world. Hence it does not follow that this movement
ceases naturally.