he is sick. But if you seek for another way besides to escape from hence, look to
God continually, and be content with glory from Him; and if you find the
passion tickling you, and stirring you to tell your well-doings to your fellowservants, bethink yourself next, that after telling them you gain nothing. Quench
the absurd desire, and say to your soul, Lo, you have been so long big with your
own well-doings to tell them, and you have not had the courage to keep them to
yourself, but hast blabbed them out to all. What good then have you gotten from
this? None at all, but loss to the utmost, and avoidance of all that had been
gathered together with much labor. And besides this, consider another thing also,
which is, that most men's opinion is perverted, and not perverted only, but that it
withers away so soon.
For supposing they do admire you for the time, when the occasion has gone
by they will have forgotten it all, and have taken away from you the crown God
had given, and have been unable to secure to you that from themselves. And yet
if this were abiding, it were a most miserable thing to exchange that for this. But
when even this has gone, what defence shall we be able to make for betraying
the abiding one for the sake of the unabiding one, for losing such blessings for
the sake of credit with a few? And indeed even if they who praise were
numerous, even for this they were to be pitied, and the more so the more
numerous those who do it. But if you are surprised at what I have said, hear
Christ giving His sentence in this way, "Woe unto you, when all men speak well
of you." [Luke 6:26] And so indeed it should seem. For if in every art you look
to the workmen ([δημιουργους]) in it to be judges of it, how come you to trust
the proving of virtue to the many, and not most of all to Him Who knows it more
surely then any, and is best able to applaud and to crown it? This saying then, let
us inscribe both on our walls and our doors and our mind, and let us keep
constantly saying to ourselves, "Woe unto us, when all men speak well of us."
For even they that so speak slander one afterward as a vain person, and fond of
honor, and covetous of their good word. But God does not so. But when He sees
you coveting the glory that comes of Him, then He will praise you most, and

respect ([θαυμάσεται] om. in most manuscripts) you, and proclaim you
conqueror. Not so man; but, when he finds you slavish instead of free, by
gratifying you often by bare words with false praise, he snatches from you your
true meed, and makes you more of a menial than a purchased slave. For those
last men get to obey them after their orders, but thou even without orders makest
yourself a slave. For thou dost not even wait to hear something from them, but if
you merely know wherein you may gratify them, even without their command
you do all. What hell then should we not deserve, for giving the wicked pleasure,
and courting their service before they give orders, while we will not hearken to
God, even when He every day commands and exhorts us? And yet if you are
covetous of glory and praise, avoid the praise that comes of men, and then you
will attain to glory. Turn aside from fair speeches, and then you will obtain
praises without number both from God and from men. For there is no one we are
used to give so much glory to, as the man who looks down upon glory, or to
praise and respect so much as the man who thinks scorn of getting respected and
praised. And if we do so, much more will the God of the universe. And when He
glorifies you and praises you, what man can be more justly pronounced blessed?
For there is not a greater difference between glory and disgrace, than between
the glory from above and that of men. Or rather, there is a much greater, aye an
infinite difference. For if this, even when it does not get put beside any other, is
but a base and uncomely one, when we come to scrutinize it by the other's side,
just consider how great its baseness will be found to be! For as a prostitute
stands at her place and lets herself out to any one, so are they that be slaves of
vanity. Or rather, these be more base than she. For that sort of women do in
many instances treat those enamoured of them with scorn. But you prostitute
yourself to everybody, whether runaway slaves, or thieves, or cut-purses (for it is
of these and such as these that the play-houses that applaud you consist), and
those whom as individuals you hold to be nothing worth, when in a body, you
honor more than your own salvation and show yourself less worthy of honor
than any of them. For how can you be else than less worthy, when you stand in