book also, and that God was not triple, but a Trinity; and that the Father
and the Son are not, as it were, a double as opposed to the single Holy
Spirit: for therein three are not anything more than one. We considered,
too, how to understand the words of Bishop Hilary, "Eternity in the
Father, form in the Image, use in the Gift." In the seventh, the question is
explained which had been deferred: in what way that God who begat the
Son is not only Father of His own power and wisdom, but is Himself also
power and wisdom; so, too, the Holy Spirit; and yet that they are not
three powers or three wisdoms, but one power and one wisdom, as one
God and one essence. It was next inquired, in what way they are called
one essence, three persons, or by some Greeks one essence, three
substances; and we found that the words were so used through the needs
of speech, that there might be one term by which to answer, when it is
asked what the three are, whom we truly confess to be three, viz. Father,
and Son, and Holy Spirit. In the eighth, it is made plain by reason also to
those who understand, that not only the Father is not greater than the
Son in the substance of truth, but that both together are not anything
greater than the Holy Spirit alone, nor that any two at all in the same
Trinity are anything greater than one, nor all three together anything
greater than each severally. Next, I have pointed out, that by means of the
truth, which is beheld by the understanding, and by means of the highest
good, from which is all good, and by means of the righteousness for which
a righteous mind is loved even by a mind not yet righteous, we might
understand, so far as it is possible to understand, that not only
incorporeal but also unchangeable nature which is God; and by means,
too, of love, which in the Holy Scriptures is called God, by which, first of
all, those who have understanding begin also, however feebly, to discern
the Trinity, to wit, one that loves, and that which is loved, and love. In the
ninth, the argument advances as far as to the image of God, viz. man in
respect to his mind; and in this we found a kind of trinity, i.e. the mind,
and the knowledge whereby the mind knows itself, and the love whereby
it loves both itself and its knowledge of itself; and these three are shown
to be mutually equal, and of one essence. In the tenth, the same subject is
more carefully and subtly handled, and is brought to this point, that we
found in the mind a still more manifest trinity of the mind, viz. in
memory, and understanding, and will. But since it turned out also, that
the mind could never be in such a case as not to remember, understand,

and love itself, although it did not always think of itself; but that when it
did think of itself, it did not in the same act of thought distinguish itself
from things corporeal; the argument respecting the Trinity, of which this
is an image, was deferred, in order to find a trinity also in the things
themselves that are seen with the body, and to exercise the reader's
attention more distinctly in that. Accordingly, in the eleventh, we chose
the sense of sight, wherein that which should have been there found to
hold good might be recognized also in the other four bodily senses.
although not expressly mentioned; and so a trinity of the outer man first
showed itself in those things which are discerned from without, to wit,
from the bodily object which is seen, and from the form which is thence
impressed upon the eye of the beholder, and from the purpose of the will
combining the two. But these three things, as was patent, were not
mutually equal and of one substance. Next, we found yet another trinity
in the mind itself, introduced into it, as it were, by the things perceived
from without; wherein the same three things, as it appeared, were of one
substance: the image of the bodily object which is in the memory, and the
form thence impressed when the mind's eye of the thinker is turned to it,
and the purpose of the will combining the two. But we found this trinity
to pertain to the outer man, on this account, that it was introduced into
the mind from bodily objects which are perceived from without. In the
twelfth, we thought good to distinguish wisdom from knowledge, and to
seek first, as being the lower of the two, a kind of appropriate and special
trinity in that which is specially called knowledge; but that although we
have got now in this to something pertaining to the inner man, yet it is
not yet to be either called or thought an image of God. And this is
discussed in the thirteenth book by the commendation of Christian faith.
In the fourteenth we discuss the true wisdom of man, viz. that which is
granted him by God's gift in the partaking of that very God Himself,
which is distinct from knowledge; and the discussion reached this point,
that a trinity is discovered in the image of God, which is man in respect to
his mind, which mind is "renewed in the knowledge" of God "after the
image of Him that created" man; "after His own image;" and so obtains
wisdom, wherein is the contemplation of things eternal.