envyings, and plottings, and hatred, and false accusations, and ten thousand
impediments to virtue, indolence, wantonness, greediness, drunkenness, which
make even freemen slaves, nay, worse than slaves bought with money, slaves not
to men, but even to the most grievous of the passions, and maladies of the soul.
Such a one dares many things displeasing to God and men, dreading lest any
should remove from him this dominion. O bitter slavery, and devlish tyranny!
For this is the most grievous thing of all, that when entangled in such evils we
are pleased and hug our chain, and dwelling in a prison house full of darkness,
refuse to come forth to the light, but rivet evil upon ourselves, and rejoice in our
malady. So that we cannot be freed, but are in a worse state than those that work
the mines, enduring labors and affliction, but not enjoying the fruit. And what is
in truth worse than all, if any one desire to free us from this bitter captivity, we
do not suffer it, but are even vexed and displeased, being in this respect in no
better case than madmen, or rather in a much more miserable state than any
such, inasmuch as we are not even willing to be delivered from our madness.
What? Was it for this, O man, that you were brought into the world? Was it for
this that you were made a man, that you might work in these mines, and gather
gold? Not for this did God create you in His Image, but that you might please
Him, that you might obtain the things to come, that you might join the choir of
Angels. Why now do you banish yourself from such a relationship, and thrust
yourself into the extreme of dishonor and meanness? He who came by the same
birth pangs with you, (the spiritual birth pangs I mean,) is perishing with hunger,
and you are bursting with fullness: your brother goes about with naked body, but
you provide garments even for your garments, heaping up all this clothing for
the worms. How much better would it have been to put them on the bodies of the
poor; so would they have remained undestroyed, would have freed you from all
care, and have won for you the life to come. If you will not have them to be
moth-eaten, give them to the poor, these are they who know how to shake these
garments well. The Body of Christ is more precious and more secure than the
coffer, for not only does It keep the garments safe, not only does It preserve

them unconsumed, but even renders them brighter. Oftentimes the coffer taken
with the garments causes you the utmost loss, but this place of safety not even
death can harm. With It we need neither doors nor bolts, nor wakeful servants,
nor any other such security, for our possessions are free from all treacherous
attacks, and are laid up under guard, as we may suppose things laid up in heaven
would be; for to all wickedness that place is inaccessible. These things we cease
not continually to say to you, and you hearing are not persuaded. The reason is,
that we are of a soul which is mean, gaping upon the earth, groveling on the
ground. Or rather, God forbid that I should condemn you all of wickedness, as
though all were incurably diseased. For even if those who are drunk with riches
stop their ears against my words, yet they who live in poverty will be able to
look clearly to what I say. "But what," says some one, "has this to do with the
poor? For they have no gold, or any such garments." No, but they have bread
and cold water, but they have two obols, and feet to visit the sick, but they have a
tongue and speech to comfort the bedridden, but they have house and shelter to
make the stranger their inmate. We demand not from the poor such and such a
number of talents of gold, these we ask from the rich. But if a man be poor, and
come to the doors of others, our Lord is not ashamed to receive even an obol, but
will say that He has received more from the giver, than from those who cast in
much. How many of those who now stand here would desire to have been born
at that time, when Christ went about the earth in the flesh, to have conversed and
sat at meat with Him? Lo, this may be done now, we may invite Him more than
then to a meal, and feast with Him, and that to greater profit. For of those who
then feasted with Him many even perished, as Judas and others like him; but
every one of those who invite Him to their houses now, and share with Him table
and roof, shall enjoy a great blessing. "Come," it says, "ye blessed of My Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I
was an hungered, and you gave Me meat: I was thirsty, and you gave Me drink: I
was a stranger, and you took Me in; sick, and you visited Me; I was in prison,
and you came unto Me." [Matthew 25:34-36] That then we may hear these