The missionary power of intercessory prayer

281. One form of prayer moves us particularly to take up the task of evangelization and to seek

the good of others: it is the prayer of intercession. Let us peer for a moment into the heart of Saint
Paul, to see what his prayer was like. It was full of people: “…I constantly pray with you in every
one of my prayers for all of you… because I hold you in my heart” (Phil 1:4, 7). Here we see that
intercessory prayer does not divert us from true contemplation, since authentic contemplation
always has a place for others.

282. This attitude becomes a prayer of gratitude to God for others. “First, I thank my God through
Jesus Christ for all of you” (Rom 1:8). It is constant thankfulness: “I give thanks to God always for
you because of the grace of God which was given you in Christ Jesus” (1 Cor 1:4); “I thank my
God in all my remembrance of you” (Phil 1:3). Far from being suspicious, negative and despairing,
it is a spiritual gaze born of deep faith which acknowledges what God is doing in the lives of
others. At the same time, it is the gratitude which flows from a heart attentive to others. When
evangelizers rise from prayer, their hearts are more open; freed of self-absorption, they are
desirous of doing good and sharing their lives with others.

283. The great men and women of God were great intercessors. Intercession is like a “leaven” in
the heart of the Trinity. It is a way of penetrating the Father’s heart and discovering new
dimensions which can shed light on concrete situations and change them. We can say that God’s
heart is touched by our intercession, yet in reality he is always there first. What our intercession
achieves is that his power, his love and his faithfulness are shown ever more clearly in the midst of
the people.

### II. Mary, mother of evangelization

284. With the Holy Spirit, Mary is always present in the midst of the people. She joined the
disciples in praying for the coming of the Holy Spirit (Acts 1:14) and thus made possible the
missionary outburst which took place at Pentecost. She is the Mother of the Church which
evangelizes, and without her we could never truly understand the spirit of the new evangelization.

Jesus’ gift to his people

285. On the cross, when Jesus endured in his own flesh the dramatic encounter of the sin of the
world and God’s mercy, he could feel at his feet the consoling presence of his mother and his
friend. At that crucial moment, before fully accomplishing the work which his Father had entrusted
to him, Jesus said to Mary: “Woman, here is your son”. Then he said to his beloved friend: “Here is
your mother” (Jn 19:26-27). These words of the dying Jesus are not chiefly the expression of his
devotion and concern for his mother; rather, they are a revelatory formula which manifests the
mystery of a special saving mission. Jesus left us his mother to be our mother. Only after doing so
did Jesus know that “all was now finished” (Jn 19:28). At the foot of the cross, at the supreme hour
of the new creation, Christ led us to Mary. He brought us to her because he did not want us to
journey without a mother, and our people read in this maternal image all the mysteries of the