there are faithful men, so also it is His glory that there are those who are to enjoy
His blessings. It is the glory of Him that is good, to have those to whom He may
impart His beneficence. "And to be marveled at," he says, "in all them that
believed," that is, "through them that believed." See here again, "in" is used for
"through." For through them He is shown to be admirable, when He brings to so
much splendor those who were pitiable and wretched, and who had suffered
unnumbered ills, and had believed. His power is shown then; because although
they seem to be deserted here, yet nevertheless they there enjoy great glory; then
especially is shown all the glory and the power of God. How?
"Because our testimony unto you was believed in that day."
Ver. 11. "To which end also we pray always for you."
That is, when those are brought into public view, who have suffered
unnumbered ills, deigned to make them apostatize from the faith, and yet have
not yielded, but have believed, God is glorified. Then is shown the glory of these
men also. "Judge none blessed," it says, "before his death." [Sirach 11:28] On
this account he says, in that day will be shown those who believed. "To which
end also we pray," he says, "always for you, that our God may count you worthy
of your calling, and fulfill every desire of goodness and every work of faith, with
power."
"That He may count you," he says, "worthy of calling"; for they were not
called. Therefore he has added, "and fulfill every desire of goodness." Since he
also who was clothed in filthy garments, was called, but did not abide in his
calling, but for this reason was the more rejected. "Of the calling," namely that
to the bride-chamber. Since the five virgins also were called. "Arise" it says, "the
bridegroom comes." [From Matthew 25:6] And they prepared themselves, but
did not enter in. But he speaks of that other calling. Showing therefore what
calling he is speaking of, he has added, "And fulfill every desire of goodness and
every work of faith, with power." This is the calling, he says, that we seek. See
how gently he takes them down. For that they may not be rendered vain by the
excess of commendation, as if they had done great deeds, and may not become

slothful, he shows that something still is wanting to them, so long as they are in
this life. Which also he said in his Epistle to the Hebrews. "You have not yet
resisted unto blood, striving against sin." [Hebrews 12:4] "Unto all
wellpleasing," he says, that is, His gratification, persuasion, full assurance. That
is, that the persuasion of God may be fulfilled, that nothing may be wanting to
you, that you may be so, as He wills. "And every work of faith," he says, "with
power." What is this? The patient endurance of persecutions, that we may not
faint, he says.
Ver. 12. "That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you,
and you in Him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ."
He spoke there of glory, he speaks of it also here. He said, that they are
glorified, so that they might even boast. He said, what was much more, that they
also glorify God. He said, that they will receive that glory. But here too he
means; For the Master being glorified, the servants also are glorified. For those
who glorify their Master, are much more glorified themselves, both by that very
thing, and apart from it. For tribulation for the sake of Christ is glory, and that
thing he everywhere calls glory. And by how much the more we suffer anything
dishonorable, so much the more illustrious we become. Then again showing that
this also itself is of God, he says, "according to the grace of our God and the
Lord Jesus Christ"; that is, this grace He Himself has given us, that He may be
glorified in us, and that He may glorify us in Him. How is He glorified in us?
Because we prefer nothing before Him. How are we glorified in Him? Because
we have received power from Him, so that we do not at all yield to the evils that
are brought upon us. For when temptation happens, at the same time God is
glorified, and we too. For they glorify Him, because He has so nerved us; they
admire us, because we have rendered ourselves worthy. And all these things are
done by the grace of God.
Chap. 2:1, 2. "Now we beseech you, brethren, touching the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto Him; to the end that you be
not quickly shaken from your mind."