FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.2.

is an apparent good, the will sometimes desires an evil, and in this
sense is in the will.
Reply to Objection 2: If the defect in the apprehensive power were
nowise subject to the will, there would be no sin, either in the will, or
in the apprehensive power, as in the case of those whose ignorance
is invincible. It remains therefore that when there is in the
apprehensive power a defect that is subject to the will, this defect
also is deemed a sin.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument applies to those efficient causes
whose actions pass into external matter, and which do not move
themselves, but move other things; the contrary of which is to be
observed in the will; hence the argument does not prove.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the will alone is the subject of sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will alone is the subject of sin.
For Augustine says (De Duabus Anim. x, 10) that "no one sins except
by the will." Now the subject of sin is the power by which we sin.
Therefore the will alone is the subject of sin.
Objection 2: Further, sin is an evil contrary to reason. Now good and
evil pertaining to reason are the object of the will alone. Therefore
the will alone is the subject of sin.
Objection 3: Further, every sin is a voluntary act, because, as
Augustine states (De Lib. Arb. iii, 18) [De Vera Relig. xiv.], "so true is
it that every sin is voluntary, that unless it be voluntary, it is no sin at
all." Now the acts of the other powers are not voluntary, except in so
far as those powers are moved by the will; nor does this suffice for
them to be the subject of sin, because then even the external
members of the body, which are moved by the will, would be a
subject of sin; which is clearly untrue. Therefore the will alone is the
subject of sin.
On the contrary, Sin is contrary to virtue: and contraries are about
one same thing. But the other powers of the soul, besides the will,
are the subject of virtues, as stated above (Question 56). Therefore
the will is not the only subject of sin.
I answer that, As was shown above (Article 1), whatever is the a
principle of a voluntary act is a subject of sin. Now voluntary acts are
not only those which are elicited by the will, but also those which are
commanded by the will, as we stated above (Question 6, Article 4) in
treating of voluntariness. Therefore not only the will can be a subject
of sin, but also all those powers which can be moved to their acts, or
restrained from their acts, by the will; and these same powers are the
subjects of good and evil moral habits, because act and habit belong
to the same subject.
Reply to Objection 1: We do not sin except by the will as first mover;
but we sin by the other powers as moved by the will.
Reply to Objection 2: Good and evil pertain to the will as its proper
objects; but the other powers have certain determinate goods and