you see a garment flung out of its place, though you have not the care of it,
though you be at enmity with him whose business it is, yet, out of good-will to
the master, will you not put it right? So in the present case. These are part of the
furniture: if you see them lying about in disorder, put them to rights: apply to
me, I do not refuse the trouble: inform me, make the offender known to me: it is
not possible for me to see all: excuse me (in this). See, what wickedness
overspreads the whole world! Said I without reason that we are (no better than)
so much hay (disorderly as) a troubled sea? I am not talking of those (young
people), that they behave thus; (what I complain of, is) that such a sleepy
indifference possesses those who come in here, that they do not even correct this
misbehavior.
Again I see others stand talking while Prayer is going on; while the more
consistent of them (do this) not only during the Prayer, but even when the Priest
is giving the Benediction. O, horror! When shall there be salvation? When shall
it be possible for us to propitiate God?— Soldiers go to their diversion, and you
shall see them, all keeping time in the dance, and nothing done negligently, but,
just as in embroidery and painting, from the well-ordered arrangement in each
individual part of the composition, there results at once an exceeding harmony
and good keeping, so it is here: we have one shield, one head, all of us (in
common): and if but some casual point be deranged by negligence, the whole is
deranged and is spoilt, and the good order of the many is defeated by the
disorder of the one part. And, fearful indeed to think of, here you come, not to a
diversion, not to act in a dance, and yet you stand disorderly. Know you not that
you are standing in company with angels? With them you chant, with them sing
hymns, and do you stand laughing? Is it not wonderful that a thunderbolt is not
launched not only at those (who behave thus), but at us? For such behavior
might well be visited with the thunderbolt. The Emperor is present, is reviewing
the army: and do you, even with His eyes upon you, stand laughing, and endure
to see another laughing? How long are we to go on chiding, how long
complaining? Ought not such to be treated as very pests and nuisances; as

abandoned, worthless reprobates, fraught with innumerable mischiefs, to be
driven away from the Church? When will these forebear laughing, who laugh in
the hour of the dread Mystery ([ἑ] [ν ὣρᾳ φρίκης])? When refrain from their
trifling, who talk at the instant of the Benediction? Have they no sense of shame
before those who are present? Have they no fear of God? Are our own idle
thoughts not enough for us, is it not enough that in our prayers we rove hither
and there, but laughter also must needs intrude, and bursts of merriment? Is it a
theatrical amusement, what is done here? Aye, but, methinks, it is the theatres
that do this: to the theatres we owe it that the most of you so refuse to be curbed
by us, and to be reformed. What we build up here, is thrown down there: and not
only so, but the hearers themselves cannot help being filled with other
filthinesses besides: so that the case is just the same as if one should want to
clean out a place with a fountain above it discharging mire; for however much
you may clean out, more runs in. So it is here. For when we clean people out, as
they come here from the theatres with their filthiness, there they go again, and
take in a larger stock of filthiness, as if they lived for the purpose of only giving
us trouble, and then come back to us, laden with ordure, in their manners, in
their movements, in their words, in their laughter, in their idleness. Then once
more we begin shovelling it out afresh, as if we had to do this only on purpose
that, having sent them away clean, we may again see them clogging themselves
with filth. Therefore I solemnly protest to you, the sound members, that this will
be to you judgment and condemnation, and I give you over to God from this
time forth, if any having seen a person behaving disorderly, if any having seen
any person talking, especially in that part (of the Service), shall not inform
against him, not bring him round (to a better behavior). To do this is better than
prayer. Leave your prayer and rebuke him, that you may both do him good, and
yourself get profit, and so we may be enabled all to be saved and to attain unto
the Kingdom of Heaven, through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory,
dominion, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.