means not this, that all men were ignorant of Him, but that with the knowledge
wherewith He knows Him, no man is acquainted with Him; which may be said
of the Son too. For it was not of some God unknown, and revealed to no man,
that He was so speaking, as Marcion says; but it is the perfection of knowledge
that He is here intimating, since neither do we know the Son as He should be
known; and this very thing, to add no more, Paul was declaring, when he said,
"We know in part, and we prophesy in part." [1 Corinthians 13:9]
3. Next, having brought them by His words to an earnest desire, and having
signified His unspeakable power, He after that invites them, saying, "Come unto
me, all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest."
[Matthew 11:28] Not this or that person, but all that are in anxiety, in sorrows, in
sins. Come, not that I may call you to account, but that I may do away your sins;
come, not that I want your honor, but that I want your salvation. "For I," says
He, "will give you rest." He said not, "I will save you," only; but what was much
more, "I will place you in all security."
"Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart;
and you shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is
light." [Matthew 11:29-30] Thus, "be not afraid," says He, hearing of a yoke, for
it is easy: fear not, because I said, "a burden," for it is light.
And how said He before, "The gate is narrow and the way strait?"
[Matthew 7:13] Whilst you are careless, while you are supine; whereas, if you
duly perform His words, the burden will be light; wherefore also He has now
called it so.
But how are they duly performed? If you have become lowly, and meek,
and gentle. For this virtue is the mother of all strictness of life. Wherefore also,
when beginning those divine laws, with this He began. [Matthew 5:3] And here
again He does the very same, and exceeding great is the reward He appoints.
"For not to another only do you become serviceable; but yourself also above all
you refresh," says He. "For you shall find rest unto your souls."
Even before the things to come, He gives you here your recompense, and

bestows the prize already, making the saying acceptable, both hereby, and by
setting Himself forward as an example. For, "Of what are you afraid?" says He,
"lest you should be a loser by your low estate? Look to me, and to all that is
mine; learn of me, and then shall you know distinctly how great your blessing."
Do you see how in all ways He is leading them to humility? By His own doings:
"Learn of me, for I am meek." By what themselves are to gain; for, "You shall
find," says He, rest unto your souls. By what He bestows on them; for, "I too will
refresh you," says He. By rendering it light; "For my yoke is easy, and my burden
is light." So likewise does Paul, saying, "For the present light affliction, which is
but for a moment, works a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory."
[2 Corinthians 4:17]
And how, some one may say, is the burden light, when He says, "Except
one hate father and mother;" and, "Whosoever takes not up his cross, and
follows after me, is not worthy of me:" and, "Whosoever forsakes not all that he
has, cannot be my disciple:" when He commands even to give up our very life?
[Matthew 16:25] Let Paul teach you, saying, "Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? [Romans 8:35] " And that, "The sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed
in us." [Romans 8:18] Let those teach you, who return from the council of the
Jews after plenty of stripes, and "rejoice that they were counted worthy to suffer
shame for the name of Christ." [Acts 5:41] And if you are still afraid and
tremblest at hearing of the yoke and the burden, the fear comes not of the nature
of the thing, but of your remissness; since if you are prepared, and in earnest, all
will be easy to you and light. Since for this cause Christ also, to signify that we
too must needs labor ourselves, did not mention the gracious things only, and
then hold His peace, nor the painful things only, but set down both. Thus He
both spoke of "a yoke," and called it "easy;" both named a burden, and added
that it was "light;" that you should neither flee from them as toilsome, nor
despise them as over easy.