of both these at His discretion; for he neither suffers us to enjoy continual
repose, lest we should grow listless, nor on the other hand does he permit us to
be in constant tribulation, lest we sink under it, and become desperate.
6. Let us then leave to Him the time for the removal of our evils; let us only
pray; let us live in piety: for this is our work, to turn to virtue; but to set us free
from these evils is God's work! For indeed He is more desirous to quench this
fire than thou who art tried by it: but He is waiting for your salvation. As
tribulation then came of rest, so also after tribulation, rest must be expected. For
neither is it always winter, nor always summer; neither are there always waves,
nor always a calm; neither always night, nor always day. Thus tribulation is not
perpetual, but there will be also repose; only in our tribulation, let us give thanks
to God always. For the three youths were cast into the furnace, and did not even
for this forget their piety; neither did the flames affright them, but more earnestly
than men sitting in a chamber, and suffering nothing to alarm them, did they,
while encircled by the fire, send up to heaven those sacred prayers — therefore
the fire became a wall unto them, and the flame a robe; and the furnace was a
fountain; and whereas it received them bound, it restored them free. It received
bodies that were mortal, but abstained from them as if they had been immortal!
It knew their nature, yet it reverenced their piety! The tyrant bound their feet,
and their feet bound the operation of the fire! O marvellous thing! The flame
loosed those who were bound, and was itself afterwards bound by those who had
been in bonds; for the piety of the youths changed the nature of things; or rather
it did not change the nature, but, what was far more wonderful, it stayed the
operation of them, even while their nature remained. For it did not quench the
fire, but though burning, made it powerless. And it was truly marvellous and
unaccountable, that this not only happened with respect to the bodies of these
saints, but also with respect to their garments, and their shoes. And as it was in
the case of the Apostles, the garments of Paul expelled diseases and demons,
[Acts 19:12] and the shadow of Peter [Acts 5:15] put death to flight; so indeed
also in this case, the shoes of these youths extinguished the power of the fire.

7. I know not how I should speak, for the wonder surpasses all description!
The force of the fire was both quenched and not quenched: for while it came in
contact with the bodies of these saints, it was quenched; but when it was needful
to burst their bonds, it was not quenched; wherefore it broke their bonds, but
touched not their ancles. [Daniel 3:25] Do you see how very near it was? Yet the
fire was not deceived, and dared not penetrate within the bonds. The tyrant
bound, and the flame set loose; that you might learn at once the fierceness of the
barbarian, and the submissiveness of the element. For what reason did he bind,
when he was about to cast into the fire? In order that the miracle might be the
greater; that the sign might be the more unaccountable; that you may not
suppose that the things seen were an optical delusion. For if that fire had been no
fire, it would not have consumed the bands; and what is much more, it would not
have seized upon the soldiers who were placed without the furnace; but as the
case was, it showed its power upon those without; but towards those within, its
submissiveness. But observe, I pray, in everything, how the devil by the very
same means with which he fights with the servants of God, pulls down his own
power; not intentionally, but because the wisdom and abundant contrivance of
God turns all his weapons and devices upon his own head; which assuredly
happened on that occasion. For the devil at that time inspiring the tyrant, neither
suffered the heads of the saints to be cut off with the sword, nor that they should
be delivered to wild beasts, nor punished in any such manner; but that they
should be thrown into the fire; to the end that not even any relics of these saints
should remain, their bodies being altogether consumed, and their ashes being
mingled with the ashes of the fagots. But God accordingly employed this very
circumstance for the taking away of impiety. And how? I will tell you. Fire is
accounted by the Persians to be a god; and the barbarians, who inhabit that
country even now honour it with much worship. God, therefore, being desirous
to pull up by the roots the material of impiety, permitted the punishment to take
this form, in order that He might give the victory to His servants before the eyes
of all these fire-worshippers; persuading them by the plain fact, that the gods of