There is constant reference in this section to rabbinical conceits and follies.

carnal knowledge of each other, and begat Cain, whom the serpent, that had been cast down along
with his sons, immediately laid hold of and destroyed by filling him with mundane oblivion, and
urging into folly and audacity, so that, by slaying his brother Abel, he was the first to bring to light
envy and death. After these, they affirm that, by the forethought of Prunicus, Seth was begotten,
and then Norea, from whom they represent all the rest of mankind as being descended. They
were urged on to all kinds of wickedness by the inferior Hebdomad, and to apostasy, idolatry, and
a general contempt for everything by the superior holy Hebdomad, since the mother was always
secretly opposed to them, and carefully preserved what was peculiarly her own, that is, the
besprinkling of light. They maintain, moreover, that the holy Hebdomad is the seven stars which
they call planets; and they affirm that the serpent cast down has two names, Michael and Samael.
10. Ialdabaoth, again, being incensed with men, because they did not worship or honour him
as father and God, sent forth a deluge upon them, that he might at once destroy them all. But Sophia
opposed him in this point also, and Noah and his family were saved in the ark by means of the
besprinkling of that light which proceeded from her, and through it the world was again filled with
mankind. Ialdabaoth himself chose a certain man named Abraham from among these, and made a
covenant with him, to the effect that, if his seed continued to serve him, he would give to them the
earth for an inheritance. Afterwards, by means of Moses, he brought forth Abraham's descendants
from Egypt, and gave them the law, and made them the Jews. Among that people he chose seven
days, which they also call the holy Hebdomad. Each of these receives his own herald for the
purpose of glorifying and proclaiming God; so that, when the rest hear these praises, they too may
serve those who are announced as gods by the prophets.
11. Moreover, they distribute the prophets in the following manner: Moses, and Joshua the son
of Nun, and Amos, and Habakkuk, belonged to Ialdabaoth; Samuel, and Nathan, and Jonah, and
Micah, to Iao; Elijah, Joel, and Zechariah to Sabaoth; Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah, and Daniel, to
Adonai; Tobias and Haggai to Eloi; Michaiah and Nahum to Oreus; Esdras and Zephaniah to
Astanphæus. Each one of these, then, glorifies his own father and God, and they maintain that
Sophia, herself has also spoken many things through them regarding the first Anthropos (man),
and concerning that Christ who is above, thus admonishing and reminding men of the incorruptible
light, the first Anthropos, and of the descent of Christ. The [other] powers being terrified by these
things, and marvelling at the novelty of those things which were announced by the prophets, Prunicus
to Harvey, "each deified day of the week had his ministering prophets."