John 10:39-41
"Therefore they sought again to take Him, but He escaped out of their hands,
and went away again beyond Jordan, into the place where John at first baptized.
And many resorted unto Him, and said, John did no miracle, but all things that
John spoke of this man were true."
When He has uttered anything great and sublime, He quickly retires, giving
way to their anger, so that the passion may abate and cease through His absence.
And thus He acted at that time. But wherefore does the Evangelist mention the
place? That you may learn that He went there to remind them of the things there
done and said by John, and of his testimony; at least when they came there, they
straightway remembered John. Wherefore also they said, "John indeed did no
miracle," since how did it follow that they should add this, unless the place had
brought the Baptist to their memory, and they had come to remember his
testimony. And observe how they form incontrovertible syllogisms. "John
indeed did no miracle," "but this man does," says some one; "hence therefore his
superiority is shown. If therefore men believed him who did no miracles, much
more must they believe this man." Then, since it was John who bore the witness,
lest his having done no miracle might seem to prove him unworthy of being a
witness, they added, "Yet if he did no miracle, still he spoke all things truly
concerning this man"; no longer proving Christ to be trustworthy by means of
John, but John to be so by what Christ had done.

John 10:42
"Many therefore believed on Him."
There were many things that attracted them. They remembered the words
which John had spoken, calling Christ "mightier than himself," and "light," and
"life," and "truth," and all the rest. They remembered the Voice which came
down from heaven, and the Spirit which appeared in the shape of a dove, and
pointed Him out to all; and with this they recollected the demonstration afforded
by the miracles, looking to which they were for the future established. "For,"
says some one, "if it was right that we should believe John, much more ought we
to believe this man; if him without miracles, much more this man, who besides
the testimony of John, has also the proof from miracles." Do you see how much
the abiding in this place, and the being freed from the presence of evil men,
profited them? Wherefore Jesus continually leads and draws them away from the
company of those persons; as also He seems to have done under the old
Covenant, forming and ordering the Jews in all points, in the desert, at a distance
from the Egyptians.
And this He now advises us also to do, bidding us avoid public places, and
tumults, and disturbances, and pray peacefully in the chamber. For the vessel
which is free from confusion, sails with a fair wind, and the soul which is
separated from worldly matters rests in harbor. Wherefore women ought to have
more true wisdom than men, because they are for the most part riveted to
keeping at home. So, for instance, Jacob was a plain man, because he dwelt at
home, and was free from the bustle of public life; for not without a cause has
Scripture put this, when It says, "dwelling in a house." [Genesis 25:27] "But,"
says some woman, "even in a house there is great confusion." Yes, when you
will have it so, and bringest about yourself a crowd of cares. For the man who
spends his time in the midst of the market-places and courts of justice is
overwhelmed, as if by waves, by external troubles; but the women who sits in