Reply to Objection 2: Substances that are subsisting forms have no
'formal' cause of their existence and unity, nor such active cause as
produces its effect by changing the matter from a state of
potentiality to actuality; but they have a cause productive of their
entire substance.
From this the solution of the third difficulty is manifest.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the angel was produced by God from

eternity?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angel was produced by God from
eternity. For God is the cause of the angel by His being: for He does
not act through something besides His essence. But His being is
eternal. Therefore He produced the angels from eternity.
Objection 2: Further, everything which exists at one period and not
at another, is subject to time. But the angel is above time, as is laid
down in the book De Causis. Therefore the angel is not at one time
existing and at another non-existing, but exists always.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine (De Trin. xiii) proves the soul's
incorruptibility by the fact that the mind is capable of truth. But as
truth is incorruptible, so is it eternal. Therefore the intellectual nature
of the soul and of the angel is not only incorruptible, but likewise
eternal.
On the contrary, It is said (Prov. 8:22), in the person of begotten
Wisdom: "The Lord possessed me in the beginning of His ways,
before He made anything from the beginning." But, as was shown
above (Article 1), the angels were made by God. Therefore at one
time the angels were not.
I answer that, God alone, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, is from
eternity. Catholic Faith holds this without doubt; and everything to
the contrary must be rejected as heretical. For God so produced
creatures that He made them "from nothing"; that is, after they had
not been.
Reply to Objection 1: God's being is His will. So the fact that God
produced the angels and other creatures by His being does not
exclude that He made them also by His will. But, as was shown
above (Question 19, Article 3; Question 46, Article 1), God's will does
not act by necessity in producing creatures. Therefore He produced
such as He willed, and when He willed.
Reply to Objection 2: An angel is above that time which is the
measure of the movement of the heavens; because he is above every
movement of a corporeal nature. Nevertheless he is not above time

which is the measure of the succession of his existence after his
non-existence, and which is also the measure of the succession
which is in his operations. Hence Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. viii,
20,21) that "God moves the spiritual creature according to time."
Reply to Objection 3: Angels and intelligent souls are incorruptible
by the very fact of their having a nature whereby they are capable of
truth. But they did not possess this nature from eternity; it was
bestowed upon them when God Himself willed it. Consequently it
does not follow that the angels existed from eternity.