against riches. For if you direct your argument at once against riches, you will
bear too heavily upon her; but if you do it by taking an occasion, you will
succeed entirely. For you will appear to be doing it in the way of an apology, not
as a morose sort of person, and ungracious, and over-nice about trifles. But when
you take occasion from what relates to herself, she will be even pleased. You
will say then, (for I must now take up the discourse again,) that "whereas I might
have married a rich woman, and with good fortune, I could not endure it. And
why so? Not capriciously, and without reason; but I was taught well and truly,
that money is no real possession, but a most despicable thing, a thing which
moreover belongs as well to thieves, and to harlots, and to grave-robbers. So I
gave up these things, and went on till I fell in with the excellence of your soul,
which I value above all gold. For a young damsel who is discreet and ingenuous,
and whose heart is set on piety, is worth the whole world. For these reasons
then, I courted you, and I love you, and prefer you to my own soul. For the
present life is nothing. And I pray, and beseech, and do all I can, that we may be
counted worthy so to live this present life, as that we may be able also there in
the world to come to be united to one another in perfect security. For our time
here is brief and fleeting. But if we shall be counted worthy by having pleased
God to so exchange this life for that one, then shall we ever be both with Christ
and with each other, with more abundant pleasure. I value your affection above
all things, and nothing is so bitter or so painful to me, as ever to be at variance
with you. Yes, though it should be my lot to lose my all, and to become poorer
than Irus, and undergo the extremest hazards, and suffer any pain whatsoever,
all will be tolerable and endurable, so long as your feelings are true towards me.
And then will my children be most dear to me, while you are affectionately
disposed towards me. But you must do these duties too." Then mingle also with
your discourse the Apostle's words, that "thus God would have our affections
blended together; for listen to the Scripture, which says, 'For this cause shall a
man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife.' Let us have no pretext
for narrow-minded jealousy. Perish riches, and retinue of slaves, and all your

outward pomps. To me this is more valuable than all." What weight of gold,
what amount of treasures, are so dear to a wife as these words? Never fear that
because she is beloved she will ever rave against you, but confess that you love
her. For courtezans indeed, who now attach themselves to one and now to
another, would naturally enough feel contempt towards their lovers, should they
hear such expressions as these; but a free-born wife or a noble damsel would
never be so affected with such words; no, she will be so much the more subdued.
Show her too, that you set a high value on her company, and that you are more
desirous to be at home for her sake, than in the market-place. And esteem her
before all your friends, and above the children that are born of her, and let these
very children be beloved by you for her sake. If she does any good act, praise
and admire it; if any foolish one, and such as girls may chance to do, advise her
and remind her. Condemn out and out all riches and extravagance, and gently
point out the ornament that there is in neatness and in modesty; and be
continually teaching her the things that are profitable.
Let your prayers be common. Let each go to Church; and let the husband
ask his wife at home, and she again ask her husband, the account of the things
which were said and read there. If any poverty should overtake you, cite the case
of those holy men, Paul and Peter, who were more honored than any kings or
rich men; and yet how they spent their lives, in hunger and in thirst. Teach her
that there is nothing in life that is to be feared, save only offending against God.
If any marry thus, with these views, he will be but little inferior to monks; the
married but little below the unmarried.
If you have a mind to give dinners, and to make entertainments, let there be
nothing immodest, nothing disorderly. If you should find any poor saint able to
bless your house, able only just by setting his foot in it to bring in the whole
blessing of God, invite him. And shall I say moreover another thing? Let no one
of you make it his endeavor to marry a rich woman, but much rather a poor one.
When she comes in, she will not bring so great a source of pleasure from her
riches, as she will annoyance from her taunts, from her demanding more than