FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.7.

conditions of the pupil: wherefore the process of argument in
sciences should be ordered becomingly, so that the instruction is
based on principles more generally known. And thus also he who
would persuade a man to the observance of any precepts, needs to
move him at first by things for which he has an affection; just as
children are induced to do something, by means of little childish
gifts. Now it has been said above (Question 98, Articles 1,2,3) that
the Old Law disposed men to (the coming of) Christ, as the imperfect
in comparison disposes to the perfect, wherefore it was given to a
people as yet imperfect in comparison to the perfection which was to
result from Christ's coming: and for this reason, that people is
compared to a child that is still under a pedagogue (Gal. 3:24). But
the perfection of man consists in his despising temporal things and
cleaving to things spiritual, as is clear from the words of the Apostle
(Phil. 3:13,15): "Forgetting the things that are behind, I stretch forth
myself to those that are before . . . Let us therefore, as many as are
perfect, be thus minded." Those who are yet imperfect desire
temporal goods, albeit in subordination to God: whereas the
perverse place their end in temporalities. It was therefore fitting that
the Old Law should conduct men to God by means of temporal
goods for which the imperfect have an affection.
Reply to Objection 1: Covetousness whereby man places his end in
temporalities, is the bane of charity. But the attainment of temporal
goods which man desires in subordination to God is a road leading
the imperfect to the love of God, according to Ps. 48:19: "He will
praise Thee, when Thou shalt do well to him."
Reply to Objection 2: Human law persuades men by means of
temporal rewards or punishments to be inflicted by men: whereas
the Divine law persuades men by meas of rewards or punishments to
be received from God. In this respect it employs higher means.
Reply to Objection 3: As any one can see, who reads carefully the
story of the Old Testament, the common weal of the people
prospered under the Law as long as they obeyed it; and as soon as
they departed from the precepts of the Law they were overtaken by
many calamities. But certain individuals, although they observed the
justice of the Law, met with misfortunes---either because they had
already become spiritual (so that misfortune might withdraw them all
the more from attachment to temporal things, and that their virtue
might be tried)---or because, while outwardly fulfilling the works of
the Law, their heart was altogether fixed on temporal goods, and far

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.7.

removed from God, according to Is. 29:13 (Mt. 15:8): "This people
honoreth Me with their lips; but their hearts is far from Me."