FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.4.

from the very nature of act and habit, that act surpasses habit both
in goodness and in badness. Whereas the fact that habit is more
lasting than act, is accidental to them, and is due to the fact that they
are both found in a nature such that it cannot always be in action,
and whose action consists in a transient movement. Consequently
act simply excels in goodness and badness, but habit excels in a
certain respect.
Reply to Objection 2: A habit is several acts, not simply, but in a
certain respect, i.e. virtually. Wherefore this does not prove that
habit precedes act simply, both in goodness and in badness.
Reply to Objection 3: Habit causes act by way of efficient causality:
but act causes habit, by way of final causality, in respect of which we
consider the nature of good and evil. Consequently act surpasses
habit both in goodness and in badness.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.71, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether sin is compatible with virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that a vicious act, i.e. sin, is incompatible
with virtue. For contraries cannot be together in the same subject.
Now sin is, in some way, contrary to virtue, as stated above (Article
1). Therefore sin is incompatible with virtue.
Objection 2: Further, sin is worse than vice, i.e. evil act than evil
habit. But vice cannot be in the same subject with virtue: neither,
therefore, can sin.
Objection 3: Further, sin occurs in natural things, even as in
voluntary matters (Phys. ii, text. 82). Now sin never happens in
natural things, except through some corruption of the natural power;
thus monsters are due to corruption of some elemental force in the
seed, as stated in Phys. ii. Therefore no sin occurs in voluntary
matters, except through the corruption of some virtue in the soul: so
that sin and virtue cannot be together in the same subject.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 2,3) that "virtue is
engendered and corrupted by contrary causes." Now one virtuous
act does not cause a virtue, as stated above (Question 51, Article 3):
and, consequently, one sinful act does not corrupt virtue. Therefore
they can be together in the same subject.
I answer that, Sin is compared to virtue, as evil act to good habit.
Now the position of a habit in the soul is not the same as that of a
form in a natural thing. For the form of a natural thing produces, of
necessity, an operation befitting itself; wherefore a natural form is
incompatible with the act of a contrary form: thus heat is
incompatible with the act of cooling, and lightness with downward
movement (except perhaps violence be used by some extrinsic
mover): whereas the habit that resides in the soul, does not, of
necessity, produce its operation, but is used by man when he wills.
Consequently man, while possessing a habit, may either fail to use
the habit, or produce a contrary act; and so a man having a virtue
may produce an act of sin. And this sinful act, so long as there is but
one, cannot corrupt virtue, if we compare the act to the virtue itself
as a habit: since, just as habit is not engendered by one act, so
neither is it destroyed by one act as stated above (Question 63,
Article 2, ad 2). But if we compare the sinful act to the cause of the