Ver. 13. "Wherefore I ask that you faint not at my tribulations for you,
which are your glory."
How is it "for them?" How is it "their glory?" It is because God so loved
them, as to give even the Son for them, and to afflict His servants for them: for it
was in order that they might attain so many blessings, that Paul was in prison.
Surely this was from God's exceeding love towards them: it is what God also
says concerning the Prophets, "I have slain them by the words of my mouth."
[Hosea 6:5] But how was it that they fainted, when another was afflicted? He
means, they were troubled, were distressed. This also he says when writing to
the Thessalonians, "that no man be moved by these afflictions." [1 Thessalonians
3:3] For not only ought we not to grieve, but we ought even to rejoice. If you
find consolation in the forewarning, we tell you beforehand that here we have
tribulation. And why pray? Because thus has the Lord ordered.
Ver. 14, 15. "For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father from whom
every family in heaven and on earth is named."
He here shows the spirit of his prayer for them. He does not say simply, "I
pray," but manifests the supplication to be heartfelt, by the "bowing of the
knees."
"From whom every family."
That is, no longer, he means, reckoned, according to the number of Angels,
but according to Him who has created the tribes both in heaven above and in
earth beneath, not as the Jewish.
Ver. 16, 17. "That He would grant you according to the riches of His glory
that you may be strengthened with power through His Spirit in the inward man;
that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith."
Mark with what insatiable earnestness he invokes these blessings upon
them, that they may not be tossed about. But how shall this be effected? By the
"Holy Spirit in your inward man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts through
faith." How again shall this be?
Ver. 18, 19. "To the end that you being rooted and grounded in love, may be

strong to apprehend with all the saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
height, and depth, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge."
Thus is his prayer now again, the very same as when he began. For what
were his words in the beginning? "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of glory may give unto you a Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of Him; having the eyes of your heart enlightened, that you may know
what is the hope of His calling, what the riches of the glory of His inheritance in
the saints; and what the exceeding greatness of His power to us-ward who
believe." And now again he says the same. "That ye may be strong to apprehend
with all the saints what is the breadth, and length, and height, and depth;" i.e., to
know perfectly the mystery which has been providentially ordered in our behalf:
"and the breadth, and length, and height, and depth;" that is, too, the immensity
of the love of God, and how it extends every where. And he outlines it by the
visible dimensions of solid bodies, pointing as it were to a man. He comprehends
the upper and under and sides. I have thus spoken indeed, he would say, yet is it
not for any words of mine to teach you these things; that must be the work of the
Holy Spirit. "By His might," says he, is it that you must be "strengthened"
against the trials that await you, and in order to remain unshaken; so that there is
no other way to be strengthened but by the Holy Ghost, both on account of trials
and carnal reasonings.
But how does Christ dwell in the hearts? Hear what Christ Himself says, "I
and my Father will come unto him, and make our abode with him." [John 14:23]
He dwells in those hearts that are faithful, in those that are "rooted" in His love,
those that remain firm and unshaken.
"That ye may be" thoroughly "strong," says he; so that there is great
strength needed.
"That ye may be filled unto all the fullness of God."
What he means is this. Although the love of Christ lies above the reach of
all human knowledge, yet shall you know it, if you shall have Christ dwelling in
you, yea, not only shall know from Him this, but shall even "be filled unto all the