first He showed forth His power to take vengeance. Wherefore not in any other,
but in the moistest of all planted things did He work the miracle, so that hence
also the miracle appeared greater.
And that you might learn, that for their sakes this was done, that He might
train them to feel confidence, hear what He says afterwards. But what says He?
"You also shall do greater things, if you are willing to believe and to be confident
in prayer." Do you see that all is done for their sake, so that they might not be
afraid and tremble at plots against them? Wherefore He says this a second time
also, to make them cleave to prayer and faith. "For not this only shall you do, but
also shall remove mountains; and many more things shall you do, being
confident in faith and prayer."
But the boastful and arrogant Jews, wishing to interrupt His teaching, came
unto Him, and asked, "By what authority doest thou these things?"
[Matthew 21:23] For since they could not object against the miracles, they bring
forward against Him the correction of the traffickers in the temple. And this in
John also they appear to ask, although not in these words, but with the same
intent. For there too they say, "What sign do you show unto us? Seeing that you
do these things." But there He answers them, saying, "Destroy this temple, and I
in three days will raise it up," whereas here He drives them into a difficulty.
Whence it is manifest, that then indeed was the beginning and prelude of the
miracles, but here the end.
But what they say is this: Have you received the teacher's chair? Have you
been ordained a priest, that you displayed such authority? It is said. And yet He
had done nothing implying arrogance, but had been careful for the good order of
the temple, yet nevertheless having nothing to say, they object against this. And
indeed when He cast them out, they did not dare to say anything, because of the
miracles, but when He showed Himself, then they find fault with Him.
What then says He? He does not answer them directly, to show that, if they
had been willing to see His authority, they could; but He asks them again,
saying, "The baptism of John, whence is it? From heaven, or of men?"

And what sort of inference is this? The greatest surely. For if they had said,
from heaven, He would have said unto them, why then did ye not believe him?
For if they had believed, they would not have asked these things. For of Him
John had said, "I am not worthy to loose the latchet of His shoe;" and, "Behold
the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world;" and, "This is the Son
of God;" and, "He that comes from above is above all;" [John 4:31] and, "His
fan is in His hand, and He will thoroughly purge His floor." [Matthew 3:12] So
that if they had believed him, there was nothing to hinder them from knowing by
what authority Christ does these things.
After this, because they, dealing craftily, said, "We know not," He said not,
neither know I, but what? "Neither tell I you." [Matthew 21:27] For if indeed
they had been ignorant it would have been requisite for them to be instructed;
but since they were dealing craftily with good reason He answers them nothing.
And how was it they did not say that the baptism was of men? "They feared
the people" [Matthew 21:26] it is said. Do you see a perverse heart? In every
case they despise God and do all things for the sake of men. For this man too
they feared for their sakes not reverencing the saint but on account of men, and
they were not willing to believe in Christ, because of men, and all their evils
were engendered to them from hence.
After this, He says, "What do you think? A man had two sons; and he says
to the first, go, work today in the vineyard. But he answered and said, I will not:
but afterward he repented, and went. And he came to the second, and said
likewise. And he answered and said, I go sir: and went not. Whether then of them
two did the will of his father? They say, the first."
Again He convicts them by a parable, intimating both their unreasonable
obstinacy, and the submissiveness of those who were utterly condemned by
them. For these two children declare what came to pass with respect to both the
Gentiles and the Jews. For the former not having undertaken to obey, neither
having become hearers of the law, showed forth their obedience in their works;
and the latter having said, "All that the Lord shall speak, we will do, and will