THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.56, C.2.

On the contrary, on 1 Cor. 15:12: "Now if Christ be preached, that He
rose again from the dead," the gloss says: "Who is the efficient
cause of our resurrection."
I answer that, As stated in 2 Metaphysics, text 4: "Whatever is first in
any order, is the cause of all that come after it." But Christ's
Resurrection was the first in the order of our resurrection, as is
evident from what was said above (Question 53, Article 3). Hence
Christ's Resurrection must be the cause of ours: and this is what the
Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:20,21): "Christ is risen from the dead, the
first-fruits of them that sleep; for by a man came death, and by a man
the resurrection of the dead."
And this is reasonable. Because the principle of human life-giving is
the Word of God, of whom it is said (Ps. 35:10): "With Thee is the
fountain of life": hence He Himself says (Jn. 5:21): "As the Father
raiseth up the dead, and giveth life; so the Son also giveth life to
whom He will." Now the divinely established natural order is that
every cause operates first upon what is nearest to it, and through it
upon others which are more remote; just as fire first heats the
nearest air, and through it it heats bodies that are further off: and
God Himself first enlightens those substances which are closer to
Him, and through them others that are more remote, as Dionysius
says (Coel. Hier. xiii). Consequently, the Word of God first bestows
immortal life upon that body which is naturally united with Himself,
and through it works the resurrection in all other bodies.
Reply to Objection 1: As was stated above, Christ's Resurrection is
the cause of ours through the power of the united Word, who
operates according to His will. And consequently, it is not necessary
for the effect to follow at once, but according as the Word of God
disposes, namely, that first of all we be conformed to the suffering
and dying Christ in this suffering and mortal life; and afterwards may
come to share in the likeness of His Resurrection.
Reply to Objection 2: God's justice is the first cause of our
resurrection, whereas Christ's Resurrection is the secondary, and as
it were the instrumental cause. But although the power of the
principal cause is not restricted to one instrument determinately,
nevertheless since it works through this instrument, such instrument
causes the effect. So, then, the Divine justice in itself is not tied
down to Christ's Resurrection as a means of bringing about our

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.56, C.2.

resurrection: because God could deliver us in some other way than
through Christ's Passion and Resurrection, as already stated
(Question 46, Article 2). But having once decreed to deliver us in this
way, it is evident that Christ's Resurrection is the cause of ours.
Reply to Objection 3: Properly speaking, Christ's Resurrection is not
the meritorious cause, but the efficient and exemplar cause of our
resurrection. It is the efficient cause, inasmuch as Christ's humanity,
according to which He rose again, is as it were the instrument of His
Godhead, and works by Its power, as stated above (Question 13,
Articles 2,3). And therefore, just as all other things which Christ did
and endured in His humanity are profitable to our salvation through
the power of the Godhead, as already stated (Question 48, Article 6),
so also is Christ's Resurrection the efficient cause of ours, through
the Divine power whose office it is to quicken the dead; and this
power by its presence is in touch with all places and times; and such
virtual contact suffices for its efficiency. And since, as was stated
above (ad 2), the primary cause of human resurrection is the Divine
justice, from which Christ has "the power of passing judgment,
because He is the Son of Man" (Jn. 5:27); the efficient power of His
Resurrection extends to the good and wicked alike, who are subject
to His judgment.
But just as the Resurrection of Christ's body, through its personal
union with the Word, is first in point of time, so also is it first in
dignity and perfection; as the gloss says on 1 Cor. 15:20,23. But
whatever is most perfect is always the exemplar, which the less
perfect copies according to its mode; consequently Christ's
Resurrection is the exemplar of ours. And this is necessary, not on
the part of Him who rose again, who needs no exemplar, but on the
part of them who are raised up, who must be likened to that
Resurrection, according to Phil. 3:21: "He will reform the body of our
lowness, made like to the body of His glory." Now although the
efficiency of Christ's Resurrection extends to the resurrection of the
good and wicked alike, still its exemplarity extends properly only to
the just, who are made conformable with His Sonship, according to
Rm. 8:29.
Reply to Objection 4: Considered on the part of their efficiency,
which is dependent on the Divine power, both Christ's death and His
Resurrection are the cause both of the destruction of death and of
the renewal of life: but considered as exemplar causes, Christ's
death---by which He withdrew from mortal life---is the cause of the