inasmuch as he had made mention of warfare and fighting, he shows us that this
conflict with the evil spirits we must needs have: for the gospel is "the gospel of
peace"; this war which we have against them, puts an end to another war, that,
namely, which is between us and God; if we are at war with the devil, we are at
peace with God. Fear not therefore, beloved; it is a "gospel," that is, a word of
good news; already is the victory won.
"Withal taking up the shield of faith."
By "faith" in this place, he means, not knowledge, (for that he never would
have ranged last,) but that gift by which miracles are wrought. And with reason
does he term this "'faith' a shield"; for as the shield is put before the whole body,
as if it were a sort of rampart, just so is this faith; for all things yield to it.
"Wherewith you shall be able," says he, "to quench all the fiery darts of the
evil one."
For this shield nothing shall be able to resist; for hearken to what Christ
says to His disciples, "If you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you shall say
unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove."
[Matthew 17:20] But how are we to have this faith? When we have rightly
performed all those duties.
"By the darts of the evil one," he means, both temptations, and vile desires;
and "fiery," he says, for such is the character of these desires. Yet if faith can
command the evil spirits, much more can it also the passions of the soul.
"And take the helmet," he continues, "of salvation," that is, of your
salvation. For he is casing them in armor.
"And the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God." He either means
the Spirit, or else, "the spiritual sword": for by this all things are severed, by this
all things are cleft asunder, by this we cut off even the serpent's head.
Ver. 18, 19, 20. "With all prayer and supplication," says he, "praying at all
seasons in the Spirit, and watching thereunto in all perseverance and
supplication for all the saints; and on my behalf that utterance may be given
unto me, in opening my mouth to make known with boldness the mystery of the

gospel, for which I am an ambassador in chains, that in it I may speak boldly, as
I ought to speak."
As the word of God has power to do all things, so also has he who has the
spiritual gift. "For the word of God," says he, "is living, and active and sharper
than any two-edged sword." [Hebrews 4:12] Now mark the wisdom of this
blessed Apostle. He has armed them with all security. What then is necessary
after that? To call upon the King, that He may stretch forth His hand. "With all
prayer, and supplication, praying at all seasons in the Spirit"; for it is possible
"to pray" not "in the Spirit," when one "uses vain repetitions" [Matthew 6:7];
"and watching thereunto," he adds, that is, keeping sober; for such ought the
armed warrior, he that stands at the King's side, to be; wakeful and temperate:—
"in all perseverance and supplication for all the saints; and on my behalf that
utterance may be given unto me in opening my mouth." What do you say, blessed
Paul? Have you, then, need of your disciples? And well does he say, "in opening
my mouth." He did not then study what he used to say, but according to what
Christ said, "When they deliver you up, be not anxious how or what you shall
speak: for it shall be given you in that hour what you shall speak" [Matthew
10:19]: so truly did he do everything by faith, everything by grace. "With
boldness," he proceeds, "to make known the mystery of the Gospel"; that is, that I
may answer for myself in its defense, as I ought. And are you bound in your
chain, and still needest the aid of others? Yea, says he, for so was Peter also
bound in his chain, and yet nevertheless "was prayer made earnestly for him."
[Acts 12:5] "For which I am an ambassador in chains, that in it I may speak
boldly, as I ought to speak"; that is, that I may answer with confidence, with
courage, with great prudence.
Ver. 21. "But that you also may know my affairs, how I do, Tychicus, the
beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shall make known to you all
things."
As soon as he had mentioned his chains, he leaves something for Tychicus
also to relate to them of his own accord. For whatever topics there were of