FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.62, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: The wisdom which the Philosopher (Ethic. vi,
3,7) reckons as an intellectual virtue, considers Divine things so far
as they are open to the research of human reason. Theological
virtue, on the other hand, is about those same things so far as they
surpass human reason.
Reply to Objection 3: Though charity is love, yet love is not always
charity. When, then, it is stated that every virtue is the order of love,
this can be understood either of love in the general sense, or of the
love of charity. If it be understood of love, commonly so called, then
each virtue is stated to be the order of love, in so far as each cardinal
virtue requires ordinate emotions; and love is the root and cause of
every emotion, as stated above (Question 27, Article 4; Question 28,
Article 6, ad 2; Question 41, Article 2, ad 1). If, however, it be
understood of the love of charity, it does not mean that every other
virtue is charity essentially: but that all other virtues depend on
charity in some way, as we shall show further on (Question 65,
Articles 2,5; SS, Question 23, Article 7).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.62, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether faith, hope, and charity are fittingly

reckoned as theological virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that faith, hope, and charity are not
fittingly reckoned as three theological virtues. For the theological
virtues are in relation to Divine happiness, what the natural
inclination is in relation to the connatural end. Now among the
virtues directed to the connatural end there is but one natural virtue,
viz. the understanding of principles. Therefore there should be but
one theological virtue.
Objection 2: Further, the theological virtues are more perfect than
the intellectual and moral virtues. Now faith is not reckoned among
the intellectual virtues, but is something less than a virtue, since it is
imperfect knowledge. Likewise hope is not reckoned among the
moral virtues, but is something less than a virtue, since it is a
passion. Much less therefore should they be reckoned as theological
virtues.
Objection 3: Further, the theological virtues direct man's soul to
God. Now man's soul cannot be directed to God, save through the
intellective part, wherein are the intellect and will. Therefore there
should be only two theological virtues, one perfecting the intellect,
the other, the will.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:13): "Now there remain
faith, hope, charity, these three."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the theological virtues
direct man to supernatural happiness in the same way as by the
natural inclination man is directed to his connatural end. Now the
latter happens in respect of two things. First, in respect of the reason
or intellect, in so far as it contains the first universal principles which
are known to us by the natural light of the intellect, and which are
reason's starting-point, both in speculative and in practical matters.
Secondly, through the rectitude of the will which tends naturally to
good as defined by reason.
But these two fall short of the order of supernatural happiness,
according to 1 Cor. 2:9: "The eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither hath it entered into the heart of man, what things God hath