come I shall find you not such as I would, and I be found of you such as you
would not," [2 Corinthians 12:20] and a little afterwards, "Lest when I come
again to you, God humble me, and I shall mourn many of those who have sinned
before, and have not repented of their uncleanness, and wantonness, and
fornication which they have committed." [2 Corinthians 12:21] And throughout
you see that he is in tears and lamentations on account of members of the
household, and evermore fearing and trembling for the believers. Just as then we
admire the pilot, not when he is able to bring those who are on board safe to
shore when the sea is calm, and the ship is borne along by favourable winds, but
when the deep is raging and the waves contending, and the passengers
themselves within in revolt, and a great storm within and without besets those
who are on board, and he is able to steer the ship with all security; so we ought
to wonder at, and admire those who then had the Church committed to their
hands, much more than those who now have the management of it; when there
was a great war without and within, when the plant of the faith was more tender,
and needed much care, when, as a newly-born babe, the multitude in the church
required much forethought, and the greatest wisdom in any soul destined to
nurse it; and in order that you may more clearly learn, how great crowns they
were worthy of, who then had the Church entrusted to them, and how great work
and danger there was in undertaking the matter on the threshold and at the
beginning, and in being the first to enter upon it, I bring forward for you the
testimony of Christ, who pronounces a verdict on these things, and confirms the
opinion which has been expressed by me. For when he saw many coming to him,
and was wishing to show the apostles that the prophets toiled more than they, he
says: "Others have laboured, and you have entered into their labour."
[John 4:38] And yet the apostles toiled much more than the prophets. But since
they first sowed the word of piety, and won over the untaught souls of men to the
truth, the greater part of the work is credited to them. For it is by no means the
same thing for one to come and teach after many teachers, and himself to be the
first to sow seeds. For that which has been already practised, and has become

customary with many, would be easily accepted; but that which is now for the
first time heard, agitates the mind of the hearers, and gives the teacher a great
deal to do. This at least it was which disturbed the audience at Athens, and on
this account they turned away from Paul, reproaching him with, "You bring
certain strange things to our ears." [Acts 17:20] For if the oversight of the
Church now furnishes much weariness and work to those who govern it,
consider how double and treble and manifold was the work then, when there
were dangers and fighting and snares, and fear continually. It is not possible to
set forth in words the difficulty which those saints then encountered, but he
alone will know it who comes to it by experience.
4. And I will speak of a fourth crown, arising for us out of this episcopate.
What then is this? The fact that he was entrusted with our own native city. For it
is a laborious thing indeed to have the oversight of a hundred men, and of fifty
alone. But to have on one's hands so great a city, and a population extending to
two hundred thousand, of how great virtue and wisdom do you think there is a
proof? For as in the care of armies, the wiser of the generals have on their hands
the more leading and more numerous regiments, so, accordingly, in the care of
cities. The more able of the rulers are entrusted with the larger and more
populous. And at any rate this city was of much account to God, as indeed He
manifested by the very deeds which He did. At all events the master of the whole
world, Peter, to whose hands He committed the keys of heaven, whom He
commanded to do and to bear all, He bade tarry here for a long period. Thus in
His sight our city was equivalent to the whole world. But since I have mentioned
Peter, I have perceived a fifth crown woven from him, and this is that this man
succeeded to the office after him. For just as any one taking a great stone from a
foundation hastens by all means to introduce an equivalent to it, lest he should
shake the whole building, and make it more unsound, so, accordingly, when
Peter was about to depart from here, the grace of the Spirit introduced another
teacher equivalent to Peter, so that the building already completed should not be
made more unsound by the insignificance of the successor. We have reckoned up