The text is here altogether uncertain, and the meaning obscure.

2. But Jesus, he affirms, has the following unspeakable origin. From the mother of all things,
that is, the first Tetrad, there came forth the second Tetrad, after the manner of a daughter; and thus
an Ogdoad was formed, from which, again, a Decad proceeded: thus was produced a Decad and
an Ogdoad. The Decad, then, being joined with the Ogdoad, and multiplying it ten times, gave rise
to the number eighty; and, again, multiplying eighty ten times, produced the number eight hundred.
Thus, then, the whole number of the letters proceeding from the Ogdoad [multiplied] into the Decad,
is eight hundred and eighty-eight. This is the name of Jesus; for this name, if you reckon up the
numerical value of the letters, amounts to eight hundred and eighty-eight. Thus, then, you have a
clear statement of their opinion as to the origin of the supercelestial Jesus. Wherefore, also, the
alphabet of the Greeks contains eight Monads, eight Decads, and eight Hecatads, which present
the number eight hundred and eighty-eight, that is, Jesus, who is formed of all numbers; and on
this account He is called Alpha and Omega, indicating His origin from all. And, again, they put the
matter thus: If the first Tetrad be added up according to the progression of number, the number ten
appears. For one, and two, and three, and four, when added together, form ten; and this, as they
will have it, is Jesus. Moreover, Chreistus, he says, being a word of eight letters, indicates the first
Ogdoad, and this, when multiplied by ten, gives birth to Jesus (888). And Christ the Son, he says,
is also spoken of, that is, the Duodecad. For the name Son, (!"#$) contains four letters, and Christ
(Chreistus) eight, which, being combined, point out the greatness of the Duodecad. But, he alleges,
before the Episemon of this name appeared, that is Jesus the Son, mankind were involved in great
ignorance and error. But when this name of six letters was manifested (the person bearing it clothing
Himself in flesh, that He might come under the apprehension of man's senses, and having in Himself
these six and twenty-four letters), then, becoming acquainted with Him, they ceased from their
ignorance, and passed from death unto life, this name serving as their guide to the Father of truth.
For the Father of all had resolved to put an end to ignorance, and to destroy death. But this abolishing
of ignorance was just the knowledge of Him. And therefore that man (Anthropos) was chosen
according to His will, having been formed after the image of the [corresponding] power above.
3. As to the Æons, they proceeded from the Tetrad, and in that Tetrad were Anthropos and
Ecclesia, Logos and Zoe. The powers, then, he declares, who emanated from these, generated that
Jesus who appeared upon the earth. The angel Gabriel took the place of Logos, the Holy Spirit that
of Zoe, the Power of the Highest that of Anthropos, while the Virgin pointed out the place of
Ecclesia. And thus, by a special dispensation, there was generated by Him, through Mary, that man,
whom, as He passed through the womb, the Father of all chose to [obtain] the knowledge of Himself
by means of the Word. And on His coming to the water [of baptism], there descended on Him, in
eight tens, and eight hundreds.