SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.2.

I answer that, As Jerome observes the Greek skandalon may be
rendered offense, downfall, or a stumbling against something. For
when a body, while moving along a path, meets with an obstacle, it
may happen to stumble against it, and be disposed to fall down:
such an obstacle is a skandalon.
In like manner, while going along the spiritual way, a man may be
disposed to a spiritual downfall by another's word or deed, in so far,
to wit, as one man by his injunction, inducement or example, moves
another to sin; and this is scandal properly so called.
Now nothing by its very nature disposes a man to spiritual downfall,
except that which has some lack of rectitude, since what is perfectly
right, secures man against a fall, instead of conducing to his
downfall. Scandal is, therefore, fittingly defined as "something less
rightly done or said, that occasions another's spiritual downfall."
Reply to Objection 1: The thought or desire of evil lies hidden in the
heart, wherefore it does not suggest itself to another man as an
obstacle conducing to his spiritual downfall: hence it cannot come
under the head of scandal.
Reply to Objection 2: A thing is said to be less right, not because
something else surpasses it in rectitude, but because it has some
lack of rectitude, either through being evil in itself, such as sin, or
through having an appearance of evil. Thus, for instance, if a man
were to "sit at meat in the idol's temple" (1 Cor. 8:10), though this is
not sinful in itself, provided it be done with no evil intention, yet,
since it has a certain appearance of evil, and a semblance of
worshipping the idol, it might occasion another man's spiritual
downfall. Hence the Apostle says (1 Thess. 5:22): "From all
appearance of evil refrain yourselves." Scandal is therefore fittingly
described as something done "less rightly," so as to comprise both
whatever is sinful in itself, and all that has an appearance of evil.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (FS, Question 75, Articles 2,3;
FS, Question 80, Article 1), nothing can be a sufficient cause of a
man's spiritual downfall, which is sin, save his own will. Wherefore
another man's words or deeds can only be an imperfect cause,
conducing somewhat to that downfall. For this reason scandal is
said to afford not a cause, but an occasion, which is an imperfect,
and not always an accidental cause. Nor is there any reason why

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.2.

certain definitions should not make mention of things that are
accidental, since what is accidental to one, may be proper to
something else: thus the accidental cause is mentioned in the
definition of chance (Phys. ii, 5).
Reply to Objection 4: Another's words or deed may be the cause of
another's sin in two ways, directly and accidentally. Directly, when a
man either intends, by his evil word or deed, to lead another man
into sin, or, if he does not so intend, when his deed is of such a
nature as to lead another into sin: for instance, when a man publicly
commits a sin or does something that has an appearance of sin. In
this case he that does such an act does, properly speaking, afford an
occasion of another's spiritual downfall, wherefore his act is called
"active scandal." One man's word or deed is the accidental cause of
another's sin, when he neither intends to lead him into sin, nor does
what is of a nature to lead him into sin, and yet this other one,
through being ill-disposed, is led into sin, for instance, into envy of
another's good, and then he who does this righteous act, does not,
so far as he is concerned, afford an occasion of the other's downfall,
but it is this other one who takes the occasion according to Rm. 7:8:
"Sin taking occasion by the commandment wrought in me all manner
of concupiscence." Wherefore this is "passive," without "active
scandal," since he that acts rightly does not, for his own part, afford
the occasion of the other's downfall. Sometimes therefore it happens
that there is active scandal in the one together with passive scandal
in the other, as when one commits a sin being induced thereto by
another; sometimes there is active without passive scandal, for
instance when one, by word or deed, provokes another to sin, and
the latter does not consent; and sometimes there is passive without
active scandal, as we have already said.
Reply to Objection 5: "Weakness" denotes proneness to scandal;
while "offense" signifies resentment against the person who
commits a sin, which resentment may be sometimes without
spiritual downfall; and "scandal" is the stumbling that results in
downfall.