pretext of delay." Should God perceive your soul inflamed, and your diligence
quickened, then He also Himself will lend His assistance to your reformation!
Yea, I pray and beseech you, let us be in earnest, lest we also hear it said of us,
"The men of Nineveh shall rise up, and shall condemn this generation;"
[Luke 11:32] for these, when they had once heard, reformed themselves; but we
are not converted after frequent hearing. These were proficients in every part of
virtue, but we in no part. They when they heard that their city would be
overthrown were affrighted; but we, though we have heard of Hell, are not
affrighted: these, men who did not partake of the instructions of the prophets;
we, enjoying the advantage of perpetual teaching, and of much grace.
23. These things I now speak to you, not as if reproving you for your own
sins, but for the sake of others; for I know full well that by you (as I have already
observed), this law concerning swearing has been accomplished. But this does
not suffice for our safety, unless by teaching we amend others, since he who
produced the one talent, restoring as he did the whole portion committed to him,
was punished, because he had not enriched that with which he was entrusted.
Wherefore, let us not regard this point, that we ourselves have been set free from
this sin; but until we have delivered others from it, let us not desist; and let every
one offer to God ten friends whom he has corrected; whether you have servants,
or apprentices: or if you have neither servants, nor apprentices, you have friends;
these do thou reform. Further, do not make me this reply; "We have banished
oaths for the most part, and we are rarely caught in that snare;" but let even this
rarity of offending be got rid of. If you had lost one piece of gold, would you not
go about to all persons, searching and making enquiry, in order to find it? This
do also with regard to oaths. If you perceive that you have been cheated out of
one oath, weep, lament, as though your whole substance were lost. Again I say
what I did before. Shut up yourself at home; make it a subject of practice and
exercise along with your wife, your children, and domestics. Say to yourself in
the first instance, "I must not put a finger to private or public matters until I have
rectified this soul of mine." If you will thus school your own sons, they too will

instruct their children in turn, and thus this discipline, reaching even to the
consummation and appearing of Christ, will bring all that great reward to those
who go to the root of the matter. If your son has learned to say, "Believe me;" he
will not be able to go up to the theatre, or to enter a tavern, or to spend his time
at dice; for that word, lying upon his mouth instead of a bridle, will make him
however unwilling feel shame and blush. But if at any time he should appear in
these places, it will quickly compel him to retreat. Suppose some persons laugh.
Do thou on the other hand weep for their transgression! Many also once laughed
at Noah while he was preparing the ark; but when the flood came, he laughed at
them; or rather, the just man never laughed at them at all, but wept and bewailed!
When therefore you see persons laughing, reflect that those teeth, that grin now,
will one day have to sustain that most dreadful wailing and gnashing, and that
they will remember this same laugh on That Day while they are grinding and
gnashing! Then thou too shall remember this laugh! How did the rich man laugh
at Lazarus! But afterwards, when he beheld him in Abraham's bosom, he had
nothing left to do but to bewail himself!
24. Being mindful then of all these things, be urgent with all, for the speedy
fulfilment of this precept. And tell me not, that you will do this little by little; nor
put it off till the morrow, for this tomorrow never finds an end. Forty days have
already passed away. Should the Holy Easter pass away, I will thenceforward
pardon no one, nor employ further admonition, but a commanding authority, and
severity not to be despised. For this apology drawn from custom is of no force.
Why may not the thief as well plead custom, and get free from punishment?
Why may not the murderer and adulterer? Therefore I protest, and give warning
to all, that if, when I have met you in private, and put the matter to the proof
(and I will certainly put it to the proof), I detect any who have not corrected this
vice, I will inflict punishment upon them, by ordering them to be excluded from
the Holy Mysteries; not that they may remain always shut out, but that having
reformed themselves, they may thus enter in, and with a pure conscience enjoy
the Holy Table; for this is to be a partaker of the Communion! God grant that