spirit is not by nature in a place so as to be subject to place. But the
corporeal fire is enabled as the instrument of the vengeance of
Divine justice thus to detain a spirit; and thus it has a penal effect on
it, by hindering it from fulfilling its own will, that is by hindering it
from acting where it will and as it will.
This way is asserted by Gregory (Dial. iv, 29). For in explaining how
the soul can suffer from that fire by feeling it, he expresses himself
as follows: "Since Truth declares the rich sinner to be condemned to
fire, will any wise man deny that the souls of the wicked are
imprisoned in flames?" Julian [Bishop of Toledo, Prognostic ii, 17]
says the same as quoted by the Master (Sent. iv, D, 44): "If the
incorporeal spirit of a living man is held by the body, why shall it not
be held after death by a corporeal fire?" and Augustine says (De Civ.
Dei xxi, 10) that "just as, although the soul is spiritual and the body
corporeal, man is so fashioned that the soul is united to the body as
giving it life, and on account of this union conceives a great love for
its body, so it is chained to the fire, as receiving punishment
therefrom, and from this union conceives a loathing."
Accordingly we must unite all the aforesaid modes together, in order
to understand perfectly how the soul suffers from a corporeal fire: so
as to say that the fire of its nature is able to have an incorporeal
spirit united to it as a thing placed is united to a place; that as the
instrument of Divine justice it is enabled to detain it enchained as it
were, and in this respect this fire is really hurtful to the spirit, and
thus the soul seeing the fire as something hurtful to it is tormented
by the fire. Hence Gregory (Dial. iv, 29) mentions all these in order,
as may be seen from the above quotations.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine speaks there as one inquiring:
wherefore he expresses himself otherwise when deciding the point,
as quoted above (De Civ. Dei xxi). Or we may reply that Augustine
means to say that the things which are the proximate occasion of the
soul's pain or sorrow are spiritual, since it would not be distressed
unless it apprehended the fire as hurtful to it: wherefore the fire as
apprehended is the proximate cause of its distress, whereas the
corporeal fire which exists outside the soul is the remote cause of its
distress.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the soul is simply more excellent
than the fire, the fire is relatively more excellent than the soul, in so
far, to wit, as it is the instrument of Divine justice.

Reply to Objection 3: The Philosopher and Boethius are speaking of
the action whereby the patient is changed into the nature of the
agent. Such is not the action of the fire on the soul: and
consequently the argument is not conclusive.
Reply to Objection 4: By acting on the soul the fire bestows nothing
on it but detains it, as stated above. Hence the argument is not to the
point.
Reply to Objection 5: In intellectual vision sorrow is not caused by
the fact that something is seen, since the thing seen as such can
nowise be contrary to the intellect. But in the sensible vision the
thing seen, by its very action on the sight so as to be seen, there
may be accidentally something corruptive of the sight, in so far as it
destroys the harmony of the organ Nevertheless, intellectual vision
may cause sorrow, in so far as the thing seen is apprehended as
hurtful, not that it hurts through being seen, but in some other way
no matter which. It is thus that the soul in seeing the fire is
distressed.
Reply to Objection 6: The comparison does not hold in every
respect, but it does in some, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 7: Although there is no bodily contact between
the soul and body, there is a certain spiritual contact between them
(even as the mover of the heaven, being spiritual, touches the
heaven, when it moves it, with a spiritual contact) in the same way as
a "painful object is said to touch," as stated in De Gener. i. This
mode of contact is sufficient for action.
Reply to Objection 8: The souls of the damned are never outside hell,
except by Divine permission, either for the instruction or for the trial
of the elect. And wherever they are outside hell they nevertheless
always see the fire thereof as prepared for their punishment.
Wherefore, since this vision is the immediate cause of their distress,
as stated above, wherever they are, they suffer from hell-fire. Even
so prisoners, though outside the prison, suffer somewhat from the
prison, seeing themselves condemned thereto. Hence just as the
glory of the elect is not diminished, neither as to the essential, nor as
to the accidental reward, if they happen to be outside the empyrean,
in fact this somewhat conduces to their glory, so the punishment of