FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.4.

If, however, we speak of a meritorious work, inasmuch as it proceeds
from the grace of the Holy Ghost moving us to life everlasting, it is
meritorious of life everlasting condignly. For thus the value of its
merit depends upon the power of the Holy Ghost moving us to life
everlasting according to Jn. 4:14: "Shall become in him a fount of
water springing up into life everlasting." And the worth of the work
depends on the dignity of grace, whereby a man, being made a
partaker of the Divine Nature, is adopted as a son of God, to whom
the inheritance is due by right of adoption, according to Rm. 8:17: "If
sons, heirs also."
Reply to Objection 1: The Apostle is speaking of the substance of
these sufferings.
Reply to Objection 2: This saying is to be understood of the first
cause of our reaching everlasting life, viz. God's mercy. But our
merit is a subsequent cause.
Reply to Objection 3: The grace of the Holy Ghost which we have at
present, although unequal to glory in act, is equal to it virtually as
the seed of a tree, wherein the whole tree is virtually. So likewise by
grace of the Holy Ghost dwells in man; and He is a sufficient cause
of life everlasting; hence, 2 Cor. 1:22, He is called the "pledge" of our
inheritance.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether grace is the principle of merit through

charity rather than the other virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that grace is not the principle of merit
through charity rather than the other virtues. For wages are due to
work, according to Mt. 20:8: "Call the laborers and pay them their
hire." Now every virtue is a principle of some operation, since virtue
is an operative habit, as stated above (Question 55, Article 2). Hence
every virtue is equally a principle of merit.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 3:8): "Every man shall
receive his own reward according to his labor." Now charity lessens
rather than increases the labor, because as Augustine says (De
Verbis Dom., Serm. lxx), "love makes all hard and repulsive tasks
easy and next to nothing." Hence charity is no greater principle of
merit than any other virtue.
Objection 3: Further, the greatest principle of merit would seem to be
the one whose acts are most meritorious. But the acts of faith and
patience or fortitude would seem to be the most meritorious, as
appears in the martyrs, who strove for the faith patiently and bravely
even till death. Hence other virtues are a greater principle of merit
than charity.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Jn. 14:21): "He that loveth Me, shall
be loved of My Father; and I will love him and will manifest Myself to
him." Now everlasting life consists in the manifest knowledge of
God, according to Jn. 17:3: "This is eternal life: that they may know
Thee, the only true" and living "God." Hence the merit of eternal life
rests chiefly with charity.
I answer that, As we may gather from what has been stated above
(Article 1), human acts have the nature of merit from two causes:
first and chiefly from the Divine ordination, inasmuch as acts are
said to merit that good to which man is divinely ordained. Secondly,
on the part of free-will, inasmuch as man, more than other creatures,
has the power of voluntary acts by acting by himself. And in both
these ways does merit chiefly rest with charity. For we must bear in
mind that everlasting life consists in the enjoyment of God. Now the
human mind's movement to the fruition of the Divine good is the
proper act of charity, whereby all the acts of the other virtues are