adoption to all the world's offspring in common.
Reflect now on the greatness of the gift, and do not account His dignity the
less for His appearing in such a likeness. For I actually hear some saying, that
"such as is the difference between a man and a dove, so great is that between
Christ and the Spirit: since the one appeared in our nature, the other in the
likeness of a dove." What must we say then to these things? That the Son of God
did indeed take upon Him the nature of man, but the Spirit took not on Him the
nature of a dove. Therefore the evangelist also said not, "in the nature of a
dove," but "in the form of a dove." Accordingly, never after did He so much as
appear in this fashion, but at that moment only. And if on this account you affirm
His dignity to be less, the cherubim too will be made out by this reasoning much
His superior, even as much so as an eagle is to a dove: because they too were
figured into that visible shape. And the angels too superior again, for they no less
have many times appeared in the fashion of men. But these things are not so,
indeed they are not. For the truth of an economy is one thing, and the
condescension of a temporary vision another.
Do not now, I pray you, become unthankful towards your Benefactor nor
with the very contraries requite Him that has bestowed on you the fountain of
blessedness. For where adoption is vouchsafed, there is also the removing of
evils, and the giving of all good things.
4. On this very account the Jewish baptism ceases, and ours takes its
beginning. And what was done with regard to the Passover, the same ensues in
the baptism also. For as in that case too, He acting with a view to both, brought
the one to an end, but to the other He gave a beginning: so here, having fulfilled
the Jewish baptism, He at the same time opens also the doors of that of the
Church; as on one table then, so in one river now, He had both sketched out the
shadow, and now adds the truth. For this baptism alone has the grace of the
Spirit, but that of John was destitute of this gift. For this very cause in the case of
the others that were baptized no such thing came to pass, but only in the instance
of Him who was to hand on this; in order that, besides what we have said, you

might learn this also, that not the purity of the baptizer, but the power of the
baptized, had this effect. Not until then, assuredly, were either the heavens
opened, nor did the Spirit make His approach. Because henceforth He leads us
away from the old to the new polity, both opening to us the gates on high, and
sending down His Spirit from thence to call us to our country there; and not
merely to call us, but also with the greatest mark of dignity. For He has not made
us angels and archangels, but He has caused us to become "sons of God," and
"beloved," and so He draws us on towards that portion of ours.
Having then all this in your mind, show forth a life worthy of the love of
Him who calls you, and of your citizenship in that world, and of the honor that is
given you. Crucified as you are to the world, and having crucified it to yourself,
show yourself with all strictness a citizen of the city of the heavens. And do not,
because your body is not translated unto heaven, suppose that you have anything
to do with the earth; for you have your Head abiding above. Yea with this very
purpose the Lord, having first come here and having brought His angels, did
then, taking you with Him, depart there; that even before your going up to that
place, you might understand that it is possible for you to inhabit earth as it were
heaven.
Let us then keep watch over that noble birth, which we received from the
beginning; and let us every day seek more and more the palaces there, and
account all that is here to be a shadow and a dream. For so, had any king among
those on earth, finding you poor and a beggar, made you suddenly his son, never
would you have thought upon your cottage, and your cottage's mean
appointments. Yet surely in that case the difference is not much. Do not then
either in this case take account of any of the former things, for you are called
unto much greater. For both He who calls is the Lord of the angels, and the good
things that are given surpass all both word and thought. Since not from earth to
earth does He remove you, as the king does, but from earth to heaven, and from
a mortal nature to an immortal, and to glory unspeakable, then only possible to
be properly manifested, when we shall actually enjoy it.