Holy Ghost also, recasting the soul in baptism as in a furnace and consuming its
sins, causes it to glisten with more purity than all purest gold.
Further, the credibility of the resurrection of our bodies he signifies to you
again from what follows: viz., that since sin brought in death, now that the root
is dried up, one must not after that doubt of the destruction of the fruit. Therefore
having first mentioned "the forgiveness of sins," you next confess also "the
resurrection of the dead;" the one guides you as by hand on to the other.
Yet again, because the term Resurrection is not sufficient to indicate the
whole: for many after rising have again departed, as those in the Old Testament,
as Lazarus, as they at the time of the crucifixion: one is bid to say, "and the life
everlasting," that none may any longer have a notion of death after that
resurrection.
These words therefore Paul recalling to their minds, says, "What shall they
do which are baptized for the dead?" "For if there be no resurrection," says he,
"these words are but scenery. If there be no resurrection, how persuade we them
to believe things which we do not bestow?" Just as if a person bidding another to
deliver a document to the effect that he had received so much, should never give
the sum named therein, yet after the subscription should demand of him the
specified monies. What then will remain for the subscriber to do, now that he has
made himself responsible, without having received what he admitted he had
received? This then he here says of those who are baptized also. "What shall they
do which are baptized," says he, "having subscribed to the resurrection of dead
bodies, and not receiving it, but suffering fraud? And what need was there at all
of this confession, if the fact did not follow?"

1 Corinthians 15:30-31
3. "Why do we also stand in jeopardy every hour?"
"I protest by that glorying in you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I
die daily."
See again whence he endeavors to establish the doctrine, from his own
suffrage: or rather not from his only, but from that also of the other apostles. And
this too is no small thing; that the teachers whom you produce were full of
vehement conviction and signified the same not by words only, but also by very
deeds. Therefore, you see, he does not say simply, "we are persuaded," for this
alone was not sufficient to persuade them, but he also furnishes the proof by
facts; as if he should say, "in words to confess these things haply seems to you no
marvel; but if we should also produce unto you the voice which deeds send forth,
what can you have to say against that? Hear ye then, how by our perils also day
by day we confess these things?" And he said not "I," but "we," taking along
with him all the apostles together, and thereby at once speaking modestly and
adding credibility to his discourse.
For what can you have to say? That we are deceiving you when we preach
these things, and that our doctrines come of vain-glory? Nay, our perils suffer
you not to pass such a sentence. For who would choose to be in continual
jeopardy to no purpose and with no effect? Wherefore also he said, "Why do we
also stand in jeopardy every hour?" For if one should even choose it through
vain-glory, such his choice will be but for once and again, not all his life long,
like ours. For we have assigned our whole life to this purpose.
"I protest by that glorying in you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I
die daily:" by glorying here, meaning their advancement. Thus since he had
intimated that his perils were many, lest he might seem to say this by way of
lamentation, "far from grieving," says he, "I even glory in suffering this for your