time, there is a very great tie between male and female, to which tie
even the generic nature inclines.
Reply to Objection 2: The assertion of Tully may be true of some
particular nation, provided we understand it as referring to the
proximate beginning of that nation when it became a nation distinct
from others; for that to which natural reason inclines is not realized
in all things, and this statement is not universally true, since Holy
Writ states that there has been matrimony from the beginning of the
human race.
Reply to Objection 3: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii)
"human nature is not unchangeable as the Divine nature is." Hence
things that are of natural law vary according to the various states
and conditions of men; although those which naturally pertain to
things Divine nowise vary.
Reply to Objection 4: Nature intends not only being in the offspring,
but also perfect being, for which matrimony is necessary, as shown
above.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether matrimony still comes under a precept?

Objection 1: It would seem that matrimony still comes under a
precept. For a precept is binding so long as it is not recalled. But the
primary institution of matrimony came under a precept, as stated in
the text (Sent. iv, D, 26); nor do we read anywhere that this precept
was recalled, but rather that it was confirmed (Mt. 19:6): "What . . .
God hath joined together let no man put asunder." Therefore
matrimony still comes under a precept.
Objection 2: Further, the precepts of natural law are binding in
respect of all time. Now matrimony is of natural law, as stated above
(Article 1). Therefore, etc.
Objection 3: Further, the good of the species is better than the good
of the individual, "for the good of the State is more Godlike than the
good of one man" (Ethic. i, 2). Now the precept given to the first man
concerning the preservation of the good of the individual by the act
of the nutritive power is still in force. Much more therefore does the
precept concerning matrimony still hold, since it refers to the
preservation of the species.
Objection 4: Further, where the reason of an obligation remains the
same, the obligation must remain the same. Now the reason why
men were bound to marry in olden times was lest the human race
should cease to multiply. Since then the result would be the same, if
each one were free to abstain from marriage, it would seem that
matrimony comes under a precept.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 7:38): "He that giveth not his
virgin in marriage doth better," namely than he that giveth her in
marriage. Therefore the contract of marriage is not now a matter of
precept.
Further, no one deserves a reward for breaking a precept. Now a
special reward, namely the aureole, is due to virgins [Question 96,
Article 5]. Therefore matrimony does not come under a precept.
I answer that, Nature inclines to a thing in two ways. In one way as to
that which is necessary for the perfection of the individual, and such
an obligation is binding on each one, since natural perfections are