THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.30, C.4.

concerned, his inferior powers are weakened; and from this results
the aforesaid disturbance: thus, also, when the natural heat is drawn
within a body, the exterior parts tremble. Secondly, because, as
Origen says (Hom. iv in Luc.): "The angel who appeared, knowing
hers was a human nature, first sought to remedy the disturbance of
mind to which a man is subject." Wherefore both to Zachary and to
Mary, as soon as they were disturbed, he said: "Fear not." For this
reason, as we read in the life of Anthony, "it is difficult to discern
good from evil spirits. For if joy succeed fear, we should know that
the help is from the Lord: because security of soul is a sign of
present majesty. But if the fear with which we are stricken persevere,
it is an enemy that we see."
Moreover it was becoming to virginal modesty that the Virgin should
be troubled. Because, as Ambrose says on Lk. 1:20: "It is the part of
a virgin to be timid, to fear the advances of men, and to shrink from
men's addresses."
But others says that as the Blessed Virgin was accustomed to
angelic visions, she was not troubled at seeing this angel, but with
wonder at hearing what the angel said to her, for she did not think so
highly of herself. Wherefore the evangelist does not say that she was
troubled at seeing the angel, but "at his saying."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.30, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Annunciation took place in becoming

order?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Annunciation did not take place
in becoming order. For the dignity of the Mother of God results from
the child she conceived. But the cause should be made known
before the effect. Therefore the angel should have announced to the
Virgin the conception of her child before acknowledging her dignity
in greeting her.
Objection 2: Further, proof should be omitted in things which admit
of no doubt; and premised where doubt is possible. But the angel
seems first to have announced what the virgin might doubt, and
which, because of her doubt, would make her ask: "How shall this be
done?" and afterwards to have given the proof, alleging both the
instance of Elizabeth and the omnipotence of God. Therefore the
Annunciation was made by the angel in unbecoming order.
Objection 3: Further, the greater cannot be adequately proved by the
less. But it was a greater wonder for a virgin than for an old woman
to be with child. Therefore the angel's proof was insufficient to
demonstrate the conception of a virgin from that of an old woman.
On the contrary, it is written (Rm. 13:1): "Those that are of God, are
well ordered." Now the angel was "sent by God" to announce unto
the Virgin, as is related Lk. 1:26. Therefore the Annunciation was
made by the angel in the most perfect order.
I answer that, The Annunciation was made by the angel in a
becoming manner. For the angel had a threefold purpose in regard to
the Virgin. First, to draw her attention to the consideration of a
matter of such moment. This he did by greeting her by a new and
unwonted salutation. Wherefore Origen says, commenting on Luke
(Hom. vi), that if "she had known that similar words had been
addressed to anyone else, she, who had knowledge of the Law,
would never have been astonished at the seeming strangeness of
the salutation." In which salutation he began by asserting her
worthiness of the conception, by saying, "Full of grace"; then he
announced the conception in the words, "The Lord is with thee"; and
then foretold the honor which would result to her therefrom, by
saying, "Blessed art thou among women."