connected by the common business of soldiering, and in the same
way those who are connected by the fellowship of nature are said to
be tied by blood [consanguinei]. Hence in the above definition "tie"
is included as being the genus of consanguinity; the "persons
descending from the same common ancestor," who are thus tied
together are the subject of this tie. while "carnal procreation" is
mentioned as being its origin.
Reply to Objection 1: An active force is not received into an
instrument in the same degree of perfection as it has in the principal
agent. And since every moved mover is an instrument, it follows that
the power of the first mover in a particular genus when drawn out
through many mediate movers fails at length, and reaches
something that is moved and not a mover. But the power of a
begetter moves not only as to that which belongs to the species, but
also as to that which belongs to the individual, by reason of which
the child is like the parent even in accidentals and not only in the
specific nature. And yet this individual power of the father is not so
perfect in the son as it was in the father, and still less so in the
grandson, and thus it goes on failing: so that at length it ceases and
can go no further. Since then consanguinity results from this power
being communicated to many through being conveyed to them from
one person by procreation, it destroys itself by little and little, as
Isidore says (Etym. ix). Consequently in defining consanguinity we
must not take a remote common ancestor but the nearest, whose
power still remains in those who are descended from him.
Reply to Objection 2: It is clear from what has been said that blood
relations agree not only in the specific nature but also in that power
peculiar to the individual which is conveyed from one to many: the
result being that sometimes the child is not only like his father, but
also his grandfather or his remote ancestors (De Gener. Anim. iv, 3).
Reply to Objection 3: Likeness depends more on form whereby a
thing is actually, than on matter whereby a thing is potentially: for
instance, charcoal has more in common with fire than with the tree
from which the wood was cut. In like manner food already
transformed by the nutritive power into the substance of the person
fed has more in common with the subject nourished than with that
from which the nourishment was taken. The argument however
would hold according to the opinion of those who asserted that the
whole nature of a thing is from its matter and that all forms are
accidents: which is false.

Reply to Objection 4: It is the blood that is proximately changed into
the semen, as proved in De Gener. Anim. i, 18. Hence the tie
contracted by carnal procreation is more fittingly called bloodrelationship than flesh-relationship. That sometimes one relation is
called the flesh of another, is because the blood which is
transformed into the man's seed or into the menstrual fluid is
potentially flesh and bone.
Reply to Objection 5: Some say that the reason why the tie of
consanguinity is contracted among men through carnal procreation,
and not among other animals, is because whatever belongs to the
truth of human nature in all men was in our first parent: which does
not apply to other animals. But according to this, matrimonial
consanguinity would never come to an end. However the above
theory was disproved in the Second Book (Sent. ii, D, 30: FP,
Question 119, Article 1). Wherefore we must reply that the reason for
this is that animals are not united together in the union of friendship
through the begetting of many from one proximate parent, as is the
case with men, as stated above.