SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.8.

and just as the physician of the body restores the sick man to health,
if possible, without cutting off a limb, but, if this be unavoidable, cuts
off a limb which is least indispensable, in order to preserve the life of
the whole body, so too he who desires his brother's amendment
should, if possible, so amend him as regards his conscience, that he
keep his good name.
For a good name is useful, first of all to the sinner himself, not only
in temporal matters wherein a man suffers many losses, if he lose
his good name, but also in spiritual matters, because many are
restrained from sinning, through fear of dishonor, so that when a
man finds his honor lost, he puts no curb on his sinning. Hence
Jerome says on Mt. 18:15: "If he sin against thee, thou shouldst
rebuke him in private, lest he persist in his sin if he should once
become shameless or unabashed." Secondly, we ought to safeguard
our sinning brother's good name, both because the dishonor of one
leads to the dishonor of others, according to the saying of Augustine
(Ep. ad pleb. Hipponens. lxxviii): "When a few of those who bear a
name for holiness are reported falsely or proved in truth to have
done anything wrong, people will seek by busily repeating it to make
it believed of all": and also because when one man's sin is made
public others are incited to sin likewise.
Since, however, one's conscience should be preferred to a good
name, Our Lord wished that we should publicly denounce our
brother and so deliver his conscience from sin, even though he
should forfeit his good name. Therefore it is evident that the precept
requires a secret admonition to precede public denunciation.
Reply to Objection 1: Whatever is hidden, is known to God,
wherefore hidden sins are to the judgment of God, just what public
sins are to the judgment of man. Nevertheless God does rebuke
sinners sometimes by secretly admonishing them, so to speak, with
an inward inspiration, either while they wake or while they sleep,
according to Job 33:15-17: "By a dream in a vision by night, when
deep sleep falleth upon men . . . then He openeth the ears of men,
and teaching instructeth them in what they are to learn, that He may
withdraw a man from the things he is doing."
Reply to Objection 2: Our Lord as God knew the sin of Judas as
though it were public, wherefore He could have made it known at
once. Yet He did not, but warned Judas of his sin in words that were
obscure. The sin of Ananias and Saphira was denounced by Peter

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.8.

acting as God's executor, by Whose revelation he knew of their sin.
With regard to Joseph it is probable that he warned his brethren,
though Scripture does not say so. Or we may say that the sin was
public with regard to his brethren, wherefore it is stated in the plural
that he accused "his brethren."
Reply to Objection 3: When there is danger to a great number of
people, those words of Our Lord do not apply, because then thy
brother does not sin against thee alone.
Reply to Objection 4: Proclamations made in the chapter of religious
are about little faults which do not affect a man's good name,
wherefore they are reminders of forgotten faults rather than
accusations or denunciations. If, however, they should be of such a
nature as to injure our brother's good name, it would be contrary to
Our Lord's precept, to denounce a brother's fault in this manner.
Reply to Objection 5: A prelate is not to be obeyed contrary to a
Divine precept, according to Acts 5:29: "We ought to obey God
rather then men." Therefore when a prelate commands anyone to tell
him anything that he knows to need correction, the command rightly
understood supports the safeguarding of the order of fraternal
correction, whether the command be addressed to all in general, or
to some particular individual. If, on the other hand, a prelate were to
issue a command in express opposition to this order instituted by
Our Lord, both would sin, the one commanding, and the one obeying
him, as disobeying Our Lord's command. Consequently he ought not
to be obeyed, because a prelate is not the judge of secret things, but
God alone is, wherefore he has no power to command anything in
respect of hidden matters, except in so far as they are made known
through certain signs, as by ill-repute or suspicion; in which cases a
prelate can command just as a judge, whether secular or
ecclesiastical, can bind a man under oath to tell the truth.