THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.3.

is not named after the minister thereof, because he does not
accomplish its principal effect, which is the inward cleansing.
Reply to Objection 2: The whole teaching and work of John was
ordered unto Christ, who, by many miracles confirmed both His own
teaching and that of John. But if John had worked signs, men would
have paid equal attention to John and to Christ. Wherefore, in order
that men might pay greater attention to Christ, it was not given to
John to work a sign. Yet when the Jews asked him why he baptized,
he confirmed his office by the authority of Scripture, saying: "I am
the voice of one crying in the wilderness," etc. as related, Jn. 1:23
(cf. Is. 40:3). Moreover, the very austerity of his life was a
commendation of his office, because, as Chrysostom says,
commenting on Matthew (Hom. x in Matth.), "it was wonderful to
witness such endurance in a human body."
Reply to Objection 3: The baptism of John was intended by God to
last only for a short time, for the reasons given above (Article 1).
Therefore it was not the subject of a general commandment set
down in Sacred Writ, but of a certain interior revelation of the Holy
Ghost, as stated above.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.38, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether grace was given in the baptism of John?

Objection 1: It would seem that grace was given in the baptism of
John. For it is written (Mk. 1:4): "John was in the desert baptizing
and preaching the baptism of penance unto remission of sins." But
penance and remission of sins are the effect of grace. Therefore the
baptism of John conferred grace.
Objection 2: Further, those who were about to be baptized by John
"confessed their sins," as related Mt. 3:6 and Mk. 1:5. But the
confession of sins is ordered to their remission, which is effected by
grace. Therefore grace was conferred in the baptism of John.
Objection 3: Further, the baptism of John was more akin than
circumcision to the baptism of Christ. But original sin was remitted
through circumcision: because, as Bede says (Hom. x in Circumcis.),
"under the Law, circumcision brought the same saving aid to heal
the wound of original sin as baptism is wont to bring now that grace
is revealed." Much more, therefore, did the baptism of John effect
the remission of sins, which cannot be accomplished without grace.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 3:11): "I indeed baptize you in water
unto penance." Which words Gregory thus expounds in a certain
homily (Hom. vii in Evang.): "John baptized, not in the Spirit, but in
water: because he could not forgive sins." But grace is given by the
Holy Ghost, and by means thereof sins are taken away. Therefore the
baptism of John did not confer grace.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2, ad 2), the whole teaching
and work of John was in preparation for Christ: just as it is the duty
of the servant and of the under-craftsman to prepare the matter for
the form which is accomplished by the head-craftsman. Now grace
was to be conferred on men through Christ, according to Jn. 1:17:
"Grace and truth came through Jesus Christ." Therefore the baptism
of John did not confer grace, but only prepared the way for grace;
and this in three ways: first, by John's teaching, which led men to
faith in Christ; secondly, by accustoming men to the rite of Christ's
baptism; thirdly, by penance, preparing men to receive the effect of
Christ's baptism.
Reply to Objection 1: In these words, as Bede says (on Mk. 1:4), a