happened, but I see the storm big with it; so I am in fear, yet not in despair; you
have the power to set all right, and to return into your former calm. Then, as it
were stretching out a hand to them thus tempest-tost, he brings himself into the
midst, saying,
Ver. 12. "I beseech you, brethren, be as I am; for I am as you are."
This is addressed to his Jewish disciples, and he brings his own example
forward, to induce them thereby to abandon their old customs. Though you had
none other for a pattern, he says, to look at me only would have sufficed for such
a change, and for your taking courage. Therefore gaze on me; I too was once in
your state of mind, especially so; I had a burning zeal for the Law; yet
afterwards I feared not to abandon the Law, to withdraw from that rule of life.
And this you know full well how obstinately I clung hold of Judaism, and how
with yet greater force I let it go. He does well to place this last in order: for most
men, though they are given a thousand reasons, and those just ones, are more
readily influenced by that which is like their own case, and more firmly hold to
that which they see done by others.
Ver. 12. "You did me no wrong."
Observe how he again addresses them by a title of honor, which was a
reminder moreover of the doctrine of grace. Having chid them seriously, and
brought things together from all quarters, and shown their violations of the Law,
and hit them on many sides, he gives in and conciliates them speaking more
tenderly. For as to do nothing but conciliate causes negligence, so to be
constantly talked at with sharpness sours a man; so that it is proper to observe
due proportion everywhere. See then how he excuses to them what he has said,
and shows that it proceeded not simply because he did not like them, but from
anxiety. After giving them a deep cut, he pours in this encouragement like oil;
and, showing that his words were not words of hate or enmity, he reminds them
of the love which they had evinced toward him, mixing his self-vindication with
praises. Therefore he says, "you did me no wrong."
Ver. 13, 14. "But you know that because of an infirmity of the flesh I

preached the Gospel unto you the first time. And that which was a temptation in
my flesh you despised not, nor rejected."
Not to have injured one is indeed no great thing, for no man whatever
would choose to hurt wantonly and without object to annoy another who had
never injured him. But for you, not only have you not injured me, but you have
shown me great and inexpressible kindness, and it is impossible that one who
has been treated with such attention should speak thus from any malevolent
motive. My language then cannot be caused by ill-will; it follows, that it
proceeds from affection and solicitude. "You did me no wrong; you know that
because of an infirmity of the flesh I preached the Gospel unto you." What can
be gentler than this holy soul, what sweeter, or more affectionate! And the words
he had already used, arose not from an unreasoning anger, nor from a passionate
emotion, but from much solicitude. And why do I say, you have not injured me?
Rather have you evinced a great and sincere regard for me. For "you know," he
says, "that because of an infirmity of the flesh I preached the Gospel unto you;
and that which was a temptation to you in my flesh you despised not, nor
rejected." What does he mean? While I preached to you, I was driven about, I
was scourged, I suffered a thousand deaths, yet you thought no scorn of me; for
this is meant by "that which was a temptation to you in my flesh you despised
not, nor rejected." Observe his spiritual skill; in the midst of his self-vindication,
he again appeals to their feelings by showing what he had suffered for their
sakes. This however, says he, did not at all offend you, nor did you reject me on
account of my sufferings and persecutions; or, as he now calls them, his
infirmity and temptation.
Ver. 14. "But you received me as an Angel of God."
Was it not then absurd in them to receive him as an Angel of God, when he
was persecuted and driven about, and then not to receive him when pressing on
them what was fitting?
Ver. 15, 16. "Where then is that gratulation of yourselves? For I bear you
witness, that, if possible, you would have plucked out your eyes, and given them