SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.5.

the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to his
whole land."
Reply to Objection 1: The prophecy of David approaches near to the
vision of Moses, as regards the intellectual vision, because both
received a revelation of intelligible and supernatural truth, without
any imaginary vision. Yet the vision of Moses was more excellent as
regards the knowledge of the Godhead; while David more fully knew
and expressed the mysteries of Christ's incarnation.
Reply to Objection 2: These signs of the prophets mentioned were
greater as to the substance of the thing done; yet the miracles of
Moses were greater as regards the way in which they were done,
since they were wrought on a whole people.
Reply to Objection 3: John belongs to the New Testament, whose
ministers take precedence even of Moses, since they are spectators
of a fuller revelation, as stated in 2 Cor. 3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there is a degree of prophecy in the

blessed?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is a degree of prophecy in the
blessed. For, as stated above (Article 4), Moses saw the Divine
essence, and yet he is called a prophet. Therefore in like manner the
blessed can be called prophets.
Objection 2: Further, prophecy is a "divine revelation." Now divine
revelations are made even to the blessed angels. Therefore even
blessed angels can be prophets.
Objection 3: Further, Christ was a comprehensor from the moment of
His conception; and yet He calls Himself a prophet (Mt. 13:57), when
He says: "A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country."
Therefore even comprehensors and the blessed can be called
prophets.
Objection 4: Further, it is written of Samuel (Ecclus. 46:23): "He lifted
up his voice from the earth in prophecy to blot out the wickedness of
the nation." Therefore other saints can likewise be called prophets
after they have died.
On the contrary, The prophetic word is compared (2 Pt. 1:19) to a
"light that shineth in a dark place." Now there is no darkness in the
blessed. Therefore they cannot be called prophets.
I answer that, Prophecy denotes vision of some supernatural truth as
being far remote from us. This happens in two ways. First, on the
part of the knowledge itself, because, to wit, the supernatural truth is
not known in itself, but in some of its effects; and this truth will be
more remote if it be known by means of images of corporeal things,
than if it be known in its intelligible effects; and such most of all is
the prophetic vision, which is conveyed by images and likenesses of
corporeal things. Secondly, vision is remote on the part of the seer,
because, to wit, he has not yet attained completely to his ultimate
perfection, according to 2 Cor. 5:6, "While we are in the body, we are
absent from the Lord."
Now in neither of these ways are the blessed remote; wherefore they
cannot be called prophets.