eagle. Are you quick of hearing? The ass is more so. Of scent? The hound
suffers you not to surpass him. Are you a good provider? Yet you are inferior to
the ant. Do you gather gold? Yet not as the Indian ants. Are you proud because
of your health? Unreasoning creatures are far better than we both in habit of
body, and in independence; they fear no poverty. "Behold the birds of the
heaven, that they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns."
[Matthew 6:26] "And surely," He means, "God has not created the irrational
animals superior to ourselves." Do you mark what want of consideration is here?
Do you observe the lack of all investigation? Do you observe the great
advantage which we derive from an investigation of the points? He, whose mind
is lifted up above all men, is found to be even lower than the irrational creatures.
But we will have pity upon him, and not follow his example; nor because
the limits of our mortal nature are too narrow for his conceit of himself, will we
proceed to lower him to the level of the beasts that are without reason, but will
lift him up from thence, not for his own sake, for he deserves no better fate, but
that we may set forth the lovingkindness of God, and the honor which He has
vouchsafed us. For there are things, yes, there are things wherein the irrational
animals have no participation with us. And of what sort are these? Piety, and a
life based on virtue. Here you can never speak of fornicators, nor of effeminate
persons, nor of murderers, for from them we have been severed. And what then
is this which is found here? We know God, His Providence we acknowledge, and
are embued with true philosophy concerning immortality. Here let the irrational
animals give place. They cannot contend with us in these points. We live in selfcommand. Here the irrational animals have nothing in common with us. For,
while coming behind all of them, we exercise dominion over them; for herein
lies the superiority of our dominion, that, while coming behind them, we yet
reign over them: that you might be instructed that the cause of these things is,
not yourself, but God who made you, and gave you reason. We set nets and toils
for them, we drive them in, and they are at our mercy.
Self-command, a compliant temper, mildness, contempt of money, are

prerogatives of our race; but since thou who art one of those blinded by
presumption hast none of these, you do well in entertaining notions either above
the level of mankind, or beneath the very irrational creatures. For this is the
nature of folly and of audacity; it is either unduly elevated, or on the other hand
it is equally depressed, never observing a proper proportion. We are equal to
angels in this respect, that we have a Kingdom pledged to us, the choir, unto
which Christ is joined. He that is a man may be scourged, yet does he not
succumb. A man laughs at death, is a stranger to fear and trembling, he does not
covet more than he has. So that they all who are not like this are beneath the
irrational animals. For when in the things of the body you would have the
advantage, but hast no advantage in the things that concern the soul, how are you
anything else than inferior to the irrational animals? For bring forward one of the
vicious and unthinking, of those that are living in excess and to self. The horse
surpasses him in warlike spirit, the boar in strength, the hare in swiftness, the
peacock in grace, the swan in fineness of voice, the elephant in size, the eagle in
keenness of sight, all birds in wealth. Whence then do you derive your title to
rule the irrational creatures? From reason? But you have it not? For whosoever
ceases to make a due use of it, is again inferior to them; for when though
possessing reason he is more irrational than they, it had been better if he had
never from the first become capable of exercising reason. For it is not the same
thing after having received dominion to betray the trust, as to let pass the season
to receive it. That sovereign, who is below the level of his guards, had better
never have had on the purple. And it is the very self-same thing in this case.
Knowing then that without virtue we are inferior to the very irrational animals,
let us exercise ourselves therein, that we may become men, yea rather angels,
and that we may enjoy the promised blessings, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.