substantial form perfects not only the whole, but each part of the
whole. For since a whole consists of parts, a form of the whole which
does not give existence to each of the parts of the body, is a form
consisting in composition and order, such as the form of a house;
and such a form is accidental. But the soul is a substantial form; and
therefore it must be the form and the act, not only of the whole, but
also of each part. Therefore, on the withdrawal of the soul, as we do
not speak of an animal or a man unless equivocally, as we speak of a
painted animal or a stone animal; so is it with the hand, the eye, the
flesh and bones, as the Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 1). A proof of
which is, that on the withdrawal of the soul, no part of the body
retains its proper action; although that which retains its species,
retains the action of the species. But act is in that which it actuates:
wherefore the soul must be in the whole body, and in each part
thereof.
That it is entire in each part thereof, may be concluded from this, that
since a whole is that which is divided into parts, there are three
kinds of totality, corresponding to three kinds of division. There is a
whole which is divided into parts of quantity, as a whole line, or a
whole body. There is also a whole which is divided into logical and
essential parts: as a thing defined is divided into the parts of a
definition, and a composite into matter and form. There is, further, a
third kind of whole which is potential, divided into virtual parts. The
first kind of totality does not apply to forms, except perhaps
accidentally; and then only to those forms, which have an indifferent
relationship to a quantitative whole and its parts; as whiteness, as
far as its essence is concerned, is equally disposed to be in the
whole surface and in each part of the surface; and, therefore, the
surface being divided, the whiteness is accidentally divided. But a
form which requires variety in the parts, such as a soul, and
specially the soul of perfect animals, is not equally related to the
whole and the parts: hence it is not divided accidentally when the
whole is divided. So therefore quantitative totality cannot be
attributed to the soul, either essentially or accidentally. But the
second kind of totality, which depends on logical and essential
perfection, properly and essentially belongs to forms: and likewise
the virtual totality, because a form is the principle of operation.
Therefore if it be asked whether the whole whiteness is in the whole
surface and in each part thereof, it is necessary to distinguish. If we
mean quantitative totality which whiteness has accidentally, then the
whole whiteness is not in each part of the surface. The same is to be

said of totality of power: since the whiteness which is in the whole
surface moves the sight more than the whiteness which is in a small
part thereof. But if we mean totality of species and essence, then the
whole whiteness is in each part of a surface.
Since, however, the soul has not quantitative totality, neither
essentially, nor accidentally, as we have seen; it is enough to say
that the whole soul is in each part of the body, by totality of
perfection and of essence, but not by totality of power. For it is not in
each part of the body, with regard to each of its powers; but with
regard to sight, it is in the eye; and with regard to hearing, it is in the
ear; and so forth. We must observe, however, that since the soul
requires variety of parts, its relation to the whole is not the same as
its relation to the parts; for to the whole it is compared primarily and
essentially, as to its proper and proportionate perfectible; but to the
parts, secondarily, inasmuch as they are ordained to the whole.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher is speaking there of the
motive power of the soul.
Reply to Objection 2: The soul is the act of an organic body, as of its
primary and proportionate perfectible.
Reply to Objection 3: An animal is that which is composed of a soul
and a whole body, which is the soul's primary and proportionate
perfectible. Thus the soul is not in a part. Whence it does not follow
that a part of an animal is an animal.
Reply to Objection 4: Some of the powers of the soul are in it
according as it exceeds the entire capacity of the body, namely the
intellect and the will; whence these powers are not said to be in any
part of the body. Other powers are common to the soul and body;
wherefore each of these powers need not be wherever the soul is,
but only in that part of the body, which is adapted to the operation of
such a power.
Reply to Objection 5: One part of the body is said to be nobler than
another, on account of the various powers, of which the parts of the
body are the organs. For that part which is the organ of a nobler
power, is a nobler part of the body: as also is that part which serves
the same power in a nobler manner.