SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the precept of fraternal correction

demands that a private admonition should precede
denunciation?
Objection 1: It would seem that the precept of fraternal correction
does not demand that a private admonition should precede
denunciation. For, in works of charity, we should above all follow the
example of God, according to Eph. 5:1,2: "Be ye followers of God, as
most dear children, and walk in love." Now God sometimes punishes
a man for a sin, without previously warning him in secret. Therefore
it seems that there is no need for a private admonition to precede
denunciation.
Objection 2: Further, according to Augustine (De Mendacio xv), we
learn from the deeds of holy men how we ought to understand the
commandments of Holy Writ. Now among the deeds of holy men we
find that a hidden sin is publicly denounced, without any previous
admonition in private. Thus we read (Gn. 37:2) that "Joseph accused
his brethren to his father of a most wicked crime": and (Acts 5:4,9)
that Peter publicly denounced Ananias and Saphira who had secretly
"by fraud kept back the price of the land," without beforehand
admonishing them in private: nor do we read that Our Lord
admonished Judas in secret before denouncing him. Therefore the
precept does not require that secret admonition should precede
public denunciation.
Objection 3: Further, it is a graver matter to accuse than to
denounce. Now one may go to the length of accusing a person
publicly, without previously admonishing him in secret: for it is
decided in the Decretal (Cap. Qualiter, xiv, De Accusationibus) that
"nothing else need precede accusation except inscription."
Therefore it seems that the precept does not require that a secret
admonition should precede public denunciation.
Objection 4: Further, it does not seem probable that the customs
observed by religious in general are contrary to the precepts of
Christ. Now it is customary among religious orders to proclaim this
or that one for a fault, without any previous secret admonition.
Therefore it seems that this admonition is not required by the
precept.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.8.

Objection 5: Further, religious are bound to obey their prelates. Now
a prelate sometimes commands either all in general, or someone in
particular, to tell him if they know of anything that requires
correction. Therefore it would seem that they are bound to tell them
this, even before any secret admonition. Therefore the precept does
not require secret admonition before public denunciation.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xvi, 4) on the words,
"Rebuke him between thee and him alone" (Mt. 18:15): "Aiming at his
amendment, while avoiding his disgrace: since perhaps from shame
he might begin to defend his sin; and him whom you thought to
make a better man, you make worse." Now we are bound by the
precept of charity to beware lest our brother become worse.
Therefore the order of fraternal correction comes under the precept.
I answer that, With regard to the public denunciation of sins it is
necessary to make a distinction: because sins may be either public
or secret. In the case of public sins, a remedy is required not only for
the sinner, that he may become better, but also for others, who know
of his sin, lest they be scandalized. Wherefore such like sins should
be denounced in public, according to the saying of the Apostle (1
Tim. 5:20): "Them that sin reprove before all, that the rest also may
have fear," which is to be understood as referring to public sins, as
Augustine states (De Verb. Dom. xvi, 7).
On the other hand, in the case of secret sins, the words of Our Lord
seem to apply (Mt. 18:15): "If thy brother shall offend against thee,"
etc. For if he offend thee publicly in the presence of others, he no
longer sins against thee alone, but also against others whom he
'disturbs. Since, however, a man's neighbor may take offense even at
his secret sins, it seems that we must make yet a further distinction.
For certain secret sins are hurtful to our neighbor either in his body
or in his soul, as, for instance, when a man plots secretly to betray
his country to its enemies, or when a heretic secretly turns other
men away from the faith. And since he that sins thus in secret, sins
not only against you in particular, but also against others, it is
necessary to take steps to denounce him at once, in order to prevent
him doing such harm, unless by chance you were firmly persuaded
that this evil result would be prevented by admonishing him secretly.
On the other hand there are other sins which injure none but the
sinner, and the person sinned against, either because he alone is
hurt by the sinner, or at least because he alone knows about his sin,
and then our one purpose should be to succor our sinning brother: