Prologue
We next consider the work of the third day. Under this head there are
two points of inquiry:
(1) About the gathering together of the waters;
(2) About the production of plants.

### ARTICLE 1. Whether it was fitting that the gathering together

of the waters should take place, as recorded, on the third day?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was not fitting that the gathering
together of the waters should take place on the third day. For what
was made on the first and second days is expressly said to have
been "made" in the words, "God said: Be light made," and "Let there
be a firmament made."But the third day is contradistinguished from
the first and the second days. Therefore the work of the third day
should have been described as a making not as a gathering together.
Objection 2: Further, the earth hitherto had been completely covered
by the waters, wherefore it was described as "invisible" [Question
66, Article 1, Objection 1]. There was then no place on the earth to
which the waters could be gathered together.
Objection 3: Further, things which are not in continuous contact
cannot occupy one place. But not all the waters are in continuous
contact, and therefore all were not gathered together into one place.
Objection 4: Further, a gathering together is a mode of local
movement. But the waters flow naturally, and take their course
towards the sea. In their case, therefore, a Divine precept of this kind
was unnecessary.
Objection 5: Further, the earth is given its name at its first creation
by the words, "In the beginning God created heaven and earth."
Therefore the imposition of its name on the third day seems to be
recorded without necessity.
On the contrary, The authority of Scripture suffices.
I answer that, It is necessary to reply differently to this question
according to the different interpretations given by Augustine and
other holy writers. In all these works, according to Augustine (Gen.
ad lit. i, 15; iv, 22,34; De Gen. Contr. Manich. i, 5, 7), there is no order
of duration, but only of origin and nature. He says that the formless
spiritual and formless corporeal natures were created first of all, and
that the latter are at first indicated by the words "earth" and "water."
Not that this formlessness preceded formation, in time, but only in
origin; nor yet that one formation preceded another in duration, but

merely in the order of nature. Agreeably, then, to this order, the
formation of the highest or spiritual nature is recorded in the first
place, where it is said that light was made on the first day. For as the
spiritual nature is higher than the corporeal, so the higher bodies are
nobler than the lower. Hence the formation of the higher bodies is
indicated in the second place, by the words, "Let there be made a
firmament," by which is to be understood the impression of celestial
forms on formless matter, that preceded with priority not of time, but
of origin only. But in the third place the impression of elemental
forms on formless matter is recorded, also with a priority of origin
only. Therefore the words, "Let the waters be gathered together, and
the dry land appear," mean that corporeal matter was impressed with
the substantial form of water, so as to have such movement, and
with the substantial form of earth, so as to have such an appearance.
According, however, to other holy writers [Question 66, Article 1] an
order of duration in the works is to be understood, by which is meant
that the formlessness of matter precedes its formation, and one form
another, in order of time. Nevertheless, they do not hold that the
formlessness of matter implies the total absence of form, since
heaven, earth, and water already existed, since these three are
named as already clearly perceptible to the senses; rather they
understand by formlessness the want of due distinction and of
perfect beauty, and in respect of these three Scripture mentions
three kinds of formlessness. Heaven, the highest of them, was
without form so long as "darkness" filled it, because it was the
source of light. The formlessness of water, which holds the middle
place, is called the "deep," because, as Augustine says (Contr.
Faust. xxii, 11), this word signifies the mass of waters without order.
Thirdly, the formless state of the earth is touched upon when the
earth is said to be "void" or "invisible," because it was covered by
the waters. Thus, then, the formation of the highest body took place
on the first day. And since time results from the movement of the
heaven, and is the numerical measure of the movement of the
highest body, from this formation, resulted the distinction of time,
namely, that of night and day. On the second day the intermediate
body, water, was formed, receiving from the firmament a sort of
distinction and order (so that water be understood as including
certain other things, as explained above (Question 68, Article 3)). On
the third day the earth, the lowest body, received its form by the
withdrawal of the waters, and there resulted the distinction in the
lowest body, namely, of land and sea. Hence Scripture, having
clearly expresses the manner in which it received its form by the