be compassionate; but if we begin to make over-curious enquiries, we shall
never be compassionate? What do you mean? Is a man an impostor in order to
get a loaf? If indeed he asks for talents of gold and silver, or costly clothes, or
slaves, or anything else of this sort, one might with good reason call him a
swindler. But if he ask none of these things, but only food and shelter, things
which are suited to a philosophic life, tell me, is this the part of a swindler?
Cease we from this unseasonable fondness for meddling, which is Satanic,
which is destructive.
For indeed, if a man say that he is on the list of the Clergy, or calls himself
a priest, then busy yourself [to enquire], make much ado: since in that case the
communicating without enquiry is not without danger. For the danger is about
matters of importance, for thou dost not give but receive. But if he want food,
make no enquiry.
Enquire, if you will, how Abraham showed hospitality towards all who
came to him. If he had been over-curious about those who fled to him for refuge,
he would not have "entertained angels." [Hebrews 13:2] For perhaps not
thinking them to be angels, he would have thrust them too away with the rest.
But since he used to receive all, he received even angels.
What? Is it from the life of those that receive [your bounty] that God grants
you your reward? Nay [it is] from your own purpose, from your abundant
liberality; from your loving-kindness; from your goodness. Let this be [found],
and you shall attain all good things, which may we all attain, through the grace
and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and
together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever and
world without end. Amen.

## Homily 12 on Hebrews

Hebrews 7:1-3
"For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the most High God, who
met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him: to
whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all; first being by interpretation King
of Righteousness, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of Peace,
without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of
days, nor end of life, but made like the Son of God, abides a Priest continually."
1. Paul wishing to show the difference between the New and Old
[Covenant], scatters it everywhere; and shoots from afar, and noises it abroad,
and prepares beforehand. For at once even from the introduction, he laid down
this saying, that "to them indeed He spoke by prophets, but to us by the Son" [c.
i. 1, 2], and to them "at sundry times and in various manners," but to us through
the Son. Afterwards, having discoursed concerning the Son, who He was and
what He had wrought, and given an exhortation to obey Him, lest we should
suffer the same things as the Jews; and having said that He is "High Priest after
the order of Melchisedec" [Hebrews 6:20], and having oftentimes wished to
enter into [the subject of] this difference, and having used much preparatory
management; and having rebuked them as weak, and again soothed and restored
them to confidence; then at last he introduces the discussion on the difference [of
the two dispensations] to ears in their full vigor. For he who is depressed in
spirits would not be a ready hearer. And that you may understand this, hear the
Scripture saying, "They hearkened not to Moses for anguish of spirit." [Exodus
6:9] Therefore having first cleared away their despondency by many
considerations, some fearful, some more gentle, he then from this point enters
upon the discussion of the difference [of the dispensations].