judgment seat. For he who has once been cast in there, must remain for ever;
there is no one to deliver him from his punishment, not father, not mother, not
brother. And this the prophets themselves declared aloud; one saying, "Brother
delivers not brother. Shall man deliver?" [Psalm 49:7, Septuagint] And Ezekiel
has declared somewhat more than this, saying, "Though Noah, Daniel, and Job
were in it, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters." [Ezekiel 14:16] For
one defense only, that through works, is there, and he who is deprived of that
cannot be saved by any other means. Revolving these things, then, and reflecting
upon them continually, let us cleanse our life and make it lustrous, that we may
see the Lord with boldness, and obtain the promised good things; through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to
the Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 13 on the Gospel of John
John 1:15
"John bears witness of Him, and cries, saying, This is He of whom I spoke,
saying, He that comes after me is preferred before me, for He was before me."
1. Do we then run and labor in vain? Are we sowing upon the rocks? Does
the seed fall upon the rocks? Does the seed fall without our knowing it by the
wayside, and among thorns? I am greatly troubled and fear, lest our husbandry
be unprofitable; not as though I shall be a loser as well as you, touching the
reward of this labor. For it is not with those who teach as it is with husbandmen.
Oftentimes the husbandman after his year's toil, his hard work and sweat, if the
earth produce no suitable return for his pains, will be able to find comfort for his
labors from none else, but returns ashamed and downcast from his barn to his
dwelling, his wife and children, unable to require of any man a reward for his
lengthened toil. But in our case there is nothing like this. For even though the
soil which we cultivate bring forth no fruit, if we have shown all industry, the
Lord of it and of us will not suffer us to depart with disappointed hopes, but will
give us a recompense; for, says St. Paul, "Every man shall receive his own
reward according to his own labor" [1 Corinthians 3:8], not according to the
event of things. And that it is so, hearken: "And You," he says, "Son of man,
testify unto this people, if they will hear, and if they will understand." [Ezekiel
2:5, not from Septuagint] And Ezekiel says, "If the watchman give warning what
it behooves to flee from, and what to choose, he has delivered his own soul,
although there be none that will take heed." [Ezekiel 3:18, and 33:9; not quoted
from Septuagint] Yet although we have this strong consolation, and are confident
of the recompense that shall be made us, still when we see that the work in you
does not go forward, our state is not better than the state of those husbandmen