What then? When he heard, "Adam, where are you?" [Genesis 3:9], he said, "I
heard Your voice, and I was afraid, because I am naked, and I hid myself."
[Genesis 3:10] It is a great good to acknowledge our sins, and to bear them in
mind continually. Nothing so effectually cures a fault, as a continual
remembrance of it. Nothing makes a man so slow to wickedness.
6. I know that conscience starts back, and endures not to be scourged by the
remembrance of evil deeds; but hold tight your soul and place a muzzle on it.
For like an ill-broken horse, so it bears impatiently [what is put upon it], and is
unwilling to persuade itself that it has sinned: but all this is the work of Satan.
But let us persuade it that it has sinned; let us persuade it that it has sinned, that
it may also repent, in order that having repented it may escape torment. How do
you think to obtain pardon for your sins, tell me, when you have not yet
confessed them? Assuredly he is worthy of compassion and kindness who has
sinned. But thou who hast not yet persuaded yourself [that you have sinned],
how do you think to be pitied, when you are thus without shame for some
things?
Let us persuade ourselves that we have sinned. Let us say it not with the
tongue only, but also with the mind. Let us not call ourselves sinners, but also
count over our sins, going over them each specifically. I do not say to you, Make
a parade of yourself, nor accuse yourself before others: but be persuaded by the
prophet when he says, "Reveal your way unto the Lord." [Psalm 37:5] Confess
these things before God. Confess before the Judge your sins with prayer; if not
with tongue, yet in memory, and be worthy of mercy.
If you keep your sins continually in remembrance, you will never bear in
mind the wrongs of your neighbor. I do not say, if you are persuaded that you are
yourself a sinner; this does not avail so to humble the soul, as sins themselves
[taken] by themselves, and examined specifically. You will have no
remembrance of wrongs [done you], if you have these things continually in
remembrance; you will feel no anger, you will not revile, you will have no high
thoughts, you will not fall again into the same [sins], you will be more earnest

towards good things.
7. Do you see how many excellent [effects] are produced from the
remembrance of our sins? Let us then write them in our minds. I know that the
soul does not endure a recollection which is so bitter: but let us constrain and
force it. It is better that it should be gnawed with the remembrance now, than at
that time with vengeance.
Now, if you remember them, and continually present them before God (see
p. 448), and pray for them, you will speedily blot them out; but if you forget
them now, you will then be reminded of them even against your will, when they
are brought out publicly before the whole world, displayed before all, both
friends and enemies, and Angels. For surely He did not say to David only, "What
you did secretly, I will make manifest to" [2 Samuel 12:12] all, but even to us all.
You were afraid of men (he said) and respected them more than God; and God
seeing you, you cared not, but were ashamed before men. For it says, "the eyes
of men, this is their fear." Therefore you shall suffer punishment in that very
point; for I will reprove you, setting your sins before the eyes of all. For that this
is true, and that in that day the sins of us all are [to be] publicly displayed, unless
we now do them away by continual remembrance, hear how cruelty and
inhumanity are publicly exposed, "I was an hungered" (He says) "and you gave
Me no meat." [Matthew 25:42] When are these things said? Is it in a corner? Is it
in a secret place? By no means. When then? "When the Son of Man shall come in
His glory" [Matthew 25:31-32], and "all the nations" are gathered together,
when He has separated the one from the other, then will He speak in the
audience of all, and will "set" them "on His right hand" and "on" His "left"
[Matthew 25:33]: "I was an hungered and you gave Me no meat."
See again the five virgins also, hearing before all, "I know you not."
[Matthew 25:12] For the five and five do not set forth the number of five only,
but those virgins who are wicked and cruel and inhuman, and those who are not
such. So also he that buried his one talent, heard before all, even of those who
had brought the five and the two, "You wicked and slothful servant." [Matthew