2. And observe how after having said so many things before, he again sets
down yet other grounds of excuse, saying further thus,

2 Corinthians 11:18
"Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also."
What is, "after the flesh?" Of things external, of high birth, of wealth, of
wisdom, of being circumcised, of Hebrew ancestry, of popular renown. And
behold wisdom. He sets down those things which he shows to be nothings , and
then, folly also. For if to glory in what are really good things be folly, much
more is it so [to glory in] those that are nothing. And this is what he calls, "not
after the Lord." For it is no advantage to be a Hebrew, or any such like things
soever. 'Think not, therefore, that I set these down as a virtue; no; but because
those men boast I also am compelled to institute my comparison on these points.'
Which he does also in another place, saying, "If any man thinks that he may trust
in the flesh, I more:" [Philippians 3:4] and there, it is on their account that
trusted in this. Just as if one who had come of an illustrious race but had chosen
a philosophic life, should see others priding themselves greatly on being wellborn; and being desirious of taking down their vanity, should be compelled to
speak of his own distinction; not to adorn himself, but to humble them; so, truly,
does Paul also do. Then leaving those, he empties all his censure upon the
Corinthians, saying,

2 Corinthians 11:19
"For you bear with the foolish gladly." 'So that you are to blame for this,
and more than they. For if you had not borne with them, and so far as it lay in
them received damage, I would not have spoken a word; but I do it out of a
tender care for your salvation, and in condescension. And behold, how he
accompanies even his censure with praise. For having said, "ye bear with the
foolish gladly;" he added,
"Being wise yourselves." For it was a sign of folly to glory, and on such
matters. And yet it behooved to rebuke them, and say, 'Do not bear with the
foolish;' he does this, however, at greater advantage. For in that case he would
have seemed to rebuke them because he himself was destitute of these
advantages; but now having showed himself to be their superior even in these
points, and to esteem them to be nothing, he corrects them with greater effect. At
present, however, before entering upon his own praises and the comparison, he
also reproaches the Corinthians with their great slavishness, because they were
extravagantly submissive to them. And observe how he ridicules them.

2 Corinthians 11:20
"For you bear with a man," he says, "if he devour you."
How then did you say, "that wherein they glory, they may be found even as
we?" [2 Corinthians 11:12] Do you see that he shows that they did take of them,
and not simply take, but even in excess: for the term "devour" plainly shows this,
"If a man bring you into bondage." 'You have given away both your money,'
he says, 'and your persons, and your freedom. For this is more than taking of
you; to be masters not only of your money, but of yourselves also.' And he
makes this plain even before, where he says, "If others partake of this right over
you, do not we much more?" [1 Corinthians 9:12] Then he adds what is more
severe, saying,
"If a man exalt himself." 'For neither is your slavery of a moderate sort, nor
are your masters gentle, but burdensome and odious.'
"If a man smite you on the face." Do you see again a further stretch of
tyranny? He said this, not meaning that they were stricken on the face, but that
they spat upon and dishonored them; wherefore he added,