SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.4.

opposite of omitting it, is a special part of justice, distinct from
avoiding evil, to which transgression is opposed, so too is omission
distinct from transgression.
Reply to Objection 2: Omission is not original but actual sin, not as
though it had some act essential to it, but for as much as the
negation of an act is reduced to the genus of act, and in this sense
non-action is a kind of action, as stated above (FS, Question 71,
Article 6, ad 1).
Reply to Objection 2: Omission, as stated above, is only of such
good as is due and to which one is bound. Now no man is bound to
the impossible: wherefore no man sins by omission, if he does not
do what he cannot. Accordingly she who is violated after vowing
virginity, is guilty of an omission, not through not having virginity,
but through not repenting of her past sin, or through not doing what
she can to fulfil her vow by observing continence. Again a priest is
not bound to say Mass, except he have a suitable opportunity, and if
this be lacking, there is no omission. And in like manner, a person is
bound to restitution, supposing he has the wherewithal; if he has not
and cannot have it, he is not guilty of an omission, provided he does
what he can. The same applies to other similar cases.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as the sin of transgression is opposed to
negative precepts which regard the avoidance of evil, so the sin of
omission is opposed to affirmative precepts, which regard the doing
of good. Now affirmative precepts bind not for always, but for a fixed
time, and at that time the sin of omission begins. But it may happen
that then one is unable to do what one ought, and if this inability is
without any fault on his part, he does not omit his duty, as stated
above (ad 2; FS, Question 71, Article 5). On the other hand if this
inability is due to some previous fault of his (for instance, if a man
gets drunk at night, and cannot get up for matins, as he ought to),
some say that the sin of omission begins when he engages in an
action that is illicit and incompatible with the act to which he is
bound. But this does not seem to be true, for supposing one were to
rouse him by violence and that he went to matins, he would not omit
to go, so that, evidently, the previous drunkenness was not an
omission, but the cause of an omission. Consequently, we must say
that the omission begins to be imputed to him as a sin, when the
time comes for the action; and yet this is on account of a preceding
cause by reason of which the subsequent omission becomes
voluntary.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.78, C.4.

Reply to Objection 4: Omission is directly opposed to justice, as
stated above; because it is a non-fulfilment of a good of virtue, but
only under the aspect of due, which pertains to justice. Now more is
required for an act to be virtuous and meritorious than for it to be
sinful and demeritorious, because "good results from an entire
cause, whereas evil arises from each single defect" [Dionysius, De
Div. Nom. iv]. Wherefore the merit of justice requires an act, whereas
an omission does not.