do we wallow in the mire? How long do we set sluggards and belly-gods for our
judges? They can prove dicers well, drunkards, those who live for the belly, but
as for virtue and vice, they cannot imagine so much as a dream. If any one taunt
you because you have not skill to draw the channels of the watercourses, you
will not think it any terrible thing, but wilt even laugh at him who objects to you
ignorance of this kind; and do you, when you desire to practice virtue, appoint as
judges those who know nothing of it? On this account we never reach that art.
We commit our case not to the practiced, but to the unlearned, and they judge not
according to the rules of art, but according to their own ignorance. Wherefore, I
exhort you, let us despise the many; or rather let us desire neither praises, nor
possessions, nor wealth, nor deem poverty any evil. For poverty is to us a
teacher of prudence, and endurance, and all true wisdom. Thus Lazarus lived in
poverty, and received a crown; Jacob desired to get bread only; and Joseph was
in the extreme of poverty, being not merely a slave, but also a prisoner; and on
this account we admire him the more, and we do not so much praise him when
he distributed the grain, as when he dwelt in the dungeon: not when he wore the
diadem, but when the chain; not when he sat upon the throne, but when he was
plotted against and sold. Considering then all these things, and the crowns
twined for us after the conflicts, let us admire not wealth, and honor, and luxury,
and power, but poverty, and the chain, and bonds, and endurance in the cause of
virtue. For the end of those things is full of troubles and confusion, and their lot
is bound up with this present life; but the fruit of these, heaven, and the good
things in the heavens, which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard; which may we
all obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory for ever. Amen.

Homily 77 on the Gospel of John
John 15:11-12
"These things have I spoken unto you, that My joy might remain in you, and that
your joy might be full. This is My commandment, that you love one another, as I
have loved you."
1. All things good then have their reward, when they arrive at their proper
end, but if they be cut off midway, shipwreck ensues. And as a vessel of
immense burden, if it reach not the harbor in time, but founder in the midst of
the sea, gains nothing from the length of the voyage, but even makes the
calamity greater, in proportion as it has endured more toils; so are those souls
which fall back when near the end of their labors, and faint in the midst of the
struggle. Wherefore Paul said, that glory, and honor, and peace, should meet
those who ran their course with patient continuance in well-doing. A thing which
Christ now effects in the case of the disciples. [Romans 2:7] For since He had
accepted them, and they rejoiced in Him, and then the sudden coming of the
Passion and His sad words were likely to cut short their pleasure; after having
conversed with them sufficiently to soothe them, He adds, "These things have I
spoken unto you, that My joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be
fulfilled"; that is, "that you might not be separated from Me, that you might not
cut short your course. You were rejoicing in Me, and you were rejoicing
exceedingly, but despondency has fallen upon you. This then I remove, that joy
may come at the last, showing that your present circumstances are fit cause, not
for pain, but for pleasure. I saw you offended; I despised you not; I said not,
'Why do ye not continue noble?' But I spoke to you words which brought comfort
with them. And so I wish ever to keep you in the same love. You have heard
concerning a kingdom, you rejoiced. In order therefore that your joy might be
fulfilled, I have spoken these things unto you." But "this is the commandment,