FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.9.

Consequently such affection or delectation in respect of the thought
of fornication is not a mortal sin in virtue of its genus, but is
sometimes a venial sin and sometimes no sin at all: wherefore
neither is it a mortal sin to consent to such a thought. In this sense
the first opinion is true.
But that a man in thinking of fornication takes pleasure in the act
thought of, is due to his desire being inclined to this act. Wherefore
the fact that a man consents to such a delectation, amounts to
nothing less than a consent to the inclination of his appetite to
fornication: for no man takes pleasure except in that which is in
conformity with his appetite. Now it is a mortal sin, if a man
deliberately chooses that his appetite be conformed to what is in
itself a mortal sin. Wherefore such a consent to delectation in a
mortal sin, is itself a mortal sin, as the second opinion maintains.
Reply to Objection 1: Consent to delectation may be not only in the
lower reason, but also in the higher reason, as stated above (Article
7). Nevertheless the lower reason may turn away from the eternal
types, for, though it is not intent on them, as regulating according to
them, which is proper to the higher reason, yet, it is intent on them,
as being regulated according to them: and by turning from them in
this sense, it may sin mortally; since even the acts of the lower
powers and of the external members may be mortal sins, in so far as
the direction of the higher reason fails in directing them according to
the eternal types.
Reply to Objection 2: Consent to a sin that is venial in its genus, is
itself a venial sin, and accordingly one may conclude that the
consent to take pleasure in a useless thought about fornication, is a
venial sin. But delectation in the act itself of fornication is, in its
genus, a mortal sin: and that it be a venial sin before the consent is
given, is accidental, viz. on account of the incompleteness of the act:
which incompleteness ceases when the deliberate consent has been
given, so that therefore it has its complete nature and is a mortal sin.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument considers the delectation which
has the thought for its object.
Reply to Objection 4: The delectation which has an external act for
its object, cannot be without complacency in the external act as
such, even though there be no decision to fulfil it, on account of the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.9.

prohibition of some higher authority: wherefore the act is inordinate,
and consequently the delectation will be inordinate also.
Reply to Objection 5: The consent to delectation, resulting from
complacency in an act of murder thought of, is a mortal sin also: but
not the consent to delectation resulting from complacency in the
thought of murder.
Reply to Objection 6: The Lord's Prayer is to be said in order that we
may be preserved not only from venial sin, but also from mortal sin.