service to you perpetually, and with it will bestow also the things of this life. For
if He be made the joint heir of your children, He does lighten their orphanage for
them, do away with plots against them, beat off insults, stop the mouths of
pettifoggers. And if they themselves be unable to stand up for their
bequeathments, He will Himself stand up, and not let them be broken through.
But if He do even allow this, then He makes up of Himself all that was ordered
in the will with still greater liberality, because He has been but mentioned in it.
Leave Him then your heir. For it is to Him that you are upon the point of going.
He will be your Judge Himself in the trial for all that has been done here. But
there are some so miserable and pinched, that though they have no children, still
they have not the courage to do this, but approve of giving that they have to
hangers on, and to flatterers, and to this person and to that, sooner than to Christ,
Who has done them so great benefits. And what can be more unreasonable than
this conduct? For if one were to compare men of this cast to asses, aye, or to
stones, one shall not still be saying anything tantamount to their
unreasonableness and senselessness. Nor could one find a similitude to put
before you their madness and dementedness. For what pardon shall they obtain
for not having fed Him in their lifetime, who, even when they are on the point of
departing to Him, have not the inclination to give Him but a trifle out of those
goods, of which they are no longer the owners, but are of such an inimical and
hostile disposition, as not even to give Him a share in what is useless to
themselves? Do you not know how many of mankind have not even been
counted worthy to obtain an end of this kind, but have been snatched off
suddenly? But you does God empower to give orders to your kindred, and to
speak with them about your property, and set all that is in your house in order.
What defence then will you have to set up, when even after receiving this favor
from Him, you have treacherously given up the benefit, and art standing as it
were in diametrical opposition to your forefathers in the faith? For they even in
their lifetime sold all, and brought it to the Apostle's feet. But you, even at your
death, dost not give any share to them that need. What is the better part, and

gives one much boldness, is to remedy poverty in one's lifetime. But if you have
not been minded to do this, at all events do upon your death-bed some noble act.
For this is not what a strong love for Christ would do, yet still it is an act of love.
For if you will not have the high place with the Lambs, still even to be after them
at all is no light thing, and so not to be placed with the goats nor on the left hand.
But if you will not do even this, what plea is to rescue you, when neither the fear
of death nor your money having become henceforth of no use to you, nor the
leaving of safety behind you to your children, nor the laying up of much pardon
there against the time to come, will make you merciful to man? Wherefore I
advise, as the best thing, that in your lifetime you give the larger half of your
goods to the poor. But if there be any of so narrow a soul as not to have the heart
to do so, at all events let them by necessity become merciful. For when you were
living as if there were no death, then you clung close to your goods. But now
since you have learned that you are to die, at least now give over your opinion,
and deliberate about your affairs as one that must die. Or rather as one that ought
to enjoy immortal life for evermore. For if what I am going to say be distasteful,
and big with horror, still it must be said. Reckon with your slaves the Lord. Are
you giving your slaves liberty? Give Christ liberty from famine, from distress,
from imprisonment, from nakedness. Are you horrified at the words? Is it not
then more horrible when thou dost not even thus much? And here the word
makes your blood curdle. But when you are gone to that world, and hast to hear
things far more grievous than these, and see the tortures which are incurable,
what will you say? To whom will you flee for refuge? Whom will you call to
your alliance and assistance? Will it be Abraham? He will not hearken to you. Or
those virgins? They will not give you of their oil. Your father then or your
grandfather? But none even of these, if he be ever so holy, will have it in his
power to reverse that sentence. Weighing then all these things, to Him Who
alone is Lord to blot out the bill against you and to quench that flame, to Him
make prayer and supplication, and propitiate Him, by now feeding Him and
clothing Him continually: that in this world you may depart with a good hope,