whether the Father also by Himself is wise, and is Himself His own
wisdom itself; or whether He is wise in the same way as He speaks. For
He speaks by the Word which He begat, not by the word which is uttered,
and sounds, and passes away, but by the Word which was with God, and
the Word was God, and all things were made by Him:2 by the Word
which is equal to Himself, by whom He always and unchangeably utters
Himself. For He is not Himself the Word, as He is not the Son nor the
image. But in speaking (putting aside those words of God in time which
are produced in the creature, for they sound and pass away,—in speaking
then) by that co-eternal Word, He is not understood singly, but with that
Word itself, without whom certainly He does not speak. Is He then in
such way wise as He is one who speaks, so as to be in such way wisdom,
as He is the Word, and so that to be the Word is to be wisdom, that is,
also to be power, so that power and wisdom and the Word may be the
same, and be so called relatively as the Son and the image: and that the
Father is not singly powerful or wise, but together with the power and
wisdom itself which He begat (genuit); just as He is not singly one who
speaks, but by that Word and together with that Word which He begat;
and in like way great by that and together with that greatness, which He
begat? And if He is not great by one thing, and God by another, but great
by that whereby He is God, because it is not one thing to Him to be great
and another to be God; it follows that neither is He God singly, but by
that and together with that deity (deitas) which He begat; so that the Son
is the deity of the Father, as He is the wisdom and power of the Father,
and as He is the Word and image of the Father. And because it is not one
thing to Him to be, another to be God, the Son is also the essence of the
Father, as He is His Word and image. And hence also—except that He is
the Father —the Father is not anything unless because
He has the Son; so that not only that which is meant by Father (which it
is manifest He is not called relatively to Himself but to the Son, and
therefore is the Father because He has the Son), but that which He is in
respect to His own substance is so called, because He begat His own
essence. For as He is great, only with that greatness which He begat, so
also He is, only with that essence which He begat; because it is not one
thing to Him to be, and another to be great. Is He therefore the Father of
His own essence, in the same way as He is the Father of His own
greatness, as He is the Father of His own power and wisdom? since His

greatness is the same as His power, and His essence the same as His
greatness.
2. This discussion has arisen from that which is written, that "Christ is
the power of God, and the wisdom of God." Wherefore our discourse is
compressed into these narrow limits, while we desire to speak things
unspeakable; that either we must say that Christ is not the power of God
and the wisdom of God, and so shamelessly and impiously resist the
apostle; or we must acknowledge that Christ is indeed the power of God
and the wisdom of God, but that His Father is not the Father of His own
power and wisdom, which is not less impious; for so neither will He be
the Father of Christ, because Christ is the power of God and the wisdom
of God; or that the Father is not powerful with His own power, or wise
with His own wisdom: and who shall dare to say this? Or yet, again, that
we must understand, that in the Father it is one thing to be, another thing
to be wise, so that He is not by that by which He is wise: a thing usually
understood of the soul, which is at some times unwise, at others wise; as
being by nature changeable, and not absolutely and perfectly simple. Or,
again, that the Father is not anything in respect to His own substance;
and that not only that He is the Father, but that He is, is said relatively to
the Son. How then can the Son be of the same essence as the Father,
seeing that the Father, in respect to Himself, is neither His own essence,
nor is at all in respect to Himself, but even His essence is in relation to
the Son? But, on the contrary, much more is He of one and the same
essence, since the Father and Son are one and the same essence; seeing
that the Father has His being itself not in respect to Himself, but to the
Son, which essence He begat, and by which essence He is whatever He is.
Therefore neither  is in respect to Himself alone; and both exist
relatively the one to the other. Or is the Father alone not called Father of
himself, but whatever He is called, is called relatively to the Son, but the
Son is predicated of in reference to Himself? And if it be so, what is
predicated of Him in reference to Himself? Is it His essence itself? But
the Son is the essence of the Father, as He is the power and wisdom of the
Father, as He is the Word of the Father, and the image of the Father. Or if
the Son is called essence in reference to Himself, but the Father is not
essence, but the begetter of the essence, and is not in respect to Himself,
but is by that very essence which He begat; as He is great by that