## Homily 1 on Eutropius

On Eutropius, the eunuch, Patrician and Consul.
1. "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity"— it is always seasonable to utter this
but more especially at the present time. Where are now the brilliant surroundings
of your consulship? Where are the gleaming torches? Where is the dancing, and
the noise of dancers' feet, and the banquets and the festivals? Where are the
garlands and the curtains of the theatre? Where is the applause which greeted
you in the city, where the acclamation in the hippodrome and the flatteries of
spectators? They are gone— all gone: a wind has blown upon the tree shattering
down all its leaves, and showing it to us quite bare, and shaken from its very
root; for so great has been the violence of the blast, that it has given a shock to
all these fibres of the tree and threatens to tear it up from the roots. Where now
are your feigned friends? Where are your drinking parties, and your suppers?
Where is the swarm of parasites, and the wine which used to be poured forth all
day long, and the manifold dainties invented by your cooks? Where are they who
courted your power and did and said everything to win your favour? They were
all mere visions of the night, and dreams which have vanished with the dawn of
day: they were spring flowers, and when the spring was over they all withered:
they were a shadow which has passed away— they were a smoke which has
dispersed, bubbles which have burst, cobwebs which have been rent in pieces.
Therefore we chant continually this spiritual song— "Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity." For this saying ought to be continually written on our walls, and
garments, in the market place, and in the house, on the streets, and on the doors
and entrances, and above all on the conscience of each one, and to be a perpetual
theme for meditation. And inasmuch as deceitful things, and maskings and
pretence seem to many to be realities it behooves each one every day both at
supper and at breakfast, and in social assemblies to say to his neighbour and to

hear his neighbour say in return "vanity of vanities, all is vanity." Was I not
continually telling you that wealth was a runaway? But you would not heed me.
Did I not tell you that it was an unthankful servant? But you would not be
persuaded. Behold actual experience has now proved that it is not only a
runaway, and ungrateful servant, but also a murderous one, for it is this which
has caused you now to fear and tremble. Did I not say to you when you
continually rebuked me for speaking the truth, "I love you better than they do
who flatter you?" "I who reprove you care more for you than they who pay you
court?" Did I not add to these words by saying that the wounds of friends were
more to be relied upon than the voluntary kisses of enemies. [Proverbs 27:6] If
you had submitted to my wounds their kisses would not have wrought you this
destruction: for my wounds work health, but their kisses have produced an
incurable disease. Where are now your cup-bearers, where are they who cleared
the way for you in the market place, and sounded your praises endlessly in the
ears of all? They have fled, they have disowned your friendship, they are
providing for their own safety by means of your distress. But I do not act thus,
nay in your misfortune I do not abandon you, and now when you are fallen I
protect and tend you. And the Church which you treated as an enemy has opened
her bosom and received you into it; whereas the theatres which you courted, and
about which you were oftentimes indignant with me have betrayed and ruined
you. And yet I never ceased saying to you "why doest thou these things?" "you
are exasperating the Church, and casting yourself down headlong," yet you
hurried away from all my warnings. And now the hippodromes, having
exhausted your wealth, have whetted the sword against you, but the Church
which experienced your untimely wrath is hurrying in every direction, in her
desire to pluck you out of the net.
2. And I say these things now not as trampling upon one who is prostrate,
but from a desire to make those who are still standing more secure; not by way
of irritating the sores of one who has been wounded, but rather to preserve those
who have not yet been wounded in sound health; not by way of sinking one who