that natural love, which is merely natural, in so far as it belongs to a
nature which has not likewise the perfection of either sense or
intellect.
Reply to Objection 2: All things in the world are moved to act by
something else except the First Agent, Who acts in such a manner
that He is in no way moved to act by another; and in Whom nature
and will are the same. So there is nothing unfitting in an angel being
moved to act in so far as such natural inclination is implanted in him
by the Author of his nature. Yet he is not so moved to act that he
does not act himself, because he has free-will.
Reply to Objection 3: As natural knowledge is always true, so is
natural love well regulated; because natural love is nothing else than
the inclination implanted in nature by its Author. To say that a
natural inclination is not well regulated, is to derogate from the
Author of nature. Yet the rectitude of natural love is different from
the rectitude of charity and virtue: because the one rectitude
perfects the other; even so the truth of natural knowledge is of one
kind, and the truth of infused or acquired knowledge is of another.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there is love of choice in the angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no love of choice in the
angels. For love of choice appears to be rational love; since choice
follows counsel, which lies in inquiry, as stated in Ethic. iii, 3. Now
rational love is contrasted with intellectual, which is proper to
angels, as is said (Div. Nom. iv). Therefore there is no love of choice
in the angels.
Objection 2: Further, the angels have only natural knowledge
besides such as is infused: since they do not proceed from
principles to acquire the knowledge of conclusions. Hence they are
disposed to everything they can know, as our intellect is disposed
towards first principles, which it can know naturally. Now love
follows knowledge, as has been already stated (Article 1; Question
16, Article 1). Consequently, besides their infused love, there is only
natural love in the angels. Therefore there is no love of choice in
them.
On the contrary, We neither merit nor demerit by our natural acts.
But by their love the angels merit or demerit. Therefore there is love
of choice in them.
I answer that, There exists in the angels a natural love, and a love of
choice. Their natural love is the principle of their love of choice;
because, what belongs to that which precedes, has always the
nature of a principle. Wherefore, since nature is first in everything,
what belongs to nature must be a principle in everything.
This is clearly evident in man, with respect to both his intellect and
his will. For the intellect knows principles naturally; and from such
knowledge in man comes the knowledge of conclusions, which are
known by him not naturally, but by discovery, or by teaching. In like
manner, the end acts in the will in the same way as the principle
does in the intellect, as is laid down in Phys. ii, text. 89.
Consequently the will tends naturally to its last end; for every man
naturally wills happiness: and all other desires are caused by this
natural desire; since whatever a man wills he wills on account of the
end. Therefore the love of that good, which a man naturally wills as
an end, is his natural love; but the love which comes of this, which is
of something loved for the end's sake, is the love of choice.