11:6). Now the first example of faith was given to men in the person
of Abraham, who was the first to sever himself from the body of
unbelievers, and to receive a special sign of faith: for which reason
"the place of rest given to men after death is called Abraham's
bosom," as Augustine declares (Gen. ad lit. xii). But the souls of the
saints have not at all times had the same rest after death; because,
since Christ's coming they have had complete rest through enjoying
the vision of God, whereas before Christ's coming they had rest
through being exempt from punishment, but their desire was not set
at rest by their attaining their end. Consequently the state of the
saints before Christ's coming may be considered both as regards the
rest it afforded, and thus it is called Abraham's bosom, and as
regards its lack of rest, and thus it is called the limbo of hell.
Accordingly, before Christ's coming the limbo of hell and Abraham's
bosom were one place accidentally and not essentially: and
consequently, nothing prevents Abraham's bosom from being after
Christ's coming, and from being altogether distinct from limbo, since
things that are one accidentally may be parted from one another.
Reply to Objection 1: The state of the holy Fathers as regards what
was good in it was called Abraham's bosom, but as regards its
deficiencies it was called hell. Accordingly, neither is Abraham's
bosom taken in an unfavorable sense nor hell in a favorable sense,
although in a way they are one.
Reply to Objection 2: The place of rest of the holy Fathers was called
Abraham's bosom before as well as after Christ's coming, but in
different ways. For since before Christ's coming the saints' rest had
a lack of rest attached to it, it was called both hell and Abraham's
bosom, wherefore God was not seen there. But since after the
coming of Christ the saints' rest is complete through their seeing
God, this rest is called Abraham's bosom, but not hell by any means.
It is to this bosom of Abraham that the Church prays for the faithful
to be brought.
Hence the Reply to the Third Objection is evident: and the same
meaning applies to a gloss on Lk. 16:22, "It came to pass that the
beggar died," etc., which says: "Abraham's bosom is the rest of the
blessed poor, whose is the kingdom of heaven."

### ARTICLE 5. Whether limbo is the same as the hell of the

damned?
Objection 1: It would seem that the limbo of hell is the same as the
hell of the damned. For Christ is said to have "bitten" [Osee 13:14]
hell, but not to have swallowed it, because He took some from
thence but not all. Now He would not be said to have "bitten" hell if
those whom He set free were not part of the multitude shut up in hell.
Therefore since those whom He set free were shut up in hell, the
same were shut up in limbo and in hell. Therefore limbo is either the
same as hell, or is a part of hell.
Objection 2: Further, in the Creed Christ is said to have descended
into hell. But he did not descend save to the limbo of the Fathers.
Therefore the limbo of the Fathers is the same as hell.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Job 17:16): "All that I have shall go
down into the deepest hell." Now since Job was a holy and just man,
he went down to limbo. Therefore limbo is the same as the deepest
hell.
On the contrary, In hell there is no redemption [Office of the Dead,
Resp. vii]. But the saints were redeemed from limbo. Therefore limbo
is not the same as hell.
Further, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii): "I do not see how we can
believe that the rest which Lazarus received was in hell." Now the
soul of Lazarus went down into limbo. Therefore limbo is not the
same as hell.
I answer that, The abodes of souls after death may be distinguished
in two ways; either as to their situation, or as to the quality of the
places, inasmuch as souls are punished or rewarded in certain
places. Accordingly if we consider the limbo of the Fathers and hell
in respect of the aforesaid quality of the places, there is no doubt
that they are distinct, both because in hell there is sensible
punishment, which was not in the limbo of the Fathers, and because
in hell there is eternal punishment, whereas the saints were detained
but temporally in the limbo of the Fathers. On the other hand, if we
consider them as to the situation of the place, it is probable that hell
and limbo are the same place, or that they are continuous as it were