to have hypostasis and not person, it would be necessary to abstract
the rationality from the nature, but not the property from the person.
Reply to Objection 1: Person does not add to hypostasis a
distinguishing property absolutely, but a distinguishing property of
dignity, all of which must be taken as the difference. Now, this
distinguishing property is one of dignity precisely because it is
understood as subsisting in a rational nature. Hence, if the
distinguishing property be removed from the person, the hypostasis
no longer remains; whereas it would remain were the rationality of
the nature removed; for both person and hypostasis are individual
substances. Consequently, in God the distinguishing relation
belongs essentially to both.
Reply to Objection 2: By paternity the Father is not only Father, but
is a person, and is "someone," or a hypostasis. It does not follow,
however, that the Son is not "someone" or a hypostasis; just as it
does not follow that He is not a person.
Reply to Objection 3: Augustine does not mean to say that the
hypostasis of the Father would remain as unbegotten, if His paternity
were removed, as if innascibility constituted and distinguished the
hypostasis of the Father; for this would be impossible, since "being
unbegotten" says nothing positive and is only a negation, as he
himself says. But he speaks in a general sense, forasmuch as not
every unbegotten being is the Father. So, if paternity be removed,
the hypostasis of the Father does not remain in God, as
distinguished from the other persons, but only as distinguished from
creatures; as the Jews understand it.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the properties presuppose the notional

acts?
Objection 1: It would seem that the notional acts are understood
before the properties. For the Master of the Sentences says (Sent. i,
D, xxvii) that "the Father always is, because He is ever begetting the
Son." So it seems that generation precedes paternity in the order of
intelligence.
Objection 2: Further, in the order of intelligence every relation
presupposes that on which it is founded; as equality presupposes
quantity. But paternity is a relation founded on the action of
generation. Therefore paternity presupposes generation.
Objection 3: Further, active generation is to paternity as nativity is to
filiation. But filiation presupposes nativity; for the Son is so called
because He is born. Therefore paternity also presupposes
generation.
On the contrary, Generation is the operation of the person of the
Father. But paternity constitutes the person of the Father. Therefore
in the order of intelligence, paternity is prior to generation.
I answer that, According to the opinion that the properties do not
distinguish and constitute the hypostases in God, but only manifest
them as already distinct and constituted, we must absolutely say
that the relations in our mode of understanding follow upon the
notional acts, so that we can say, without qualifying the phrase, that
"because He begets, He is the Father." A distinction, however, is
needed if we suppose that the relations distinguish and constitute
the divine hypostases. For origin has in God an active and passive
signification---active, as generation is attributed to the Father, and
spiration, taken for the notional act, is attributed to the Father and
the Son; passive, as nativity is attributed to the Son, and procession
to the Holy Ghost. For, in the order of intelligence, origin, in the
passive sense, simply precedes the personal properties of the
person proceeding; because origin, as passively understood,
signifies the way to a person constituted by the property. Likewise,
origin signified actively is prior in the order of intelligence to the nonpersonal relation of the person originating; as the notional act of
spiration precedes, in the order of intelligence, the unnamed relative