Hebrews 7:4
4. "Now consider" (says he) "how great this man is to whom even the
Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils." Up to this point he has been
applying the type: henceforward he boldly shows him [Melchisedec] to be more
glorious than the Jewish realities. But if he who bears a type of Christ is so much
better not merely than the priests, but even than the forefather himself of the
priests, what should one say of the reality? You see how super-abundantly he
shows the superiority.
"Now consider" (he says) "how great this man is to whom even the
Patriarch Abraham gave a tenth out of the choice portions." Spoils taken in
battle are called "choice portions." And it cannot be said that he gave them to
him as having a part in the war, because (he said) he met him "returning from the
slaughter of the kings," for he had staid at home (he means), yet [Abraham] gave
him the first-fruits of his labors.

Hebrews 7:5-6
"And verily they that are of the sons of Levi who receive the office of
Priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the
law, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham."
So great (he would say) is the superiority of the priesthood, that they who
from their ancestors are of the same dignity, and have the same forefather, are
yet far better than the rest. At all events they "receive tithes" from them. When
then one is found, who receives tithes from these very persons, are not they
indeed in the rank of laymen, and he among the Priests?
And not only this; but neither was he of the same dignity with them, but of
another race: so that he would not have given tithes to a stranger unless his
dignity had been great. Astonishing! What has he accomplished? He has made
quite clear a greater point than those relating to faith which he treated in the
Epistle to the Romans. For there indeed he declares Abraham to be the forefather
both of our polity and also of the Jewish. But here he is exceeding bold against
him, and shows that the uncircumcised person is far superior. How then did he
show that Levi paid tithes? Abraham (he says) paid them. 'And how does this
concern us?' It especially concerns you: for you will not contend that the Levites
are superior to Abraham. [Hebrews 7:6] "But he whose descent is not counted
from them, received tithes of Abraham."

Hebrews 7:7
And after that he did not simply pass on, but added, "and blessed him that
had the promises." Inasmuch as throughout, this was regarded with reverence, he
shows that [Melchisedec] was to be reverenced more than Abraham, from the
common judgment of all men. [Hebrews 7:7] "And without all contradiction," he
says, "the less is blessed of the better," i.e. in the opinion of all men it is the
inferior that is blessed by the superior. So then the type of Christ is superior even
to "him that had the promises."