some affection, or by natural aptitude, or by the disposition of the
Divine order; because whatever is received into anything is
conditioned according to the mode of the recipient.
Reply to Objection 1: The intellect does not know the singular by
way of abstraction; neither does the separated soul know it thus; but
as explained above.
Reply to Objection 2: The knowledge of the separated soul is
confined to those species or individuals to which the soul has some
kind of determinate relation, as we have said.
Reply to Objection 3: The separated soul has not the same relation
to all singulars, but one relation to some, and another to others.
Therefore there is not the same reason why it should know all
singulars.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the habit of knowledge here acquired

remains in the separated soul?
Objection 1: It would seem that the habit of knowledge acquired in
this life does not remain in the soul separated from the body: for the
Apostle says: "Knowledge shall be destroyed" (1 Cor. 13:8).
Objection 2: Further, some in this world who are less good enjoy
knowledge denied to others who are better. If, therefore, the habit of
knowledge remained in the soul after death, it would follow that
some who are less good would, even in the future life, excel some
who are better; which seems unreasonable.
Objection 3: Further, separated souls will possess knowledge by
influence of the Divine light. Supposing, therefore, that knowledge
here acquired remained in the separated soul, it would follow that
two forms of the same species would co-exist in the same subject
which cannot be.
Objection 4: Further, the Philosopher says (Praedic. vi, 4,5), that "a
habit is a quality hard to remove: yet sometimes knowledge is
destroyed by sickness or the like." But in this life there is no change
so thorough as death. Therefore it seems that the habit of knowledge
is destroyed by death.
On the contrary, Jerome says (Ep. liii, ad Paulinum), "Let us learn on
earth that kind of knowledge which will remain with us in heaven."
I answer that, Some say that the habit of knowledge resides not in
the intellect itself, but in the sensitive powers, namely, the
imaginative, cogitative, and memorative, and that the intelligible
species are not kept in the passive intellect. If this were true, it would
follow that when the body is destroyed by death, knowledge here
acquired would also be entirely destroyed.
But, since knowledge resides in the intellect, which is "the abode of
species," as the Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 4), the habit of
knowledge here acquired must be partly in the aforesaid sensitive
powers and partly in the intellect. This can be seen by considering
the very actions from which knowledge arises. For "habits are like
the actions whereby they are acquired" (Ethic. ii, 1). Now the actions