THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.5.

Reply to Objection 1: Brute animals are akin generically to man,
wherefore they were created on the same day as man. And since He
had worked many miracles on the bodies of men, there was no need
for Him to work miracles on the bodies of brute animals. and so
much the less that, as to their sensible and corporeal nature, the
same reason applies to both men and animals, especially terrestrial.
But fish, from living in water, are more alien from human nature;
wherefore they were made on another day. On them Christ worked a
miracle in the plentiful draught of fishes, related Lk. 5 and Jn. 21;
and, again, in the fish caught by Peter, who found a stater in it (Mt.
17:26). As to the swine who were cast headlong into the sea, this
was not the effect of a Divine miracle, but of the action of the
demons, God permitting.
Reply to Objection 2: As Chrysostom says on Mt. 21:19: "When our
Lord does any such like thing" on plants or brute animals, "ask not
how it was just to wither up the fig-tree, since it was not the fruit
season; to ask such a question is foolish in the extreme," because
such things cannot commit a fault or be punished: "but look at the
miracle, and wonder at the worker." Nor does the Creator "inflict"
any hurt on the owner, if He choose to make use of His own creature
for the salvation of others; rather, as Hilary says on Mt. 21:19, "we
should see in this a proof of God's goodness, for when He wished to
afford an example of salvation as being procured by Him, He
exercised His mighty power on the human body: but when He
wished to picture to them His severity towards those who wilfully
disobey Him, He foreshadows their doom by His sentence on the
tree." This is the more noteworthy in a fig-tree which, as Chrysostom
observes (on Mt. 21:19), "being full of moisture, makes the miracle all
the more remarkable."
Reply to Objection 3: Christ also worked miracles befitting to Himself
in the air and water: when, to wit, as related Mt. 8:26, "He
commanded the winds, and the sea, and there came a great calm."
But it was not befitting that He who came to restore all things to a
state of peace and calm should cause either a disturbance in the
atmosphere or a division of waters. Hence the Apostle says (Heb.
12:18): "You are not come to a fire that may be touched and
approached, and a whirlwind, and darkness, and storm."
At the time of His Passion, however, the "veil was rent," to signify
the unfolding of the mysteries of the Law; "the graves were opened,"
to signify that His death gave life to the dead; "the earth quaked and

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.5.

the rocks were rent," to signify that man's stony heart would be
softened, and the whole world changed for the better by the virtue of
His Passion.
Reply to Objection 4: The multiplication of the loaves was not
effected by way of creation, but by an addition of extraneous matter
transformed into loaves; hence Augustine says on Jn. 6:1-14:
"Whence He multiplieth a few grains into harvests, thence in His
hands He multiplied the five loaves": and it is clearly by a process of
transformation that grains are multiplied into harvests.