SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.8.

professed his belief therein, saying: "I saw, and I gave testimony,
that this is the Son of God" (Jn. 1:34). Hence he did not say: "Art
Thou He that hast come?" but "Art Thou He that art to come?" thus
saying about the future, not about the past. Likewise it is not to be
believed that he was ignorant of Christ's future Passion, for he had
already said (Jn. 1:39): "Behold the Lamb of God, behold Him who
taketh away the sins of the world," thus foretelling His future
immolation; and since other prophets had foretold it, as may be seen
especially in Isaias 53. We may therefore say with Gregory (Hom.
xxvi in Evang.) that he asked this question, being in ignorance as to
whether Christ would descend into hell in His own Person. But he
did not ignore the fact that the power of Christ's Passion would be
extended to those who were detained in Limbo, according to Zach.
9:11: "Thou also, by the blood of Thy testament hast sent forth Thy
prisoners out of the pit, wherein there is no water"; nor was he
bound to believe explicitly, before its fulfilment, that Christ was to
descend thither Himself.
It may also be replied that, as Ambrose observes in his commentary
on Lk. 7:19, he made this inquiry, not from doubt or ignorance but
from devotion: or again, with Chrysostom (Hom. xxxvi in Matth.), that
he inquired, not as though ignorant himself, but because he wished
his disciples to be satisfied on that point, through Christ: hence the
latter framed His answer so as to instruct the disciples, by pointing
to the signs of His works.
Reply to Objection 3: Many of the gentiles received revelations of
Christ, as is clear from their predictions. Thus we read (Job 19:25): "I
know that my Redeemer liveth." The Sibyl too foretold certain things
about Christ, as Augustine states (Contra Faust. xiii, 15). Moreover,
we read in the history of the Romans, that at the time of Constantine
Augustus and his mother Irene a tomb was discovered, wherein lay a
man on whose breast was a golden plate with the inscription: "Christ
shall be born of a virgin, and in Him, I believe. O sun, during the
lifetime of Irene and Constantine, thou shalt see me again" [Baron,
Annal., A.D. 780]. If, however, some were saved without receiving
any revelation, they were not saved without faith in a Mediator, for,
though they did not believe in Him explicitly, they did, nevertheless,
have implicit faith through believing in Divine providence, since they
believed that God would deliver mankind in whatever way was
pleasing to Him, and according to the revelation of the Spirit to those
who knew the truth, as stated in Job 35:11: "Who teacheth us more
than the beasts of the earth."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.8.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.9.