him to prayer.
But some say that the words are a prophecy, declaring the state which shall
be in the life to come, and that there is no eating or drinking there. Now if that
which is moderate shall have an end, much more ought we to abstain from
excess.
Then lest any one should suppose that the body is the object of his censure,
and suspect that from a part he is blaming the whole, and say that the nature of
the body was the cause of gluttony or of fornication, hear what follows. "I blame
not," he says, "the nature of the body, but the immoderate license of the mind."
And therefore he subjoins, "Now the body is not for fornication, but for the
Lord;" for it was not formed for this purpose, to live riotously and commit
fornication, as neither was the belly to be greedy; but that it might follow Christ
as a Head, and that the Lord might be set over the body. Let us be overcome with
shame, let us be horror-struck, that after we have been counted worthy of such
great honor as to become members of Him that sits on high, we defile ourselves
with so great evils.
2. Having now sufficiently condemned the glutton, he uses also the hope of
things to come to divert us from this wickedness: saying,

1 Corinthians 6:14
And God both raised up the Lord, and will raise up us also through His
power.
Do you perceive again his Apostolical wisdom? For he is always
establishing the credibility of the Resurrection from Christ, and especially now.
For if our body be a member of Christ, and Christ be risen, the body also shall
surely follow the Head.
"Through his power." For since he had asserted a thing disbelieved and not
to be apprehended by reasonings, he has left entirely to His incomprehensible
power the circumstances of Christ's own Resurrection, producing this too as no
small demonstration against them. And concerning the Resurrection of Christ he
did not insert this: for he did not say, "And God shall also raise up the Lord;"—
for the thing was past and gone—but how? "And God both raised up the Lord;"
nor was there need of any proof. But concerning our resurrection, since it has not
yet come to pass, he spoke not thus, but how? "And will raise up us also through
His power:" by the reliance to be placed on the power of the Worker, he stops
the mouths of the gainsayers.
Further: if he ascribe unto the Father the Resurrection of Christ, let not this
at all disturb you. For not as though Christ were powerless, has he put this down,
for He it is Himself who says, [John 2:19] "Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up:" and again, [John 10:18] "I have power to lay down My
life, and I have power to take it again." And Luke also in the Acts says, [cf. Acts
1:3] "To whom also He showed Himself alive." Wherefore then does Paul so
speak? Because both the acts of the Son are imputed unto the Father, and the
Father's unto the Son. For He says, [John 5:19] "Whatsoever things He does,
these the Son also does in like manner."
And very opportunely he here made mention of the Resurrection, keeping