2 Corinthians 3:13
"And not as Moses, who put a veil upon his face, so that the children of
Israel should not look steadfastly on the end of that which was passing away."
Now what he says is of this nature. There is no need for us to cover
ourselves as Moses did; for you are able to look upon this glory which we are
encircled with, although it is far greater and brighter than the other. Do you see
the advance? For he that in the former Epistle said, "I have fed you with milk, not
with meat;" says here, "We use great boldness of speech." And he produces
Moses before them, carrying forward the discourse by means of comparison, and
thus leading his hearer upwards.
And for the present he sets them above the Jews, saying that 'we have no
need of a veil as he had with those he governed;' but in what comes afterwards
he advances them even to the dignity itself of the Lawgiver, or even to a much
greater.
Mean time, however, let us hear what follows next.

2 Corinthians 3:14
"But their minds were hardened, for until this day remains the same veil in
the reading of the Old Covenant, [it] not being revealed to them that it is done
away in Christ."
See what he establishes by this. For what happened then once in the case of
Moses, the same happens continually in the case of the Law. What is said,
therefore, is no accusation of the Law, as neither is it of Moses that he then
veiled himself, but only the senseless Jews. For the law has its proper glory, but
they were unable to see it. 'Why therefore are you perplexed,' he says, 'if they are
unable to see this glory of the Grace, since they saw not that lesser one of Moses,
nor were able to look steadfastly upon his countenance? And why are you
troubled that the Jews believe not Christ, seeing at least that they believe not
even the Law? For they were therefore ignorant of the Grace also, because they
knew not even the Old Covenant nor the glory which was in it. For the glory of
the Law is to turn [men] unto Christ.'
3. Do you see how from this consideration also he takes down the inflation
of the Jews? By that in which they thought they had the advantage, namely, that
Moses' face shone, he proves their grossness and groveling nature. Let them not
therefore pride themselves on that, for what was that to Jews who enjoyed it not?
Wherefore also he keeps on dwelling upon it, saying one while, "The same veil
in the reading of the old covenant remains," it "not being revealed that it is done
away in Christ:" another while, that "unto this day when Moses is read," [2
Corinthians 3:15] the same veil lies upon their heart; showing that the veil lies
both on the reading and on their heart; and above, "So that the children of Israel
could not look steadfastly upon the face of Moses for the glory of his
countenance; which" [2 Corinthians 3:7] glory "was passing away." Than which
what could mark less worth in them? Seeing that even of a glory that is to be