and see," [Genesis 11:7; 18:21] He says it not as needing to go down, (for He
both fills all things and knows all things certainly,) but to teach us not to give
sentence lightly. And when He says, "The Lord looked down from Heaven:"
[Psalm 14:2] it describes His perfect knowledge by a metaphor taken from men.
So also here He says, "Now I know," to declare this to be greater than all which
had preceded it. Of this itself too He furnishes proof by adding, Because you
spared not your son, your well-beloved, for My sake; He says not "your son"
only, but yet more, "your well-beloved." For it was not nature only, but also
parental fondness, which having both by natural disposition and by the great
goodness of his child, he yet dared in him to spurn. And if about worthless
children parents are not easily indifferent, but mourn even for them; when it is
his son, his only-begotten, and his well-beloved, even Isaac, and the father
himself is on the point of immolating him; who can describe the excessiveness
of such philosophy? This exploit outshines thousands of diadems and crowns
innumerable. For the wearer of that crown, both death ofttimes assails and
annoys, and before death, assaults of circumstances without number; but this
diadem shall no one have strength to take from him that wears it; no not even
after death; neither of his own household, nor of strangers. And let me point you
out the costliest stone in this diadem. For as a costly stone, so this comes at the
end and clasps it. What then is this? The words, "for My sake?" for not herein is
the marvel, that he spared not, but that it was "for His sake."
Oh! blessed right hand, of what a knife was it accounted worthy? Oh!
Wondrous knife, of what a right hand was it accounted worthy? Oh! Wondrous
knife, for what a purpose was it prepared? To what an office did it serve? To
what a type did it minister? How was it bloodied? How was it not bloodied? For
I know not what to say, so awful was that mystery. It touched not the neck of the
child, nor passed through the throat of that holy one: nor was crimsoned with the
blood of the righteous; rather it both touched, and passed through, and was
crimsoned, and was bathed in it, yet was not bathed. Perchance I seem to you
beside myself, uttering such contradictions. For, in truth, I am beside myself,

with the thought of the wondrous deed of that righteous man; but I utter no
contradictions. For indeed the righteous man's hand thrust it in the throat of the
lad, but God's Hand suffered it not, so thrust, to be stained with blood of the lad.
For it was not Abraham alone that held it back, but God also: and he by his
purpose gave the stroke, God by His voice restrained it. For the same voice both
armed and disarmed that right hand, which, marshalled under God, as if under a
leader, performed all things at His beck, and all were ministered at His voice.
For observe; He said, "Slay," and straightway it was armed: He said, "Slay not,"
and straightway it was disarmed: for every thing [before] had been fully
prepared.
And now God showed the soldier and general to the whole world; this
crowned victor to the theatre of the angels; this priest, this king, crowned with
that knife beyond a diadem, this trophy-bearer, this champion, this conqueror
without a fight. For as if some general having a most valiant soldier, should use
his mastery of his weapons, his bearing, his ordered movements to dismay the
adversary; so also God, by the purpose, the attitude, the bearing only of that
righteous man, dismayed and routed the common enemy of us all, the Devil. For
I deem that even he then shrunk away aghast. But if any one say, 'And why did
he not suffer that right hand to be bathed, and then immediately raise him up
after being sacrificed?' Because God might not accept such bloody offerings;
such a table were that of avenging demons. But here two things were displayed,
both the loving kindness of the Master, and the faithfulness of the servant. And
before, indeed, he went out from his country: but then he abandoned even nature.
Wherefore also he received his principal with usury: and very reasonably. For he
chose to lose the name of father, to show himself a faithful servant. Wherefore
he became not a father only, but also a priest; and because for God's sake he
gave up his own, therefore also did God give him with these His own besides.
When then enemies devise mischief, He allows it to come even to the trial, and
then works miracles; as in the case of the furnace and the lions; [Daniel 3 and
Daniel 6] but when Himself bids, readiness attained, He stays His bidding. What