commandment, then He would have seemed, in the judgment of most men, to be
that which you say He is.
For let us suppose that this law had been altogether done away, and that no
one feared the punishment ensuing thereupon, but that license had been given to
all the wicked to follow their own disposition in all security, to adulterers, and to
murderers, to perjured persons, and to parricides; would not all things have been
turned upside down? Would not cities, market-places, and houses, sea and land,
and the whole world, have been filled with unnumbered pollutions and murders?
Every one sees it. For if, when there are laws, and fear, and threatening, our evil
dispositions are hardly checked; were even this security taken away, what is
there to prevent men's choosing vice? And what degree of mischief would not
then come revelling upon the whole of human life?
The rather, since cruelty lies not only in allowing the bad to do what they
will, but in another thing too quite as much; to overlook, and leave uncared for,
him who has done no wrong, but who is without cause or reason suffering ill.
For tell me; were any one to gather together wicked men from all quarters, and
arm them with swords, and bid them go about the whole city, and massacre all
that came in their way, could there be anything more like a wild beast than he?
And what if some other should bind, and confine with the utmost strictness those
whom that man had armed, and should snatch from those lawless hands them,
who were on the point of being butchered; could anything be greater humanity
than this?
Now then, I bid you transfer these examples to the law likewise; for He that
commands to pluck out "an eye for an eye," has laid the fear as a kind of strong
chain upon the souls of the bad, and so resembles him, who detains those
assassins in prison; whereas he who appoints no punishment for them, does all
but arm them by such security, and acts the part of that other, who was putting
the swords in their hands, and letting them loose over the whole city.
Do you see not, how the commandments, so far from coming of cruelty,
come rather of abounding mercy? And if on account of these you call the

Lawgiver grievous, and hard to bear with; tell me which sort of command is the
more toilsome and grievous, "Do no murder," or, "Be not even angry"? Which is
more in extreme, he who exacts a penalty for murder, or for mere anger? He who
subjects the adulterer to vengeance after the fact, or he who enjoins a penalty
even for the very desire, and that penalty everlasting? See ye not how their
reasoning comes round to the very contrary? How the God of the old covenant,
whom they call cruel, will be found mild and meek: and He of the new, whom
they acknowledged to be good, will be hard and grievous, according to their
madness? Whereas we say, that there is but one and the same Legislator of either
covenant, who dispensed all meetly, and adapted to the difference of the times
the difference between the two systems of law. Therefore neither are the first
commandments cruel, nor the second hard and grievous, but all of one and the
same providential care.
For that He Himself gave the old covenant also, hear the affirmation of the
prophet, or rather (so we must speak), of Him who is both the one and the other:
"I will make a covenant with you, not according to the covenant which I made
with your fathers." [Jeremiah 31:31-32]
But if he receive not this, who is diseased with the Manichæan doctrines, let
him hear Paul saying the very same in another place, "For Abraham had two
sons, one by the bondmaid, and another by the freewoman; and these are two
covenants." [Galatians 4:22] As therefore in that case the wives are different, the
husband the same; so here too the covenants are two, the Lawgiver one.
And to prove to you that it was of one and the same mildness; in the one He
says, "An eye for an eye," but in this other,
"If one smite you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also."
[Matthew 5:39]
For as in that case He checks him that does the wrong with the fear of this
suffering, even so also in this. "How so," it may be said, "when He bids turn to
him the other cheek also?" Nay, what of that? Since not to take away his fear did
He enjoin this, but as charging yourself to allow him to take his fill entirely.