order of nature; hence man can have happiness of a kind by knowing
the separated substances, although his perfect happiness consists
in knowing the first substance, namely, God. But it is quite natural
for one separate substance to know another; as it is natural for us to
know sensible natures. Hence, as man's happiness does not consist
in knowing sensible natures; so neither does the angel's happiness
consist in knowing separated substances.
Reply to Objection 2: What is most manifest in its nature is hidden
from us by its surpassing the bounds of our intellect; and not merely
because our intellect draws knowledge from phantasms. Now the
Divine substance surpasses the proportion not only of the human
intellect, but even of the angelic. Consequently, not even an angel
can of his own nature know God's substance. Yet on account of the
perfection of his intellect he can of his nature have a higher
knowledge of God than man can have. Such knowledge of God
remains also in the demons. Although they do not possess the purity
which comes with grace, nevertheless they have purity of nature;
and this suffices for the knowledge of God which belongs to them
from their nature.
Reply to Objection 3: The creature is darkness in comparison with
the excellence of the Divine light; and therefore the creature's
knowledge in its own nature is called "evening" knowledge. For the
evening is akin to darkness, yet it possesses some light: but when
the light fails utterly, then it is night. So then the knowledge of things
in their own nature, when referred to the praise of the Creator, as it is
in the good angels, has something of the Divine light, and can be
called evening knowledge; but if it be not referred to God, as is the
case with the demons, it is not called evening, but "nocturnal"
knowledge. Accordingly we read in Gn. 1:5 that the darkness, which
God separated from the light, "He called night."
Reply to Objection 4: All the angels had some knowledge from the
very beginning respecting the mystery of God's kingdom, which
found its completion in Christ; and most of all from the moment
when they were beatified by the vision of the Word, which vision the
demons never had. Yet all the angels did not fully and equally
apprehend it; hence the demons much less fully understood the
mystery of the Incarnation, when Christ was in the world. For, as
Augustine observes (De Civ. Dei ix, 21), "It was not manifested to
them as it was to the holy angels, who enjoy a participated eternity
of the Word; but it was made known by some temporal effects, so as

to strike terror into them." For had they fully and certainly known
that He was the Son of God and the effect of His passion, they would
never have procured the crucifixion of the Lord of glory.
Reply to Objection 5: The demons know a truth in three ways: first of
all by the subtlety of their nature; for although they are darkened by
privation of the light of grace, yet they are enlightened by the light of
their intellectual nature: secondly, by revelation from the holy
angels; for while not agreeing with them in conformity of will, they
do agree, nevertheless, by their likeness of intellectual nature,
according to which they can accept what is manifested by others:
thirdly, they know by long experience; not as deriving it from the
senses; but when the similitude of their innate intelligible species is
completed in individual things, they know some things as present,
which they previously did not know would come to pass, as we said
when dealing with the knowledge of the angels (Question 57, Article
3, ad 3).