His part.
Knowing this, then, let us also not intermit to do all things unto them that
sin and are remiss, warning, teaching, exhorting, admonishing, advising, though
we profit nothing. For Christ indeed foreknew that the traitor was incorrigible,
yet nevertheless He ceased not to supply what could be done by Himself, as well
admonishing as threatening and bewailing over him, and nowhere plainly, nor
openly, but in a concealed way. And at the very time of the betrayal, He allowed
him even to kiss Him, but this benefited him nothing. So great an evil is
covetousness, this made him both a traitor, and a sacrilegious robber.
Hearken, all you covetous, you that have the disease of Judas; hearken, and
beware of the calamity. For if he that was with Christ, and wrought signs, and
had the benefit of so much instruction, because he was not freed from the
disease, was sunk into such a gulf; how much more shall you, who do not so
much as listen to the Scripture, who are constantly riveted to the things present,
become an easy prey to this calamity, unless you have the advantage of constant
care. Every day was that man with Him, who had not where to lay His head, and
every day was he instructed by deeds, and by words, not to have gold, nor silver,
nor two coats; and yet he was not taught self restraint; and how do you expect to
escape the disease, if you have not the benefit of earnest attention, and dost not
use much diligence? For terrible, terrible is the monster, yet nevertheless, if you
be willing, you will easily get the better of him. For the desire is not natural; and
this is manifest from them that are free from it. For natural things are common to
all; but this desire has its origin from remissness alone; hence it takes its birth,
hence it derives its increase, and when it has seized upon those who look
greedily after it, it makes them live contrary to nature. For when they regard not
their fellow countrymen, their friends, their brethren, in a word all men, and with
these even themselves, this is to live against nature. Whence it is evident that the
vice and disease of covetousness, wherein Judas, being entangled, became a
traitor, is contrary to nature. And how did he become such a one, you may say,
having been called by Christ? Because God's call is not compulsory, neither does

it force the will of them who are not minded to choose virtue, but admonishes
indeed, and advises, and does and manages all things, so as to persuade men to
become good; but if some endure not, it does not compel. But if you would learn
from what cause he became such as he was, you will find him to have been
ruined by covetousness.
And how was he taken by this calamity? One may say. Because he grew
remiss. For hence arise such changes, as on the other hand, those for the better
from diligence. How many for instance that were violent, are now more gentle
than lambs? How many lascivious persons have become afterwards continent?
How many, heretofore covetous, yet now have cast away even their own
possessions? And the contrary again has been the result of remissness. For
Gehazi also lived with a holy man, and he too became depraved from the same
disease. For this calamity is the most grievous of all. Hence come robbers of
tombs, hence menslayers, hence wars and fightings, and whatsoever evil you
may mention, it comes hence. And in every respect is such a one useless,
whether it be requisite to lead an army or to guide a people: or rather not in
public matters only, but also in private. If he is to marry a wife, he will not take
the virtuous woman, but the vilest of all; if he have to buy a house, not that
which becomes a free man, but what can bring much rent; if he is to buy slaves,
or what else it may be, he will take the worst.
And why do I speak of leading an army, and guiding a people, and
managing households; for should he be a king, he is the most wretched of all
men, and a pest to the world, and the poorest of all men. For he will feel like one
of the common sort, not accounting all men's possessions to be his, but himself
to be one of all; and when spoiling all men's goods, thinks himself to have less
than any. For measuring the things present by his desire for those whereof he is
not yet possessed, he will account the former nothing compared to the latter.
Wherefore also one says, "There is not a more wicked thing than a covetous
man." [Sirach 10:9]
4. For such a one both sets himself to sale, and goes about, a common