St. John indeed, as also does the present writer, dwells at greater length on this
subject than the others; but none has clearly related every thing (for they
hastened to something else); however, we have learned these things through the
Apostles, for what they heard, that did they tell. "To whom also He showed
Himself alive." Having first spoken of the Ascension, he adverts to the
Resurrection; for since you have been told that "He was taken up," therefore, lest
you should suppose Him to have been taken up by others , he adds, "To whom
He showed Himself alive." For if He showed Himself in the greater, surely He
did in the minor circumstance. Do you see, how casually and unperceived he
drops by the way the seeds of these great doctrines?
"Being seen of them during forty days." He was not always with them now,
as He was before the Resurrection. For the writer does not say "forty days," but,
"during forty days." He came, and again disappeared; by this leading them on to
higher conceptions, and no longer permitting them to stand affected towards
Him in the same way as before, but taking effectual measures to secure both
these objects, that the fact of His Resurrection should be believed, and that He
Himself should be ever after apprehended to be greater than man. At the same
time, these were two opposite things; for in order to the belief in His
Resurrection, much was to be done of a human character, and for the other
object, just the reverse. Nevertheless, both results have been effected, each when
the fitting time arrived.
But why did He appear not to all, but to the Apostles only? Because to the
many it would have seemed a mere apparition, inasmuch as they understood not
the secret of the mystery. For if the disciples themselves were at first incredulous
and were troubled, and needed the evidence of actual touch with the hand, and of
His eating with them, how would it have fared in all likelihood with the
multitude? For this reason therefore by the miracles [wrought by the Apostles]
He renders the evidence of His Resurrection unequivocal, so that not only the
men of those times— this is what would come of the ocular proof— but also all
men thereafter, should be certain of the fact, that He was risen. Upon this ground

also we argue with unbelievers. For if He did not rise again, but remains dead,
how did the Apostles perform miracles in His name? But they did not, say you,
perform miracles? How then was our religion ([ἔ] [θνος]) instituted? For this
certainly they will not controvert nor impugn what we see with our eyes: so that
when they say that no miracles took place, they inflict a worse stab upon
themselves. For this would be the greatest of miracles, that without any miracles,
the whole world should have eagerly come to be taken in the nets of twelve poor
and illiterate men. For not by wealth of money, not by wisdom of words, not by
any thing else of this kind, did the fishermen prevail; so that objectors must even
against their will acknowledge that there was in these men a Divine power, for
no human strength could ever possibly effect such great results. For this He then
remained forty days on earth, furnishing in this length of time the sure evidence
of their seeing Him in His own proper Person, that they might not suppose that
what they saw was a phantom. And not content with this, He added also the
evidence of eating with them at their board: as to signify this, the writer adds,
"And being at table with them, He commanded." [Acts 1:4] And this
circumstance the Apostles themselves always put forth as an fallible token of the
Resurrection; as where they say, "Who ate and drank with Him." [Acts 10:41]
And what did He, when appearing unto them those forty days? Why, He
conversed with them, says the writer, "concerning the kingdom of God." [Acts
1:3] For, since the disciples both had been distressed and troubled at the things
which already had taken place, and were about to go forth to encounter great
difficulties, He recovered them by His discourses concerning the future. "He
commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
promise of the Father." [Acts 1:4] First, He led them out to Galilee, afraid and
trembling, in order that they might listen to His words in security. Afterwards,
when they had heard, and had passed forty days with Him, "He commanded
them that they should not depart from Jerusalem." Wherefore? Just as when
soldiers are to charge a multitude, no one thinks of letting them issue forth until
they have armed themselves, or as horses are not suffered to start from the