is not able to assist us when we are punished in that place and suffer because of
his laws, nay, he increases the flame; the other, though He command us to give
but a cup of cold water, never allows us to lose our reward and recompense even
for this, but repays us with great abundance. How then is it not extremest folly to
slight a rule so mild, so full of all good things, and to serve a thankless,
ungrateful tyrant, and one who neither in this world nor in the world to come is
able to help those who obey and give heed to him. Nor is this the only dreadful
thing, nor is this only the penalty, that he does not defend them when they are
being punished; but that besides this, he, as I before said, surrounds those who
obey him with ten thousand evils. For of those who are punished in that place,
one may see that the greater part are punished for this cause, that they were
slaves to money, that they loved gold, and would not assist those who needed.
That we be not in this case, let us scatter, let us give to the poor, let us deliver
our souls from hurtful cares in this world, and from the vengeance, which
because of these things is appointed for us in that place. Let us store up
righteousness in the heavens. Instead of riches upon earth, let us collect treasures
impregnable, treasures which can accompany us on our journey to heaven,
which can assist us in our peril, and make the Judge propitious at that hour.
Whom may we all have gracious unto us, both now and at that day, and enjoy
with much confidence the good things prepared in the heavens for those who
love Him as they ought, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever,
and world without end. Amen.

Homily 9 on the Gospel of John
John 1:11
"He came unto His own, and His own received Him not."
1. If you remember our former reflections, we shall the more zealously
proceed with the building up of what remains, as doing so for great gain. For so
will our discourse be more intelligible to you who remember what has been
already said, and we shall not need much labor, because you are able through
your great love of learning to see more clearly into what remains. The man who
is always losing what is given to him will always need a teacher, and will never
know anything; but he who retains what he has received, and so receives in
addition what remains, will quickly be a teacher instead of a learner, and useful
not only to himself, but to all others also; as, conjecturing from their great
readiness to hear, I anticipate that this assembly will specially be. Come then, let
us lay up in your souls, as in a safe treasury, the Lord's money, and unfold, as far
as the grace of the Spirit may afford us power, the words this day set before us.
He (St. John) had said, speaking of the old times, that "the world knew him
not" [John 1:10]; afterwards he comes down in his narrative to the times of the
proclamation (of the Gospel), and says, "He came to His own, and His own
received Him not," now calling the Jews "His own," as His peculiar people, or
perhaps even all mankind, as created by Him. And as above, when perplexed at
the folly of the many, and ashamed of our common nature, he said that "the
world by Him was made," and having been made, did not recognize its Maker;
so here again, being troubled beyond bearing at the stupidity of the Jews and the
many, he sets forth the charge in a yet more striking manner, saying, that "His
own received Him not," and that too when "He came to them." And not only he,
but the prophets also, wondering, said the very same, as did afterwards Paul,