and afterwards abandon it, and these are deserving not of a lesser
but of a greater punishment, since according to 2 Pt. 2:21, "it had
been better for them not to have known the way of justice than, after
they have known it, to turn back." Moreover it is clear that
heresiarchs who renounce the Catholic faith and invent new heresies
sin more grievously than those who have conformed to some heresy
from the first. And therefore some have maintained that those alone
are exempt from eternal punishment, who persevere to the end in the
Catholic faith, however guilty they may have been of other crimes.
But this is clearly contrary to Holy Writ, for it is written (James 2:20):
"Faith without works is dead," and (Mt. 7:21) "Not every one that
saith to Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but
he that doth the will of My Father Who is in heaven": and in many
other passages Holy Scripture threatens sinners with eternal
punishment. Consequently those who persevere in the faith unto the
end will not all be exempt from eternal punishment, unless in the end
they prove to be free from other crimes.
Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord speaks there of formed faith [SS,
Question 4, Article 3] "that worketh by love ": wherein whosoever
dieth shall be saved. But to this faith not only is the error of unbelief
opposed, but also any mortal sin whatsoever.
Reply to Objection 2: The saying of our Lord refers not to those who
partake only sacramentally, and who sometimes by receiving
unworthily "eat and drink judgment" to themselves (1 Cor. 11:29),
but to those who eat spiritually and are incorporated with Him by
charity, which incorporation is the effect of the sacramental eating,
in those who approach worthily [TP, Question 80, Articles 1,2,3].
Wherefore, so far as the power of the sacrament is concerned, it
brings us to eternal life, although sin may deprive us of that fruit,
even after we have received worthily.
Reply to Objection 3: In this passage of the Apostle the foundation
denotes formed faith, upon which whosoever shall build venial sins
[FS, Question 89, Article 2] "shall suffer loss," because he will be
punished for them by God; yet "he himself shall be saved" in the end
"by fire," either of temporal tribulation, or of the punishment of
purgatory which will be after death.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether all those who perform works of mercy

will be punished eternally?
Objection 1: It would seem that all who perform works of mercy will
not be punished eternally, but only those who neglect those works.
For it is written (James 2:13): "Judgment without mercy to him that
hath not done mercy"; and (Mt. 5:7): "Blessed are the merciful for
they shall obtain mercy."
Objection 2: Further, (Mt. 25:35-46) we find a description of our
Lord's discussion with the damned and the elect. But this discussion
is only about works of mercy. Therefore eternal punishment will be
awarded only to such as have omitted to practice works of mercy:
and consequently the same conclusion follows as before.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Mt. 6:12): "Forgive us our debts, as
we also forgive our debtors," and further on (Mt. 6:14): "For if you
will forgive men their offenses, your heavenly Father will forgive you
also your offenses." Therefore it would seem that the merciful, who
forgive others their offenses, will themselves obtain the forgiveness
of their sins, and consequently will not be punished eternally.
Objection 4: Further, a gloss of Ambrose on 1 Tim. 4:8, "Godliness is
profitable to all things," says: "The sum total of a Christian's rule of
life consists in mercy and godliness. Let a man follow this, and
though he should suffer from the inconstancy of the flesh, without
doubt he will be scourged, but he will not perish: whereas he who
can boast of no other exercise but that of the body will suffer
everlasting punishment." Therefore those who persevere in works of
mercy, though they be shackled with fleshly sins, will not be
punished eternally: and thus the same conclusion follows as before.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 6:9,10): "Neither fornicators . . .
nor adulterers," etc. "shall possess the kingdom of God." Yet many
are such who practice works of mercy. Therefore the merciful will
not all come to the eternal kingdom: and consequently some of them
will be punished eternally.
Further, it is written (James 2:10): "Whosoever shall keep the whole
law, but offend in one point, is become guilty of all." Therefore
whoever keeps the law as regards the works of mercy and omits