benefit to others also: as is shown by him who brought the one talent safe, and
was cut in sunder because he had not made more of it. And thou then, brother,
though you should remain without food, though you should sleep upon the
ground, though you should eat ashes and be ever wailing, and do good to no
other; you will do no great work. For so also those great and noble persons who
were in the beginning made this their chiefest care: examine accurately their life,
and you will see clearly that none of them ever looked to his own things, but
each one to the things of his neighbor, whence also they shone the brighter. For
so Moses (to mention him first) wrought many and great wonders and signs; but
nothing made him so great as that blessed voice which he uttered unto God,
saying, "If You will forgive their sin," forgive; "but if not, blot me also out."
[Exodus 32:32] Such too was David: wherefore also he said, "I the shepherd
have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these, the flock, what have they
done? Let Your hand be upon me and upon my father's house." [2 Samuel 24:17]
So likewise Abraham sought not his own profit, but the profit of many.
Wherefore he both exposed himself to dangers and besought God for those who
in no wise belonged to him.
Well: these indeed so became glorious. But as for those who sought their
own, consider what harm too they received. The nephew, for instance, of the last
mentioned, because he listened to the saying, "If you will go to the right, I will
go to the left;" [Genesis 13:9] and accepting the choice, sought his own profit,
did not even find his own: but this region was burned up, while that remained
untouched. Jonah again, not seeking the profit of many, but his own, was in
danger even of perishing: and while the city stood fast, he himself was tossed
about and overwhelmed in the sea. But when he sought the profit of many, then
he also found his own. So likewise Jacob among the flocks, not seeking his own
gain, had exceeding riches for his portion. And Joseph also, seeking the profit of
his brethren, found his own. At least, being sent by his father, [Genesis 37:14] he
said not, "What is this? Have you not heard that for a vision and certain dreams
they even attempted to tear me in pieces, and I was held responsible for my

dreams, and suffer punishment for being beloved of you? What then will they not
do when they get me in the midst of them?" He said none of these things, he
thought not of them, but prefers the care of his brethren above all. Therefore he
enjoyed also all the good things which followed, which both made him very
brilliant and declared him glorious. Thus also Moses—for nothing hinders that
we should a second time make mention of him, and behold how he overlooked
his own things and sought the things of others:— I say this Moses, being
conversant in a king's court, because he "counted the reproach of Christ
[Hebrews 11:26] greater riches than the treasures of Egypt;" and having cast
them even all out of his hands, became a partaker of the afflictions of the
Hebrews;— so far from being himself enslaved, he liberated them also from
bondage.
Well: these surely are great things and worthy of an angelical life. But the
conduct of Paul far exceeds this. For all the rest leaving their own blessings
chose to be partakers in the afflictions of others: but Paul did a thing much
greater. For it was not that he consented to be a partaker in others' misfortunes,
but he chose himself to be at all extremities that other men might enjoy
blessings. Now it is not the same for one who lives in luxury to cast away his
luxury and suffer adversity, as for one himself alone suffering adversity, to cause
others to be in security and honor. For in the former case, though it be a great
thing to exchange prosperity for affliction for your neighbor's sake, nevertheless
it brings some consolation to have partakers in the misfortune. But consenting to
be himself alone in the distress that others may enjoy their good things—this
belongs to a much more energetic soul, and to Paul's own spirit.
And not by this only, but by another and greater excellency does he surpass
all those before mentioned. That is, Abraham and all the rest exposed themselves
to dangers in the present life, and all these were but asking for this kind of death
once for all: but Paul prayed [Romans 9:3] that he might fall from the glory of
the world to come for the sake of others' salvation.
I may mention also a third point of superiority. And what is this? That some