man no one discerns." For if no man is able to know the mind of God, much less
can he teach and correct it. For this is the meaning of, "that he may instruct
Him."
Do you see how from every quarter he repels the wisdom which is without,
and shows that the spiritual man knows more things and greater? For seeing that
those reasons, "That no flesh should glory;" and, "For this cause has He chosen
the foolish things, that He might confound the wise men;" and, "Lest the Cross of
Christ should be made void:" seemed not to the unbelievers greatly worthy of
credit, nor yet attractive, or necessary, or useful, he finishes by laying down the
principal reason; because in this way we most easily see from Whom we may
have the means of learning even high things, and things secret, and things which
are above us. For reason was absolutely made of none effect by our inability to
apprehend through Gentile wisdom the things above us.
You may observe, too, that it was more advantageous to learn in this way
from the Spirit. For that is the easiest and clearest of all teaching.
"But we have the mind of Christ." That is, spiritual, divine, that which has
nothing human. For it is not of Plato, nor of Pythagoras, but it is Christ Himself,
putting His own things into our mind.
This then, if naught else, let us revere, O beloved, and let our life shine
forth as most excellent; since He also Himself makes this a sure proof of great
friendship, viz. the revealing His secrets unto us: where He says, [John 15:15]
"Henceforth I call you not servants, for all you are My friends; for all things
which I have heard from My Father I have told unto you:" that is, I have had
confidence towards you. Now if this by itself is a proof of friendship, namely, to
have confidence: when it appears that He has not only confided to us the
mysteries conveyed by words, ([τὰ διὰ ῥημάτων μυστηρία]) but also imparted to
us the same conveyed by works, ([διὰ τῶν ἔργων], i.e. sacramental actions)
consider how vast the love of which this is the fruit. This, if nothing else, let us
revere; even though we will not make any such great account of hell, yet let it be
more fearful than hell to be thankless and ungrateful to such a friend and

benefactor. And not as hired servants, but as sons and freemen, let us do all
things for the love of our Father; and let us at last cease from adhering to the
world that we may put the Greeks also to shame. For even now desiring to put
out my strength against them, I shrink from so doing, lest haply, surpass them as
we may by our arguments and the truth of what we teach, we bring upon
ourselves much derision from the comparison of our way of life; seeing that they
indeed, cleaving unto error and having no such conviction, abide by philosophy,
but we do just the contrary. However, I will say it. For it may be, it may be that
in practising how to contend against them, we shall long as rivals to become
better than they in our mode of life also.
14. I was saying not long ago, that it would not have entered the Apostles'
thoughts to preach what they did preach, had they not enjoyed Divine Grace; and
that so far from succeeding, they would not even have devised such a thing. Well
then, let us also today prosecute the same subject in our discourse; and let us
show that it was a thing impossible so much as to be chosen or thought of by
them, if they had not had Christ among them: not because they were arrayed, the
weak against the strong, not because few against many, not because poor against
rich, not because unlearned against wise, but because the strength of their
prejudice, too, was great. For you know that nothing is so strong with men as the
tyranny of ancient custom. So that although they had not been twelve only, and
not so contemptible, and such as they really were, but another world as large as
this, and with an equivalent number arrayed on their side, or even much greater;
even in this case the result would have been hard to achieve. For the other party
had custom on their side, but to these their novelty was an obstacle. For nothing
so much disturbs the mind, though it be done for some beneficial purpose, as to
innovate and introduce strange things, and most of all when this is done in
matters relating to divine worship and the glory of God. And how great force
there is in this circumstance I will now make plain; first having made the
following statement that there was added also another difficulty with regard to
the Jews. For in the case of the Greeks, they destroyed both their gods and their