Consequently it seems that these should be reckoned as dowries
rather than the aforesaid.
I answer that, All agree in reckoning three dowries of the soul, in
different ways however. For some say that the three dowries of the
soul are vision, love, and fruition. others reckon them to be vision,
comprehension, and fruition; others, vision, delight, and
comprehension. However, all these reckonings come to the same,
and their number is assigned in the same way. For it has been said
(Article 2) that a dowry is something inherent to the soul, and
directing it to the operation in which beatitude consists. Now two
things are requisite in this operation: its essence which is vision,
and its perfection which is delight: since beatitude must needs be a
perfect operation. Again, a vision is delightful in two ways: first, on
the part of the object, by reason of the thing seen being delightful;
secondly, on the part of the vision, by reason of the seeing itself
being delightful, even as we delight in knowing evil things, although
the evil things themselves delight us not. And since this operation
wherein ultimate beatitude consists must needs be most perfect, this
vision must needs be delightful in both ways. Now in order that this
vision be delightful on the part of the vision, it needs to be made
connatural to the seer by means of a habit; while for it to be
delightful on the part of the visible object, two things are necessary,
namely that the visible object be suitable, and that it be united to the
seer. Accordingly for the vision to be delightful on its own part a
habit is required to elicit the vision, and thus we have one dowry,
which all call vision. But on the part of the visible object two things
are necessary. First, suitableness, which regards the affections---and
in this respect some reckon love as a dowry, others fruition (in so far
as fruition regards the affective part) since what we love most we
deem most suitable. Secondly, union is required on the part of the
visible object, and thus some reckon comprehension, which is
nothing else than to have God present and to hold Him within ourself
[FS, Question 4, Article 3]; while others reckon fruition, not of hope,
which is ours while on the way, but of possession which is in
heaven.
Thus the three dowries correspond to the three theological virtues,
namely vision to faith, comprehension (or fruition in one sense) to
hope, and fruition (or delight according to another reckoning to
charity). For perfect fruition such as will be had in heaven includes
delight and comprehension, for which reason some take it for the
one, and some for the other.

Others, however, ascribe these three dowries to the three powers of
the soul, namely vision to the rational, delight to the concupiscible,
and fruition to the irascible, seeing that this fruition is acquired by a
victory. But this is not said properly, because the irascible and
concupiscible powers are not in the intellective but in the sensitive
part, whereas the dowries of the soul are assigned to the mind.
Reply to Objection 1: Memory and understanding have but one act:
either because understanding is itself an act of memory, or---if
understanding denote a power---because memory does not proceed
to act save through the medium of the understanding, since it
belongs to the memory to retain knowledge. Consequently there is
only one habit, namely knowledge, corresponding to memory and
understanding: wherefore only one dowry, namely vision,
corresponds to both.
Reply to Objection 2: Fruition corresponds to hope, in so far as it
includes comprehension which will take the place of hope: since we
hope for that which we have not yet; wherefore hope chafes
somewhat on account of the distance of the beloved: for which
reason it will not remain in heaven [SS, Question 18, Article 2] but
will be succeeded by comprehension.
Reply to Objection 3: Fruition as including comprehension is distinct
from vision and love, but otherwise than love from vision. For love
and vision denote different habits, the one belonging to the intellect,
the other to the affective faculty. But comprehension, or fruition as
denoting comprehension, does not signify a habit distinct from those
two, but the removal of the obstacles which made it impossible for
the mind to be united to God by actual vision. This is brought about
by the habit of glory freeing the soul from all defects; for instance by
making it capable of knowledge without phantasms, of complete
control over the body, and so forth, thus removing the obstacles
which result in our being pilgrims from the Lord.
Reply to Objection 4:is clear from what has been said.
Reply to Objection 5: Properly speaking, the dowries are the
immediate principles of the operation in which perfect beatitude
consists and whereby the soul is united to Christ. The things
mentioned by Anselm do not answer to this description; but they are
such as in any way accompany or follow beatitude, not only in