you expose others to hunger? Do you know what a dreadful thing it is to beg,
how dreadful to be perishing by hunger? Spare also your brethren! Are you
ashamed, tell me, to be hungry, and are you not ashamed to rob? Are you afraid
to perish by hunger, and not afraid to destroy others? And yet to be hungry is
neither a disgrace nor a crime; but to cast others into such a state brings not only
disgrace, but extreme punishment.
All these are pretenses, words, trifles. For that it is not on account of your
children that you act thus, they testify who indeed have no children, nor will
have, but who yet toil and harass themselves, and are busy in acquiring wealth,
as much as if they had innumerable children to leave it to. It is not the care for
his children that makes a man covetous, but a disease of the soul. On this
account many even who have not children are mad about riches, and others
living with a great number of children even despise what they have. They will
accuse you in that Day. For if the necessities of children compelled men to
accumulate riches, they also must necessarily have the same longing, the same
lust. And if they have not, it is not from the number of children that we are thus
mad, but from the love of money. And who are they, you say, who having
children, yet despise riches? Many, and in many places. And if you will allow
me, I will speak also of instances among the ancients.
Had not Jacob twelve children? Did he not lead the life of a hireling? Was
he not wronged by his kinsman? And did he not often disappoint him? And did
his number of children ever compel him to have recourse to any dishonest
counsel? What was the case with Abraham? With Isaac, had he not also many
other children? What then? Did he not possess all he had for the benefit of
strangers? Do you see, how he not only did not do wrong, but even gave up his
possessions, not only doing good, but choosing to be wronged by his nephew?
For to endure being robbed for the sake of God is a much greater thing than to
do good. Why? Because the one is the fruit of the soul and of free choice,
whence also it is easily performed: but the other is injurious treatment and
violence. And a man will more easily throw away ten thousand talents

voluntarily, and will not think that he has suffered any harm, than he will bear
meekly being robbed of three pence against his will. So that this rather is
philosophy of soul. And this, we see, happened in the case of Abraham. "For
Lot," it is said, "beheld all the plain; and it was well watered as the garden of
God, and he chose it." [Genesis 13:10-11] And Abraham said nothing against it.
Do you see, that he not only did not wrong him, but he was even wronged by
him? Why, O man, do you accuse your own children? God did not give us
children for this end, that we should seize the possessions of others. Take care,
lest in saying this thou provoke God. For if you say that your children are the
causes of your grasping and your avarice, I fear lest you be deprived of them, as
injuring and ensnaring you. God has given you children that they may support
your old age, that they may learn virtue from you.
For God on this account has willed that mankind should thus be held
together, providing for two most important objects: on the one hand, appointing
fathers to be teachers, and on the other, implanting great love. For if men were
merely to come into being, no one would have any relation towards any other.
For if now, when there are the relations of fathers, and children, and
grandchildren, many do not regard many, much more would it then be the case.
On this account God has given you children. Do not therefore accuse the
children.
But if they who have children have no excuse, what can they say for
themselves, who having no children wear themselves out about the acquisition of
riches? But they have a saying for themselves, which is destitute of all excuse.
And what is this? That, instead of children we may have, they say, may have our
riches as a memorial. This is truly ridiculous. Instead of children, one says, my
house becomes the immortal memorial of my glory. Not of your glory, O man,
will it be the memorial, but of your covetousness. Do you not see how many
now as they pass the magnificent houses say one to another, What frauds, what
robberies such an one committed, that he might build this house, and now he has
become dust and ashes, and his house has passed into the inheritance of others!