remembers both Himself and the Son, not by the memory of the Son, but
by His own, so does the Son remember both Himself and the Father, not
by the memory of the Father, but by His own. Where, again, there is no
love, who would say there was any wisdom? And hence we must infer that
the Father is in such way His own love, as He is His own understanding
and memory. And therefore these three, i.e. memory, understanding, love
or will in that highest and unchangeable essence which is God, are, we
see, not the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, but the Father alone.
And because the Son too is wisdom begotten of wisdom, as neither the
Father nor the Holy Spirit understands for Him, but He understands for
Himself; so neither does the Father remember for Him, nor the Holy
Spirit love for Him, but He remembers and loves for Himself: for He is
Himself also His own memory, His own understanding, and His own
love. But that He is so comes to Him from the Father, of whom He is
born. And because the Holy Spirit also is wisdom proceeding from
wisdom, He too has not the Father for a memory, and the Son for an
understanding, and Himself for love: for He would not be wisdom if
another remembered for Him, and yet another understood for Him, and
He only loved for Himself; but Himself has all three things, and has them
in such way that they are Himself.But that He is so comes to Him thence,
whence He proceeds.
13. What man, then, is there who can comprehend that wisdom by which
God knows all things, in such wise that neither what we call things past
are past therein, nor what we call things future are therein waited for as
coming, as though they were absent, but both past and future with things
present are all present; nor yet are things thought severally, so that
thought passes from one to another, but all things simultaneously are at
hand in one glance;—what man, I say, is there that comprehends that
wisdom, and the like prudence, and the like knowledge, since in truth
even our own wisdom is beyond our comprehension? For somehow we
are able to behold the things that are present to our senses or to our
understanding; but the things that are absent, and yet have once been
present, we know by memory, if we have not forgotten them. And we
conjecture, too, not the past from the future, but the future from the past,
yet by all unstable knowledge. For there are some of our thoughts to
which, although future, we, as it were, look onward with greater plainness

and certainty as being very near; and we do this by the means of memory
when we are able to do it, as much as we ever are able, although memory
seems to belong not to the future, but to the past. And this may be tried in
the case of any words or songs, the due order of which we are rendering
by memory; for we certainly should not utter each in succession, unless
we foresaw in thought what came next. And yet it is not foresight, but
memory, that enables us to foresee it; for up to the very end of the words
or the song, nothing is uttered except as foreseen and looked forward to.
And yet in doing this, we are not said to speak or sing by foresight, but by
memory; and if any one is more than commonly capable of uttering many
pieces in this way, he is usually praised, not for his foresight, but for his
memory. We know, and are absolutely certain, that all this takes place in
our mind or by our mind; but how it takes place, the more attentively we
desire to scrutinize, the more do both our very words break down, and
our purpose itself fails, when by our understanding, if not our tongue, we
would reach to something of clearness. And do such as we are, think, that
in so great infirmity of mind we can comprehend whether the foresight of
God is the same as His memory and His understanding, who does not
regard in thought each several thing, but embraces all that He knows in
one eternal and unchangeable and ineffable vision? In this difficulty,
then, and strait, we may well cry out to the living God, "Such knowledge
is too wonderful for me: it is high, I cannot attain unto it." For I
understand by myself how wonderful and incomprehensible is Thy
knowledge, by which Thou madest me, when I cannot even comprehend
myself whom Thou hast made! And yet, "while I was musing, the fire
burned," so that "I seek Thy face evermore."