FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.2.

particular virtue, it must needs be that you have none at all."
I answer that, Moral virtue may be considered either as perfect or as
imperfect. An imperfect moral virtue, temperance for instance, or
fortitude, is nothing but an inclination in us to do some kind of good
deed, whether such inclination be in us by nature or by habituation.
If we take the moral virtues in this way, they are not connected: since
we find men who, by natural temperament or by being accustomed,
are prompt in doing deeds of liberality, but are not prompt in doing
deeds of chastity.
But the perfect moral virtue is a habit that inclines us to do a good
deed well; and if we take moral virtues in this way, we must say that
they are connected, as nearly as all are agreed in saying. For this
two reasons are given, corresponding to the different ways of
assigning the distinction of the cardinal virtues. For, as we stated
above (Question 61, Articles 3,4), some distinguish them according
to certain general properties of the virtues: for instance, by saying
that discretion belongs to prudence, rectitude to justice, moderation
to temperance, and strength of mind to fortitude, in whatever matter
we consider these properties to be. In this way the reason for the
connection is evident: for strength of mind is not commended as
virtuous, if it be without moderation or rectitude or discretion: and so
forth. This, too, is the reason assigned for the connection by
Gregory, who says (Moral. xxii, 1) that "a virtue cannot be perfect" as
a virtue, "if isolated from the others: for there can be no true
prudence without temperance, justice and fortitude": and he
continues to speak in like manner of the other virtues (cf. Question
61, Article 4, Objection 1). Augustine also gives the same reason (De
Trin. vi, 4).
Others, however, differentiate these virtues in respect of their
matters, and it is in this way that Aristotle assigns the reason for
their connection (Ethic. vi, 13). Because, as stated above (Question
58, Article 4), no moral virtue can be without prudence; since it is
proper to moral virtue to make a right choice, for it is an elective
habit. Now right choice requires not only the inclination to a due end,
which inclination is the direct outcome of moral virtue, but also
correct choice of things conducive to the end, which choice is made
by prudence, that counsels, judges, and commands in those things
that are directed to the end. In like manner one cannot have
prudence unless one has the moral virtues: since prudence is "right
reason about things to be done," and the starting point of reason is

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.2.

the end of the thing to be done, to which end man is rightly disposed
by moral virtue. Hence, just as we cannot have speculative science
unless we have the understanding of the principles, so neither can
we have prudence without the moral virtues: and from this it follows
clearly that the moral virtues are connected with one another.
Reply to Objection 1: Some moral virtues perfect man as regards his
general state, in other words, with regard to those things which have
to be done in every kind of human life. Hence man needs to exercise
himself at the same time in the matters of all moral virtues. And if he
exercise himself, by good deeds, in all such matters, he will acquire
the habits of all the moral virtues. But if he exercise himself by good
deeds in regard to one matter, but not in regard to another, for
instance, by behaving well in matters of anger, but not in matters of
concupiscence; he will indeed acquire a certain habit of restraining
his anger; but this habit will lack the nature of virtue, through the
absence of prudence, which is wanting in matters of concupiscence.
In the same way, natural inclinations fail to have the complete
character of virtue, if prudence be lacking.
But there are some moral virtues which perfect man with regard to
some eminent state, such as magnificence and magnanimity; and
since it does not happen to all in common to be exercised in the
matter of such virtues, it is possible for a man to have the other
moral virtues, without actually having the habits of these virtues--provided we speak of acquired virtue. Nevertheless, when once a
man has acquired those other virtues he possesses these in
proximate potentiality. Because when, by practice, a man has
acquired liberality in small gifts and expenditure, if he were to come
in for a large sum of money, he would acquire the habit of
magnificence with but little practice: even as a geometrician, by dint
of little study, acquires scientific knowledge about some conclusion
which had never been presented to his mind before. Now we speak
of having a thing when we are on the point of having it, according to
the saying of the Philosopher (Phys. ii, text. 56): "That which is
scarcely lacking is not lacking at all."
This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: The intellectual virtues are about divers
matters having no relation to one another, as is clearly the case with
the various sciences and arts. Hence we do not observe in them the
connection that is to be found among the moral virtues, which are