SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.5.

remain in perpetuity. If, on the other hand, he intend to bind himself
to enter religion for the purpose of trial, while retaining the freedom
to remain or not remain, it is clear that he is not bound to remain. If,
however, in vowing he thought merely of entering religion, without
thinking of being free to leave, or of remaining in perpetuity, it would
seem that he is bound to enter religion according to the form
prescribed by common law, which is that those who enter should be
given a year's probation. Wherefore he is not bound to remain for
ever.
Reply to Objection 1: It is better to enter religion with the purpose of
making a trial than not to enter at all, because by so doing one
disposes oneself to remain always. Nor is a person accounted to
turn or to look back, save when he omits to do that which he
engaged to do: else whoever does a good work for a time, would be
unfit for the kingdom of God, unless he did it always, which is
evidently false.
Reply to Objection 2: A man who has entered religion gives neither
scandal nor bad example by leaving, especially if he do so for a
reasonable motive; and if others are scandalized, it will be passive
scandal on their part, and not active scandal on the part of the
person leaving, since in doing so, he has done what was lawful, and
expedient on account of some reasonable motive, such as sickness,
weakness, and the like.
Reply to Objection 3: He who enters with the purpose of leaving
forthwith, does not seem to fulfil his vow, since this was not his
intention in vowing. Hence he must change that purpose, at least so
as to wish to try whether it is good for him to remain in religion, but
he is not bound to remain for evermore.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether children should be received in religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that children ought not to be received in
religion. Because it is said (Extra, De Regular. et Transeunt. ad
Relig., cap. Nullus): "No one should be tonsured unless he be of
legal age and willing." But children, seemingly, are not of legal age;
nor have they a will of their own, not having perfect use of reason.
Therefore it seems that they ought not to be received in religion.
Objection 2: Further, the state of religion would seem to be a state of
repentance; wherefore religion is derived [Question 81, Article 1]
from "religare" [to bind] or from "re-eligere" [to choose again], as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 3 [De Vera Relig. lv]). But repentance
does not become children. Therefore it seems that they should not
enter religion.
Objection 3: Further, the obligation of a vow is like that of an oath.
But children under the age of fourteen ought not to be bound by oath
(Decret. XXII, qu. v, cap. Pueri and cap. Honestum.). Therefore it
would seem that neither should they be bound by vow.
Objection 4: Further, it is seemingly unlawful to bind a person to an
obligation that can be justly canceled. Now if any persons of unripe
age bind themselves to religion, they can be withdrawn by their
parents or guardians. For it is written in the Decretals (XX, qu. ii, can.
Puella) that "if a maid under twelve years of age shall take the sacred
veil of her own accord, her parents or guardians, if they choose, can
at once declare the deed null and void." It is therefore unlawful for
children, especially of unripe age, to be admitted or bound to
religion.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Mt. 19:14): "Suffer the little children,
and forbid them not to come to Me." Expounding these words Origen
says (Tract. vii in Matth.) that "the disciples of Jesus before they
have been taught the conditions of righteousness [Mt. 19:16-30],
rebuke those who offer children and babes to Christ: but our Lord
urges His disciples to stoop to the service of children. We must
therefore take note of this, lest deeming ourselves to excel in
wisdom we despise the Church's little ones, as though we were
great, and forbid the children to come to Jesus."