by grace. For though they had done ten thousand things, the munificence were of
grace, that in return for services so small and cheap, such a heaven, and a
kingdom, and so great honor, should be given them.
"And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished these sayings, He said unto
His disciples, You know that after two days is the passover, and the Son of Man
is betrayed to be crucified." [Matthew 26:1-2] In good season again does He
speak of the passion, when He had reminded them of the kingdom, and of the
recompense there, and of the deathless punishment; as though He had said, Why
are you afraid at the dangers that are for a season, when such good things await
you?
3. But mark thou, I pray you, how He has in all His first sayings after a new
manner worked up and thrown into the shade what was most painful to them.
For He said not, You know that after two days I am betrayed, but, "You know
that after two days is the passover," to show that what is done is a mystery and
that a feast and celebration is being kept for the salvation of the world, and that
with foreknowledge He suffered all. So then, as though this were sufficient
consolation for them, He did not even say anything to them now about a
resurrection; for it was superfluous, after having discoursed so much about it, to
speak of it again. And moreover, as I said, He shows that even His very passion
is a deliverance from countless evils, having by the passover reminded them of
the ancient benefits in Egypt.
"Then were assembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the
elders of the people, in the palace of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,
and consulted that they might take Jesus by subtlety, and kill Him. But they said,
Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the people."
Do you see the unspeakable corruption of the Jewish state? Attempting
unlawful acts, they come to the high priest, desiring to obtain their authority
from that quarter, whence they ought to have found hindrance.
And how many high priests were there? For the law wills there should be
one, but then there were many. Whence it is manifest, that the Jewish

constitution had begun to dissolve. For Moses, as I said, commanded there
should be one, and that when he was dead there should be another, and by the
life of this person He measured the banishment of them that had involuntarily
committed manslaughter. How then were there at that time many high priests?
They were afterwards made for a year. And this the evangelist declared, when he
was speaking of Zacharias, saying, that he was of the course of Abia. Those
therefore does he here call high priests, who had been high priests.
What did they consult together? That they might seize Him secretly, or that
they might put Him to death? Both; for they feared the people. Wherefore also
they waited for the feast to be past; for "they said, Not on the feast day." For the
devil, lest he should make the passion conspicuous, was not willing it should
take place at the passover; but they, lest there should be an uproar. Mark them
then ever fearing, not the ills from God, neither lest any greater pollution should
arise to them from the season, but in every case the ills from men.
Yet for all this, boiling with anger, they changed their purpose again. For
though they had said, "Not at the feast time;" when they found the traitor, they
waited not for the time, but slew Him at the feast. But why did they take Him
then? They were boiling with rage, as I said; and they expected then to find Him,
and all things they did as blinded. For though He Himself made the greatest use
of their wickedness for His own dispensation, they were not surely for this
guiltless, but deserving of inflictions without number for their temper of mind.
At least when all should be set free, even the guilty, then these men slew the
guiltless, Him that had conferred on them countless benefits, and who for a time
had neglected the Gentiles for their sake. But O loving-kindness! Them that
were thus depraved, them that were thus froward, and full of countless evils, He
again saves, and sends the apostles to be slain in their behalf, and by the apostles
makes entreaty. "For we are ambassadors for Christ."
Having then such patterns as these, I say not, let us die for our enemies, for
we ought to do even this; but since we are too feeble for this, I say for the
present, at least let us not look with an evil eye upon our friends, let us not envy