For the attempts at defense were unprofitable, no man hearing. For this was
a show only of a court of justice, but in truth an onset of robbers, assailing Him
without cause, as in a cave, or on a road.
Wherefore "He held His peace," but the other continued, saying, "I adjure
You by the living God, that Thou tell us whether Thou be the Christ, the Son of
the living God. But He said, You have said. Nevertheless I say unto you,
Hereafter shall you see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds. Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He has
spoken blasphemy." And this he did to add force to the accusation, and to
aggravate what He said, by the act. For since what had been said moved the
hearers to fear, what they did about Stephen, [Acts 7:59] stopping their ears, this
high priest does here also.
3. And yet what kind of blasphemy was this? For indeed before He had
said, when they were gathered together, "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit on my
right hand," [Matthew 22:43-46] and interpreted the saying, and they dared say
nothing, but held their peace, and from that time forth gainsaid Him no more.
Why then did they now call the saying a blasphemy? And wherefore also did
Christ thus answer them? To take away all their excuse, because unto the last day
He taught that He was Christ, and that He sits at the right hand of the Father, and
that He will come again to judge the world, which was the language of one
manifesting His full accordance with the Father.
Having rent therefore his clothes, he says, "What do you think?"
[Matthew 26:66] He gives not the sentence from himself, but invites it from
them, as in a case of confessed sins, and manifest blasphemy. For, inasmuch as
they knew that if the thing came to be inquired into, and carefully decided, it
would free Him from all blame, they condemn Him among themselves, and
anticipate the hearers by saying, "You have heard the blasphemy;" all but
necessitating and forcing them to deliver the sentence. What then say they? "He
is guilty of death;" that having taken Him as condemned, they should thus work
upon Pilate thereupon to pass sentence. In which matter those others also being

accomplices say, "He is guilty of death;" themselves accusing, themselves
judging, themselves passing sentence, themselves being everything then.
But wherefore did they not bring forward the Sabbaths? Because He had
often stopped their mouths; and moreover they wanted to take Him, and
condemn Him by the things then said. And the high priest anticipated them, and
gave the sentence as from them, and drew them all on by rending his vestments,
and having led Him away as now condemned unto Pilate, thus did all.
Before Pilate at any rate they said nothing of this kind, but what? "If this
Man were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered Him up unto you;"
attempting to put Him to death by political accusations. And wherefore did they
not slay Him secretly? They were desirous also to bring up an evil report against
His fame. For since many had now heard Him, and were admiring Him, and
amazed at Him, therefore they endeavored that He should be put to death
publicly, and in the presence of all.
But Christ hindered it not, but made full use of their wickedness for the
establishment of the truth, so that His death should be manifest. And the result
was the contrary to what they wished. For they wished to make a show of it, as
in this way disgracing Him, but He even by these very things shone forth the
more. And much as they said, "Let us put Him to death, lest the Romans come
and take away our place and nation;" and after they had put Him to death, this
came to pass; so also here; their object was to crucify Him publicly, that they
might injure His fame, and the contrary result took place.
For in proof that indeed they had power to have put Him to death, even
among themselves, hear what Pilate says: "Take ye Him, and judge Him
according to your law." [John 18:31] But they would not, that He might seem to
have been put to death as a transgressor, as an usurper, as a mover of sedition.
Therefore also they crucified thieves with Him; therefore also they said, "Write
not that this man is King of the Jews; but that He said it."
But all these things are done for the truth, so that they might not have so
much as any shadow of a defense that is surely shameless. And at the sepulchre