inasmuch as there are deceivers. "Sons of disobedience"; he thus calls those who
are utterly disobedient, those who disobey Him.
Ver. 7, 8. "Be not ye, therefore, partakers with them. For you were once
darkness, but are now light in the Lord."
Observe how wisely he urges them forward; first, from the thought of
Christ, that you love one another, and do injury to no man; then, on the other
hand, from the thought of punishment and hell-fire. "For you were once
darkness," says he, "but are now light in the Lord." Which is what he says also
in the Epistle to the Romans; "What fruit then had ye at that time in the things
whereof you are now ashamed?" [Romans 6:21], and reminds them of their
former wickedness. That is to say, thinking what ye once were, and what you are
now become, do not run back into your former wickedness, nor do "despite to
the grace" [Hebrews 10:29] of God.
"You were once darkness, but are now light in the Lord!"
Not, he says, by your own virtue, but through the grace of God has this
accrued to you. That is to say, you also were sometime worthy of the same
punishments, but now are so no more. "Walk" therefore "as children of light."
What is meant however by "children of light," he adds afterwards.
Ver. 9, 10. "For the fruit of the light is in all goodness and righteousness
and truth, proving what is well-pleasing unto the Lord."
"In all goodness," he says: this is opposed to the angry, and the bitter: "and
righteousness"; this to the covetous: "and truth"; this to false pleasure: not those
former things, he says, which I was mentioning, but their opposites. "In all"; that
is, the fruit of the Spirit ought to be evinced in everything. "Proving what is
well-pleasing unto the Lord"; so that those things are tokens of a childish and
imperfect mind.
Ver. 11, 12, 13. "And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather even reprove them. For the things which are done by them
in secret it is a shame even to speak of. But all things when they are reproved,
are made manifest by the light."

He had said, "you are light." Now the light reproves by exposing the things
which take place in the darkness. So that if you, says he, are virtuous, and
conspicuous, the wicked will be unable to lie hidden. For just as when a candle
is set, all are brought to light, and the thief cannot enter; so if your light shine,
the wicked being discovered shall be caught. So then it is our duty to expose
them. How then does our Lord say, "Judge not, that you be not judged"?
[Matthew 7:1-3] Paul did not say "judge," he said "reprove," that is, correct. And
the words, "Judge not, that you be not judged," He spoke with reference to very
small errors. Indeed, He added, "Why do you behold the mote that is in your
brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in your own eye?" But what
Paul is saying is of this sort. As a wound, so long as it is imbedded and
concealed outwardly, and runs beneath the surface, receives no attention, so also
sin, as long as it is concealed, being as it were in darkness, is daringly committed
in full security; but as soon as "it is made manifest," becomes "light"; not indeed
the sin itself, (for how could that be?) but the sinner. For when he has been
brought out to light, when he has been admonished, when he has repented, when
he has obtained pardon, have you not cleared away all his darkness? Have you
not then healed his wound? Have you not called his unfruitfulness into fruit?
Either this is his meaning, or else what I said above, that your life "being
manifest, is light." For no one hides an irreproachable life; whereas things which
are hidden, are hidden by darkness covering them.
Ver. 14. "Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall shine upon you."
By the "sleeper" and the "dead," he means the man that is in sin; for he
both exhales noisome odors like the dead, and is inactive like one that is asleep,
and like him he sees nothing, but is dreaming, and forming fancies and illusions.
Some indeed read, "And you shall touch Christ"; but others, "And Christ shall
shine upon you"; and it is rather this latter. Depart from sin, and you shall be able
to behold Christ. "For every one that does ill, hates the light, and comes not to
the light." [John 3:20] He therefore that does it not, comes to the light.