FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.6.

getting drunk, for in that case the drunkenness is not imputed to him
as a sin, but only the excessive drink. If, however, he gets drunk
frequently, this ignorance no longer avails as an excuse, for his will
seems to choose to give way to drunkenness rather than to refrain
from excess of wine: wherefore the sin returns to its specific nature.
Reply to Objection 2: Morose delectation is not a mortal sin except in
those matters which are mortal sins generically. In such matters, if
the delectation be not morose, there is a venial sin through
imperfection of the act, as we have said with regard to anger (ad 1):
because anger is said to be lasting, and delectation to be morose, on
account of the approval of the deliberating reason.
Reply to Objection 3: A circumstance does not make a good act to
be evil, unless it constitute the species of a sin, as we have stated
above (Question 18, Article 5, ad 4).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether a mortal sin can become venial?

Objection 1: It would seem that a mortal sin can become venial.
Because venial sin is equally distant from mortal, as mortal sin is
from venial. But a venial sin can become mortal, as stated above
(Article 5). Therefore also a mortal sin can become venial.
Objection 2: Further, venial and mortal sin are said to differ in this,
that he who sins mortally loves a creature more than God, while he
who sins venially loves the creature less than God. Now it may
happen that a person in committing a sin generically mortal, loves a
creature less than God; for instance, if anyone being ignorant that
simple fornication is a mortal sin, and contrary to the love of God,
commits the sin of fornication, yet so as to be ready, for the love of
God, to refrain from that sin if he knew that by committing it he was
acting counter to the love of God. Therefore his will be a venial sin;
and accordingly a mortal sin can become venial.
Objection 3: Further, as stated above (Article 5, Objection 3), good is
more distant from evil, than venial from mortal sin. But an act which
is evil in itself, can become good; thus to kill a man may be an act of
justice, as when a judge condemns a thief to death. Much more
therefore can a mortal sin become venial.
On the contrary, An eternal thing can never become temporal. But
mortal sin deserves eternal punishment, whereas venial sin deserves
temporal punishment. Therefore a mortal sin can never become
venial.
I answer that, Venial and mortal differ as perfect and imperfect in the
genus of sin, as stated above (Article 1, ad 1). Now the imperfect can
become perfect, by some sort of addition: and, consequently, a
venial sin can become mortal, by the addition of some deformity
pertaining to the genus of mortal sin, as when a man utters an idle
word for the purpose of fornication. On the other hand, the perfect
cannot become imperfect, by addition; and so a mortal sin cannot
become venial, by the addition of a deformity pertaining to the genus
of venial sin, for the sin is not diminished if a man commit
fornication in order to utter an idle word; rather is it aggravated by
the additional deformity.