SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.6.

a person's request for the bestowal of a temporary favor is directed
to some kind of usefulness which has a pecuniary value. Wherefore
just as a man contracts the guilt of simony by accepting money or
any eternal thing which comes under the head of "real
remuneration," so too does he contract it, by receiving "oral
remuneration" or an "equivalent in service rendered."
Reply to Objection 1: If a cleric renders a prelate a lawful service,
directed to spiritual things (e.g. to the good of the Church, or benefit
of her ministers), he becomes worthy of an ecclesiastical benefice by
reason of the devotion that led him to render the service, as he
would by reason of any other good deed. Hence this is not a case of
remuneration for service rendered, such as Gregory has in mind. But
if the service be unlawful, or directed to carnal things (e.g. a service
rendered to the prelate for the profit of his kindred, or the increase of
his patrimony, or the like), it will be a case of remuneration for
service rendered, and this will be simony.
Reply to Objection 2: The bestowal of a spiritual thing gratis on a
person by reason of kinship or of any carnal affection is unlawful
and carnal, but not simoniacal: since nothing is received in return,
wherefore it does not imply a contract of buying and selling, on
which simony is based. But to present a person to an ecclesiastical
benefice with the understanding or intention that he provide for
one's kindred from the revenue is manifest simony.
Reply to Objection 3: Oral remuneration denotes either praise that
pertains to human favor, which has its price, or a request whereby
man's favor is obtained or the contrary avoided. Hence if one intend
this chiefly one commits simony. Now to grant a request made for an
unworthy person implies, seemingly, that this is one's chief intention
wherefore the deed itself is simoniacal. But if the request be made
for a worthy person, the deed itself is not simoniacal, because it is
based on a worthy cause, on account of which a spiritual thing is
granted to the person for whom the request is made. Nevertheless
there may be simony in the intention, if one look, not to the
worthiness of the person, but to human favor. If, however, a person
asks for himself, that he may obtain the cure of souls, his very
presumption renders him unworthy, and so his request is made for
an unworthy person. But, if one be in need, one may lawfully seek for
oneself an ecclesiastical benefice without the cure of souls.
Reply to Objection 4: A hypocrite does not give a spiritual thing for

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.99, C.6.

the sake of praise, he only makes a show of it, and under false
pretenses stealthily purloins rather than buys human praise: so that
seemingly the hypocrite is not guilty of simony.