it is not uttered according as it really is, but as it can be seen or heard by
the body. When, therefore, that is in the word which is in the knowledge,
then there is a true word, and truth, such as is looked for from man; such
that what is in the knowledge is also in the word, and what is not in the
knowledge is also not in the word. Here may be recognized, "Yea, yea;
nay, nay." And so this likeness of the image that is made, approaches as
nearly as is possible to that likeness of the image that is born, by which
God the Son is declared to be in all things like in substance to the Father.
We must notice in this enigma also another likeness of the word of God;
viz. that, as it is said of that Word, "All things were made by Him," where
God is declared to have made the universe by His only-begotten Son, so
there are no works of man that are not first spoken in his heart: whence it
is written, "A word is the beginning of every work." But here also, it is
when the word is true, that then it is the beginning of a good work. And a
word is true when it is begotten from the knowledge of working good
works, so that there too may be preserved the "yea yea, nay nay;" in order
that whatever is in that knowledge by which we are to live, may be also in
the word by which we are to work, and whatever is not in the one may not
be in the other. Otherwise such a word will be a lie, not truth; and what
comes thence will be a sin, and not a good work. There is yet this other
likeness of the Word of God in this likeness of our word, that there can be
a word of ours with no work following it, but there cannot be any work
unless a word precedes; just as the Word of God could have existed
though no creature existed, but no creature could exist unless by that
Word by which all things are made. And therefore not God the Father,
not the Holy Spirit, not the Trinity itself, but the Son only, which is the
Word of God, was made flesh; although the Trinity was the maker: in
order that we might live rightly through our word following and imitating
His example, i.e. by having no lie in either the thought or the work of our
word. But this perfection of this image is one to be at some time
hereafter. In order to attain this it is that the good master teaches us by
Christian faith, and by pious doctrine, that "with face unveiled" from the
veil of the law, which is the shadow of things to come, "beholding as in a
glass the glory of the Lord," i.e. gazing at it through a glass, "we may be
transformed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of
the Lord;" as we explained above.

21. When, therefore, this image shall have been renewed to perfection by
this transformation, then we shall be like God, because we shall see Him,
not through a glass, but "as He is;" which the Apostle Paul expresses by
"face to face." But now, who can explain how great is the unlikeness
also, in this glass, in this enigma, in this likeness such as it is? Yet I will
touch upon some points, as I can, by which to indicate it.