THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.63, C.5.

character disposes the soul directly and proximately to the fulfilling
of things pertaining to Divine worship: and because such cannot be
accomplished suitably without the help of grace, since, according to
Jn. 4:24, "they that adore" God "must adore Him in spirit and in
truth," consequently, the Divine bounty bestows grace on those who
receive the character, so that they may accomplish worthily the
service to which they are deputed. Therefore the subject should be
ascribed to a character in respect of those actions that pertain to the
Divine worship, rather than in respect of grace.
Reply to Objection 2: The subject of the natural power, which flows
from the principles of the essence. Now a character is not a power of
this kind. but a spiritual power coming from without. Wherefore, just
as the essence of the soul, from which man has his natural life, is
perfected by grace from which the soul derives spiritual life; so the
natural power of the soul is perfected by a spiritual power, which is a
character. For habit and disposition belong to a power of the soul,
since they are ordained to actions of which the powers are the
principles. And in like manner whatever is ordained to action, should
be attributed to a power.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above, a character is ordained unto
things pertaining to the Divine worship; which is a protestation of
faith expressed by exterior signs. Consequently, a character needs
to be in the soul's cognitive power, where also is faith.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.63, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a character can be blotted out from the

soul?
Objection 1: It seems that a character can be blotted out from the
soul. Because the more perfect an accident is, the more firmly does
it adhere to its subject. But grace is more perfect than a character;
because a character is ordained unto grace as to a further end. Now
grace is lost through sin. Much more, therefore, is a character so
lost.
Objection 2: Further, by a character a man is deputed to the Divine
worship, as stated above (Articles 3,4). But some pass from the
worship of God to a contrary worship by apostasy from the faith. It
seems, therefore, that such lose the sacramental character.
Objection 3: Further, when the end ceases, the means to the end
should cease also: thus after the resurrection there will be no
marriage, because begetting will cease, which is the purpose of
marriage. Now the exterior worship to which a character is ordained,
will not endure in heaven, where there will be no shadows, but all will
be truth without a veil. Therefore the sacramental character does not
last in the soul for ever: and consequently it can be blotted out.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Contra Parmen. ii): "The Christian
sacraments are not less lasting than the bodily mark" of military
service. But the character of military service is not repeated, but is
"recognized and approved" in the man who obtains the emperor's
forgiveness after offending him. Therefore neither can the
sacramental character be blotted out.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3), in a sacramental character
Christ's faithful have a share in His Priesthood; in the sense that as
Christ has the full power of a spiritual priesthood, so His faithful are
likened to Him by sharing a certain spiritual power with regard to the
sacraments and to things pertaining to the Divine worship. For this
reason it is unbecoming that Christ should have a character: but His
Priesthood is compared to a character, as that which is complete
and perfect is compared to some participation of itself. Now Christ's
Priesthood is eternal, according to Ps. 109:4: "Thou art a priest for
ever, according to the order of Melchisedech." Consequently, every
sanctification wrought by His Priesthood, is perpetual, enduring as