2. "He took therefore the five loaves, and the two fishes, and commanded
the multitude," it is said, "to sit down upon the grass, and looking up to Heaven,
He blessed, and broke, and gave to His disciples, and the disciples to the
multitude. And they did all eat and were filled, and they took up of the fragments
that remained twelve baskets full. And they that had eaten were about five
thousand men, beside women and children."
Wherefore did He look up to Heaven, and bless? It was to be believed of
Him, both that He is of the Father, and that He is equal to Him. But the proofs of
these things seemed to oppose one another. For while His equality was indicated
by His doing all with authority, of His origin from the Father they could no
otherwise be persuaded, than by His doing all with great lowliness, and with
reference to Him, and invoking Him on His works. Wherefore we see that He
neither did these actions only, nor those, that both might be confirmed; and now
He works miracles with authority, now with prayer.
Then again, that what He did might not seem an inconsistency, in the lesser
things He looks up to Heaven, but in the greater does all with authority; to teach
you in the lesser also, that not as receiving power from elsewhere, but as
honoring Him that begot Him, so He acts. For example: when He forgave sins,
and opened paradise, and brought in the thief, and most utterly set aside the old
law, and raised innumerable dead, and bridled the sea, and reproved the unuttered thoughts of men, and created an eye—which are achievements of God
only and of none else—we see Him in no instance praying: but when He
provided for the loaves to multiply themselves, a far less thing than all these,
then He looks up to Heaven; at once establishing these truths which I have
spoken of, and instructing us not to touch a meal, until we have given thanks to
Him who gives us this food.
And why does He not make it of things that are not? Stopping the mouth of
Marcion, and of Manichæans, who alienate His creation from Him, and teaching
by His very works, that even all the things that are seen are His works and
creatures, and signifying that it is Himself who gives the fruits, who said at the

beginning, "Let the earth put forth the herb of grass," and "Let the waters bring
forth things moving with living souls."
For this is not at all a less work than the other. For though those were made
of things that are not, yet nevertheless were they of water; and it was no greater
thing to produce fruits out of the earth, and moving things with life out of the
water, than out of five loaves to make so many; and of fishes again, which was a
sign that He was ruler both of the earth and of the sea.
Thus, since the sick were constantly the subject of His miracles, He works
also a general benefit, that the many might not be spectators only of what befell
others, but themselves also partakers of the gift.
And that which in the wilderness seemed to the Jews marvellous, (they said
at least, "Can He give bread also? Or prepare a table in the wilderness?" ) this
He shows forth in His works. With this view also He leads them into the
wilderness, that the miracle might be very far beyond suspicion, and that no one
might think that any village lying near contributed ought to the meal. For this
reason He mentions the hour also, not the place only.
And another thing too we learn, the self-restraint of the disciples which they
practised in necessary things, and how little they accounted of food. For being
twelve, they had five loaves only and two fishes; so secondary to them were the
things of the body: so did they cling to the things spiritual only.
And not even that little did they hold fast, but gave up even it when asked.
Whereby we should be taught, that though we have but little, this too we ought
to give up to them that are in need. Thus, when commanded to bring the five
loaves, they say not, "and whence are we to have food? Whence to appease our
own hunger?" but they obey at once.
And besides what I have mentioned, to this end, as I at least think, He
makes it out of the materials which they had, namely, that He might lead them to
faith; for as yet they were rather in a weak state.
Wherefore also "He looks up to Heaven." For of the other miracles they had
many examples, but of this none.