because, as was said above (Article 4), the mode of knowledge
follows the mode of the nature of the knower. But our soul, as long
as we live in this life, has its being in corporeal matter; hence
naturally it knows only what has a form in matter, or what can be
known by such a form. Now it is evident that the Divine essence
cannot be known through the nature of material things. For it was
shown above (Articles 2,9) that the knowledge of God by means of
any created similitude is not the vision of His essence. Hence it is
impossible for the soul of man in this life to see the essence of God.
This can be seen in the fact that the more our soul is abstracted from
corporeal things, the more it is capable of receiving abstract
intelligible things. Hence in dreams and alienations of the bodily
senses divine revelations and foresight of future events are
perceived the more clearly. It is not possible, therefore, that the soul
in this mortal life should be raised up to the supreme of intelligible
objects, i.e. to the divine essence.
Reply to Objection 1: According to Dionysius (Coel. Hier. iv) a man is
said in the Scriptures to see God in the sense that certain figures are
formed in the senses or imagination, according to some similitude
representing in part the divinity. So when Jacob says, "I have seen
God face to face," this does not mean the Divine essence, but some
figure representing God. And this is to be referred to some high
mode of prophecy, so that God seems to speak, though in an
imaginary vision; as will later be explained (SS, Question 174) in
treating of the degrees of prophecy. We may also say that Jacob
spoke thus to designate some exalted intellectual contemplation,
above the ordinary state.
Reply to Objection 2: As God works miracles in corporeal things, so
also He does supernatural wonders above the common order,
raising the minds of some living in the flesh beyond the use of
sense, even up to the vision of His own essence; as Augustine says
(Gen. ad lit. xii, 26,27,28) of Moses, the teacher of the Jews; and of
Paul, the teacher of the Gentiles. This will be treated more fully in the
question of rapture (SS, Question 175).
Reply to Objection 3: All things are said to be seen in God and all
things are judged in Him, because by the participation of His light,
we know and judge all things; for the light of natural reason itself is a
participation of the divine light; as likewise we are said to see and
judge of sensible things in the sun, i.e., by the sun's light. Hence
Augustine says (Soliloq. i, 8), "The lessons of instruction can only be

seen as it were by their own sun," namely God. As therefore in order
to see a sensible object, it is not necessary to see the substance of
the sun, so in like manner to see any intelligible object, it is not
necessary to see the essence of God.
Reply to Objection 4: Intellectual vision is of the things which are in
the soul by their essence, as intelligible things are in the intellect.
And thus God is in the souls of the blessed; not thus is He in our
soul, but by presence, essence and power.