enjoyment, and wealth. Therefore, if you would have the things and not the
names, leave the earth and what is here, and find you a place to anchor in
Heaven: for what is here is a shadow, but all things there are immovable,
steadfast, and beyond any assault.
Let us therefore choose them with all diligent care, that we may be
delivered from the turmoil of the things here, and having sailed into that calm
harbor, may be found with our lading abundant, and with that unspeakable
wealth of almsgiving; unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the might,
world without end. Amen.

## Homily 24 on Matthew

Matt. VII. 21.
"Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven."
Wherefore said He not, "but he that does my will?" Because for the time it
was a great gain for them to receive even this first; yea it was very great,
considering their weakness. And moreover He intimated the one also by the
other. And withal this may be mentioned, that in fact there is no other will of the
Son besides that of the Father.
And here He seems to me to be censuring the Jews chiefly, laying as they
did the whole stress upon the doctrines, and taking no care of practice. For which
Paul also blames them, saying, "Behold you are called a Jew, and restest in the
law, and makest your boast of God, and know His will:" "Who then are these
men?" you ask. Many of them that believed received gifts such as he that was
casting out devils, and was not with Him; such as Judas; for even he too, wicked
as he was, had a gift. And in the Old Testament also this may be found, in that
grace has oftentimes wrought upon unworthy persons, that it might do good to
others. That is, since all men were not meet for all things, but some were of a
pure life, not having so great faith, and others just the contrary; by these sayings,
while He urges the one to show forth much faith, the others too He was
summoning by this His unspeakable gift to become better men. Wherefore also
with great abundance did He bestow that grace. For "we wrought," it is said,
"many mighty works." But "then will I profess unto them, I knew you not." For
"now indeed they suppose they are my friends; but then shall they know, that not
as to friends did I give to them."
And why marvel if He has bestowed gifts on men that have believed on
Him, though without life suitable to their faith, when even on those who have

fallen from both these, He is unquestionably found working? For so Balaam was
an alien both from faith and from a truly good life; nevertheless grace wrought
on him for the service of other men. And Pharaoh too was of the same sort: yet
for all that even to him He signified the things to come. And Nebuchadnezzar
was very full of iniquity; yet to him again He revealed what was to follow after
many generations. [Daniel iii] And again to the son of this last, though
surpassing his father in iniquity, He signified the things to come, ordering a
marvellous and great dispensation. [Daniel v] Accordingly because then also the
beginnings of the gospel were taking place, and it was requisite that the
manifestation of its power should be abundant, many even of the unworthy used
to receive gifts. Howbeit, from those miracles no gain accrued to them; rather
they are the more punished. Wherefore unto them did He utter even that fearful
saying, "I never knew you:" there being many for whom His hatred begins
already even here; whom He turns away from, even before the judgment.
Let us fear therefore, beloved; and let us take great heed to our life, neither
let us account ourselves worse off, in that we do not work miracles now. For that
will never be any advantage to us, as neither any disadvantage in our not
working them, if we take heed to all virtue. Because for the miracles we
ourselves are debtors, but for our life and our doings we have God our debtor.
3. Having now, you see, finished all, having discoursed accurately of all
virtue, and pointed out the pretenders to it, of various kinds, both such as for
display fast and make prayers, and such as come in the sheep's hide; and them
too that spoil it, whom He also called swine and dogs: He proceeds to signify
how great is the profit of virtue even here, and how great the mischief of
wickedness, by saying,
"Whosoever therefore hears these sayings of mine, and does them, shall be
likened unto a wise man."
As thus: What they shall suffer who do not (although they work miracles),
you have heard; but you should know also what such as obey all these sayings
shall enjoy; not in the world to come only, but even here. "For whosoever," says