He, "hears these sayings of mine, and does them, shall be likened to a wise
man."
Do you see how He varies His discourse; at one time saying, "Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord," and revealing Himself; at another time, "He that
does the will of my Father;" and again, bringing in Himself as judge, "For many
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in your name, and
I will say, I know you not." And here again He indicates Himself to have the
power over all, this being why He said, "Whosoever hears these sayings of
mine."
Thus whereas all His discourse had been touching the future; of a kingdom,
and an unspeakable reward and consolation, and the like; His will is, out of
things here also to give them their fruits, and to signify how great is the strength
of virtue even in the present life. What then is this her strength? To live in safety,
to be easily subdued by no terror, to stand superior to all that despitefully use us.
To this what can be equal? For this, not even he that wears the diadem can
provide for himself, but that man who follows after virtue. For he alone is
possessed of it in full abundance: in the ebb and flow of the things present he
enjoys a great calm. The truly marvellous thing being this, that not in fair
weather, but when the storm is vehement, and the turmoil great, and the
temptations continual, he cannot be shaken ever so little.
"For the rain descended," says He, "the floods came, the winds blew, and
beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon the rock."
[Matthew 7:25]
By "rain" here, and "floods," and "winds," He is expressing metaphorically
the calamities and afflictions that befall men; such as false accusations, plots,
bereavements, deaths, loss of friends, vexations from strangers, all the ills in our
life that any one could mention. "But to none of these," says He, "does such a
soul give way; and the cause is, it is founded on the rock." He calls the
steadfastness of His doctrine a rock; because in truth His commands are stronger
than any rock, setting one above all the waves of human affairs. For he who

keeps these things strictly, will not have the advantage of men only when they
are vexing him, but even of the very devils plotting against him. And that it is
not vain boasting so to speak, Job is our witness, who received all the assaults of
the devil, and stood unmoveable; and the apostles too are our witnesses, for that
when the waves of the whole world were beating against them, when both
nations and princes, both their own people and strangers, both the evil spirits,
and the devil, and every engine was set in motion, they stood firmer than a rock,
and dispersed it all.
And now, what can be happier than this kind of life? For this, not wealth,
not strength of body, not glory, not power, nor ought else will be able to secure,
but only the possession of virtue. For there is not, nay there is not another life we
may find free from all evils, but this alone. And you are witnesses, who know
the plots in king's courts, the turmoils and the troubles in the houses of the rich.
But there was not among the apostles any such thing.
What then? Did no such thing befall them? Did they suffer no evil at any
man's hand? Nay, the marvel is this above all things, that they were indeed the
object of many plots, and many storms burst upon them, but their soul was not
overset by them, nor thrown into despair, but with naked bodies they wrestled,
prevailed, and triumphed.
Thou then likewise, if you be willing to perform these things exactly, shall
laugh all ills to scorn. Yea, for if you be but strengthened with such philosophy
as is in these admonitions, nothing shall be able to hurt you. Since in what is he
to harm you, who is minded to lay plots? Will he take away your money? Well,
but before their threatening you were commanded to despise it, and to abstain
from it so exceedingly, as not so much as even to ask any such thing of your
Lord. But does he cast you into prison? Why, before your prison, you were
enjoined so to live, as to be crucified even to all the world. But does he speak
evil? Nay, from this pain also Christ has delivered you, by promising you
without toil a great reward for the endurance of evil, and making you so clear
from the anger and vexation hence arising, as even to command you to pray for