Matt. v. 34.

the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves." And what reason had He for thus
doing and saying, and vindicating His house, if He did preach another God? But [He did so], that
He might point out the transgressors of His Father's law; for neither did He bring any accusation
against the house, nor did He blame the law, which He had come to fulfil; but He reproved those
who were putting His house to an improper use, and those who were transgressing the law. And
therefore the scribes and Pharisees, too, who from the times of the law had begun to despise God,
did not receive His Word, that is, they did not believe on Christ. Of these Esaias says: "Thy princes
are rebellious, companions of thieves, loving gifts, following after rewards, not judging the fatherless,
and negligent of the cause of the widows." And Jeremiah, in like manner: "They," he says, "who
rule my people did not know me; they are senseless and imprudent children; they are wise to do
evil, but to do well they have no knowledge."
8. But as many as feared God, and were anxious about His law, these ran to Christ, and were
all saved. For He said to His disciples: "Go ye to the sheep of the house of Israel, which have
perished." And many more Samaritans, it is said, when the Lord had tarried among them, two days,
"believed because of His words, and said to the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying,
for we ourselves have heard [Him], and know that this man is truly the Saviour of the world."
And Paul likewise declares, "And so all Israel shall be saved;" but he has also said, that the law
was our pedagogue [to bring us] to Christ Jesus. Let them not therefore ascribe to the law the
unbelief of certain [among them]. For the law never hindered them from believing in the Son of
God; nay, but it even exhorted them so to do, saying that men can be saved in no other way
from the old wound of the serpent than by believing in Him who, in the likeness of sinful flesh, is
lifted up from the earth upon the tree of martyrdom, and draws all things to Himself, and vivifies
the dead.

Matt. x. 6.

### Chapter III.—Answer to the cavils of the Gnostics. We are not to suppose that the true God
can be changed, or come to an end because the heavens, which are His throne and the earth,
His footstool, shall pass away.
1. Again, as to their malignantly asserting that if heaven is indeed the throne of God, and earth
His footstool, and if it is declared that the heaven and earth shall pass away, then when these pass
away the God who sitteth above must also pass away, and therefore He cannot be the God who is
over all; in the first place, they are ignorant what the expression means, that heaven is [His] throne
and earth [His] footstool. For they do not know what God is, but they imagine that He sits after the
fashion of a man, and is contained within bounds, but does not contain. And they are also
unacquainted with [the meaning of] the passing away of the heaven and earth; but Paul was not
ignorant of it when he declared, "For the figure of this world passeth away." In the next place,
David explains their question, for he says that when the fashion of this world passes away, not only
shall God remain, but His servants also, expressing himself thus in the 101st Psalm: "In the
beginning, Thou, O Lord, hast founded the earth, and the heavens are the works of Thy hands. They
shall perish, but Thou shalt endure, and all shall wax old as a garment; and as a vesture Thou shalt
change them, and they shall be changed: but Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail. The
children of Thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established for ever;" pointing
out plainly what things they are that pass away, and who it is that doth endure for ever—God,
together with His servants. And in like manner Esaias says: "Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and
look upon the earth beneath; for the heaven has been set together as smoke, and the earth shall wax
old like a garment, and they who dwell therein shall die in like manner. But my salvation shall be
for ever, and my righteousness shall not pass away."