animal, of those on the right and those on the left, of the light and of the heavy, and of those tending
upwards as well as of those tending downwards. He created also seven heavens, above which they
say that he, the Demiurge, exists. And on this account they term him Hebdomas, and his mother
Achamoth Ogdoads, preserving the number of the first-begotten and primary Ogdoad as the Pleroma.
They affirm, moreover, that these seven heavens are intelligent, and speak of them as being angels,
while they refer to the Demiurge himself as being an angel bearing a likeness to God; and in the
same strain, they declare that Paradise, situated above the third heaven, is a fourth angel possessed
of power, from whom Adam derived certain qualities while he conversed with him.
3. They go on to say that the Demiurge imagined that he created all these things of himself,
while he in reality made them in conjunction with the productive power of Achamoth. He formed
the heavens, yet was ignorant of the heavens; he fashioned man, yet knew not man; he brought to
light the earth, yet had no acquaintance with the earth; and, in like manner, they declare that he
was ignorant of the forms of all that he made, and knew not even of the existence of his own mother,
but imagined that he himself was all things. They further affirm that his mother originated this
opinion in his mind, because she desired to bring him forth possessed of such a character that he
should be the head and source of his own essence, and the absolute ruler over every kind of operation
[that was afterwards attempted]. This mother they also call Ogdoad, Sophia, Terra, Jerusalem, Holy
Spirit, and, with a masculine reference, Lord. Her place of habitation is an intermediate one,
above the Demiurge indeed, but below and outside of the Pleroma, even to the end.
4. As, then, they represent all material substance to be formed from three passions, viz., fear,
grief, and perplexity, the account they give is as follows: Animal substances originated from fear
and from conversion; the Demiurge they also describe as owing his origin to conversion; but the
existence of all the other animal substances they ascribe to fear, such as the souls of irrational
animals, and of wild beasts, and men. And on this account, he (the Demiurge), being incapable of
recognising any spiritual essences, imagined himself to be God alone, and declared through the
prophets, "I am God, and besides me there is none else." They further teach that the spirits of
wickedness derived their origin from grief. Hence the devil, whom they also call Cosmocrator (the
ruler of the world), and the demons, and the angels, and every wicked spiritual being that exists,
found the source of their existence. They represent the Demiurge as being the son of that mother
of theirs (Achamoth), and Cosmocrator as the creature of the Demiurge. Cosmocrator has knowledge
of what is above himself, because he is a spirit of wickedness; but the Demiurge is ignorant of such
things, inasmuch as he is merely animal. Their mother dwells in that place which is above the
heavens, that is, in the intermediate abode; the Demiurge in the heavenly place, that is, in the
creation: she was the reflex of the one, and therefore masculo-feminine; she was the pattern to be realized in the latter, and
therefore was named Earth and Jerusalem." —Harvey.