how can it be otherwise than absurd, when we demand from our servants so
much minding of wisdom and obedience, but will not yield to our Master in
those matters in which we desire our domestics to yield to us? This I say because
of your readiness to inflict punishment one upon another. The truly wise man
ought not to do this even, but to pardon and forgive offenses, though there were
not that great reward proposed, the receiving in return forgiveness. For, tell me,
if you condemn one who has sinned, wherefore do you sin yourself, and fall into
the same fault? Hath he insulted? Insult not thou again, or you have insulted
yourself. Hath he struck? Strike not thou again, for then there is no difference
between you. Hath he vexed you? Vex him not again, for the profit is nothing,
and you will in your turn be placed on an equality with those who have wronged
you. Thus, if you bear with meekness and gentleness, you shall be able to
reprove your enemy, to shame him, to weary him of being angry. No man cures
evil with evil, but evil with good. These rules of wisdom give some of the
heathen; now if there be such wisdom among the foolish heathen, let us be
ashamed to show ourselves inferior to them. Many of them have been injured,
and have borne it; many have been maliciously accused, and not defended
themselves; have been plotted against, and have repaid by benefits. And there is
no small fear lest some of them be found in their lives to be greater than we, and
so render our punishment severer. For when we who have partaken of the Spirit,
we who look for the Kingdom, who follow wisdom for the sake of heavenly
things, who fear (not) hell, and are bidden to become angels, who enjoy the
Mysteries; when we reach not to the virtue unto which they have attained, what
pardon shall we have? If we must go beyond the Jews, (for, "Unless your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven" [Matthew 5:20]) much more
the heathen; if the Pharisees, much more the unbelievers. Since if when we go
not beyond the righteousness of the Jews, the Kingdom is shut against us, how
shall we be able to attain unto it when we prove ourselves worse than the
heathen? Let us then cast out all bitterness, and wrath, and anger. To speak "the

same things, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe," [Philippians
3:1] For physicians also often use the same remedy, and we will not cease from
sounding the same things in your ears, reminding, teaching, exhorting, for great
is the tumult of worldly things, and it causes in us forgetfulness, and we have
need of continual teaching. Let us then, in order that we meet not together in this
place uselessly and in vain, exhibit the proof which is by works, that so we may
obtain the good things to come, through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost
be glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.