FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether the acts of the external members are

commanded?
Objection 1: It would seem that the members of the body do not obey
reason as to their acts. For it is evident that the members of the body
are more distant from the reason, than the powers of the vegetal
soul. But the powers of the vegetal soul do not obey reason, as
stated above (Article 8). Therefore much less do the members of the
body obey.
Objection 2: Further, the heart is the principle of animal movement.
But the movement of the heart is not subject to the command of
reason: for Gregory of Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxii.] says
that "the pulse is not controlled by reason." Therefore the movement
of the bodily members is not subject to the command of reason.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 16) that "the
movement of the genital members is sometimes inopportune and not
desired; sometimes when sought it fails, and whereas the heart is
warm with desire, the body remains cold." Therefore the movements
of the members are not obedient to reason.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Confess. viii, 9): "The mind
commands a movement of the hand, and so ready is the hand to
obey, that scarcely can one discern obedience from command."
I answer that, The members of the body are organs of the soul's
powers. Consequently according as the powers of the soul stand in
respect of obedience to reason, so do the members of the body
stand in respect thereof. Since then the sensitive powers are subject
to the command of reason, whereas the natural powers are not;
therefore all movements of members, that are moved by the
sensitive powers, are subject to the command of reason; whereas
those movements of members, that arise from the natural powers,
are not subject to the command of reason.
Reply to Objection 1: The members do not move themselves, but are
moved through the powers of the soul; of which powers, some are in
closer contact with the reason than are the powers of the vegetal
soul.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.17, C.10.

Reply to Objection 2: In things pertaining to intellect and will, that
which is according to nature stands first, whence all other things are
derived: thus from the knowledge of principles that are naturally
known, is derived knowledge of the conclusions; and from volition of
the end naturally desired, is derived the choice of the means. So also
in bodily movements the principle is according to nature. Now the
principle of bodily movements begins with the movement of the
heart. Consequently the movement of the heart is according to
nature, and not according to the will: for like a proper accident, it
results from life, which follows from the union of soul and body.
Thus the movement of heavy and light things results from their
substantial form: for which reason they are said to be moved by their
generator, as the Philosopher states (Phys. viii, 4). Wherefore this
movement is called "vital." For which reason Gregory of Nyssa
(Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxii) says that, just as the movement of
generation and nutrition does not obey reason, so neither does the
pulse which is a vital movement. By the pulse he means the
movement of the heart which is indicated by the pulse veins.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 17,20) it is
in punishment of sin that the movement of these members does not
obey reason: in this sense, that the soul is punished for its rebellion
against God, by the insubmission of that member whereby original
sin is transmitted to posterity.
But because, as we shall state later on, the effect of the sin of our
first parent was that his nature was left to itself, through the
withdrawal of the supernatural gift which God had bestowed on man,
we must consider the natural cause of this particular member's
insubmission to reason. This is stated by Aristotle (De Causis Mot.
Animal.) who says that "the movements of the heart and of the
organs of generation are involuntary," and that the reason of this is
as follows. These members are stirred at the occasion of some
apprehension; in so far as the intellect and imagination represent
such things as arouse the passions of the soul, of which passions
these movements are a consequence. But they are not moved at the
command of the reason or intellect, because these movements are
conditioned by a certain natural change of heat and cold, which
change is not subject to the command of reason. This is the case
with these two organs in particular, because each is as it were a
separate animal being, in so far as it is a principle of life; and the
principle is virtually the whole. For the heart is the principle of the
senses; and from the organ of generation proceeds the seminal