"That have," he says, their "senses exercised." You see that it is needful to
exercise our hearing by divine studies, so that they may not sound strangely.
"Exercised," says he, "for discerning," that is, to be skilled.
One man says, that there is no Resurrection; and another looks for none of
the things to come; another says there is a different God; another that He has His
beginning from Mary. And see at once how they have all fallen away from want
of moderation, some by excess, others by defect. As for instance, the first Heresy
of all was that of Marcion; this introduced another different God, who has no
existence. See the excess. After this that of Sabellius, saying that the Son and the
Spirit and the Father are One. Next that of Marcellus and Photinus, setting forth
the same things. Moreover that of Paul of Samosata, saying that He had His
beginning from Mary. Afterwards that of the Manichæans; for this is the most
modern of all. After these the heresy of Arius. And there are others too.
And on this account have we received the Faith, that we might not be
compelled to attack innumerable heresies, and to deal with them, but whatever
any man might have endeavored either to add or take away, that we might
consider spurious. For as those who give the standards do not oblige [people] to
busy themselves about measures innumerable, but bid them keep to what is
given them; so also in the case of doctrines.
9. But no man is willing to give heed to the Scriptures. For if we did give
heed, not only should we not be ourselves entangled by deceit, but we should
also set others free who are deceived, and should draw them out of dangers. For
the strong soldier is not only able to help himself, but also to protect his
comrade, and to free him from the malice of the enemy. But as it is, some do not
even know that there are any Scriptures. Yet the Holy Spirit indeed made so
many wise provisions in order that they might be safely kept.
And look at it from the first, that you may learn the unspeakable love of
God. He inspired the blessed Moses; He engraved the tables, He detained him on
the mount forty days; and again as many [more] to give the Law. And after this
He sent prophets who suffered woes innumerable. War came on; they slew them

all, they cut them to pieces, the books were burned. Again, He inspired another
admirable man to publish them, Ezra I mean, and caused them to be put together
from the remains. And after this He arranged that they should be translated by
the seventy. They did translate them. Christ came, He receives them; the
Apostles disperse them among men. Christ wrought signs and wonders.
What then after so great painstaking? The Apostles also wrote, even as Paul
likewise said, "they were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world have come." [1 Corinthians 10:11] And again Christ said, "You do err not
knowing the Scriptures" [Matthew 22:29]: and again Paul said, "That through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures we may have hope." [Romans 15:4] And
again, "All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable." [2
Timothy 3:16] And "let the word of Christ dwell in you richly." [Colossians
3:16] And the prophet, "he shall meditate in His Law day and night" [Psalm
1:2], and again in another place, "Let all your communication be in the law of the
Most High." [Sirach 9:15] And again, "How sweet are Your words unto my
throat." (He said not to my hearing, but to my "throat"); "more than honey and
the honeycomb to my mouth." [Psalm 119:103] And Moses says, "You shall
meditate in them continually, when you rise up, when you sit, when you lie
down." [Deuteronomy 6:7] "Be in them" [1 Timothy 4:15], says he. And
innumerable things one might say concerning them. But notwithstanding, after
so many things there are some who do not even know that there are Scriptures at
all. For this cause, believe me, nothing sound, nothing profitable comes from us.
10. Yet, if any one wished to learn military affairs, of necessity he must
learn the military laws. And if any one sought to learn navigation or carpentry or
anything else, of necessity he must learn the [principles] of the art. But in this
case they will not do anything of the kind, although this is a science which needs
much wakeful attention. For that it too is an art which needs teaching, hear the
prophet saying, "Come, you children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear
of the Lord." [Psalm 34:11] It follows therefore certainly that the fear of God
needs teaching. Then he says, "What man is he that desires life?" [Psalm 34:12]