THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.10.

according to" Ezech. 18:4: "'As the soul of the Father, so also the
soul of the son is mine; the soul that sinneth, the same shall die.' Yet
he contracted from Adam that which was loosed by the grace of this
sacrament, because as yet he was not endowed with a separate
existence." But the faith of one, indeed of the whole Church, profits
the child through the operation of the Holy Ghost, Who unites the
Church together, and communicates the goods of one member to
another.
Reply to Objection 3: Just as a child, when he is being baptized,
believes not by himself but by others, so is he examined not by
himself but through others, and these in answer confess the
Church's faith in the child's stead, who is aggregated to this faith by
the sacrament of faith. And the child acquires a good conscience in
himself, not indeed as to the act, but as to the habit, by sanctifying
grace.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.68, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether children of Jews or other unbelievers be

baptized against the will of their parents?
Objection 1: It seems that children of Jews or other unbelievers
should be baptized against the will of their parents. For it is a matter
of greater urgency to rescue a man from the danger of eternal death
than from the danger of temporal death. But one ought to rescue a
child that is threatened by the danger of temporal death, even if its
parents through malice try to prevent its being rescued. Therefore
much more reason is there for rescuing the children of unbelievers
from the danger of eternal death, even against their parents' will.
Objection 2: The children of slaves are themselves slaves, and in the
power of their masters. But Jews and all other unbelievers are the
slaves of kings and rulers. Therefore without any injustice rulers can
have the children of Jews baptized, as well as those of other slaves
who are unbelievers.
Objection 3: Further, every man belongs more to God, from Whom
he has his soul, than to his carnal father, from whom he has his
body. Therefore it is not unjust if the children of unbelievers are
taken away from their carnal parents, and consecrated to God by
Baptism.
On the contrary, It is written in the Decretals (Dist. xlv), quoting the
council of Toledo: "In regard to the Jews the holy synod commands
that henceforward none of them be forced to believe: for such are
not to be saved against their will, but willingly, that their
righteousness may be without flaw."
I answer that, The children of unbelievers either have the use of
reason or they have not. If they have, then they already begin to
control their own actions, in things that are of Divine or natural law.
And therefore of their own accord, and against the will of their
parents, they can receive Baptism, just as they can contract
marriage. Consequently such can lawfully be advised and persuaded
to be baptized.
If, however, they have not yet the use of free-will, according to the
natural law they are under the care of their parents as long as they
cannot look after themselves. For which reason we say that even the