much glory, reach Christ the king of glory, and attain to everlasting good by the
grace, and compassion, and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
and with whom be glory, power, honour, to the Father, together with the all holy,
and good and quickening Spirit, now and always and for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 3. On the Power of Man to Resist the
Devil.
That evil comes of sloth, and virtue from diligence, and that neither
wicked men, nor the devil himself, are able to do the wary man any harm.
The proof of this from many passages, and amongst others from those
which relate to Adam and to Job.
1. The day before yesterday we set on foot our sermon concerning the
Devil, out of our love for you. But others, the day before yesterday while these
matters were being set on foot here, took their places in the theatre, and were
looking on at the Devil's show. They were taking part in lascivious songs; you
were having a share in spiritual music. They were eating of the Devil's garbage:
you were feeding on spiritual unguents. Who pray decoyed them? Who pray
separated them from the sacred flock? Did the Devil pray deceive them? How
did he not deceive you? You and they are men alike; I mean as regards your
nature. You and they have the same soul, you have the same desires, so far as
nature is concerned. How is it then that you and they were not in the same place?
Because you and they have not the same purpose. On this account they indeed
are under deception, but you beyond deception. I do not say these things again as
discharging the Devil from accusation, but as desiring earnestly to free you from
sins. The Devil is wicked; I grant this indeed, but he is wicked for himself not
towards us if we are wary. For the nature of wickedness is of this kind. It is
destructive to those alone who hold to it. Virtue is the contrary. It is not only able
to profit those who hold to it, but those nearest at hand too. And in order that you
may learn that evil is evil in itself, but good is also good to others, I provide you
with proverbial evidence: "My son," says he, "if you have become evil, you shall
bear your evils alone, but if wise, for yourself and your neighbour."
They were deceived in the theatre, but you were not deceived. This is the

greatest proof of things, a clear testimony, and unquestionable reasoning, that in
every case, the purpose is master. Do thou accordingly use this method of proof,
and if you see a man living in wickedness, and exhibiting all kinds of evil; then
blaming the providence of God, and saying that by the necessity of fortune and
fate and through tyranny of Demons He gave us our nature, and on all sides
shifting the cause from himself indeed, and transferring it to the creator who
provides for all; silence his speech not by word, but by deed, showing him
another fellow servant living in virtue and forbearance. There is no need of long
speeches, no need of a complex plan, nor even of syllogisms. By means of deeds
the proof is brought about. He said to him: you are a servant, and he is a servant;
you are a man and he is a man. Thou livest in the same world: you are nourished
with the same nourishment under the same heaven: How is it that you are living
in wickedness, he in virtue? On this account God allowed the wicked to be
mingled with the good; and did not give one law to the wicked indeed, and
appointed another world as a colony for the good, but mixed these and those;
conferring great benefit. For the good appear more thoroughly approved when
they are in the midst of those who try to hinder them from living rightly, and
who entice them to evil, and yet keep hold of virtue. "For there must" he saith
"be also heresies among you that they which are approved may be made manifest
among you."
Therefore also on this account he has left the wicked to be in the world, in
order that the good may shine the brighter. Do you see how great is the gain? But
the gain is not owing to the wicked, but owing to the courage of the good. On
this account also we admire Noe, not because he was righteous nor yet because
he was perfect alone, but because in that perverse and wicked generation he
preserved his virtue, when he had no pattern of virtue, when all men invited him
to wickedness; and he went his whole way contrary to them, like some traveller,
pursuing his way while the great multitude is being borne along vehemently. On
this account he did not simply say "Noe was just, perfect," but added "in his
generation" in that perverse, that desperate generation, when there was no