SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.6.

sacrifice or praying. But promising either of them to God belongs to
religion, for the reason given above. Hence it is evident that some
vows belong to religion by reason only of the promise made to God,
which is the essence of a vow, while others belong thereto by reason
also of the thing promised, which is the matter of the vow.
Reply to Objection 2: He who promises something gives it already in
as far as he binds himself to give it: even as a thing is said to be
made when its cause is made, because the effect is contained
virtually in its cause. This is why we thank not only a giver, but also
one who promises to give.
Reply to Objection 3: A vow is made to God alone, whereas a
promise may be made to a man also: and this very promise of good,
which is fore made to a man, may be the matter of a vow, and in so
far as it is a virtuous act. This is how we are to understand vows
whereby we vow something to the saints or to one's superiors: so
that the promise made to the saints or to one's superiors is the
matter of the vow, in so far as one vows to God to fulfil what one has
promised to the saints or one's superiors.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether it is more praiseworthy and meritorious

to do something in fulfilment of a vow, than without a vow?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is more praiseworthy and
meritorious to do a thing without a vow than in fulfilment of a vow.
Prosper says (De Vita Contempl. ii): "We should abstain or fast
without putting ourselves under the necessity of fasting, lest that
which we are free to do be done without devotion and unwillingly."
Now he who vows to fast puts himself under the necessity of fasting.
Therefore it would be better for him to fast without taking the vow.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (2 Cor. 9:7): "Everyone as he
hath determined in his heart, not with sadness, or of necessity: for
God loveth a cheerful giver." Now some fulfil sorrowfully what they
have vowed: and this seems to be due to the necessity arising from
the vow, for necessity is a cause of sorrow according to Metaph. v
[Ed. Did. iv, 5]. Therefore, it is better to do something without a vow,
than in fulfilment of a vow.
Objection 3: Further, a vow is necessary for the purpose of fixing the
will on that which is vowed, as stated above (Article 4). But the will
cannot be more fixed on a thing than when it actually does that
thing. Therefore it is no better to do a thing in fulfilment of a vow
than without a vow.
On the contrary, A gloss on the words of Ps. 75:12, "Vow ye and
pay," says: "Vows are counseled to the will." But a counsel is about
none but a better good. Therefore it is better to do a deed in
fulfilment of a vow than without a vow: since he that does it without a
vow fulfils only one counsel, viz. the counsel to do it, whereas he
that does it with a vow, fulfils two counsels, viz. the counsel to vow
and the counsel to do it.
I answer that, For three reasons it is better and more meritorious to
do one and the same deed with a vow than without. First, because to
vow, as stated above (Article 5) is an act of religion which is the chief
of the moral virtues. Now the more excellent the virtue the better and
more meritorious the deed. Wherefore the act of an inferior virtue is
the better the more meritorious for being commanded by a superior
virtue, whose act it becomes through being commanded by it, just as
the act of faith or hope is better if it be commanded by charity. Hence