is to be found in the acts of the soul, that is, inasmuch as from the
knowledge which we possess, by actual thought we form an internal
word; and thence break forth into love. But, since the principles of
acts are the habits and powers, and everything exists virtually in its
principle, therefore, secondarily and consequently, the image of the
Trinity may be considered as existing in the powers, and still more in
the habits, forasmuch as the acts virtually exist therein.
Reply to Objection 1: Our being bears the image of God so far as if is
proper to us, and excels that of the other animals, that is to say, in
so far as we are endowed with a mind. Therefore, this trinity is the
same as that which Augustine mentions (De Trin. ix, 4), and which
consists in mind, knowledge, and love.
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine observed this trinity, first, as
existing in the mind. But because the mind, though it knows itself
entirely in a certain degree, yet also in a way does not know itself--namely, as being distinct from others (and thus also it searches
itself, as Augustine subsequently proves---De Trin. x, 3,4); therefore,
as though knowledge were not in equal proportion to mind, he takes
three things in the soul which are proper to the mind, namely,
memory, understanding, and will; which everyone is conscious of
possessing; and assigns the image of the Trinity pre-eminently to
these three, as though the first assignation were in part deficient.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine proves (De Trin. xiv, 7), we may
be said to understand, will, and to love certain things, both when we
actually consider them, and when we do not thing of them. When
they are not under our actual consideration, they are objects of our
memory only, which, in his opinion, is nothing else than habitual
retention of knowledge and love [Question 79, Article 7, ad 1]. "But
since," as he says, "a word cannot be there without actual thought
(for we think everything that we say, even if we speak with that
interior word belonging to no nation's tongue), this image chiefly
consists in these three things, memory, understanding, and will. And
by understanding I mean here that whereby we understand with
actual thought; and by will, love, or dilection I mean that which
unites this child with its parent." From which it is clear that he places
the image of the Divine Trinity more in actual understanding and will,
than in these as existing in the habitual retention of the memory;
although even thus the image of the Trinity exists in the soul in a
certain degree, as he says in the same place. Thus it is clear that
memory, understanding, and will are not three powers as stated in

the Sentences.
Reply to Objection 4: Someone might answer by referring to
Augustine's statement (De Trin. xiv, 6), that "the mind ever
remembers itself, ever understands itself, ever loves itself"; which
some take to mean that the soul ever actually understands, and
loves itself. But he excludes this interpretation by adding that "it
does not always think of itself as actually distinct from other things."
Thus it is clear that the soul always understands and loves itself, not
actually but habitually; though we might say that by perceiving its
own act, it understands itself whenever it understands anything. But
since it is not always actually understanding, as in the case of sleep,
we must say that these acts, although not always actually existing,
yet ever exist in their principles, the habits and powers. Wherefore,
Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 4): "If the rational soul is made to the
image of God in the sense that it can make use of reason and
intellect to understand and consider God, then the image of God was
in the soul from the beginning of its existence."