SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.127, C.2.

Objection 7: Further, Aristotle (Ethic. iii) reckons five parts of
fortitude. The first is "civic" fortitude, which produces brave deeds
through fear of dishonor or punishment; the second is "military"
fortitude, which produces brave deeds as a result of warlike art or
experience; the third is the fortitude which produces brave deeds
resulting from passion, especially anger; the fourth is the fortitude
which makes a man act bravely through being accustomed to
overcome; the fifth is the fortitude which makes a man act bravely
through being unaccustomed to danger. Now these kinds of fortitude
are not comprised under any of the above enumerations. Therefore
these enumerations of the parts of fortitude are unfitting.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 48), a virtue can have three
kinds of parts, subjective, integral, and potential. But fortitude, taken
as a special virtue, cannot have subjective parts, since it is not
divided into several specifically distinct virtues, for it is about a very
special matter.
However, there are quasi-integral and potential parts assigned to it:
integral parts, with regard to those things the concurrence of which
is requisite for an act of fortitude; and potential parts, because what
fortitude practices in face of the greatest hardships, namely dangers
of death, certain other virtues practice in the matter of certain minor
hardships and these virtues are annexed to fortitude as secondary
virtues to the principal virtue. As stated above (Question 123,
Articles 3,6), the act of fortitude is twofold, aggression and
endurance. Now two things are required for the act of aggression.
The first regards preparation of the mind, and consists in one's
having a mind ready for aggression. In this respect Tully mentions
"confidence," of which he says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that "with this the
mind is much assured and firmly hopeful in great and honorable
undertakings." The second regards the accomplishment of the deed,
and consists in not failing to accomplish what one has confidently
begun. In this respect Tully mentions "magnificence," which he
describes as being "the discussion and administration," i.e.
accomplishment "of great and lofty undertakings, with a certain
broad and noble purpose of mind," so as to combine execution with
greatness of purpose. Accordingly if these two be confined to the
proper matter of fortitude, namely to dangers of death, they will be
quasi-integral parts thereof, because without them there can be no
fortitude; whereas if they be referred to other matters involving less
hardship, they will be virtues specifically distinct from fortitude, but

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.127, C.2.

annexed thereto as secondary virtues to principal: thus
"magnificence" is referred by the Philosopher (Ethic. iv) to great
expenses, and "magnanimity," which seems to be the same as
confidence, to great honors. Again, two things are requisite for the
other act of fortitude, viz. endurance. The first is that the mind be not
broken by sorrow, and fall away from its greatness, by reason of the
stress of threatening evil. In this respect he mentions "patience,"
which he describes as "the voluntary and prolonged endurance of
arduous and difficult things for the sake of virtue or profit." The
other is that by the prolonged suffering of hardships man be not
wearied so as to lose courage, according to Heb. 12:3, "That you be
not wearied, fainting in your minds." In this respect he mentions
"perseverance," which accordingly he describes as "the fixed and
continued persistence in a well considered purpose." If these two be
confined to the proper matter of fortitude, they will be quasi-integral
parts thereof; but if they be referred to any kind of hardship they will
be virtues distinct from fortitude, yet annexed thereto as secondary
to principal.
Reply to Objection 1: Magnificence in the matter of liberality adds a
certain greatness: this is connected with the notion of difficulty
which is the object of the irascible faculty, that is perfected chiefly
by fortitude: and to this virtue, in this respect, it belongs.
Reply to Objection 2: Hope whereby one confides in God is
accounted a theological virtue, as stated above (Question 17, Article
5; FS, Question 62, Article 3). But by confidence which here is
accounted a part of fortitude, man hopes in himself, yet under God
withal.
Reply to Objection 3: To venture on anything great seems to involve
danger, since to fail in such things is very disastrous. Wherefore
although magnificence and confidence are referred to the
accomplishment of or venturing on any other great things, they have
a certain connection with fortitude by reason of the imminent
danger.
Reply to Objection 4: Patience endures not only dangers of death,
with which fortitude is concerned, without excessive sorrow, but
also any other hardships or dangers. In this respect it is accounted a
virtue annexed to fortitude: but as referred to dangers of death, it is
an integral part thereof.