4:16] And this is a city of Phrygia.
I pray, he says, "that the communication of your faith may become effectual
in the knowledge of every good thing which is in Christ Jesus." Do you see him
first giving, before he receives, and before he asks a favor himself bestowing a
much greater one of his own? "That the communication of your faith," he says,
"may become effectual by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you
in Christ Jesus"; that is, that you may attain all virtue, that nothing may be
deficient. For so faith becomes effectual, when it is accompanied with works.
For "without works faith is dead." [James 2:26] And he has not said, "Your
faith," but "the communication of your faith," connecting it with himself, and
showing that it is one body, and by this particularly making him ashamed to
refuse. If you are a partaker, he says, with respect to the faith, you ought to
communicate also with respect to other things.
Ver. 7. "For we have [I had] great joy and consolation in your love,
because the bowels [hearts] of the Saints are refreshed by you, brother."
Nothing so shames us into giving, as to bring forward the kindnesses
bestowed on others, and particularly when a man is more entitled to respect than
they. And he has not said, "If you do it to others, much more to me"; but he has
insinuated the same thing, though he has contrived to do it in another and a more
gracious manner.
"I had joy," that is, you have given me confidence from the things which
you have done to others. "And consolation," that is, we are not only gratified, but
we are also comforted. For they are members of us. If then there ought to be
such an agreement, that in the refreshing of any others who are in affliction,
though we obtain nothing, we should be delighted on their account, as if it were
one body that was benefited; much more if you shall refresh us also. And he has
not said, "Because you yield, and compliest," but even more vehemently and
emphatically, "because the bowels of the Saints," as if it were for a darling child
fondly loved by its parents, so that this love and affection shows that he also is
exceedingly beloved by them.

Ver. 8. "Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin you that
which is convenient [befitting]."
Observe how cautious he is, lest any of the things which were spoken even
from exceeding love should so strike the hearer, as that he should be hurt. For
this reason before he says, "to enjoin you," since it was offensive, although, as
spoken out of love, it was more proper to soothe him, yet nevertheless from an
excess of delicacy, he as it were corrects it by saying, "Having confidence," by
which he implies that Philemon was a great man, that is "You have given
confidence to us." And not only that, but adding the expression "in Christ," by
which he shows that it was not that he was more illustrious in the world, not that
he was more powerful, but it was on account of his faith in Christ—then he also
adds, "to enjoin you," and not that only, but "that which is convenient," that is, a
reasonable action. And see out of how many things he brings proof for this. You
do good to others, he says, and to me, and for Christ's sake, and that the thing is
reasonable, and that love gives, wherefore also he adds,
Ver. 9. "Yet for love's sake, I rather beseech you."
As if he had said, I know indeed that I can effect it by commanding with
much authority, from things which have already taken place. But because I am
very solicitous about this matter, "I beseech you." He shows both these things at
once; that he has confidence in him, for he commands him; and that he is
exceedingly concerned about the matter, wherefore he beseeches him.
"Being such an one," he says, "as Paul the aged." Strange! How many
things are here to shame him into compliance! Paul, from the quality of his
person, from his age, because he was old, and from what was more just than all,
because he was also "a prisoner of Jesus Christ."
For who would not receive with open arms a combatant who had been
crowned? Who seeing him bound for Christ's sake, would not have granted him
ten thousand favors? By so many considerations having previously soothed his
mind, he has not immediately introduced the name, but defers making so great a
request. For you know what are the minds of masters towards slaves that have