virtue. Wherefore writing to the Galatians, also he said, "Did ye suffer so many
things in vain, if it be indeed in vain." [Galatians 3:4] And again, writing to the
Hebrews, he said, "But call to remembrance the former days, in which, after you
were enlightened, you endured a great conflict of suffering; partly, being made a
gazing-stock both by reproaches and afflictions." [Hebrews 10:32-33] And
writing again to Macedonians, that is, to the Thessalonians, he said, "For they
themselves report concerning us, what manner of entering in we had unto you."
[1 Thessalonians 1:9] And again, "For yourselves, brethren, know our entering
in unto you, that it has not been found vain." [1 Thessalonians 2:1] And in like
sort does he witness the same things of them all, labors and strivings. But such
things ye will not now find among us; now it is much if one suffer a little in
goods alone. And in respect of their goods also he witnesses great things of
them. For to some he says, "For you took joyfully the spoiling of your
possessions" [Hebrews 10:34]; and to others, "For it has been the good pleasure
of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor" [Romans
15:26]; and "your zeal has stirred up very many of them." [2 Corinthians 9:2]
Do you see the praises of the men of that time? But we endure not so much
as buffetings or blows, neither insult nor loss of our possessions: they were
straightway zealous, and all of them strove as martyrs, while we have grown
cold in love toward Christ. Again I am constrained to accuse things present; and
what shall I do? It is against my will, yet am I constrained. Were I able by my
silence of things which are done, by holding my peace, and not mentioning
anything, to remove them, it would behoove me to be silent. But if the contrary
comes to pass; if not only are these things not removed by our silence, but even
become worse, we are forced to speak. For he who rebukes sinners, if he does
nought else, suffers them not to go farther. For there is no such shameless and
rash soul, as not to turn, and remit the extravagance of its evil deeds, on hearing
any one continually rebuking it. There is, there is indeed, even in the shameless,
a small portion of shame. For God has sown in our nature the seeds of shame;
for since fear was insufficient to bring us to a right tone, He has also prepared

many other ways for avoiding sin. For example, that a man should be accused,
fear of the enacted laws, love of reputation, the desire of forming friendships; for
all these are paths to avoid sin. Ofttimes that which was not done for God's sake,
was done through shame; that which was not done for God's sake, was done for
fear of men. That which we seek for is, in the first place not to sin, and we shall
afterwards succeed in doing this for God's sake. Else why did Paul exhort those,
who were about to overcome their enemies, not by the fear of God, but on the
score of waiting for the vengeance? "For by so doing," he says, "you shall heap
coals of fire upon his head." [Romans 12:20] For this is his first wish, that our
virtue should be established. As I said then, there is in us a sense of shame. We
have many good natural affections, which lead to virtue; as, for example, all of
us men are naturally moved to pity, and no other good thing so inheres in our
nature, but this alone. Whence any one might reasonably enquire, wherefore
these seeds have above all others been sown in our nature, by which we melt at
tears, by which we are turned to compassion, and are ready to pity. No one is
naturally idle, no one is naturally regardless of his reputation, no one is naturally
above emulation, but pity lies deep in every one's nature, however fierce and
ungentle he be. And what wonder? We pity beasts, such a superabundance of
pity lies deep in us. If we see a lion's cub, we are somewhat affected; much more
in the case of one of our race. See, how many maimed are there! And this is
sufficient to lead us to pity. Nothing so much pleases God as mercy. Wherefore
with this the priests were anointed, and the kings, and the prophets, for they had,
in oil, a type of God's love to man; and they further learned, that rulers should
have a greater share of mercy. It showed that the Spirit is to come to men
through mercy, since God pities and is kind to man. For, "You have mercy upon
all," it is written, "for You can do all things." [Wisdom 11:23] For this cause they
were anointed with oil: and indeed it was from mercy He appointed the
priesthood. And kings were anointed with oil; and would one praise a ruler, he
can make mention of nothing so becoming him as mercy. For pity is peculiar to
power. Consider that the world was established by pity, and then imitate your