the offspring, but only as far as is necessary for impregnation. But in
so far as it is instituted as a remedy (which is its secondary end),
marriage does require the debt to be paid at all times on being asked
for. Hence it is evident that by taking several wives a man does not
bind himself to the impossible, considering the principal end of
marriage; and therefore plurality of wives is not against the first
principles of the natural law.
Reply to Objection 8: This precept of the natural law, "Do not to
another what thou wouldst not were done to thyself," should be
understood with the proviso that there be equal proportion. For if a
superior is unwilling to be withstood by his subject, he is not
therefore bound not to withstand his subject. Hence it does not
follow in virtue of this precept that as a husband is unwilling for his
wife to have another husband, he must not have another wife:
because for one man to have several wives is not contrary to the first
principles of the natural law, as stated above: whereas for one wife
to have several husbands is contrary to the first principles of the
natural law, since thereby the good of the offspring which is the
principal end of marriage is, in one respect, entirely destroyed, and
in another respect hindered. For the good of the offspring means not
only begetting, but also rearing. Now the begetting of offspring,
though not wholly voided (since a woman may be impregnated a
second time after impregnation has already taken place, as stated in
De Gener. Animal. vii. 4), is nevertheless considerably hindered,
because this can scarcely happen without injury either to both fetus
or to one of them. But the rearing of the offspring is altogether done
away, because as a result of one woman having several husbands
there follows uncertainty of the offspring in relation to its father,
whose care is necessary for its education. Wherefore the marriage of
one wife with several husbands has not been sanctioned by any law
or custom, whereas the converse has been.
Reply to Objection 9: The natural inclination in the appetitive power
follows the natural concept in the cognitive power. And since it is
not so much opposed to the natural concept for a man to have
several wives as for a wife to have several husbands, it follows that a
wife's love is not so averse to another sharing the same husband
with her, as a husband's love is to another sharing the same wife
with him. Consequently both in man and in other animals the male is
more jealous of the female than "vice versa."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it was ever lawful to have several wives?

Objection 1: It would seem that it can never have been lawful to have
several wives. For, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 7), "The
natural law has the same power at all times and places." Now
plurality of wives is forbidden by the natural law, as stated above
(Article 1). Therefore as it is unlawful now, it was unlawful at all
times.
Objection 2: Further, if it was ever lawful, this could only be because
it was lawful either in itself, or by dispensation. If the former, it would
also be lawful now; if the latter, this is impossible, for according to
Augustine (Contra Faust. xxvi, 3), "as God is the founder of nature,
He does nothing contrary to the principles which He has planted in
nature." Since then God has planted in our nature the principle that
one man should be united to one wife, it would seem that He has
never dispensed man from this.
Objection 3: Further, if a thing be lawful by dispensation, it is only
lawful for those who receive the dispensation. Now we do not read in
the Law of a general dispensation having been granted to all. Since
then in the Old Testament all who wished to do so, without any
distinction, took to themselves several wives, nor were reproached
on that account, either by the law or by the prophets, it would seem
that it was not made lawful by dispensation.
Objection 4: Further, where there is the same reason for
dispensation, the same dispensation should be given. Now we
cannot assign any other reason for dispensation than the multiplying
of the offspring for the worship of God, and this is necessary also
now. Therefore this dispensation would be still in force, especially as
we read nowhere of its having been recalled.
Objection 5: Further, in granting a dispensation the greater good
should not be overlooked for the sake of a lesser good. Now fidelity
and the sacrament, which it would seem impossible to safeguard in a
marriage where one man is joined to several wives, are greater
goods than the multiplication of the offspring. Therefore this
dispensation ought not to have been granted with a view to this
multiplication.