199. Our commitment does not consist exclusively in activities or programmes of promotion and
assistance; what the Holy Spirit mobilizes is not an unruly activism, but above all an attentiveness
which considers the other “in a certain sense as one with ourselves”. This loving
attentiveness is the beginning of a true concern for their person which inspires me effectively to
seek their good. This entails appreciating the poor in their goodness, in their experience of life, in
their culture, and in their ways of living the faith. True love is always contemplative, and permits us
to serve the other not out of necessity or vanity, but rather because he or she is beautiful above
and beyond mere appearances: “The love by which we find the other pleasing leads us to offer
him something freely”. The poor person, when loved, “is esteemed as of great value”,
and this is what makes the authentic option for the poor differ from any other ideology, from any
attempt to exploit the poor for one’s own personal or political interest. Only on the basis of this real
and sincere closeness can we properly accompany the poor on their path of liberation. Only this
will ensure that “in every Christian community the poor feel at home. Would not this approach be
the greatest and most effective presentation of the good news of the kingdom?” Without the
preferential option for the poor, “the proclamation of the Gospel, which is itself the prime form of

charity, risks being misunderstood or submerged by the ocean of words which daily engulfs us in
today’s society of mass communications”.

200. Since this Exhortation is addressed to members of the Catholic Church, I want to say, with
regret, that the worst discrimination which the poor suffer is the lack of spiritual care. The great
majority of the poor have a special openness to the faith; they need God and we must not fail to
offer them his friendship, his blessing, his word, the celebration of the sacraments and a journey of
growth and maturity in the faith. Our preferential option for the poor must mainly translate into a
privileged and preferential religious care.

201. No one must say that they cannot be close to the poor because their own lifestyle demands
more attention to other areas. This is an excuse commonly heard in academic, business or
professional, and even ecclesial circles. While it is quite true that the essential vocation and
mission of the lay faithful is to strive that earthly realities and all human activity may be
transformed by the Gospel, none of us can think we are exempt from concern for the poor
and for social justice: “Spiritual conversion, the intensity of the love of God and neighbour, zeal for
justice and peace, the Gospel meaning of the poor and of poverty, are required of everyone”.
I fear that these words too may give rise to commentary or discussion with no real practical effect.
That being said, I trust in the openness and readiness of all Christians, and I ask you to seek, as a
community, creative ways of accepting this renewed call.