clamoured for the preservation of the murderer rather than of the Saviour and
benefactor. How many think you then stumbled at these things? How many were
destroyed? But I must carry my argument yet further back. Did not He who was
crucified become immediately after his birth a wanderer and a fugitive? Was He
not from the very cradle removed with the whole household into a strange land,
taking that long journey into a barbarous region? And this removal gave
occasion to torrents of blood, and cruel murder and slaughter, and all the
children of tender age were cut to pieces just as if they had been soldiers arrayed
in battle, and infants torn from the breast were handed over to death, and even
when the milk was in their throats, the sword was driven through their necks.
What could be more distressing than this tragedy? And these things were done
by him who sought to destroy Jesus, yet the long-suffering God endured this
tragical cruelty, which caused so much bloodshed, and forbore to prevent it
although He had the power, displaying his long-suffering for some inscrutably
wise purpose. And when Jesus had returned from the foreign land and was
grown up, war was rekindled against him on every side. First of all the disciples
of John were envious of Him and tried to slander Him, although John himself
behaved reverently to Him, and they said "He who was with you beyond Jordan,
behold the same baptizes and all men come to Him." [John 3:26] For these were
the words of men who were already irritated, and agitated by ill-will, and
consumed by that passion. For the same reason also one of the disciples who
said these things disputed with a certain Jew and raised a contentious argument
about purifying, comparing one kind of baptism with another, the baptism of
John with that of the disciples of Christ. "For there arose" it is said, "a
questioning on the part of John's disciples with a certain Jew about purifying."
And when He began to work miracles how many calumniators He had! Some
called Him a Samaritan and demoniac saying "You are a Samaritan and hast a
Devil" [John 8:48] others "a deceiver," saying "This man is not of God but
deceives the multitude" [John 7:12] others "a sorcerer" saying "He casts out
devils through Beelzebub the prince of the Devils" [Matthew 9:34] and they

continually said these things against Him and called Him an adversary of God,
and a gluttonous, and greedy man, and a drunkard, and a friend of the wicked
and depraved. "For" He said, "the Son of man came eating and drinking and
they say behold a gluttonous man and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and
sinners." [Luke 7:34] And when he was conversing with the harlot they called
Him a false prophet; "For had He been a prophet," one said, "He would have
known who this woman is which speaks unto Him;" [Luke 7:39] in fact every
day they sharpened their teeth against Him. And not only did the Jews thus
oppose Him, but even those who were reputed to be his brethren were not
sincerely attached to Him, but even out of his own family opposition was
kindled against Him. See at least how they also themselves were perverted, from
the evangelist adding the remark "for neither did His brethren believe in Him."
[John 7:5]
4. But since you call to mind many who were offended and went astray,
how many of the disciples do you suppose were offended at the time of the
crucifixion? One betrayed Him, the others took to flight, one denied Him, and
when all had abandoned Him He was led away bound without companions. How
many then think you who had lately seen Him working His miracles, raising the
dead, cleansing lepers, casting out devils, multiplying loaves, and doing all other
kinds of wonderful deeds, were offended at that season, when they beheld Him
led away and bound, surrounded by common soldiers, and followed by Jewish
priests making a tumult and uproar; alone in the midst hemmed in by all his
enemies, and the traitor standing by and exulting in his deed? And what was the
effect think you when He was being scourged? And probably a vast multitude
was present. For it was an illustrious festival which brought all together, and this
drama of iniquity was enacted in the capital city, and in the very middle of the
day. How many think you who were present then were offended when they saw
Him bound, scourged, streaming with blood, examined before the governor's
tribunal, and not one of His disciples standing by? What was the effect again
when He was subjected to those manifold kinds of mockery, successively