THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.5.

desire of souls of good hope. But that part of the tree which is
hidden from view to hold it fixed, and from which the entire rood
springs, denotes the depth of gratuitous grace." And, as Augustine
says (Tract. cxix in Joan.): "The tree upon which were fixed the
members of Him dying was even the chair of the Master teaching."
The seventh reason is because this kind of death responds to very
many figures. For, as Augustine says in a sermon on the Passion
(Serm. ci De Tempore), an ark of wood preserved the human race
from the waters of the Deluge; at the exodus of God's people from
Egypt, Moses with a rod divided the sea, overthrew Pharaoh and
saved the people of God. the same Moses dipped his rod into the
water, changing it from bitter to sweet; at the touch of a wooden rod
a salutary spring gushed forth from a spiritual rock; likewise, in
order to overcome Amalec, Moses stretched forth his arms with rod
in hand; lastly, God's law is entrusted to the wooden Ark of the
Covenant; all of which are like steps by which we mount to the wood
of the cross.
Reply to Objection 1: The altar of holocausts, upon which the
sacrifices of animals were immolated, was constructed of timbers, as
is set forth Ex. 27:, and in this respect the truth answers to the
figure; but "it is not necessary for it to be likened in every respect,
otherwise it would not be a likeness," but the reality, as Damascene
says (De Fide Orth. iii). But. in particular, as Chrysostom says: "His
head is not cut off, as was done to John; nor was He sawn in twain,
like Isaias, in order that His entire and indivisible body might obey
death, and that there might be no excuse for them who want to
divide the Church." While, instead of material fire, there was the
spiritual fire of charity in Christ's holocaust.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ refused to undergo dishonorable
sufferings which are allied with defects of knowledge, or of grace, or
even of virtue, but not those injuries inflicted from without---nay,
more, as is written Heb. 12:2: "He endured the cross, despising the
shame."
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xiv), sin is
accursed, and, consequently, so is death, and mortality, which
comes of sin. "But Christ's flesh was mortal, 'having the
resemblance of the flesh of sin'"; and hence Moses calls it
"accursed," just as the Apostle calls it "sin," saying (2 Cor. 5:21):
"Him that knew no sin, for us He hath made sin"---namely, because

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.5.

of the penalty of sin. "Nor is there greater ignominy on that account,
because he said: 'He is accursed of God.'" For, "unless God had
hated sin, He would never have sent His Son to take upon Himself
our death, and to destroy it. Acknowledge, then, that it was for us He
took the curse upon Himself, whom you confess to have died for us."
Hence it is written (Gal. 3:13): "Christ hath redeemed us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us."