belong to one genus, because they are the perfections of one
intellectual faculty: although the things which the species represent
belong to different genera. Therefore it is impossible for one and the
same intellect to be perfected at the same time by different
intelligible species so as actually to understand different things.
Reply to Objection 1: The intellect is above that time, which is the
measure of the movement of corporeal things. But the multitude
itself of intelligible species causes a certain vicissitude of intelligible
operations, according as one operation succeeds another. And this
vicissitude is called time by Augustine, who says (Gen. ad lit. viii,
20,22), that "God moves the spiritual creature through time."
Reply to Objection 2: Not only is it impossible for opposite forms to
exist at the same time in the same subject, but neither can any forms
belonging to the same genus, although they be not opposed to one
another, as is clear from the examples of colors and shapes.
Reply to Objection 3: Parts can be understood in two ways. First, in a
confused way, as existing in the whole, and thus they are known
through the one form of the whole, and so are known together. In
another way they are known distinctly: thus each is known by its
species; and so they are not understood at the same time.
Reply to Objection 4: If the intellect sees the difference or
comparison between one thing and another, it knows both in relation
to their difference or comparison; just, as we have said above (ad 3),
as it knows the parts in the whole.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether our intellect understands by composition

and division?
Objection 1: It would seem that our intellect does not understand by
composition and division. For composition and division are only of
many; whereas the intellect cannot understand many things at the
same time. Therefore it cannot understand by composition and
division.
Objection 2: Further, every composition and division implies past,
present, or future time. But the intellect abstracts from time, as also
from other individual conditions. Therefore the intellect does not
understand by composition and division.
Objection 3: Further, the intellect understands things by a process of
assimilation to them. But composition and division are not in things,
for nothing is in things but what is signified by the predicate and the
subject, and which is one and the same, provided that the
composition be true, for "man" is truly what "animal" is. Therefore
the intellect does not act by composition and division.
On the contrary, Words signify the conceptions of the intellect, as
the Philosopher says (Peri Herm. i). But in words we find
composition and division, as appears in affirmative and negative
propositions. Therefore the intellect acts by composition and
division.
I answer that, The human intellect must of necessity understand by
composition and division. For since the intellect passes from
potentiality to act, it has a likeness to things which are generated,
which do not attain to perfection all at once but acquire it by
degrees: so likewise the human intellect does not acquire perfect
knowledge by the first act of apprehension; but it first apprehends
something about its object, such as its quiddity, and this is its first
and proper object; and then it understands the properties, accidents,
and the various relations of the essence. Thus it necessarily
compares one thing with another by composition or division; and
from one composition and division it proceeds to another, which is
the process of reasoning.
But the angelic and the Divine intellect, like all incorruptible things,