SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.3.

of three elements, the beginning, the middle and the end. Wherefore,
according to the Philosopher (De Coelo i, 1), "we reckon 'all' and
'whole' to consist of three parts." Now we have a triple voucher when
two agree with the prosecutor: hence two witnesses are required; or
for the sake of greater certitude three, which is the perfect number.
Wherefore it is written (Eccles. 4:12): "A threefold cord is not easily
broken": and Augustine, commenting on Jn. 8:17, "The testimony of
two men is true," says (Tract. xxxvi) that "there is here a mystery by
which we are given to understand that Trinity wherein is perpetual
stability of truth."
Reply to Objection 1: No matter how great a number of witnesses
may be determined, the evidence might sometimes be unjust, since
is written (Ex. 23:2): "Thou shalt not follow the multitude to do evil."
And yet the fact that in so many it is not possible to have certitude
without fear of error, is no reason why we should reject the certitude
which can probably be had through two or three witnesses, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 2: If the witnesses disagree certain principal
circumstances which change the substance of the fact, for instance
in time, place, or persons, which are chiefly in question, their
evidence is of no weight, because if they disagree in such things,
each one would seem to be giving distinct evidence and to be
speaking of different facts. For instance, one say that a certain thing
happened at such and such a time or place, while another says it
happened at another time or place, they seem not to be speaking of
the same event. The evidence is not weakened if one witness says
that he does not remember, while the other attests to a determinate
time or place And if on such points as these the witness for
prosecution and defense disagree altogether, and if they be equal in
number on either side, and of equal standing, the accused should
have the benefit of the doubt, because the judge ought to be more
inclined to acquit than to condemn, except perhaps in favorable
suits, such as a pleading for liberty and the like. If, however, the
witnesses for the same side disagree, the judge ought to use his
own discretion in discerning which side to favor, by considering
either the number of witnesses, or their standing, or the
favorableness of the suit, or the nature of the business and of the
evidence
Much more ought the evidence of one witness to be rejected if he
contradict himself when questioned about what he has seen and

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.3.

about what he knows; not, however, if he contradict himself when
questioned about matters of opinion and report, since he may be
moved to answer differently according to the different things he has
seen and heard.
On the other hand if there be discrepancy of evidence in
circumstances not touching the substance of the fact, for instance,
whether the weather were cloudy or fine, whether the house were
painted or not, or such like matters, such discrepancy does not
weaken the evidence, because men are not wont to take much notice
of such things, wherefore they easily forget them. Indeed, a
discrepancy of this kind renders the evidence more credible, as
Chrysostom states (Hom. i in Matth.), because if the witnesses
agreed in every point, even in the minutest of details, they would
seem to have conspired together to say the same thing: but this
must be left to the prudent discernment of the judge.
Reply to Objection 3: This passage refers specially to the bishops,
priests, deacons and clerics of the Roman Church, on account of its
dignity: and this for three reasons. First because in that Church
those men ought to be promoted whose sanctity makes their
evidence of more weight than that of many witnesses. Secondly,
because those who have to judge other men, often have many
opponents on account of their justice, wherefore those who give
evidence against them should not be believed indiscriminately,
unless they be very numerous. Thirdly, because the condemnation
of any one of them would detract in public opinion from the dignity
and authority of that Church, a result which would be more fraught
with danger than if one were to tolerate a sinner in that same Church,
unless he were very notorious and manifest, so that a grave scandal
would arise if he were tolerated.