the same degree.
Reply to Objection 6: Although a man's father and uncle are in the
same degree in respect of the root of consanguinity, since both are
separated by one degree from the grandfather, nevertheless in
respect of the person whose consanguinity is in question, they are
not in the same degree, since the father is in the first degree,
whereas the uncle cannot be nearer than the second degree, wherein
the grandfather stands.
Reply to Objection 7: Two persons are always related in the same
degree to one another, although they are not always distant in the
same number of degrees from the common ancestor, as explained
above.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether consanguinity is an impediment to

marriage by virtue of the natural law?
Objection 1: It would seem that consanguinity is not by natural law
an impediment to marriage. For no woman can be more akin to a
man than Eve was to Adam, since of her did he say (Gn. 2:23): "This
now is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh." Yet Eve was joined
in marriage to Adam. Therefore as regards the natural law no
consanguinity is an impediment to marriage.
Objection 2: Further, the natural law is the same for all. Now among
the uncivilized nations no person is debarred from marriage by
reason of consanguinity. Therefore, as regards the law of nature,
consanguinity is no impediment to marriage.
Objection 3: Further, the natural law is what "nature has taught all
animals," as stated at the beginning of the Digests (i, ff. De just. et
jure). Now brute animals copulate even with their mother. Therefore
it is not of natural law that certain persons are debarred from
marriage on account of consanguinity.
Objection 4: Further, nothing that is not contrary to one of the goods
of matrimony is an impediment to marriage. But consanguinity is not
contrary to any of the goods of marriage. Therefore it is not an
impediment thereto.
Objection 5: Further, things which are more akin and more similar to
one another are better and more firmly united together. Now
matrimony is a kind of union. Since then consanguinity is a kind of
kinship, it does not hinder marriage but rather strengthens the
union.
On the contrary, According to the natural law whatever is an
obstacle to the good of the offspring is an impediment to marriage.
Now consanguinity hinders the good of the offspring, because in the
words of Gregory (Regist., epis. xxxi) quoted in the text (Sent. iv, D,
40): "We have learnt by experience that the children of such a union
cannot thrive." Therefore according to the law of nature
consanguinity is an impediment to matrimony.
Further, that which belongs to human nature when it was first

created is of natural law. Now it belonged to human nature from
when it was first created that one should be debarred from marrying
one's father or mother: in proof of which it was said (Gn. 2:24):
"Wherefore a man shall leave father and mother": which cannot be
understood of cohabitation, and consequently must refer to the
union of marriage. Therefore consanguinity is an impediment to
marriage according to the natural law.
I answer that, In relation to marriage a thing is said to be contrary to
the natural law if it prevents marriage from reaching the end for
which it was instituted. Now the essential and primary end of
marriage is the good of the offspring. and this is hindered by a
certain consanguinity, namely that which is between father and
daughter, or son and mother. It is not that the good of the offspring
is utterly destroyed, since a daughter can have a child of her father's
semen and with the father rear and teach that child in which things
the good of the offspring consists, but that it is not effected in a
becoming way. For it is out of order that a daughter be mated to her
father in marriage for the purpose of begetting and rearing children,
since in all things she ought to be subject to her father as
proceeding from him. Hence by natural law a father and mother are
debarred from marrying their children; and the mother still more than
the father, since it is more derogatory to the reverence due to
parents if the son marry his mother than if the father marry his
daughter; since the wife should be to a certain extent subject to her
husband. The secondary essential end of marriage is the curbing of
concupiscence; and this end would be forfeit if a man could marry
any blood-relation, since a wide scope would be afforded to
concupiscence if those who have to live together in the same house
were not forbidden to be mated in the flesh. Wherefore the Divine law
debars from marriage not only father and mother, but also other
kinsfolk who have to live in close intimacy with one another and
ought to safeguard one another's modesty. The Divine law assigns
this reason (Lev. 18:10): "Thou shalt not uncover the nakedness" of
such and such a one, "because it is thy own nakedness."
But the accidental end of marriage is the binding together of
mankind and the extension of friendship: for a husband regards his
wife's kindred as his own. Hence it would be prejudicial to this
extension of friendship if a man could take a woman of his kindred to
wife since no new friendship would accrue to anyone from such a
marriage. Wherefore, according to human law and the ordinances of
the Church, several degrees of consanguinity are debarred from