their own questions to the criminal; and through him they say and hear whatever
they wish, when they examine the offenders. But God had no need of a gobetween in dealing with man; but Himself in His own person at once judges and
consoles him. And not only this is wonderful, but also that he corrects the crimes
that had been committed. For judges in general, when they find thieves and
grave-robbers, do not consider how they may make them better, but how they
may make them pay the penalty of the offenses committed. But God, quite on
the contrary, when He finds a sinner, considers not how He may make him pay
the penalty, but how He may amend him, and make him better, and invincible for
the future. So that God is at the same time a Judge, a Physician, and a Teacher;
for as a Judge He examines, and as a Physician He amends, and as a Teacher He
instructs those who have sinned, directing them unto all spiritual wisdom.
8. But if one short and simple speech thus demonstrates the care of God,
what if we should read through this whole judgment, and unfold its entire
records? Do you see how all Scripture is consolation and comfort? But of these
records we will speak at a befitting season; before that, however, it is necessary
to state at what time this Book was given; for these things were not written in the
beginning, nor at once when Adam was made, but many generations afterwards;
and it were worth while to enquire for what reason this delay took place, and
why at length they were given to the Jews only, and not to all men; and why
written in the Hebrew tongue; and why in the wilderness of Sinai? For the
Apostle does not mention the place merely in a cursory manner; but shows that
in that circumstance too there was a great subject of contemplation for us, when
he says to us: "For these are two covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which
genders to bondage." [Galatians 4:24]
9. Other things too besides these it were to our purpose to enquire into. But
I see that the time does not permit us to launch our discourse upon so wide a sea;
wherefore prudently reserving these to a fit season, we would again address you
on the subject of abstinence from oaths; and we would entreat your Charity to
use much diligence respecting this matter. For what is it but an absurdity, that not

even a servant dares to call his master by name, nor to mention him
unceremoniously, and casually, but that he should everywhere bandy about the
name of the Lord of Angels familiarly with much irreverence! And if it be
necessary to take the book of the Gospel, you receive it with hands that have
been first washed; and fearfully and tremblingly, with much reverence and
devotion; and do you unceremoniously bandy about upon your tongue the Lord
of the Gospel? Do you desire to learn how the Powers above pronounce that
Name; with what awe, with what terror, with what wonder? "I saw the Lord,"
says the prophet, "sitting upon a throne, high, and lifted up; around Him stood
the Seraphim; and one cried unto another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
of Sabaoth; the whole earth is full of His glory!" [Isaiah 6:3] Perceivest thou,
with what dread, with what awe, they pronounce that Name, while glorifying
and praising Him? But you, in your prayers and supplications, callest upon Him
with much listlessness; when it would become you to be full of awe, and to be
watchful and sober! But in oaths, where it is wholly unsuitable that this
wonderful Name should be introduced, there you make a long string of various
forms of imprecation! What pardon then, or what excuse shall we have,
howsoever we may plead this "custom"? It is said, that a certain heathen orator,
by a kind of foolish habit, was continually moving his right shoulder as he went
along. He conquered this habit, however, by fastening sharp knives on each side
over his shoulders, so that the fear of being cut controlled the member in its
unseasonable movement by fear of the wound! Do thou too, then, act thus with
regard to your tongue, and instead of the knife, suspend over it the fear of God's
chastisement, and you will assuredly get the better! For it seems impossible,
utterly impossible, that those should ever be overcome, who are solicitous and
earnest about this, and really make it their business.
10. You applaud what is now said, but when you have amended, you will
applaud in a greater degree not only us, but also yourselves; and you will hear
with more pleasure what is spoken; and you will call upon God with a pure
conscience, who is so sparing of you, O man! That He says, "Neither shall you