for you, do you despise all? Do you not hear the Scripture saying, "Woe, you
despisers!" [cf. Acts 13:41 from Habakkuk 1:5]; do you not shudder? Do you
not humble yourself? Even when you enter a royal palace, you order yourself in
dress, and look, and gait, and all other respects: and here where there is the true
Palace, and things like those of heaven, do you laugh? You indeed, I know, see
[them] not, but hear thou that there are angels present everywhere, and in the
house of God especially they stand by the King, and all is filled by those
incorporeal Powers.
This my discourse is addressed to women also, who in the presence of their
husbands indeed do not dare readily to do this, and even if they do it, it is not at
all times, but during a season of relaxation, but here they do it always. Tell me,
O woman, do you cover your head and laugh, sitting in the Church? Did you
come in here to make confession of sins, to fall down before God, to entreat and
to supplicate for the transgressions you have wretchedly committed, and do you
do this with laughter? How then will you be able to propitiate Him?
9. But (one says) what harm is there in laughter? There is no harm in
laughter; the harm is when it is beyond measure, and out of season. Laughter has
been implanted in us, that when we see our friends after a long time, we may
laugh; that when we see any persons downcast and fearful, we may relieve them
by our smile; not that we should burst out violently and be always laughing.
Laughter has been implanted in our soul, that the soul may sometimes be
refreshed, not that it may be quite relaxed. For carnal desire also is implanted in
us, and yet it is not by any means necessary that because it is implanted in us,
therefore we should use it, or use it immoderately: but we should hold it in
subjection, and not say, Because it is implanted in us, let us use it.
Serve God with tears, that you may be able to wash away your sins. I know
that many mock us, saying, "Tears directly." Therefore it is a time for tears. I
know also that they are disgusted, who say, "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow
we die." [1 Corinthians 15:32] "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." [Ecclesiastes
1:2] It is not I that say it, but he who had had the experience of all things says

thus: "I built for me houses, I planted vineyards, I made me pools of water, [I
had] men servants and women servants." [Ecclesiastes 2:4-7] And what then
after all these things? "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." [Ecclesiastes 12:8]
Let us mourn therefore, beloved, let us mourn in order that we may laugh
indeed, that we may rejoice indeed in the time of unmixed joy. For with this joy
[here] grief is altogether mingled: and never is it possible to find it pure. But that
is simple and undeceiving joy: it has nothing treacherous, nor any admixture. In
that joy let us delight ourselves; that let us pursue after. And it is not possible to
obtain this in any other way, than by choosing here not what is pleasant, but
what is profitable, and being willing to be afflicted a little, and bearing all things
with thanksgiving. For thus we shall be able to attain even to the Kingdom of
Heaven, of which may we all be counted worthy, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
whom to the Father be glory, together with the Holy Ghost, now and for ever and
world without end. Amen.