the case of the lame man, "Why look ye on us, as though by our own power or
holiness we had made him to walk," [Acts 3:12] so here also he says, "Jesus,
Who appeared unto you." (b) Or, (he says it) that the other may believe: and he
says not, He that was crucified, the Son of God, He that does wonders: but what?
"He that appeared unto you:" (speaking) from what the other knew: as Christ
also added no more, neither said, I am Jesus, the Crucified, the Risen: but what?
"Whom you persecute." Ananias said not, "The persecuted," that he may not
seem as it were to rave over him ([ἐ] [πενθουσί& 139visibly) appear, but was
seen by the things done. And immediately he added, wishing to draw a veil over
the accusation: "That you may receive your sight." I came not to reprove the
past, but to bestow the gift: "that you may receive your sight, and be filled with
the Holy Ghost." (a) With hands laid on, he spoke these words. "And
immediately there fell from his eyes," etc. Acts 9:18]: a double blindness is
removed.— And why says it, "Having taken food, he was strengthened?" [Acts
9:19] Because they that are in such case become relaxed: he had no heart to
partake of food before, until he obtained the mighty gifts. (c) It seems to me, that
both Paul and Cornelius, at the very instant when the words were spoken,
received the Spirit. And yet (in this case) the giver was no great one. So true is it,
that there was naught of man's in the things done, nor anything was done by
man, but God was present, the Doer of these things. And at the same time (the
Lord) both teaches him to think modestly of himself, in that He does not bring
him to the Apostles who were so admired, and shows that there is nothing of
man here. He was not filled, however, with the Spirit which works signs: that in
this way also his faith might be shown; for he wrought no miracles. "And
straightway," it says, "in the synagogues he preached Jesus"— [Acts 9:20] not
that He is risen— not this: no, nor that He lives: but what? Immediately he
strictly expounded the doctrine— "that this is the Son of God. And all that heard
him were amazed," etc. [Acts 9:21] They were reduced to utter incredulity. And
yet they ought not to have wondered only, but to worship and reverence. "Is not
this he," etc. He had not merely been a persecutor, but "destroyed them which

called on this Name"— they did not say, "on Jesus;" for hatred, they could not
bear even to hear His name— and what is more marvellous still, "and came
hither for this purpose," etc. "We cannot say, that he associated with the Apostles
before." See by how many (witnesses) he is confessed to have been of the
number of the enemies! But Paul not only was not confounded by these things,
nor hid his face for shame, but "increased the more in strength, and confounded
the Jews" [Acts 9:22], i.e. put them to silence, left them nothing to say for
themselves, "proving, that this is very Christ." "Teaching," it says: for this man
was a teacher.
"And after that many days were fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to kill him."
[Acts 9:23] The Jews again resort to that valid argument ([ἰ] [σχυρὸν
συλλογισμόν]) of theirs, not now seeking false-accusers and false-witnesses;
they cannot wait for these now: but what do they? They set about it by
themselves. For as they see the affair on the increase, they do not even use the
form of a trial. "But their laying await was known of Saul. And they watched the
gates day and night to kill him." [Acts 9:24] For this was more intolerable to
them than the miracles which had taken place— than the five thousand, the three
thousand, than everything, in short. And observe him, how he is delivered, not
by (miraculous) grace, but by man's wisdom— not as the apostles were— [ἐ]
[κεἴνοι], Acts 5:19 that you may learn the energetic ([ἀ] [ρετὴν]) character of the
man, how he shines even without miracles. "Then the disciples took him by
night," that the affair might not be suspected, "and let him down by the wall in a
basket." [Acts 9:25] What then? Having escaped such a danger, does he flee? By
no means, but goes where he kindled them to greater rage.
(Recapitulation, v. 20, 21.) "And straightway in the synagogues he preached
Jesus"— for he was accurate in the faith— "that this is the Son of God. But all
that heard him were amazed," etc., for indeed it was incredible. "But Saul
increased," etc. Therefore "after many days" this happens: viz. the Jews "took
counsel to kill him. And their laying await was known of Saul." [Acts 22:22-24]
What does this mean? It is likely that for awhile he did not choose to depart