commencement by a thread of thanksgiving.
8. After this again, they seem to begin afresh, but they are keeping to the
same argument. As Paul also in the beginning of an epistle, having closed with a
doxology, where he says, "According to the will of our God and Father, to whom
be glory forever. Amen;" [Galatians 1:4-5] begins the subject again on which he
was writing. And again in another place when he had said, "They worshipped
and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed forever: Amen;"
[Romans 1:25] he completed not his discourse, but begins again.
Therefore neither let us blame these our angels, as acting disorderly, for that
having closed with a doxology they begin again the sacred hymns. For they
follow laws, beginning from a doxology, and ending therein, and after that end
making a commencement again.
Wherefore they say, "Glory be to You, O Lord; glory be to You, O Holy
One; glory be to You, O King; that You have given us food to make us glad."
Since not for the greater things only, but also for the lesser, we ought to
give thanks. And they do give thanks for these also, putting to shame the heresy
of the Manichæans, and of as many as affirm our present life to be evil. For lest
for their high self-command, and contempt of the belly, you should suspect them
as abhorring the meat, like the heretics aforesaid, who choke themselves to
death; they by their prayer teach you, that not from abhorrence of God's
creatures they abstain from most of them, but as exercising self-restraint.
And see how after thanksgiving for His past gifts, they are importunate also
for the greater things, and dwell not upon the mat ters of this life, but mount
above the heavens, and say, "Fill us with the Holy Ghost." For it is not even
possible to approve one's self as one ought, not being filled with that grace; as
there is no doing anything noble or great, without the benefit of Christ's
influences.
As therefore when they had said, "That we may abound unto every good
work," they added, "In Christ Jesus;" so here also they say, "Fill us with the
Holy Ghost, that we may be found to have been well-pleasing before You."

Do you see how for the things of this life they pray not, but give thanks
only; but for the things of the Spirit, they both give thanks and pray. For, "seek
ye," says He, "the kingdom of heaven, and all these things shall be added unto
you."
And mark too another kind of severe goodness in them; their saying,
namely, "That we may be found to have been well-pleasing in Your sight, not
being ashamed." For "we care not," say they, "for the shame that proceeds from
the many, but whatever men may say of us, laughing, upbraiding, we do not so
much as regard it; but our whole endeavor is not to be put to shame then." But
in these expressions, they bring in also the river of fire, and the prizes, and the
rewards.
They said not, "that we be not punished," but, "that we be not ashamed."
For this is to us far more fearful than hell, to seem to have offended our Lord.
But since the more part and the grosser sort are not in fear of this, they add,
"When You render to every man according to his works." Do you see how greatly
these strangers and pilgrims have benefitted us, these citizens of the wilderness,
or rather citizens of the Heavens? For whereas we are strangers to the Heavens,
but citizens of the earth, these are just the contrary.
And after this hymn, being filled with much compunction, and with many
and fervent tears, so they proceed to sleep, snatching just so much of it as a little
to refresh themselves. And again, the nights they make days, spending them in
thanksgivings and in the singing of psalms.
But not men only, but women also practise this self-denial, overcoming the
weakness of their nature by the abundance of their zeal.
Let us be abashed then at their earnestness, we who are men, let us cease to
be fastened to the things present, to shadow, to dreams, to smoke. For the more
part of our life is passed in insensibility.
For both the first period of our life is full of much folly, and that again
which travels on to old age, makes all the feeling that is in us wither away, and
small is the space between, that is able feelingly to enjoy pleasure; or rather, not