a thousand times to die, in the midst of their wealth and luxury! For luxury by no
means puts men out of the reach of grief: it is rather the very thing to produce
sorrows, diseases, and uneasiness, often when there is no real ground for it. For
when such is the habit of the soul, it is apt to grieve even without a cause.
Physicians say that from a weak state of the stomach arise sorrows without any
occasion; and does not the like happen to ourselves, to feel uneasy, without
knowing any cause for it? In short, we can find no one who is exempted from
sorrow. And if he has less occasion for grief than ourselves, yet he thinks
otherwise, for he feels his own sorrows, more than those of other men. As they
who suffer pain in any part of their bodies, think that their sufferings exceed
their neighbor's. He that has a disease of the eye, thinks there is nothing so
painful, and he that has a disorder in the stomach, considers that the sorest of
diseases, and each thinks that the heaviest of sufferings, with which he is himself
afflicted. So it is with sorrow, each thinks his own present grief the most severe.
For of this he judges by his own experience. He that is childless considers
nothing so sad as to be without children; he that is poor, and has many children,
complains of the extreme evils of a large family. He who has but one, looks upon
this as the greatest misery, because that one, being set too much store by, and
never corrected, becomes willful, and brings grief upon his father. He who has a
beautiful wife, thinks nothing so bad as having a beautiful wife, because it is the
occasion of jealousy and intrigue. He who has an ugly one, thinks nothing worse
than having a plain wife, because it is constantly disagreeable. The private man
thinks nothing more mean, more useless, than his mode of life. The soldier
declares that nothing is more toilsome, more perilous, than warfare; that it would
he better to live on bread and water than endure such hardships. He that is in
power thinks there can be no greater burden than to attend to the necessities of
others. He that is subject to that power, thinks nothing more servile than living at
the beck of others. The married man considers nothing worse than a wife, and
the cares of marriage. The unmarried declares there is nothing so wretched as
being unmarried, and wanting the repose of a home. The merchant thinks the

husbandman happy in his security. The husbandman thinks the merchant so in
his wealth. In short, all mankind are somehow hard to please, and discontented
and impatient. When condemning the whole race, he says, "Man is a thing of
nought" [Psalm 144:4], implying that the whole kind is a wretched unhappy
creature. How many long for old age! How many think youth a happy time!
Thus each different period has its unhappiness. When we find ourselves
censured on account of our youth, we say, why are we not old? And when our
heads are hoary, we ask whither has our youth flown? Numberless, in short, are
the occasions of sorrow. There is one path only by which this unevenness can be
escaped. It is the path of virtue. Yet that too has its sorrows, only they are
sorrows not unprofitable, but productive of gain and advantage. For if any one
has sinned, he washes away his sin by the compunction that comes of his sorrow.
Or, if he has grieved in sympathizing with a fallen brother, this is not without its
recompense. For sympathy with those that are in misery gives us great
confidence towards God.
Hear therefore what philosophy is taught by the example of Job in holy
Scripture! Hear also what Paul says: "Weep with them that weep"; and again,
"Condescend to men of low estate." [Romans 12:15-16] For, by the
communication of sorrow, the extreme burden of it is lightened. For as in the
case of a heavy load, he that bears part of the weight relieves him who was
bearing it alone, so it is in all other things.
But now, when any one of our relatives dies, there are many who sit by and
console us. Nay, we often raise up even an ass that has fallen; but when the souls
of our brethren are falling, we overlook them and pass by, as if they were of less
value than an ass. And if we see any one entering into a tavern indecently; nay, if
we see him drunk, or guilty of any other unseemly action, we do not restrain
him, we rather join him in it. Whence Paul has said: "They not only do these
things, but have pleasure in them that do them." [Romans 1:32] The greater part
even form associations for the purposes of drunkenness. But do thou, O man,
form associations to restrain the madness of inebriety. Such friendly doings are