sea;" [Matthew 14:25] instructing them not hastily to seek for deliverance; from
their pressing dangers, but to bear all occurrences manfully. At all events, when
they looked to be delivered, then was their fear again heightened. For,
"When the disciples," it is said, "saw Him walking on the sea, they were
troubled, saying, It is a spirit: and they cried out for fear."
Yea, and He constantly does so; when He is on the point of removing our
terrors, He brings upon us other worse things, and more alarming: which we see
took place then also. For together with the storm, the sight too troubled them, no
less than the storm. Therefore neither did He remove the darkness, nor
straightway make Himself manifest, training them, as I said, by the continuance
of these fears, and instructing them to be ready to endure. This He did in the case
of Job also; for when He was on the point of removing the terror and the
temptation, then He suffered the end to grow more grievous; I mean not for his
children's death, or the words of his wife, but because of the reproaches, both of
his servants and of his friends. And when He was about to rescue Jacob from his
affliction in the strange land, He allowed his trouble to be awakened and
aggravated: in that his father-in-law first overtook him and threatened death, and
then his brother coming immediately after, suspended over him the extremest
danger.
For since one cannot be tempted both for a long time and severely; when
the righteous are on the point of coming to an end of their conflicts, He, willing
them to gain the more, enhances their struggles. Which He did in the case of
Abraham too, appointing for his last conflict that about his child. For thus even
things intolerable will be tolerable, when they are so brought upon us, as to have
their removal near, at the very doors.
So did Christ at that time also, and did not discover Himself before they
cried out. For the more intense their alarm, the more did they welcome His
coming. Afterward when they had exclaimed, it is said,
"Straightway Jesus spoke unto them, saying, Be of good cheer, it is I; be not
afraid." [Matthew 14:27]

This word removed their fear, and caused them to take confidence. For as
they knew Him not by sight, because of His marvellous kind of motion, and
because of the time, He makes Himself manifest by His voice.
2. What then says Peter, everywhere ardent, and ever starting forward
before the rest?
"Lord, if it be Thou," says he, "bid me come unto You on the water."
[Matthew 14:28]
He said not, "Pray and entreat," but, "bid." Do you see how great his ardor,
how great his faith? Yet surely he is hereby often in danger, by seeking things
beyond his measure. For so here too he required an exceedingly great thing, for
love only, not for display. For neither did he say, "Bid me walk on the water," but
what? "Bid me come unto You." For none so loved Jesus.
This he did also after the resurrection; he endured not to come with the
others, but leapt forward. [John 21:7] And not love only, but faith also does he
display. For he not only believed that He was able Himself to walk on the sea,
but that He could lead upon it others also; and he longs to be quickly near Him.
"And he said, Come. And when Peter had come down out of the ship, he
walked on the water, and came to Jesus. But when he saw the wind boisterous,
he was afraid; and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me. And
immediately Jesus stretched forth His hand and caught him, and says unto him,
O thou of little faith, wherefore did you doubt?" [Matthew 14:29-31]
This is more wonderful than the former. Therefore this is done after that.
For when He had shown that He rules the sea, then He carries on the sign to
what is yet more marvellous. Then He rebuked the winds only; but now He both
walks Himself, and permits another to do so; which thing if He had required to
be done at the beginning, Peter would not have so well received it, because he
had not yet acquired so great faith.
Wherefore then did Christ permit him? Why, if He had said, "you can not,"
Peter being ardent would have contradicted Him again. Wherefore by the facts
He convinces him, that for the future he may be sobered.