the will is sometimes higher than the intellect, from the fact that the
object of the will occurs in something higher than that in which
occurs the object of the intellect. Thus, for instance, I might say that
hearing is relatively nobler than sight, inasmuch as something in
which there is sound is nobler than something in which there is
color, though color is nobler and simpler than sound. For as we have
said above (Question 16, Article 1; Question 27, Article 4), the action
of the intellect consists in this---that the idea of the thing understood
is in the one who understands; while the act of the will consists in
this---that the will is inclined to the thing itself as existing in itself.
And therefore the Philosopher says in Metaph. vi (Did. v, 2) that
"good and evil," which are objects of the will, "are in things," but
"truth and error," which are objects of the intellect, "are in the mind."
When, therefore, the thing in which there is good is nobler than the
soul itself, in which is the idea understood; by comparison with such
a thing, the will is higher than the intellect. But when the thing which
is good is less noble than the soul, then even in comparison with
that thing the intellect is higher than the will. Wherefore the love of
God is better than the knowledge of God; but, on the contrary, the
knowledge of corporeal things is better than the love thereof.
Absolutely, however, the intellect is nobler than the will.
Reply to Objection 1: The aspect of causality is perceived by
comparing one thing to another, and in such a comparison the idea
of good is found to be nobler: but truth signifies something more
absolute, and extends to the idea of good itself: wherefore even
good is something true. But, again, truth is something good:
forasmuch as the intellect is a thing, and truth its end. And among
other ends this is the most excellent: as also is the intellect among
the other powers.
Reply to Objection 2: What precedes in order of generation and time
is less perfect: for in one and in the same thing potentiality precedes
act, and imperfection precedes perfection. But what precedes
absolutely and in the order of nature is more perfect: for thus act
precedes potentiality. And in this way the intellect precedes the will,
as the motive power precedes the thing movable, and as the active
precedes the passive; for good which is understood moves the will.
Reply to Objection 3: This reason is verified of the will as compared
with what is above the soul. For charity is the virtue by which we
love God.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the will moves the intellect?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will does not move the intellect.
For what moves excels and precedes what is moved, because what
moves is an agent, and "the agent is nobler than the patient," as
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 16), and the Philosopher (De Anima
iii, 5). But the intellect excels and precedes the will, as we have said
above (Article 3). Therefore the will does not move the intellect.
Objection 2: Further, what moves is not moved by what is moved,
except perhaps accidentally. But the intellect moves the will,
because the good apprehended by the intellect moves without being
moved; whereas the appetite moves and is moved. Therefore the
intellect is not moved by the will.
Objection 3: Further, we can will nothing but what we understand. If,
therefore, in order to understand, the will moves by willing to
understand, that act of the will must be preceded by another act of
the intellect, and this act of the intellect by another act of the will,
and so on indefinitely, which is impossible. Therefore the will does
not move the intellect.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 26): "It is in our
power to learn an art or not, as we list." But a thing is in our power
by the will, and we learn art by the intellect. Therefore the will moves
the intellect.
I answer that, A thing is said to move in two ways: First, as an end;
for instance, when we say that the end moves the agent. In this way
the intellect moves the will, because the good understood is the
object of the will, and moves it as an end. Secondly, a thing is said to
move as an agent, as what alters moves what is altered, and what
impels moves what is impelled. In this way the will moves the
intellect and all the powers of the soul, as Anselm says (Eadmer, De
Similitudinibus). The reason is, because wherever we have order
among a number of active powers, that power which regards the
universal end moves the powers which regard particular ends. And
we may observe this both in nature and in things politic. For the
heaven, which aims at the universal preservation of things subject to
generation and corruption, moves all inferior bodies, each of which
aims at the preservation of its own species or of the individual. The