THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.6.

one Divine suppositum is incarnate, so He should assume one
human nature, so that on both sides unity might be found.
Reply to Objection 1: To be assumed belongs to the human nature of
itself, because it does not belong to it by reason of a person, as it
belongs to the Divine Nature to assume by reason of the Person; not,
however, that it belongs to it of itself as if belonging to its essential
principles, or as its natural property in which manner it would belong
to all its supposita.
Reply to Objection 2: The love of God to men is shown not merely in
the assumption of human nature, but especially in what He suffered
in human nature for other men, according to Rm. 5:8: "But God
commendeth His charity towards us; because when as yet we were
sinners . . . Christ died for us," which would not have taken place
had He assumed human nature in all its supposita.
Reply to Objection 3: In order to shorten the way, which every skilful
workman does, what can be done by one must not be done by many.
Hence it was most fitting that by one man all the rest should be
saved.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.4, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether it was fitting for the Son of God to

assume human nature of the stock of Adam?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was not fitting for the Son of God
to assume human nature of the stock of Adam, for the Apostle says
(Heb. 7:26): "For it was fitting that we should have such a high
priest . . . separated from sinners." But He would have been still
further separated from sinners had He not assumed human nature of
the stock of Adam, a sinner. Hence it seems that He ought not to
have assumed human nature of the stock of Adam.
Objection 2: Further, in every genus the principle is nobler than what
is from the principle. Hence, if He wished to assume human nature,
He ought to have assumed it in Adam himself.
Objection 3: Further, the Gentiles were greater sinners than the
Jews, as a gloss says on Gal. 2:15: "For we by nature are Jews, and
not of the Gentiles, sinners." Hence, if He wished to assume human
nature from sinners, He ought rather to have assumed it from the
Gentiles than from the stock of Abraham, who was just.
On the contrary, (Lk. 3), the genealogy of our Lord is traced back to
Adam.
I answer that, As Augustine says (De Trin. xiii, 18): "God was able to
assume human nature elsewhere than from the stock of Adam, who
by his sin had fettered the whole human race; yet God judged it
better to assume human nature from the vanquished race, and thus
to vanquish the enemy of the human race." And this for three
reasons: First, because it would seem to belong to justice that he
who sinned should make amends; and hence that from the nature
which he had corrupted should be assumed that whereby
satisfaction was to be made for the whole nature. Secondly, it
pertains to man's greater dignity that the conqueror of the devil
should spring from the stock conquered by the devil. Thirdly,
because God's power is thereby made more manifest, since, from a
corrupt and weakened nature, He assumed that which was raised to
such might and glory.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ ought to be separated from sinners as
regards sin, which He came to overthrow, and not as regards nature