and yet they are direct objects of sense.
An indirect object of sense is that which does not act on the sense,
neither as sense nor as a particular sense, but is annexed to those
things that act on sense directly: for instance Socrates; the son of
Diares; a friend and the like which are the direct object of the
intellect's knowledge in the universal, and in the particular are the
object of the cogitative power in man, and of the estimative power in
other animals. The external sense is said to perceive things of this
kind, although indirectly, when the apprehensive power (whose
province it is to know directly this thing known), from that which is
sensed directly, apprehends them at once and without any doubt or
discourse (thus we see that a person is alive from the fact that he
speaks): otherwise the sense is not said to perceive it even
indirectly.
I say then that God can nowise be seen with the eyes of the body, or
perceived by any of the senses, as that which is seen directly,
neither here, nor in heaven: for if that which belongs to sense as
such be removed from sense, there will be no sense, and in like
manner if that which belongs to sight as sight be removed therefrom,
there will be no sight. Accordingly seeing that sense as sense
perceives magnitude, and sight as such a sense perceives color, it is
impossible for the sight to perceive that which is neither color nor
magnitude, unless we call it a sense equivocally. Since then sight
and sense will be specifically the same in the glorified body, as in a
non-glorified body, it will be impossible for it to see the Divine
essence as an object of direct vision; yet it will see it as an object of
indirect vision, because on the one hand the bodily sight will see so
great a glory of God in bodies, especially in the glorified bodies and
most of all in the body of Christ, and, on the other hand, the intellect
will see God so clearly, that God will be perceived in things seen
with the eye of the body, even as life is perceived in speech. For
although our intellect will not then see God from seeing His
creatures, yet it will see God in His creatures seen corporeally. This
manner of seeing God corporeally is indicated by Augustine (De Civ.
Dei xxii), as is clear if we take note of his words, for he says: "It is
very credible that we shall so see the mundane bodies of the new
heaven and the new earth, as to see most clearly God everywhere
present, governing all corporeal things, not as we now see the
invisible things of God as understood by those that are made, but as
when we see men . . . we do not believe but see that they live."

Reply to Objection 1: This saying of Job refers to the spiritual eye, of
which the Apostle says (Eph. 1:18): "The eyes of our heart
enlightened."
Reply to Objection 2: The passage quoted does not mean that we are
to see God with the eyes of the flesh, but that, in the flesh, we shall
see God.
Reply to Objection 3: In these words Augustine speaks as one
inquiring and conditionally. This appears from what he had said
before: "Therefore they will have an altogether different power, if
they shall see that incorporeal nature": and then he goes on to say:
"Accordingly a greater power," etc., and afterwards he explains
himself.
Reply to Objection 4: All knowledge results from some kind of
abstraction from matter. Wherefore the more a corporeal form is
abstracted from matter, the more is it a principle of knowledge.
Hence it is that a form existing in matter is in no way a principle of
knowledge, while a form existing in the senses is somewhat a
principle of knowledge, in so far as it is abstracted from matter, and
a form existing in the intellect is still better a principle of knowledge.
Therefore the spiritual eye, whence the obstacle to knowledge is
removed, can see a corporeal object: but it does not follow that the
corporeal eye, in which the cognitive power is deficient as
participating in matter, be able to know perfectly incorporeal objects
of knowledge.
Reply to Objection 5: Although the mind that has become carnal
cannot think but of things received from the senses, it thinks of them
immaterially. In like manner whatever the sight apprehends it must
always apprehend it corporeally: wherefore it cannot know things
which cannot be apprehended corporeally.
Reply to Objection 6: Beatitude is the perfection of man as man. And
since man is man not through his body but through his soul, and the
body is essential to man, in so far as it is perfected by the soul: it
follows that man's beatitude does not consist chiefly otherwise than
in an act of the soul, and passes from the soul on to the body by a
kind of overflow, as explained above (Question 85, Article 1). Yet our
body will have a certain beatitude from seeing God in sensible
creatures: and especially in Christ's body.