unworthy of such a sight; and do not thou go out with the minstrels, but remain
with Peter, and John, and James.
For if He cast them out then, much more now. For then it was not yet
manifest that death was become a sleep, but now this is clearer than the very sun
itself. But is it that He has not raised your daughter now? But surely He will
raise her, and with more abundant glory. For that damsel, when she had risen,
died again; but your child, if she rise again, abides thenceforth in immortal
being.
4. Let no man therefore beat himself any more, nor wail, neither disparage
Christ's achievement. For indeed He overcame death. Why then do you wail for
nought? The thing has become a sleep. Why lament and weep? Why, even if
Greeks did this, they should be laughed to scorn; but when the believer behaves
himself unseemly in these things, what plea has he? What excuse will there be
for them that are guilty of such folly, and this, after so long a time, and so clear
proof of the resurrection?
But you, as though laboring to add to the charge against you, dost also bring
us in heathen women singing dirges, to kindle your feelings, and to stir up the
furnace thoroughly: and you hearken not to Paul, saying, "What concord has
Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that believes with an infidel?"
And while the children of heathens, who know nothing of resurrection, do
yet find words of consolation, saying, "Bear it manfully, for it is not possible to
undo what has taken place, nor to amend it by lamentations;" art not thou, who
hear sayings wiser and better than these, ashamed to behave yourself more
unseemly than they? For we say not at all, "Bear it manfully, because it is not
possible to undo what has taken place," but, "bear it manfully, because he will
surely rise again;" the child sleeps and is not dead; he is at rest and has not
perished. For resurrection will be his final lot, and eternal life, and immortality,
and an angel's portion. Do you not hear the Psalm that says, "Return unto your
rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with you?" God calls it
"bountiful dealing," and do you make lamentation?

And what more couldest thou have done, if you were a foe and an enemy of
the dead? Why, if there must be mourning, it is the devil that ought to mourn. He
may beat himself, he may wail, at our journeying to greater blessings. This
lamentation becomes his wickedness, not you, who art going to be crowned and
to rest. Yea, for death is a fair haven. Consider, at any rate, with how many evils
our present life is filled; reflect how often you yourself hast cursed our present
life. For indeed things go on to worse, and from the very beginning thou were
involved in no small condemnation. For, says He, "In sorrow you shall bring
forth children;" and, "In the sweat of your face shall you eat your bread;" and,
"In the world you shall have tribulation." [John 16:33]
But of our state there, no such word at all is spoken, but all the contrary;
that "grief and sorrow and sighing have fled away." [Isaiah 35:10] And that
"men shall come from the east and from the west, and shall recline in the bosoms
of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob." [Matthew 8:11] And that the region there is a
spiritual bride-chamber, and bright lamps, and a translation to Heaven.
5. Why then disgrace the departed? Why dispose the rest to fear and
tremble at death? Why cause many to accuse God, as though He had done very
dreadful things? Or rather, why after this invite poor persons, and entreat priests
to pray? "In order," says he, "that the dead may depart into rest; that he may find
the Judge propitious." For these things then are you mourning and wailing? You
are therefore fighting and warring with yourself: exciting a storm against
yourself on account of his having entered into harbor.
"But what can I do?" says he: "such a thing is nature." The blame is not
nature's, neither does it belong to the necessary consequence of the thing; but it
is we that are turning all things upside down, are overcome with softness, are
giving up our proper nobility, and are making the unbelievers worse. For how
shall we reason with another concerning immortality? How shall we persuade
the heathen, when we fear death, and shudder at it more than he? Many, for
instance, among the Greeks although they knew nothing of course about
immortality, have crowned themselves at the decrease of their children, and