living subject: sometimes also for a vital operation, that is, for one
whereby something is shown to be living. In this way the
Philosopher says that to understand is, in a sense, to live: for there
he distinguishes the various grades of living things according to the
various functions of life.
Reply to Objection 2: The essence of an angel is the reason of his
entire existence, but not the reason of his whole act of
understanding, since he cannot understand everything by his
essence. Consequently in its own specific nature as such an
essence, it is compared to the existence of the angel, whereas to his
act of understanding it is compared as included in the idea of a more
universal object, namely, truth and being. Thus it is evident, that,
although the form is the same, yet it is not the principle of existence
and of understanding according to the same formality. On this
account it does not follow that in the angel "to be" is the same as 'to
understand.'

### ARTICLE 3. Whether an angel's power of intelligence is his

essence?
Objection 1: It would seem that in an angel the power or faculty of
understanding is not different from his essence. For, "mind" and
"intellect" express the power of understanding. But in many
passages of his writings, Dionysius styles angels "intellects" and
"minds." Therefore the angel is his own power of intelligence.
Objection 2: Further, if the angel's power of intelligence be anything
besides his essence, then it must needs be an accident; for that
which is besides the essence of anything, we call it accident. But "a
simple form cannot be a subject," as Boethius states (De Trin. 1).
Thus an angel would not be a simple form, which is contrary to what
has been previously said (Question 50, Article 2).
Objection 3: Further, Augustine (Confess. xii) says, that God made
the angelic nature "nigh unto Himself," while He made primary
matter "nigh unto nothing"; from this it would seem that the angel is
of a simpler nature than primary matter, as being closer to God. But
primary matter is its own power. Therefore much more is an angel
his own power of intelligence.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. xi) that "the angels are
divided into substance, power, and operation." Therefore substance,
power, and operation, are all distinct in them.
I answer that, Neither in an angel nor in any creature, is the power or
operative faculty the same as its essence: which is made evident
thus. Since every power is ordained to an act, then according to the
diversity of acts must be the diversity of powers; and on this
account it is said that each proper act responds to its proper power.
But in every creature the essence differs from the existence, and is
compared to it as potentiality is to act, as is evident from what has
been already said (Question 44, Article 1). Now the act to which the
operative power is compared is operation. But in the angel to
understand is not the same as to exist, nor is any operation in him,
nor in any other created thing, the same as his existence. Hence the
angel's essence is not his power of intelligence: nor is the essence
of any creature its power of operation.