the husband it is required that he should not have married another
wife, but not that he should be a virgin, whereas on the part of the
wife it is also required that she be a virgin. The reason assigned by
those versed in the Decretals is because the bridegroom signifies
the Church militant which is entrusted to the care of a bishop, and in
which there are many corruptions, while the spouse signifies Christ
Who was a virgin: wherefore virginity on the part of the spouse, but
not on the part of the bridegroom, is required in order that a man be
made a bishop. This reason, however, is expressly contrary to the
words of the Apostle (Eph. 5:25): "Husbands, love your wives, as
Christ also loved the Church," which show that the bride signifies
the Church, and the bridegroom Christ; and again he says (Eph.
5:23): "Because the husband is the head of the wife, as Christ is the
head of the Church." Wherefore others say that Christ is signified by
the bridegroom, and that the bride signifies the Church triumphant in
which there is no stain. Also that the synagogue was first united to
Christ as a concubine; so that the sacrament loses nothing of its
signification if the bridegroom previously had a concubine. But this
is most absurd, since just as the faith of ancients and of moderns is
one, so is the Church one. Wherefore those who served God at the
time of the synagogue belonged to the unity of the Church in which
we serve God. Moreover this is expressly contrary to Jer. 3:14,
Ezech. 16:8, Osee 2:16, where the espousals of the synagogue are
mentioned explicitly: so that she was not as a concubine but as a
wife. Again, according to this, fornication would be the sacred sign
[sacramentum] of that union, which is absurd. Wherefore
heathendom, before being espoused to Christ in the faith of the
Church, was corrupted by the devil through idolatry. Hence we must
say otherwise that irregularity is caused by a defect in the sacrament
itself. Now when corruption of the flesh occurs outside wedlock on
account of a preceding marriage, it causes no defect in the
sacrament on the part of the person corrupted, but it causes a defect
in the other person, because the act of one who contracts marriage
terminates not in himself, but in the other party, wherefore it takes its
species from its term, which, moreover, in regard to that act, is the
matter as it were of the sacrament. Consequently if a woman were
able to receive orders, just as her husband becomes irregular
through marrying one who is not a virgin, but not through his not
being a virgin when he marries, so also would a woman become
irregular if she were to marry a man who is not a virgin, but not if she
were no longer a virgin when she married ---unless she had been
corrupted by reason of a previous marriage.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: In this case opinions differ. It is, however, more
probable that he is not irregular, because he has not divided his
flesh among several women.
Reply to Objection 3: Irregularity is not the infliction of a
punishment, but the defect of a sacrament. Consequently it is not
always necessary for bigamy to be voluntary in order to cause
irregularity. Hence a man who marries a woman, thinking her to be a
virgin, whereas she is not, becomes irregular by knowing her
carnally.
Reply to Objection 4: If a woman commits fornication after being
married, her husband does not become irregular on that account,
unless he again knows her carnally after she has been corrupted by
adultery, since otherwise the corruption of the wife nowise affects
the marriage act of the husband. But though he be compelled by law
to pay her the debt, or if he do so at her request, being compelled by
his own conscience, even before she is convicted of adultery, he
becomes irregular, albeit opinions differ on this point. However, what
we have said is more probable, since here it is not a question of sin,
but of signification only.