Now, what simple-minded man, I ask, would not be led away by such verses as these to think
that Homer actually framed them so with reference to the subject indicated? But he who is acquainted
with the Homeric writings will recognise the verses indeed, but not the subject to which they are
applied, as knowing that some of them were spoken of Ulysses, others of Hercules himself, others
still of Priam, and others again of Menelaus and Agamemnon. But if he takes them and restores
each of them to its proper position, he at once destroys the narrative in question. In like manner he
also who retains unchangeable in his heart the rule of the truth which he received by means of
baptism, will doubtless recognise the names, the expressions, and the parables taken from the
Scriptures, but will by no means acknowledge the blasphemous use which these men make of them.
For, though he will acknowledge the gems, he will certainly not receive the fox instead of the
likeness of the king. But when he has restored every one of the expressions quoted to its proper
position, and has fitted it to the body of the truth, he will lay bare, and prove to be without any
foundation, the figment of these heretics.
5. But since what may prove a finishing-stroke to this exhibition is wanting, so that any one,
on following out their farce to the end, may then at once append an argument which shall overthrow
it, we have judged it well to point out, first of all, in what respects the very fathers of this fable
differ among themselves, as if they were inspired by different spirits of error. For this very fact
forms an a priori proof that the truth proclaimed by the Church is immoveable, and that the
theories of these men are but a tissue of falsehoods.

### Chapter X.—Unity of the faith of the Church throughout the whole world.
1. The Church, though dispersed through our the whole world, even to the ends of the earth,
has received from the apostles and their disciples this faith: [She believes] in one God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are in them; and in one Christ
Jesus, the Son of God, who became incarnate for our salvation; and in the Holy Spirit, who
proclaimed through the prophets the dispensations2786of God, and the advents, and the birth from a
virgin, and the passion, and the resurrection from the dead, and the ascension into heaven in the
flesh of the beloved Christ Jesus, our Lord, and His [future] manifestation from heaven in the glory
"'%(%', a builder's rule.
!)(#1/$0, and may be rendered as above.
anything to take their place.]

of the Father "to gather all things in one," and to raise up anew all flesh of the whole human
race, in order that to Christ Jesus, our Lord, and God, and Saviour, and King, according to the will
of the invisible Father, "every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things
under the earth, and that every tongue should confess" to Him, and that He should execute just
judgment towards all; that He may send "spiritual wickednesses," and the angels who transgressed
and became apostates, together with the ungodly, and unrighteous, and wicked, and profane among
men, into everlasting fire; but may, in the exercise of His grace, confer immortality on the righteous,
and holy, and those who have kept His commandments, and have persevered in His love, some
from the beginning [of their Christian course], and others from [the date of] their repentance, and
may surround them with everlasting glory.
2. As I have already observed, the Church, having received this preaching and this faith, although
scattered throughout the whole world, yet, as if occupying but one house, carefully preserves it.
She also believes these points [of doctrine] just as if she had but one soul, and one and the same
heart, and she proclaims them, and teaches them, and hands them down, with perfect harmony, as
if she possessed only one mouth. For, although the languages of the world are dissimilar, yet the
import of the tradition is one and the same. For the Churches which have been planted in Germany
do not believe or hand down anything different, nor do those in Spain, nor those in Gaul, nor those
in the East, nor those in Egypt, nor those in Libya, nor those which have been established in the
central regions of the world. But as the sun, that creature of God, is one and the same throughout
the whole world, so also the preaching of the truth shineth everywhere, and enlightens all men that
are willing to come to a knowledge of the truth. Nor will any one of the rulers in the Churches,
however highly gifted he may be in point of eloquence, teach doctrines different from these (for
no one is greater than the Master); nor, on the other hand, will he who is deficient in power of
expression inflict injury on the tradition. For the faith being ever one and the same, neither does
one who is able at great length to discourse regarding it, make any addition to it, nor does one, who
can say but little diminish it.
3. It does not follow because men are endowed with greater and less degrees of intelligence,
that they should therefore change the subject-matter [of the faith] itself, and should conceive of
some other God besides Him who is the Framer, Maker, and Preserver of this universe, (as if He
were not sufficient for them), or of another Christ, or another Only-begotten. But the fact referred
to simply implies this, that one may [more accurately than another] bring out the meaning of those
things which have been spoken in parables, and accommodate them to the general scheme of the