FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.2.

while diversity of species arises from diversity of form in the same
matter; so in the acts of the soul, those that belong to different
powers, differ not only in species but also in genus, while acts and
passions regarding different specific objects, included under the one
common object of a single power, differ as the species of that genus.
In order, therefore, to discern which passions are in the irascible,
and which in the concupiscible, we must take the object of each of
these powers. For we have stated in the FP, Question 81, Article 2,
that the object of the concupiscible power is sensible good or evil,
simply apprehended as such, which causes pleasure or pain. But,
since the soul must, of necessity, experience difficulty or struggle at
times, in acquiring some such good, or in avoiding some such evil,
in so far as such good or evil is more than our animal nature can
easily acquire or avoid; therefore this very good or evil, inasmuch as
it is of an arduous or difficult nature, is the object of the irascible
faculty. Therefore whatever passions regard good or evil absolutely,
belong to the concupiscible power; for instance, joy, sorrow, love,
hatred, and such like: whereas those passions which regard good or
bad as arduous, through being difficult to obtain or avoid, belong to
the irascible faculty; such are daring, fear, hope and the like.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated in the FP, Question 81, Article 2, the
irascible faculty is bestowed on animals, in order to remove the
obstacles that hinder the concupiscible power from tending towards
its object, either by making some good difficult to obtain, or by
making some evil hard to avoid. The result is that all the irascible
passions terminate in the concupiscible passions: and thus it is that
even the passions which are in the irascible faculty are followed by
joy and sadness which are in the concupiscible faculty.
Reply to Objection 2: Jerome ascribes hatred of vice to the irascible
faculty, not by reason of hatred, which is properly a concupiscible
passion; but on account of the struggle, which belongs to the
irascible power.
Reply to Objection 3: Good, inasmuch as it is delightful, moves the
concupiscible power. But if it prove difficult to obtain, from this very
fact it has a certain contrariety to the concupiscible power: and
hence the need of another power tending to that good. The same
applies to evil. And this power is the irascible faculty. Consequently
the concupiscible passions are specifically different from the
irascible passions.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the contrariety of the irascible passions

is based on the contrariety of good and evil?
Objection 1: It would seem that the contrariety of the irascible
passions is based on no other contrariety than that of good and evil.
For the irascible passions are ordained to the concupiscible
passions, as stated above (Article 1, ad 1). But the contrariety of the
concupiscible passions is no other than that of good and evil; take,
for instance, love and hatred, joy and sorrow. Therefore the same
applies to the irascible passions.
Objection 2: Further, passions differ according to their objects; just
as movements differ according to their termini. But there is no other
contrariety of movements, except that of the termini, as is stated in
Phys. v, 3. Therefore there is no other contrariety of passions, save
that of the objects. Now the object of the appetite is good or evil.
Therefore in no appetitive power can there be contrariety of passions
other than that of good and evil.
Objection 3: Further, "every passion of the soul is by way of
approach and withdrawal," as Avicenna declares in his sixth book of
Physics. Now approach results from the apprehension of good;
withdrawal, from the apprehension of evil: since just as "good is
what all desire" (Ethic. i, 1), so evil is what all shun. Therefore, in the
passions of the soul, there can be no other contrariety than that of
good and evil.
On the contrary, Fear and daring are contrary to one another, as
stated in Ethic. iii, 7. But fear and daring do not differ in respect of
good and evil: because each regards some kind of evil. Therefore
not every contrariety of the irascible passions is that of good and
evil.
I answer that, Passion is a kind of movement, as stated in Phys. iii, 3.
Therefore contrariety of passions is based on contrariety of
movements or changes. Now there is a twofold contrariety in
changes and movements, as stated in Phys. v, 5. One is according to
approach and withdrawal in respect of the same term: and this
contrariety belongs properly to changes, i.e. to generation, which is
a change "to being," and to corruption, which is a change "from
being." The other contrariety is according to opposition of termini,