repines over the good possessed by another, inasmuch as he deems
his neighbor's good to be a hindrance to his own. But another's
good could not be deemed a hindrance to the good coveted by the
wicked angel, except inasmuch as he coveted a singular excellence,
which would cease to be singular because of the excellence of some
other. So, after the sin of pride, there followed the evil of envy in the
sinning angel, whereby he grieved over man's good, and also over
the Divine excellence, according as against the devil's will God
makes use of man for the Divine glory.
Reply to Objection 1: The demons do not delight in the obscenities
of the sins of the flesh, as if they themselves were disposed to carnal
pleasures: it is wholly through envy that they take pleasure in all
sorts of human sins, so far as these are hindrances to a man's good.
Reply to Objection 2: Avarice, considered as a special kind of sin, is
the immoderate greed of temporal possessions which serve the use
of human life, and which can be estimated in value of money; to
these demons are not at all inclined, any more than they are to carnal
pleasures. Consequently avarice properly so called cannot be in
them. But if every immoderate greed of possessing any created good
be termed avarice, in this way avarice is contained under the pride
which is in the demons. Anger implies passion, and so does
concupiscence; consequently they can only exist metaphorically in
the demons. Sloth is a kind of sadness, whereby a man becomes
sluggish in spiritual exercises because they weary the body; which
does not apply to the demons. So it is evident that pride and envy
are the only spiritual sins which can be found in demons; yet so that
envy is not to be taken for a passion, but for a will resisting the good
of another.
Reply to Objection 3: Under envy and pride, as found in the demons,
are comprised all other sins derived from them.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the devil desired to be as God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the devil did not desire to be as God.
For what does not fall under apprehension, does not fall under
desire; because the good which is apprehended moves the appetite,
whether sensible, rational, or intellectual; and sin consists only in
such desire. But for any creature to be God's equal does not fall
under apprehension, because it implies a contradiction; for it the
finite equals the infinite, then it would itself be infinite. Therefore an
angel could not desire to be as God.
Objection 2: Further, the natural end can always be desired without
sin. But to be likened unto God is the end to which every creature
naturally tends. If, therefore, the angel desired to be as God, not by
equality, but by likeness, it would seem that he did not thereby sin.
Objection 3: Further, the angel was created with greater fulness of
wisdom than man. But no man, save a fool, ever makes choice of
being the equal of an angel, still less of God; because choice regards
only things which are possible, regarding which one takes
deliberation. Therefore much less did the angel sin by desiring to be
as God.
On the contrary, It is said, in the person of the devil (Is. 14:13,14), "I
will ascend into heaven . . . I will be like the Most High." And
Augustine (De Qu. Vet. Test. cxiii) says that being "inflated with
pride, he wished to be called God."
I answer that, Without doubt the angel sinned by seeking to be as
God. But this can be understood in two ways: first, by equality;
secondly, by likeness. He could not seek to be as God in the first
way; because by natural knowledge he knew that this was
impossible: and there was no habit preceding his first sinful act, nor
any passion fettering his mind, so as to lead him to choose what was
impossible by failing in some particular; as sometimes happens in
ourselves. And even supposing it were possible, it would be against
the natural desire; because there exists in everything the natural
desire of preserving its own nature; which would not be preserved
were it to be changed into another nature. Consequently, no creature
of a lower order can ever covet the grade of a higher nature; just as
an ass does not desire to be a horse: for were it to be so upraised, it