that repays that only, which is given him, is wicked, because he did not double it;
he that has wasted even this, what will be said to him? If that person was bound,
and cast out where is gnashing of teeth, what shall we have to suffer, who, when
numberless motives are drawing us toward virtue, shrink back and are
unwilling?
For what is there, that has not enough in it to persuade you? Do you see not
the vileness of the world, the uncertainty of life, the toil, the sweat, for things
present? What? Is it the case that virtue must be toiled for, but may vice be had
without toil? If then both in the one and in the other there is toil, why did you not
choose this, which has so great profit?
Or rather, there are some parts of virtue, which are free even from toil. For
what kind of toil is it, not to calumniate, not to lie, not to swear, to lay aside our
anger against our neighbor? Nay, on the contrary, to do these things is toilsome,
and brings much anxiety.
What plea then shall we have, what excuse, not doing right even in these
matters? For hereby it is plain, that out of remissness and sloth the more
toilsome duties also altogether escape us.
All these things let us consider; let us flee vice, let us choose virtue, that we
may attain both unto the good things that are present, and unto those that are to
come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 43 on Matthew

Matthew 12:38-39.
" Then certain of the Scribes and Pharisees answered Him, saying, Master,
we would see a sign from You. But He answered and said, An evil and adulterous
generation seeks after a sign, and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign
of the Prophet Jonas."
Could then anything be more foolish than these men (not more impious
only), who after so many miracles, as though none had been wrought, say, "We
would see a sign from You?" With what intent then did they so speak? That they
might lay hold of Him again. For since by His words He had stopped their
mouths, once and twice and often, and had checked their shameless tongue, they
come to His works again. At which also the evangelist marvelling again, said,
"Then certain of the scribes answered Him, asking a sign."
"Then," when? When they ought to be stooping before Him, to admire, to
be amazed and give way, "then" they desist not from their wickedness.
And see their words too, teeming with flattery and dissimulation. For they
thought to draw Him towards them in that way. And now they insult, now they
flatter Him; now calling Him a demoniac, now again "Master," both out of an
evil mind, how contrary soever the words they speak.
Wherefore also He rebukes them severely. And when they were questioning
Him roughly and insulting Him, He reasoned with them gently; when they were
flattering; reproachfully, and with great severity; implying that He is superior to
either passion, and is neither at the one time moved to anger, nor at the other
softened by flattery. And see His reproach, that it is not merely hard words, but
contains a demonstration of their wickedness. For what says He?
"An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign." Now what He says
is to this effect: What marvel if you behave so to me who have been hitherto