man sick of the palsy lying on a bed: and Jesus seeing their faith said unto the
sick of the palsy "Son! Be of good cheer: your sins are forgiven." [Matthew 9:12] Now they were inferior to the centurion in respect of their faith, but superior
to the impotent man by the pool. For the former neither invited the physician nor
brought the sick man to the physician; but approached Him as God and said
"Speak the word only and my servant shall be healed." [Luke 7:7] Now these
men did not invite the physician to the house, and so far they are on an equality
with the centurion: but they brought the sick man to the physician and so far they
are inferior, because they did not say "speak the word only." Yet they are far
better than the man lying by the pool. For he said "Lord I have no man when the
water is troubled to put me into the pool:" but these men knew that Christ had no
need either of water, or pool, or anything else of that kind: nevertheless Christ
not only released the servant of the centurion but the other two men also from
their maladies, and did not say: "because you have proffered a smaller degree of
faith the cure which you receive shall be in proportion;" but He dismissed the
man who displayed the greater faith with eulogy and honour, saying "I have not
found so great faith, no, not in Israel." [Luke 7:9] On the man who exhibited less
faith than this one he bestowed no praise yet He did not deprive him of a cure,
no! not even him who displayed no faith at all. But just as physicians when
curing the same disorder receive from some person a hundred gold pieces, from
others half, from others less and from some nothing at all: even so Christ
received from the centurion a large and unspeakable degree of faith, but from
this man less and from the other not even an ordinary amount, and yet He healed
them all. For what reason then did He deem the man who made no deposit of
faith worthy of the benefit? Because his failure to exhibit faith was not owing to
indolence, or to insensibility of soul, but to ignorance of Christ and having never
heard any miracle in which He was concerned either small or great. On this
account therefore the man obtained indulgence: which in fact the evangelist
obscurely intimates when he says, "for he knew not who it was," [John 5:13] but
he only recognized Him by sight when he lighted upon Him the second time.

5. There are indeed some who say that this man was healed merely because
they who brought him believed; but this is not the fact. For "when He saw their
faith" refers not merely to those who brought the man but also to the man who
was brought. Why so? "Is not one man healed," you say, "because another has
believed?" For my part I do not think so unless owing to immaturity of age or
excessive infirmity he is in some way incapable of believing. How then was it
you say that in the case of the woman of Canaan the mother believed but the
daughter was cured? And how was it that the servant of the centurion who
believed rose from the bed of sickness and was preserved. Because the sick
persons themselves were not able to believe. Hear then what the woman of
Canaan says: "My daughter is grievously vexed with a devil [Matthew 15:22]
and sometimes she falls into the water and sometimes into the fire:" now how
could she believe whose mind was darkened and possessed by a devil, and was
never able to control herself, not in her sound senses? As then in the case of the
woman of Canaan so also in the case of the centurion; his servant lay ill in the
house, not knowing Christ, himself, nor who He was. How then was he to
believe in one who was unknown to him, and of whom he had never yet obtained
any experience? But in the case before us we cannot say this: for the paralytic
believed. Whence is this manifest? From the very manner of his approach to
Christ. For do not attend simply to the statement that they let the man down
through the roof: but consider how great a matter it is for a sick man to have the
fortitude to undergo this. For you are surely aware that invalids are so fainthearted and difficult to please as often to decline the treatment administered to
them on their sick bed, and to prefer bearing the pain which arises from their
maladies to undergoing the annoyance caused by the remedies. But this man had
the fortitude to go outside the house, and to be carried into the midst of the
market place, and to exhibit himself in the presence of a crowd. And it is the
habit of sick folk to die under their disorder rather than disclose their personal
calamities. This sick man however did not act thus, but when he saw that the
place of assembly was filled, the approaches blocked, the haven of refuge