them both by the miracles and by the works, and independently of these in the
person of each individual. "And it came to pass, etc. And Peter said unto him,
Eneas," etc. [Acts 9:32-34] But before discourse, before exhortations, he says to
the lame man himself, "Jesus Christ makes you whole." This word he believed in
any wise, and was made whole. Observe how unassuming he is: for he said not,
"In the Name," but rather as a sign he narrates the miracle itself, and speaks as its
Evangelist. "And having seen him," it says, "all that dwelt in Lydda, and Saron,
turned unto the Lord.— Now there was at Joppa," etc. (v. 35, 36.) Observe
everywhere the signs taking place. But let us so believe them, as if we were now
beholding them. It is not simply said, that Tabitha died, but that she died, having
been in a state of weakness. And (yet) they did not call Peter until she died; then
"they sent and told him not to delay to come unto them." Observe, they send and
call him by others. And he comes: he did not think it a piece of disrespect, to be
summoned by two men: for, it says, "they sent two men unto him."— Affliction,
my beloved, is a great thing, and rivets our souls together. Not a word of wailing
there, nor of mourning. See how thoroughly matters are cleansed! "Having
washed her," it says, "they laid her in an upper chamber:" that is, they did all
(that was right) for the dead body. Then Peter having come, "knelt down, and
prayed; and turning him to the body, said, Tabitha, arise." [Acts 9:40] They did
not perform all their miracles with the same ease. But this was profitable for
them: for truly God took thought not only for the salvation of others, but for their
own. He that healed so many by his very shadow, how is it that he now has to do
so much first? There are cases also in which the faith of the applicants
coöperated. This is the first dead person that he raises. Observe how he, as it
were, awakes her out of sleep: first she opened her eyes: then upon seeing
(Peter) she sat up: then from his hand she received strength. "And it was known
throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord." [Acts 9:42] Mark the
gain, mark the fruit, that it was not for display. Indeed, this is why he puts them
all out, imitating his Master in this also.
For where tears are— or rather, where miracles are, there tears ought not to

be; not where such a mystery is celebrating. Hear, I beseech you: although
somewhat of the like kind does not take place now, yet in the case of our dead
likewise, a great mystery is celebrating. Say, if as we sit together, the Emperor
were to send and invite some one of us to the palace, would it be right, I ask, to
weep and mourn? Angels are present, commissioned from heaven and come
from thence, sent from the King Himself to call their fellow servant, and say, do
you weep? Do you not know what a mystery it is that is taking place, how awful,
how dread, and worthy indeed of hymns and lauds? Would you learn, that you
may know, that this is no time for tears? For it is a very great mystery of the
Wisdom of God. As if leaving her dwelling, the soul goes forth, speeding on her
way to her own Lord, and do you mourn? Why then, you should do this on the
birth of a child: for this in fact is also a birth, and a better than that. For here she
goes forth to a very different light, is loosed as from a prison-house, comes off as
from a contest. "Yes," say you, "it is all very well to say this, in the case of those
of whose salvation we are assured." Then, what ails you, O man, that even in the
case of such, thou dost not take it in this way? Say, what can you have to
condemn in the little child? Why do you mourn for it? What in the newly
baptized? For he too is brought into the same condition: why do you mourn for
him? For as the sun arises clear and bright, so the soul, leaving the body with a
pure conscience, shines joyously. Not such the spectacle of Emperor as he comes
in state to take possession of the city ([ἐ] [πιβαίνοντα πόλεως]), not such the
hush of awe, as when the soul having quitted the body is departing in company
with Angels. Think what the soul must then be! In what amazement, what
wonder, what delight! Why do you mourn? Answer me.— But it is only in the
case of sinners you do this? Would that it were so, and I would not forbid your
mournings, would that this were the object! This lamentation were Apostolic,
this were after the pattern of the Lord; for even Jesus wept over Jerusalem. I
would that your mournings were discriminated by this rule. But when you speak
the words of one that would call back (the dead), and speakest of your long
intimacy and his beneficence, it is but for this you mourn (not because he was a