anthropology. He says: "There must always be some philosopher amongst mankind." I
have some hesitation however in agreeing with Renan's explanation: because this
position, which he attributes to Averroes, is clearly suicidal, and the Commentator was
no fool. If no individual man had a head on his shoulders, the race would be headless.
Averroes (see Chap.LX) does not seem to allow to the individual man, as man,
any higher faculty than a faculty proper to the sentient soul: how can a race of such
sentient beings constitute an intelligence? The intelligence of the race can only mean
the intelligence of this man and of that, combining to form society. But it is difficult to
form any rational conception of nous choristos as Averroes understood it. If Renan 's
interpretation be taken, then when Averroes speaks (De anima, III, p. 161) of the "active
and potential intellect" as being "eternal substances," we must understand him to call
them eternal with the eternity of civilised mankind, an eternity which he positively
asserts (De anima, p. 149). The main point of St Thomas's attack upon the
Commentator is his theory of the continuatio (ittisl is the Arabic name, much used by the
Arabian mystics), or point of contact between the universal intelligence outside and the
mind of the individual man. Averroes's words are these (De anima, II, pp. 178, 148b,
185b): "The potential intellect is not conjoined with us primarily and ordinarily: nay, it is
not conjoined with us at all, except inasmuch as it is conjoined with the forms in our
phantasy. . . . Since it has been shown that intellect cannot be conjoined with all men so
as to be multiplied as they are multiplied, it remains that the said intellect is conjoined
with us by conjunction with our intellectual impressions which are conceptions in the
phantasy, that is to say, through that part of those conceptions which exists in us and
serves in a manner as a form. . . . Since the impressions of speculative intellect are
conjoined with us by forms of phantasy; and the active intellect is conjoined with those
intellectual impressions; and the intellect which takes cognisance of those impressions,
that is to say, the potential intellect, is the same [as the active]: the necessary
conclusion is that the active intellect is conjoined with us by the conjunction of those
intellectual impressions." See St Thomas, Summa Theol. I, q 76 artt. 1 and 2: where he
explains Averroes thus: "The Commentator says that this union is by means of the
intellectual impression, which has a twofold residence, one in the potential intellect
[universal, eternal, independent of the individual], and another in the impressions of
phantasy, which are in the bodily organs [of the individual; in his phantasy, or sensory
memory, or in the vis cogitativa, an organic faculty allied to phantasy]. And thus, through
this intellectual impression, the potential intellect is continued and conjoined with the
body of the individual man" (art. 1). St Thomas criticises this theory as follows (art. 2):
"So long as the intellect is one, however all other things are diversified which the
intellect uses as instruments, in no way can Socrates and Plato be called other than one
intelligent being. . . . I grant that if the phantasm, or impression in the phantasy,
inasmuch as it is other and other in you and me, were a form (or idea) of the potential
intellect, then your intellectual activity and mine might be differentiated by the diversity
of phantasms . . . . but the said phantasm is not a form (or idea) of the potential intellect:
an idea in the potential intellect is obtained only by abstraction from phantasms. If then
there were but one intellect for all men, no diversities of phantasms in this man and that
could ever cause a diversity of intellectual activity between one man and another, as the
Commentator pretends." So far as the Averroistic Potential (and Active) Intellect can be
identified with the Zeitgeist or Educated Opinion of the day, and adapted to Comte's