participates human nature, so every created being participates, so to
speak, the nature of being; for God alone is His own being, as we
have said above (Question 7, Articles 1,2). Therefore no created
being can produce a being absolutely, except forasmuch as it
causes "being" in "this": and so it is necessary to presuppose that
whereby a thing is this thing, before the action whereby it makes its
own likeness. But in an immaterial substance it is not possible to
presuppose anything whereby it is this thing; because it is what it is
by its form, whereby it has being, since it is a subsisting form.
Therefore an immaterial substance cannot produce another
immaterial substance like to itself as regards its being, but only as
regards some added perfection; as we may say that a superior angel
illuminates an inferior, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv, x). In this
way even in heaven there is paternity, as the Apostle says (Eph.
3:15): "From whom all paternity in heaven and on earth is named."
From which evidently appears that no created being can cause
anything, unless something is presupposed; which is against the
very idea of creation.
Reply to Objection 2: A thing is made from its contrary indirectly
(Phys. i, text 43), but directly from the subject which is in potentiality.
And so the contrary resists the agent, inasmuch as it impedes the
potentiality from the act which the agent intends to induce, as fire
intends to reduce the matter of water to an act like to itself, but is
impeded by the form and contrary dispositions, whereby the
potentiality (of the water) is restrained from being reduced to act;
and the more the potentiality is restrained, the more power is
required in the agent to reduce the matter to act. Hence a much
greater power is required in the agent when no potentiality preexists. Thus therefore it appears that it is an act of much greater
power to make a thing from nothing, than from its contrary.
Reply to Objection 3: The power of the maker is reckoned not only
from the substance of the thing made, but also from the mode of its
being made; for a greater heat heats not only more, but quicker.
Therefore although to create a finite effect does not show an infinite
power, yet to create it from nothing does show an infinite power:
which appears from what has been said (ad 2). For if a greater power
is required in the agent in proportion to the distance of the
potentiality from the act, it follows that the power of that which
produces something from no presupposed potentiality is infinite,
because there is no proportion between "no potentiality" and the
potentiality presupposed by the power of a natural agent, as there is

no proportion between "not being" and "being." And because no
creature has simply an infinite power, any more than it has an infinite
being, as was proved above (Question 7, Article 2), it follows that no
creature can create.