time, as supporting the building from below, and being, as it were, a root, or
base. And whereas he had used the expression, "He created in Himself of the two
one new man;" [Ephesians 2:15] by this he clearly shows us, that by Himself
Christ knits together the two walls: and again, that in Him it was created. And
"He is the first-born," says he, "of all creation," that is, He Himself supports all
things.
"In whom each several building, fitly framed together."
Whether you speak of the roof, or of the walls, or of any other part
whatsoever, He it is supports the whole. Thus he elsewhere calls Him a
foundation. "For other foundations," says he, "can no man lay than that which is
laid, which is Jesus Christ." [1 Corinthians 3:11] "In whom each several
building," he says, "fitly framed together." Here he displays the perfectness of it,
and indicates that one cannot otherwise have place in it, unless by living with
great exactness. "It grows says he into a holy temple in the Lord, in whom you
also," he adds, "are built together." He is speaking continuously: "Into a holy
temple, for a habitation of God in the Spirit." What then is the object of this
building? It is that God may dwell in this temple. For each of you severally is a
temple, and all of you together are a temple. And He dwells in you as in the
body of Christ, and as in a Spiritual temple. He does not use the word which
means our coming to God, ([πρόσοδος]) but which implies God's bringing us to
Himself, ([προσαγωγή]) for we came not out of ourselves, but we were brought
near by Him. "No one," says Christ, "comes unto the Father but by Me." And
again, "I am the way, and the truth, and the life." [John 14:6]
He joins them with the Saints and again returns to his former image,
nowhere suffering them to be disunited from Christ. Doubtless then, this is a
building that shall go on until His coming. Doubtless it was for this reason that
Paul said, "As a wise master builder, I laid a foundation." [1 Corinthians 3:1011] And again that Christ is the foundation. What then means all this? You
observe that the comparisons have all referred to the subject-matters, and that we
must not expound them to the very letter. The Apostle speaks from analogy as

Christ does, where He calls the Father an husbandman, [John 15:1] and Himself
a root. [Revelation 22:16]
Chap. iii. ver. 1. "For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus in
behalf of you Gentiles."
He has mentioned Christ's great and affectionate care; he now passes on to
his own, insignificant indeed as it is, and a very nothing in comparison with that,
and yet this is enough to engage them to himself. For this cause, says he, am I
also bound. For if my Lord was crucified for your sakes, much more am I bound.
He not only was bound Himself, but allows His servants to be bound also—"for
you Gentiles." It is full of emphasis; not only do we no longer loathe you, but we
are even bound, says he, for your sakes and of this exceeding grace am I
partaker.
Ver. 2. "If so be that you have heard of the dispensation of that grace of
God, which was given me to you-ward."
He alludes to the prediction addressed to Ananias concerning him at
Damascus, when the Lord said, "Go your way, for he is a chosen vessel unto Me,
to bear My name before the Gentiles and Kings." [Acts 9:15]
By "dispensation of grace," he means the revelation made to him. As much
as to say, I learned it not from man. [Galatians 1:12] He vouchsafed to reveal it
even to me, though but an individual for your sakes. For Himself said unto me,
says he, "Depart, for I will send you forth far hence unto the Gentiles." [Acts
22:21] "If so be that you have heard" for a dispensation it was, a mighty one; to
call one, uninfluenced from any other quarter, immediately from above, and to
say, "Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me?" and to strike him blind with that
ineffable light! "if so be that you have heard," says he, "of the dispensation of
that grace of God which was given me to you-ward."
Ver. 3. "How that by revelation was made known unto me the mystery, as I
wrote afore in few words."
Perhaps he had informed them of it by some persons, or had not long before
been writing to them. Here he is pointing out that the whole is of God, that we