heavens; the first is the empyrean, which is wholly luminous; the
second is the aqueous or crystalline, wholly transparent; and the
third is called the starry heaven, in part transparent, and in part
actually luminous, and divided into eight spheres. One of these is
the sphere of the fixed stars; the other seven, which may be called
the seven heavens, are the spheres of the planets.
In the second place, the name heaven is applied to a body that
participates in any property of the heavenly body, as sublimity and
luminosity, actual or potential. Thus Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii)
holds as one heaven all the space between the waters and the
moon's orb, calling it the aerial. According to him, then, there are
three heavens, the aerial, the starry, and one higher than both these,
of which the Apostle is understood to speak when he says of himself
that he was "rapt to the third heaven."
But since this space contains two elements, namely, fire and air, and
in each of these there is what is called a higher and a lower region
Rabanus subdivides this space into four distinct heavens. The
higher region of fire he calls the fiery heaven; the lower, the
Olympian heaven from a lofty mountain of that name: the higher
region of air he calls, from its brightness, the ethereal heaven; the
lower, the aerial. When, therefore, these four heavens are added to
the three enumerated above, there are seven corporeal heavens in
all, in the opinion of Rabanus.
Thirdly, there are metaphorical uses of the word heaven, as when
this name is applied to the Blessed Trinity, Who is the Light and the
Most High Spirit. It is explained by some, as thus applied, in the
words, "I will ascend into heaven"; whereby the evil spirit is
represented as seeking to make himself equal with God. Sometimes
also spiritual blessings, the recompense of the Saints, from being
the highest of all good gifts, are signified by the word heaven, and, in
fact, are so signified, according to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte), in the words, "Your reward is very great in heaven" (Mt.
5:12).
Again, three kinds of supernatural visions, bodily, imaginative, and
intellectual, are called sometimes so many heavens, in reference to
which Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii) expounds Paul's rapture "to the
third heaven."

Reply to Objection 1: The earth stands in relation to the heaven as
the centre of a circle to its circumference. But as one center may
have many circumferences, so, though there is but one earth, there
may be many heavens.
Reply to Objection 2: The argument holds good as to the heaven, in
so far as it denotes the entire sum of corporeal creation, for in that
sense it is one.
Reply to Objection 3: All the heavens have in common sublimity and
some degree of luminosity, as appears from what has been said.

## QUESTION 69 — ON THE WORK OF THE THIRD DAY