as an invalid. My discourse is not to men only but to women also. For why do
you, O woman, continually enfeeble [your body] with luxury and exhaust it?
Why do you ruin your strength with fat? This fat is flabbiness, not strength.
Whereas, if you break off from these things, and manage yourself differently,
then will your personal beauty also improve according to your wish, when
strength and a good habit of body are there. If however thou beset it with ten
thousand diseases, there will neither be bloom of complexion, nor good health;
for you will always be in low spirits. And you know that as when the air is
smiling it makes a beautiful house look splendid, so also cheerfulness of mind
when added to a fair countenance, makes it better: but if [a woman] is in low
spirits and in pain she becomes more ill-looking. But diseases and pains produce
low spirits; and diseases are produced from the body too delicate through great
luxury. So that even for this you will flee luxury, if you take my advice.
'But, you will say, luxury gives pleasure.' Yes, but not so great as the
annoyances. And besides, the pleasure goes no further than the palate and the
tongue. For when the table has been removed, and the food swallowed, you will
be like one that has not partaken, or rather much worse, in that you bear thence
oppression, and distension, and headache, and a sleep like death, and often too,
sleeplessness from repletion, and obstruction of the breathing, and eructation.
And you would curse bitterly your belly, when you ought to curse your
immoderate eating.
7. Let us not then fatten the body, but listen to Paul saying, "Make not
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof," [Romans 13:14] As if one
should take food and throw it into a drain, so is he who throws it into the belly:
or rather it is not so, but much worse. For in the one case he uses the drain
without harm to himself: but in the other he generates innumerable diseases. For
what nourishes is a sufficiency which also can be digested: but what is over and
above our need, not only does not nourish, but even spoils the other. But no man
sees these things, owing to some prejudice and unseasonable pleasure.
Do you wish to nourish the body? Take away what is superfluous; give

what is sufficient, and as much as can be digested. Do not load it, lest you
overwhelm it. A sufficiency is both nourishment and pleasure. For nothing is so
productive of pleasure, as food well digested: nothing so [productive of] health:
nothing [so productive of] acuteness of the faculties, nothing tends so much to
keep away disease. For a sufficiency is both nourishment, and pleasure, and
health; but excess is injury, and unpleasantness and disease. For what famine
does, that also satiety does; or rather more grievous evils. For the former indeed
within a few days carries a man off and sets him free; but the other eating into
and putrefying the body, gives it over to long disease, and then to a most painful
death. But we, while we account famine a thing greatly to be dreaded, yet run
after satiety, which is more distressing than that.
Whence is this disease? Whence this madness? I do not say that we should
waste ourselves away, but that we should eat as much food as also gives us
pleasure, that is really pleasure, and can nourish the body, and furnish it to us
well ordered and adapted for the energies of the soul, well joined and fitted
together. But when it comes to be water-logged by luxury, it cannot in the floodwave, keep fast the bolts themselves, as one may say, and joints which hold the
frame together. For the flood-wave coming in, the whole breaks up and scatters.
"Make not provision for the flesh" (he says) "to fulfill the lusts thereof."
[Romans 13:14] He said well. For luxury is fuel for unreasonable lusts; though
the luxurious should be the most philosophical of all men, of necessity he must
be somewhat affected by wine, by eating, he must needs be relaxed, he must
needs endure the greater flame. Hence [come] fornications, hence adulteries. For
a hungry belly cannot generate lust, or rather not one which has used just
enough. But that which generates unseemly lusts, is that which is relaxed by
luxury. And as land which is very moist and a dung-hill which is wet through
and retains much dampness, generates worms, while that which has been freed
from such moistness bears abundant fruits, when it has nothing immoderate:
even if it be not cultivated, it yields grass, and if it be cultivated, fruits: [so also
do we].