should enter into the bride-chamber with such a body as this. If He led away, and
cast out the man that was clothed in filthy garments, what will He not do unto
the man who attaches filth to the body; how will He not dispose of him?
I observe many partaking of Christ's Body lightly and just as it happens,
and rather from custom and form, than consideration and understanding. When,
says a man, the holy season of Lent sets in, whatever a man may be, he partakes
of the mysteries, or, when the day of the Lord's Epiphany comes. And yet it is
not the Epiphany, nor is it Lent, that makes a fit time for approaching, but it is
sincerity and purity of soul. With this, approach at all times; without it, never.
"For as often," [1 Corinthians 11:26] says he, "as you do this, you proclaim the
Lord's death," i.e., "you make a remembrance of the salvation that has been
wrought for you, and of the benefits which I have bestowed." Consider those who
partook of the sacrifices under the old Covenant, how great abstinence did they
practise? How did they not conduct themselves? What did they not perform?
They were always purifying themselves. And do you, when you draw near to a
sacrifice, at which the very Angels tremble, do you measure the matter by the
revolutions of seasons? And how shall you present yourself before the judgmentseat of Christ, thou who presumest upon His body with polluted hands and lips?
You would not presume to kiss a king with an unclean mouth, and the King of
heaven do you kiss with an unclean soul? It is an outrage. Tell me, would you
choose to come to the Sacrifice with unwashen hands? No, I suppose, not. But
you would rather choose not to come at all, than come with soiled hands. And
then, thus scrupulous as you are in this little matter, do you come with soiled
soul, and thus dare to touch it? And yet the hands hold it but for a time, whereas
into the soul it is dissolved entirely. What, do you not see the holy vessels so
thoroughly cleansed all over, so resplendent? Our souls ought to be purer than
they, more holy, more brilliant. And why so? Because those vessels are made so
for our sakes. They partake not of Him that is in them, they perceive Him not.
But we do—yes, verily. Now then, you would not choose to make use of a soiled
vessel, and do you approach with a soiled soul? Observe the vast inconsistency

of the thing. At the other times you come not, no, not though often you are clean;
but at Easter, however flagrant an act you may have committed, you come. Oh!
The force of custom and of prejudice! In vain is the daily Sacrifice, in vain do
we stand before the Altar; there is no one to partake. These things I am saying,
not to induce you to partake any how, but that you should render yourselves
worthy to partake. Are you not worthy of the Sacrifice, nor of the participation?
If so, then neither are you of the prayer. You hear the herald, standing, and
saying, "As many as are in penitence, all pray." As many as do not partake, are
in penitence. If you are one of those that are in penitence, you ought not to
partake; for he that partakes not, is one of those that are in penitence. Why then
does he say, "Depart, you that are not qualified to pray," while you have the
effrontery to stand still? But no, you are not of that number, you are of the
number of those who are qualified to partake, and yet art indifferent about it, and
regardest the matter as nothing.
Look, I entreat: a royal table is set before you, Angels minister at that table,
the King Himself is there, and do you stand gaping? Are your garments defiled,
and yet do you make no account of it?— or are they clean? Then fall down and
partake. Every day He comes in to see the guests, and converses with them all.
Yes, at this moment is he speaking to your conscience; "Friends, how are you
standing here, not having on a wedding garment?" He said not, Why did you sit
down? No, before he sat down, He declared him to be unworthy, so much as to
come in. He says not, "Why did you sit down to eat," but, "Why did you come
in?" And these are the words that He is at this very moment addressing to one
and all of us that stand here with such shameless effrontery. For every one, that
partakes not of the mysteries, is standing here in shameless effrontery. It is for
this reason, that they which are in sins are first of all put forth; for just as when a
master is present at his table, it is not right that those servants who have offended
him should be present, but they are sent out of the way: just so also here when
the sacrifice is brought forth, and Christ, the Lord's sheep, is sacrificed; when
you hear the words, "Let us pray together," when you behold the curtains drawn