SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.16, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: Eternal happiness does not enter into the heart
of man perfectly, i.e. so that it be possible for a wayfarer to know its
nature and quality; yet, under the general notion of the perfect good,
it is possible for it to be apprehended by a man, and it is in this way
that the movement of hope towards it arises. Hence the Apostle says
pointedly (Heb. 6:19) that hope "enters in, even within the veil,"
because that which we hope for is as yet veiled, so to speak.
Reply to Objection 2: We ought not to pray God for any other goods,
except in reference to eternal happiness. Hence hope regards eternal
happiness chiefly, and other things, for which we pray God, it
regards secondarily and as referred to eternal happiness: just as
faith regards God principally, and, secondarily, those things which
are referred to God, as stated above (Question 1, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 3: To him that longs for something great, all
lesser things seem small; wherefore to him that hopes for eternal
happiness, nothing else appears arduous, as compared with that
hope; although, as compared with the capability of the man who
hopes, other things besides may be arduous to him, so that he may
have hope for such things in reference to its principal object.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.16, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether one man may hope for another's eternal

happiness?
Objection 1: It would seem that one may hope for another's eternal
happiness. For the Apostle says (Phil. 1:6): "Being confident of this
very thing, that He Who hath begun a good work in you, will perfect it
unto the day of Jesus Christ." Now the perfection of that day will be
eternal happiness. Therefore one man may hope for another's eternal
happiness.
Objection 2: Further, whatever we ask of God, we hope to obtain
from Him. But we ask God to bring others to eternal happiness,
according to James 5:16: "Pray for one another that you may be
saved." Therefore we can hope for another's eternal happiness.
Objection 3: Further, hope and despair are about the same object.
Now it is possible to despair of another's eternal happiness, else
Augustine would have no reason for saying (De Verb. Dom., Serm.
lxxi) that we should not despair of anyone so long as he lives.
Therefore one can also hope for another's eternal salvation.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchiridion viii) that "hope is only
of such things as belong to him who is supposed to hope for them."
I answer that, We can hope for something in two ways: first,
absolutely, and thus the object of hope is always something arduous
and pertaining to the person who hopes. Secondly, we can hope for
something, through something else being presupposed, and in this
way its object can be something pertaining to someone else. In order
to explain this we must observe that love and hope differ in this, that
love denotes union between lover and beloved, while hope denotes a
movement or a stretching forth of the appetite towards an arduous
good. Now union is of things that are distinct, wherefore love can
directly regard the other whom a man unites to himself by love,
looking upon him as his other self: whereas movement is always
towards its own term which is proportionate to the subject moved.
Therefore hope regards directly one's own good, and not that which
pertains to another. Yet if we presuppose the union of love with
another, a man can hope for and desire something for another man,
as for himself; and, accordingly, he can hope for another eternal's
life, inasmuch as he is united to him by love, and just as it is the