THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.42, C.5.

His doctrine is imprinted on the hearts of His hearers; wherefore it is
written (Mt. 7:29) that "He was teaching them as one having power."
And so it was that among the Gentiles, Pythagoras and Socrates,
who were teachers of great excellence, were unwilling to write
anything. For writings are ordained, as to an end, unto the imprinting
of doctrine in the hearts of the hearers.
Secondly, on account of the excellence of Christ's doctrine, which
cannot be expressed in writing; according to Jn. 21:25: "There are
also many other things which Jesus did: which, if they were written
everyone, the world itself, I think, would not be able to contain the
books that should be written." Which Augustine explains by saying:
"We are not to believe that in respect of space the world could not
contain them . . . but that by the capacity of the readers they could
not be comprehended." And if Christ had committed His doctrine to
writing, men would have had no deeper thought of His doctrine than
that which appears on the surface of the writing.
Thirdly, that His doctrine might reach all in an orderly manner:
Himself teaching His disciples immediately, and they subsequently
teaching others, by preaching and writing: whereas if He Himself had
written, His doctrine would have reached all immediately.
Hence it is said of Wisdom (Prov. 9:3) that "she hath sent her maids
to invite to the tower." It is to be observed, however, that, as
Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. i), some of the Gentiles
thought that Christ wrote certain books treating of the magic art
whereby He worked miracles: which art is condemned by the
Christian learning. "And yet they who claim to have read those
books of Christ do none of those things which they marvel at His
doing according to those same books. Moreover, it is by a Divine
judgment that they err so far as to assert that these books were, as it
were, entitled as letters to Peter and Paul, for that they found them in
several places depicted in company with Christ. No wonder that the
inventors were deceived by the painters: for as long as Christ lived
in the mortal flesh with His disciples, Paul was no disciple of His."
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says in the same book: "Christ is
the head of all His disciples who are members of His body.
Consequently, when they put into writing what He showed forth and
said to them, by no means must we say that He wrote nothing: since
His members put forth that which they knew under His dictation. For
at His command they, being His hands, as it were, wrote whatever He

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.42, C.5.

wished us to read concerning His deeds and words."
Reply to Objection 2: Since the old Law was given under the form of
sensible signs, therefore also was it fittingly written with sensible
signs. But Christ's doctrine, which is "the law of the spirit of
life" (Rm. 8:2), had to be "written not with ink, but with the Spirit of
the living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the
heart," as the Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:3).
Reply to Objection 3: Those who were unwilling to believe what the
apostles wrote of Christ would have refused to believe the writings
of Christ, whom they deemed to work miracles by the magic art.