may come, and for the cunning women, and let them take up a wailing. Let your
eyes run down with water, and your eyelids gush out with tears." [Jeremiah 9:1718] You hills take up wailing, and you mountains lamentation! Let us call the
whole creation into sympathy with our evils. So great a city, and the head of
those which lie under the eastern sky, is in danger of being torn away from the
midst of the civilized world! She that had so many children, has now suddenly
become childless, and there is no one who shall come to her aid! For he who has
been insulted has not an equal in dignity upon earth; for he is a monarch; the
summit and head of all here below! On this account then let us take refuge in the
King that is above. Him let us call in to our aid. If we may not obtain the favour
of heaven, there is no consolation left for what has befallen us!
8. Here I could wish to end this discourse; for the minds of those who are in
anguish are indisposed to extend their discourses to a great length. And as when
some dense cloud has formed, and flying under the solar rays, returns back to
him all his splendour again, so indeed does the cloud of sadness, when it stands
before our souls, refuse to admit an easy passage for the word, but chokes it and
restrains it forcibly within. And this is the case not only with those who speak,
but with those who hear; for as it does not suffer the word to burst forth freely
from the soul of the speaker, so neither does it suffer it to sink into the mind of
those who listen, with its natural power. Therefore also the Jews of old time,
while slaving at the mud and bricks, had not the heart to listen to Moses, while
he repeatedly told them great things respecting their future deliverance;
despondency making their minds inaccessible to the address, and shutting up
their sense of hearing. I could have wished then, as to myself, to have put an end
here to my discourse; but thinking that it is not only the nature of a cloud to
intercept the forward passage of the sun's rays, but that often just the opposite
happens to the cloud; since the sun continually falling upon it with much
warmth, wears it away, and frequently breaks through the midst of it; and shining
forth all at once, meets cheerfully the gaze of the beholders. This also I myself
expect to do this day; and the word being continually associated with your

minds, and dwelling in them, I hope to burst the cloud of sadness, and to shine
through your understandings again, with the customary instruction!
9. But afford me your attention! Lend me your ears awhile! Shake off this
despondency! Let us return to our former custom; and as we have been used
always to meet here with gladness, so let us also do now, casting all upon God.
And this will contribute towards our actual deliverance from calamity. For
should the Lord see that His words are listened to carefully; and that our love of
divine wisdom stands the trial of the difficulty of these times, He will quickly
take us up again, and will make out of the present tempest a calm and happy
change. For this too is a thing in which it behooves the Christian to differ from
the unbelievers, the bearing all things nobly; and through hope of the future,
soaring above the attack of human evils. The believer has his stand on the Rock;
for this reason he cannot be overthrown by the dashing of the billows. For
should the waves of temptation rise, they cannot reach to his feet. He stands too
lofty for any such assault. Let us not then sink down, beloved! We do not care so
much for our own safety, as God who made us. There is not so much solicitude
on our part, lest we suffer any dreadful misfortune, as with Him who bestowed
upon us a soul, and then gave us so many good things beside. Let us mount on
the wings of these hopes, and hear the things about to be spoken with our
accustomed readiness.
10. I made a prolonged discourse lately unto you beloved, and yet I saw all
following it up, and no one turning back in the middle of the course. I return
thanks to you for that readiness, and have received the reward of my labours. But
there was another reward, besides that attention, which I asked of you at that
time; perchance you know and recollect it. And what was the reward? That you
should punish and chastise the blasphemers that were in the city; that you should
restrain those who are violent and insolent against God! I do not think that I then
spoke these things of myself; but that God, foreseeing what was coming, injected
these words into my mind; for if we had punished those who dared to do such
things, that which has now happened would never have happened. How much