thoughts, and exhibits them all as in some picture both to those who have
committed the sins and to those who are ignorant of them, how is it not natural
that every power should be confounded and shake? For if there were no river of
fire winding by, nor any terrible angels standing by the side of the throne, but
men were merely summoned some to be praised and admired, others to be
dismissed with ignominy that they might not see the glory of God, ("For let the
ungodly" we read "be taken away that he may not see the glory of the Lord" )
and if this were the only punishment would not the loss of such blessings sting
the souls of those who were deprived of them more bitterly than all hell itself?
For how great an evil this is cannot possibly be represented now in words; but
then we shall know it clearly in the actual reality. But now I pray add the
punishment also to the scene, and imagine men not only covered with shame,
and veiling their heads, and bending them low, but also being dragged along the
road to the fire, and haled away to the instruments of torture and delivered over
to the cruel powers, and suffering these things just at the time when all they who
have practised what is good, and wrought deeds worthy of eternal life, are being
crowned, and proclaimed conquerors, and presented before the royal throne.
13. Now these are things which will happen in that day: but the things
which will follow, after these, what language can describe to us— the pleasure,
the profit, the joy of being in the company of Christ? For when the soul has
returned to the proper condition of nobility, and is able henceforth with much
boldness to behold its Master it is impossible to say what great pleasure it
derives therefrom, what great gain, rejoicing not only in the good things actually
in hand, but in the persuasion that these things will never come to an end. All
that gladness then cannot be described in words, nor grasped by the
understanding: but in a dim kind of way, as one indicates great things by means
of small ones, I will endeavour to make it manifest. For let us scrutinize those
who enjoy the good things of the world in this present life, I mean wealth and
power, and glory, how, exulting with delight, they reckon themselves as no
longer being upon the earth, and this although the things which they are enjoying

are acknowledged not to be really good, and do not abide with them, but take to
flight more quickly than a dream: and even if they should even last for a little
time, their favour is displayed within the limits of this present life, and cannot
accompany us further. Now if these things uplift those who possess them to such
a pitch of joy, what do you suppose is the condition of those souls which are
invited to enjoy the countless blessings in Heaven which are always securely
fixed and stable? And not only this, but also in their quantity and quality they
excel present things to such an extent as never entered even the heart of man. For
at the present time like an infant in the womb, even so do we dwell in this world
confined in a narrow space, and unable to behold the splendour and the freedom
of the world to come: but when the time of travail arrives and the present life is
delivered at the day of judgment of all men whom it has contained, those who
have been miscarried go from darkness into darkness, and from affliction into
more grievous affliction: but those which are perfectly formed and have
preserved the marks of the royal image will be presented to the king, and will
take upon themselves that service which angels and archangels minister to the
God of all. I pray you then, O friend, do not finally efface these marks, but
speedily restore them, and stamp them more perfectly on your soul. For
corporeal beauty indeed God has confined within the limits of nature, but grace
of soul is released from the constraint and bondage arising from that cause
inasmuch as it is far superior to any bodily symmetry: and it depends entirely
upon ourselves and the grace of God. For our Master, being merciful has in this
special way honoured our race, that He has entrusted to the necessity of nature
the inferior things which contribute nothing much to our advantage, and in their
issue are matters of indifference, but of the things which are really noble He has
caused us to be ourselves the artificers. For if He had placed corporeal beauty
also under our control we should have been subjected to excessive anxiety, and
should have wasted all our time upon things which are of no profit, and should
have grievously neglected our soul.
For if, even as it is, when we have not this power in ourselves, we make