2. The truth of things may also not be evident because of defect on our part, as in the case of
divine and necessary things which, according to their own nature, are most knowable.
Wherefore, to understand them, we are not capable of immediate intellection, from the very
beginning, since it is in accordance with our nature to attain from things less knowable and
posterior in themselves, to knowledge of those that are themselves more knowable and prior. But
since from none of those things that we know last do we have any knowledge of those that we
know first, it is needful for us even at first to have some notion of those things that are most
knowable in themselves; but this cannot be except by believing. And this is evident even in the
order of the sciences; since that science which is concerned with highest causes, namely,
metaphysics, comes last in human knowledge; yet in sciences that are preambles to it there must
be supposed certain truths which only in it are more fully revealed; therefore every science has

some suppositions that must be believed in order to cafty on the process of learning.

Since, therefore, the end of human life is beatitude, which consists in the full cognition of divine
truths, it is necessary that human life be directed to this beatitude by an initial possession of
divine truths by faith, truths which man can hope to know fully in the ultimate state of human
perfection.

Certain of these truths that must be known can be attained by reason even in this life: however,
although knowledge of them is possible and even possessed by certain men, nevertheless faith is
necessary for five reasons, which Rabbi Moses enumerates:

1. First, on account of the depth and subtlety of the matter, by which divine truths are hidden
from human understanding. Therefore, lest any man be without some knowledge of them,
provision is made that through faith, at least, he know divine truths. Therefore, in Eccles. 7:25 it
is said: "It is a great depth, who shall find it out?"

2. Secondly, on account of the weakness of the human intellect from the beginning. For
perfection of knowledge does not belong to the human intellect except at the end; therefore, that it
should at no time lack a knowledge of God, it requires faith by which it may accept divine truths
from the very beginning.

3. Thirdly, because of the many preambles that are required for a knowledge of God according to
reason. For this there is needed knowledge of almost all the sciences, since cognition of divine
things is the end of them all. But few indeed would comprehend these preambulatory truths or
investigate them completely. Therefore, lest large numbers of men should be left without
knowledge of divine things, the way of faith has been provided by God Himself.

4. In the fourth place, many men on account of their natural constitution are unfitted for perfect
intellectual investigation according to reason; therefore, that these might not lack knowledge of
divine truths, the way of faith has been provided.