yet shall you never take such a bride as the Church, when Christ took her, nor
one so far removed from you as the Church was from Christ. And yet for all that,
He did not abhor her, nor loathe her for her surpassing deformity. Would you
hear her deformity described? Hear what Paul says, "For you were once
darkness." [Ephesians 5:8] Did you see the blackness of her hue? What blacker
than darkness? But look again at her boldness, "living," says he, "in malice and
envy." [Titus 3:3] Look again at her impurity; "disobedient, foolish." But what
am I saying? She was both foolish, and of an evil tongue; and yet
notwithstanding, though so many were her blemishes, yet did He give Himself
up for her in her deformity, as for one in the bloom of youth, as for one dearly
beloved, as for one of wonderful beauty. And it was in admiration of this that
Paul said, For scarcely for a righteous man will one die [Romans 5:7]; and again,
"in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." [Romans 5:8] And though
such as this, He took her, He arrayed her in beauty, and washed her, and refused
not even this, to give Himself for her.
Ver. 26, 27. "That He might sanctify it having cleansed it," he proceeds, "by
the washing of water with the word; that He might present the Church to Himself
a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and without blemish."
"By the washing or laver" He washes her uncleanness. "By the word," says
he. What word? "In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost." [Matthew 28:19] And not simply has He adorned her, but has made her
"glorious, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing." Let us then also seek
after this beauty ourselves, and we shall be able to create it. Seek not thou at
your wife's hand, things which she is not able to possess. Do you see that the
Church had all things at her Lord's hands? By Him was made glorious, by Him
was made pure, by Him made without blemish? Turn not your back on your wife
because of her deformity. Hear the Scripture that says, "The bee is little among
such as fly, but her fruit is the chief of sweet things." [Sirach 11:3] She is of
God's fashioning. Thou reproachest not her, but Him that made her; what can the

woman do? Praise her not for her beauty. Praise and hatred and love based on
personal beauty belong to unchastened souls. Seek thou for beauty of soul.
Imitate the Bridegroom of the Church. Outward beauty is full of conceit and
great license, and throws men into jealousy, and the thing often makes you
suspect monstrous things. But has it any pleasure? For the first or second month,
perhaps, or at most for the year: but then no longer; the admiration by familiarity
wastes away. Meanwhile the evils which arose from the beauty still abide, the
pride, the folly, the contemptuousness. Whereas in one who is not such, there is
nothing of this kind. But the love having begun on just grounds, still continues
ardent, since its object is beauty of soul, and not of body. What better, tell me,
than heaven? What better than the stars? Tell me of what body you will, yet is
there none so fair. Tell me of what eyes you will, yet are there none so sparkling.
When these were created, the very Angels gazed with wonder, and we gaze with
wonder now; yet not in the same degree as at first. Such is familiarity; things do
not strike us in the same degree. How much more in the case of a wife! And if
moreover disease come too, all is at once fled. Let us seek in a wife
affectionateness, modest-mindedness, gentleness; these are the characteristics of
beauty. But loveliness of person let us not seek, nor upbraid her upon these
points, over which she has no power, nay, rather, let us not upbraid at all, (it were
rudeness,) nor let us be impatient, nor sullen. Do ye not see how many, after
living with beautiful wives, have ended their lives pitiably, and how many, who
have lived with those of no great beauty, have run on to extreme old age with
great enjoyment. Let us wipe off the "spot" that is within, let us smooth the
"wrinkles" that are within, let us do away the "blemishes" that are on the soul.
Such is the beauty God requires. Let us make her fair in God's sight, not in our
own. Let us not look for wealth, nor for that high-birth which is outward, but for
that true nobility which is in the soul. Let no one endure to get rich by a wife; for
such riches are base and disgraceful; no, by no means let any one seek to get rich
from this source. "For they that desire to be rich, fall into a temptation and a
snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts, and into destruction and perdition." [1