clearness and terseness; but, upon the whole, his style is very involved and prolix. And the Latin
version adds to these difficulties of the original, by being itself of the most barbarous character. In
fact, it is often necessary to make a conjectural re-translation of it into Greek, in order to obtain
some inkling of what the author wrote. Dodwell supposes this Latin version to have been made
about the end of the fourth century; but as Tertullian seems to have used it, we must rather place
it in the beginning of the third. Its author is unknown, but he was certainly little qualified for his
task. We have endeavoured to give as close and accurate a translation of the work as possible, but
there are not a few passages in which a guess can only be made as to the probable meaning.
Irenæus had manifestly taken great pains to make himself acquainted with the various heretical
systems which he describes. His mode of exposing and refuting these is generally very effective.
It is plain that he possessed a good share of learning, and that he had a firm grasp of the doctrines
of Scripture. Not unfrequently he indulges in a kind of sarcastic humour, while inveighing against
the folly and impiety of the heretics. But at times he gives expression to very strange opinions. He
is, for example, quite peculiar in imagining that our Lord lived to be an old man, and that His public
ministry embraced at least ten years. But though, on these and some other points, the judgment of
Irenæus is clearly at fault, his work contains a vast deal of sound and valuable exposition of Scripture,
in opposition to the fanciful systems of interpretation which prevailed in his day.
We possess only very scanty accounts of the personal history of Irenæus. It has been generally
supposed that he was a native of Smyrna, or some neighbouring city, in Asia Minor. Harvey,
however, thinks that he was probably born in Syria, and removed in boyhood to Smyrna. He himself
tells us (iii. 3, 4) that he was in early youth acquainted with Polycarp, the illustrious bishop of that
city. A sort of clue is thus furnished as to the date of his birth. Dodwell supposes that he was born
so early as a.d. 97, but this is clearly a mistake; and the general date assigned to his birth is
somewhere between a.d. 120 and a.d. 140.
It is certain that Irenæus was bishop of Lyons, in France, during the latter quarter of the second
century. The exact period or circumstances of his ordination cannot be determined. Eusebius states
(Hist. Eccl., v. 4) that he was, while yet a presbyter, sent with a letter, from certain members of the
Church of Lyons awaiting martyrdom, to Eleutherus, bishop of Rome; and that (v. 5) he succeeded
Pothinus as bishop of Lyons, probably about a.d. 177. His great work Against Heresies was, we
learn, written during the episcopate of Eleutherus, that is, between a.d. 182 and a.d. 188, for Victor
succeeded to the bishopric of Rome in a.d. 189. This new bishop of Rome took very harsh measures
for enforcing uniformity throughout the Church as to the observance of the paschal solemnities.
On account of the severity thus evinced, Irenæus addressed to him a letter (only a fragment of which
remains), warning him that if he persisted in the course on which he had entered, the effect would
be to rend the Catholic Church in pieces. This letter had the desired result; and the question was
more temperately debated, until finally settled by the Council of Nice.
The full title of the principal work of Irenæus, as given by Eusebius (Hist. Eccl., v. 7), and
indicated frequently by the author himself, was A Refutation and Subversion of Knowledge falsely
so called, but it is generally referred to under the shorter title, Against Heresies. Several other