THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.2.

(Eccl. Hier. v) that a deacon's office involves power over the unclean
among whom he includes the catechumens. But to teach, i.e. to
expound the Gospel, is the proper office of a bishop, whose action is
"to perfect," as Dionysius teaches (Eccl. Hier. v); and "to perfect" is
the same as "to teach." Consequently, it does not follow that the
office of baptizing belongs to deacons.
Reply to Objection 2: As Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. ii), Baptism has
a power not only of "cleansing" but also of "enlightening."
Consequently, it is outside the province of the deacon whose duty it
is to cleanse only: viz. either by driving away the unclean, or by
preparing them for the reception of a sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: Because Baptism is a necessary sacrament,
deacons are allowed to baptize in cases of urgency when their elders
are not at hand; as appears from the authority of Gelasius quoted
above. And it was thus that Blessed Laurence, being but a deacon,
baptized.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.67, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether to baptize is part of the priestly office, or

proper to that of bishops?
Objection 1: It seems that to baptize is not part of the priestly office,
but proper to that of bishops. Because, as stated above (Article 1,
Objection 1), the duties of teaching and baptizing are enjoined in the
same precept (Mt. 28:19). But to teach, which is "to perfect," belongs
to the office of bishop, as Dionysius declares (Eccl. Hier. v, vi).
Therefore to baptize also belongs to the episcopal office.
Objection 2: Further, by Baptism a man is admitted to the body of the
Christian people: and to do this seems consistent with no other than
the princely office. Now the bishops hold the position of princes in
the Church, as the gloss observes on Lk. 10:1: indeed, they even
take the place of the apostles, of whom it is written (Ps. 44:17):
"Thou shalt make them princes over all the earth." Therefore it
seems that to baptize belongs exclusively to the office of bishops.
Objection 3: Further, Isidore says (Epist. ad Ludifred.) that "it
belongs to the bishop to consecrate churches, to anoint altars, to
consecrate [conficere] the chrism; he it is that confers the
ecclesiastical orders, and blesses the consecrated virgins." But the
sacrament of Baptism is greater than all these. Therefore much more
reason is there why to baptize should belong exclusively to the
episcopal office.
On the contrary, Isidore says (De Officiis. ii): "It is certain that
Baptism was entrusted to priests alone."
I answer that, Priests are consecrated for the purpose of celebrating
the sacrament of Christ's Body, as stated above (Question 65, Article
3). Now that is the sacrament of ecclesiastical unity, according to the
Apostle (1 Cor. 10:17): "We, being many, are one bread, one body, all
that partake of one bread and one chalice." Moreover, by Baptism a
man becomes a participator in ecclesiastical unity, wherefore also he
receives the right to approach our Lord's Table. Consequently, just
as it belongs to a priest to consecrate the Eucharist, which is the
principal purpose of the priesthood, so it is the proper office of a
priest to baptize: since it seems to belong to one and the same, to
produce the whole and to dispose the part in the whole.