Here he confirms his former statements. For that his words may not appear
to be those of flattery, "he shall receive," he says, "the wrong he has done," that
is, he shall suffer punishment also, "for there is no respect of persons." For what
if you are a servant? It is no shame to you. And truly he might have said this to
the masters, as he did in the Epistle to the Ephesians. [Ephesians 6:9] But here
he seems to me to be alluding to the Grecian masters. For, what if he is a Greek
and thou a Christian? Not the persons but the actions are examined, so that even
in this case you ought to serve with good will, and heartily.
Chap. iv. 1. "Masters, render unto your servants that which is just and
equal."
What is "just"? What is "equal"? To place them in plenty of everything, and
not allow them to stand in need of others, but to recompense them for their
labors. For, because I have said that they have their reward from God, do not
thou therefore deprive them of it. And in another place he says, "forbearing
threatening" [Ephesians 6:9], wishing to make them more gentle; for those were
perfect men; that is, "with what measure you mete, it shall be measured unto
you." [Matthew 7:2] And the words, "there is no respect of persons," are spoken
with a view to these, but they are assigned to the others, in order that these may
receive them. For when we have said to one person what is applicable to another,
we have not corrected him so much, as the one who is in fault. "You also," along
with them, he says. He has here made the service common, for he says,
"knowing that you also have a Master in heaven."
Ver. 2. "Continue in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving."
For, since continuing in prayers frequently makes persons listless, therefore
he says, "watching," that is, sober, not wandering. For the devil knows, he
knows, how great a good prayer is; therefore he presses heavily. And Paul also
knows how careless many are when they pray, wherefore he says, "continue" in
prayer, as of somewhat laborious, "watching therein with thanksgiving." For let
this, he says, be your work, to give thanks in your prayers both for the seen and
the unseen, and for His benefits to the willing and unwilling, and for the

kingdom, and for hell, and for tribulation, and for refreshment. For thus is the
custom of the Saints to pray, and to give thanks for the common benefits of all.
I know a certain holy man who prays thus. He used to say nothing before
these words, but thus, "We give You thanks for all Your benefits bestowed upon
us the unworthy, from the first day until the present, for what we know, and what
we know not, for the seen, for the unseen, for those in deed, those in word, those
with our wills, those against our wills, for all that have been bestowed upon the
unworthy, even us; for tribulations, for refreshments, for hell, for punishment, for
the kingdom of heaven. We beseech You to keep our soul holy, having a pure
conscience; an end worthy of your lovingkindness. You that loved us so as to
give Your Only-Begotten for us, grant us to become worthy of Your love; give us
wisdom in Your word, and in Your fear. Only-Begotten Christ, inspire the
strength that is from You. Thou that gavest The Only-Begotten for us, and hast
sent Your Holy Spirit for the remission of our sins, if in anything we have wilfully
or unwillingly transgressed, pardon, and impute it not. Remember all that call
upon Your Name in truth; remember all that wish us well, or the contrary, for we
are all men." Then having added the Prayer of the Faithful, he there ended;
having made that prayer, as a certain crowning part, and a binding together for
all. For many benefits does God bestow upon us even against our wills; many
also, yea more, without our knowledge even. For when we pray for one thing,
and He does to us the reverse, it is plain that He does us good even when we
know it not.
Ver. 3. "Withal praying for us also." See his lowlymindedness; he sets
himself after them.
"That God may open to us a door for the word, to speak the mystery of
Christ." He means an entrance, and boldness in speaking. Wonderful! The great
athlete said not "that I may be freed from my bonds," but being in bonds he
exhorted others; and exhorted them for a great object, that himself might get
boldness in speaking. Both the two are great, both the quality of the person, and
of the thing. Wonderful! How great is the dignity! "The mystery," he says, "of