FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.6.

according as they are variously related to the sensitive appetite,
cause the different species of passions: while, according as they are
related to reason, they cause the different species of virtues. Now
the movement of reason is not the same as that of the sensitive
appetite. Wherefore nothing hinders a difference of objects from
causing diversity of passions, without causing diversity of virtues,
as when one virtue is about several passions, as stated above
(Article 4); and again, a difference of objects from causing different
virtues, without causing a difference of passions, since several
virtues are directed about one passion, e.g. pleasure.
And because diverse passions belonging to diverse powers, always
belong to diverse virtues, as stated above (Article 4); therefore a
difference of objects that corresponds to a difference of powers
always causes a specific difference of virtues---for instance the
difference between that which is good absolutely speaking, and that
which is good and difficult to obtain. Moreover since the reason
rules man's lower powers in a certain order, and even extends to
outward things; hence, one single object of the passions, according
as it is apprehended by sense, imagination, or reason, and again,
according as it belongs to the soul, body, or external things, has
various relations to reason, and consequently is of a nature to cause
a difference of virtues. Consequently man's good which is the object
of love, desire and pleasure, may be taken as referred either to a
bodily sense, or to the inner apprehension of the mind: and this
same good may be directed to man's good in himself, either in his
body or in his soul, or to man's good in relation to other men. And
every such difference, being differently related to reason,
differentiates virtues.
Accordingly, if we take a good, and it be something discerned by the
sense of touch, and something pertaining to the upkeep of human
life either in the individual or in the species, such as the pleasures of
the table or of sexual intercourse, it will belong to the virtue of
"temperance." As regards the pleasures of the other senses, they are
not intense, and so do not present much difficulty to the reason:
hence there is no virtue corresponding to them; for virtue, "like art,
is about difficult things" (Ethic. ii, 3).
On the other hand, good discerned not by the senses, but by an
inner power, and belonging to man in himself, is like money and
honor; the former, by its very nature, being employable for the good
of the body, while the latter is based on the apprehension of the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.6.

mind. These goods again may be considered either absolutely, in
which way they concern the concupiscible faculty, or as being
difficult to obtain, in which way they belong to the irascible part:
which distinction, however, has no place in pleasurable objects of
touch; since such are of base condition, and are becoming to man in
so far as he has something in common with irrational animals.
Accordingly in reference to money considered as a good absolutely,
as an object of desire, pleasure, or love, there is "liberality": but if we
consider this good as difficult to get, and as being the object of our
hope, there is "magnificence" [megaloprepeia]. With regard to that
good which we call honor, taken absolutely, as the object of love, we
have a virtue called "philotimia" [philotimia], i.e. "love of honor":
while if we consider it as hard to attain, and as an object of hope,
then we have "magnanimity." Wherefore liberality and "philotimia"
seem to be in the concupiscible part, while magnificence and
magnanimity are in the irascible.
As regards man's good in relation to other men, it does not seem
hard to obtain, but is considered absolutely, as the object of the
concupiscible passions. This good may be pleasurable to a man in
his behavior towards another either in some serious matter, in
actions, to wit, that are directed by reason to a due end, or in playful
actions, viz. that are done for mere pleasure, and which do not stand
in the same relation to reason as the former. Now one man behaves
towards another in serious matters, in two ways. First, as being
pleasant in his regard, by becoming speech and deeds: and this
belongs to a virtue which Aristotle (Ethic. ii, 7) calls
"friendship" [philia], and may be rendered "affability." Secondly, one
man behaves towards another by being frank with him, in words and
deeds: this belongs to another virtue which (Ethic. iv, 7) he calls
"truthfulness" [aletheia]. For frankness is more akin to the reason
than pleasure, and serious matters than play. Hence there is another
virtue about the pleasures of games, which the Philosopher
"eutrapelia" [eutrapelia] (Ethic. iv, 8).
It is therefore evident that, according to Aristotle, there are ten moral
virtues about the passions, viz. fortitude, temperance, liberality,
magnificence, magnanimity, "philotimia," gentleness, friendship,
truthfulness, and "eutrapelia," all of which differ in respect of their
diverse matter, passions, or objects: so that if we add "justice,"
which is about operations, there will be eleven in all.
Reply to Objection 1: All objects of the same specific operation have