SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.3.

another. Consequently euboulia (deliberating well) which makes man
take good counsel must needs be a distinct virtue from prudence,
which makes man command well. And since counsel is directed to
command as to that which is principal, so euboulia (deliberating
well) is directed to prudence as to a principal virtue, without which it
would be no virtue at all, even as neither are the moral virtues
without prudence, nor the other virtues without charity.
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to prudence to take good counsel by
commanding it, to euboulia (deliberating well) by eliciting it.
Reply to Objection 2: Different acts are directed in different degrees
to the one end which is "a good life in general" [Ethic. vi, 5]: for
counsel comes first, judgment follows, and command comes last.
The last named has an immediate relation to the last end: whereas
the other two acts are related thereto remotely. Nevertheless these
have certain proximate ends of their own, the end of counsel being
the discovery of what has to be done, and the end of judgment,
certainty. Hence this proves not that euboulia (deliberating well) is
not a distinct virtue from prudence, but that it is subordinate thereto,
as a secondary to a principal virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: Even in speculative matters the rational
science of dialectics, which is directed to research and discovery, is
distinct from demonstrative science, which decides the truth.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether synesis (judging well according to

common law) is a virtue?
Objection 1: It would seem that synesis is not a virtue. Virtues are
not in us by nature, according to Ethic. ii, 1. But synesis (judging
well according to common law) is natural to some, as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. vi, 11). Therefore synesis (judging well
according to common law) is not a virtue.
Objection 2: Further, as stated in the same book (10), synesis
(judging well according to common law) is nothing but "a faculty of
judging." But judgment without command can be even in the wicked.
Since then virtue is only in the good, it seems that synesis (judging
well according to common law) is not a virtue.
Objection 3: Further, there is never a defective command, unless
there be a defective judgment, at least in a particular matter of
action; for it is in this that every wicked man errs. If therefore
synesis (judging well according to common law) be reckoned a
virtue directed to good judgment, it seems that there is no need for
any other virtue directed to good command: and consequently
prudence would be superfluous, which is not reasonable. Therefore
synesis (judging well according to common law) is not a virtue.
On the contrary, Judgment is more perfect than counsel. But
euboulia, or good counsel, is a virtue. Much more, therefore, is
synesis (judging well according to common law) a virtue, as being
good judgment.
I answer that, synesis (judging well according to common law)
signifies a right judgment, not indeed about speculative matters, but
about particular practical matters, about which also is prudence.
Hence in Greek some, in respect of synesis (judging well according
to common law) are said to be synetoi, i.e. "persons of sense," or
eusynetoi, i.e. "men of good sense," just as on the other hand, those
who lack this virtue are called asynetoi, i.e. "senseless."
Now, different acts which cannot be ascribed to the same cause,
must correspond to different virtues. And it is evident that goodness
of counsel and goodness of judgment are not reducible to the same
cause, for many can take good counsel, without having good sense