FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.6.

be from us, and its consummation to be granted us by God; and this
he here retracts. And seemingly it is in this sense that he speaks of
faith as meriting justification. But if we suppose, as indeed it is a
truth of faith, that the beginning of faith is in us from God, the first
act must flow from grace; and thus it cannot be meritorious of the
first grace. Therefore man is justified by faith, not as though man, by
believing, were to merit justification, but that, he believes, whilst he
is being justified; inasmuch as a movement of faith is required for
the justification of the ungodly, as stated above (Question 113,
Article 4).
Reply to Objection 2: God gives grace to none but to the worthy, not
that they were previously worthy, but that by His grace He makes
them worthy, Who alone "can make him clean that is conceived of
unclean seed" (Job 14:4).
Reply to Objection 3: Man's every good work proceeds from the first
grace as from its principle; but not from any gift of man.
Consequently, there is no comparison between gifts of grace and
gifts of men.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether a man can merit the first grace for

another?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man can merit the first grace for
another. Because on Mt. 9:2: "Jesus seeing their faith," etc. a gloss
says: "How much is our personal faith worth with God, Who set such
a price on another's faith, as to heal the man both inwardly and
outwardly!" Now inward healing is brought about by grace. Hence a
man can merit the first grace for another.
Objection 2: Further, the prayers of the just are not void, but
efficacious, according to James 5:16: "The continued prayer of a just
man availeth much." Now he had previously said: "Pray one for
another, that you may be saved." Hence, since man's salvation can
only be brought about by grace, it seems that one man may merit for
another his first grace.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Lk. 16:9): "Make unto you friends
of the mammon of iniquity, that when you shall fail they may receive
you into everlasting dwellings." Now it is through grace alone that
anyone is received into everlasting dwellings, for by it alone does
anyone merit everlasting life as stated above (Article 2; Question
109, Article 5). Hence one man may by merit obtain for another his
first grace.
On the contrary, It is written (Jer. 15:1): "If Moses and Samuel shall
stand before Me, My soul is not towards this people" ---yet they had
great merit with God. Hence it seems that no one can merit the first
grace for another.
I answer that, As shown above (Articles 1,3,4), our works are
meritorious from two causes: first, by virtue of the Divine motion;
and thus we merit condignly; secondly, according as they proceed
from free-will in so far as we do them willingly, and thus they have
congruous merit, since it is congruous that when a man makes good
use of his power God should by His super-excellent power work still
higher things. And therefore it is clear that no one can merit
condignly for another his first grace, save Christ alone; since each
one of us is moved by God to reach life everlasting through the gift
of grace; hence condign merit does not reach beyond this motion.
But Christ's soul is moved by God through grace, not only so as to