124. The Aparecida Document describes the riches which the Holy Spirit pours forth in popular
piety by his gratuitous initiative. On that beloved continent, where many Christians express their
faith through popular piety, the bishops also refer to it as “popular spirituality” or “the people’s
mysticism”. It is truly “a spirituality incarnated in the culture of the lowly”. Nor is it devoid
of content; rather it discovers and expresses that content more by way of symbols than by
discursive reasoning, and in the act of faith greater accent is placed on credere in Deum than on
credere Deum. It is “a legitimate way of living the faith, a way of feeling part of the Church
and a manner of being missionaries”; it brings with itself the grace of being a missionary, of
coming out of oneself and setting out on pilgrimage: “Journeying together to shrines and taking
part in other manifestations of popular piety, also by taking one’s children or inviting others, is in
itself an evangelizing gesture”. Let us not stifle or presume to control this missionary power!

125. To understand this reality we need to approach it with the gaze of the Good Shepherd, who
seeks not to judge but to love. Only from the affective connaturality born of love can we appreciate
the theological life present in the piety of Christian peoples, especially among their poor. I think of
the steadfast faith of those mothers tending their sick children who, though perhaps barely familiar
with the articles of the creed, cling to a rosary; or of all the hope poured into a candle lighted in a
humble home with a prayer for help from Mary, or in the gaze of tender love directed to Christ
crucified. No one who loves God’s holy people will view these actions as the expression of a
purely human search for the divine. They are the manifestation of a theological life nourished by
the working of the Holy Spirit who has been poured into our hearts (cf. Rom 5:5).

126. Underlying popular piety, as a fruit of the inculturated Gospel, is an active evangelizing power
which we must not underestimate: to do so would be to fail to recognize the work of the Holy Spirit.
Instead, we are called to promote and strengthen it, in order to deepen the never-ending process
of inculturation. Expressions of popular piety have much to teach us; for those who are capable of
reading them, they are a locus theologicus which demands our attention, especially at a time when
we are looking to the new evangelization.

Person to person

127. Today, as the Church seeks to experience a profound missionary renewal, there is a kind of
preaching which falls to each of us as a daily responsibility. It has to do with bringing the Gospel to
the people we meet, whether they be our neighbours or complete strangers. This is the informal
preaching which takes place in the middle of a conversation, something along the lines of what a
missionary does when visiting a home. Being a disciple means being constantly ready to bring the
love of Jesus to others, and this can happen unexpectedly and in any place: on the street, in a city
square, during work, on a journey.