loves God more than himself with natural love, both as to the love of
concupiscence, through his seeking the Divine good for himself
rather than his own good; and, in a fashion, as to the love of
friendship, in so far as he naturally desires a greater good to God
than to himself; because he naturally wishes God to be God, while as
for himself, he wills to have his own nature. But absolutely speaking,
out of the natural love he loves himself more than he does God,
because he naturally loves himself before God, and with greater
intensity.
The falsity of such an opinion stands in evidence, if one but consider
whither natural movement tends in the natural order of things;
because the natural tendency of things devoid of reason shows the
nature of the natural inclination residing in the will of an intellectual
nature. Now, in natural things, everything which, as such, naturally
belongs to another, is principally, and more strongly inclined to that
other to which it belongs, than towards itself. Such a natural
tendency is evidenced from things which are moved according to
nature: because "according as a thing is moved naturally, it has an
inborn aptitude to be thus moved," as stated in Phys. ii, text. 78. For
we observe that the part naturally exposes itself in order to
safeguard the whole; as, for instance, the hand is without
deliberation exposed to the blow for the whole body's safety. And
since reason copies nature, we find the same inclination among the
social virtues; for it behooves the virtuous citizen to expose himself
to the danger of death for the public weal of the state; and if man
were a natural part of the city, then such inclination would be natural
to him.
Consequently, since God is the universal good, and under this good
both man and angel and all creatures are comprised, because every
creature in regard to its entire being naturally belongs to God, it
follows that from natural love angel and man alike love God before
themselves and with a greater love. Otherwise, if either of them loved
self more than God, it would follow that natural love would be
perverse, and that it would not be perfected but destroyed by charity.
Reply to Objection 1: Such reasoning holds good of things
adequately divided whereof one is not the cause of the existence and
goodness of the other; for in such natures each loves itself naturally
more than it does the other, inasmuch as it is more one with itself
than it is with the other. But where one is the whole cause of the
existence and goodness of the other, that one is naturally more

loved than self; because, as we said above, each part naturally loves
the whole more than itself: and each individual naturally loves the
good of the species more than its own individual good. Now God is
not only the good of one species, but is absolutely the universal
good; hence everything in its own way naturally loves God more
than itself.
Reply to Objection 2: When it is said that God is loved by an angel
"in so far" as He is good to the angel, if the expression "in so far"
denotes an end, then it is false; for he does not naturally love God
for his own good, but for God's sake. If it denotes the nature of love
on the lover's part, then it is true; for it would not be in the nature of
anyone to love God, except from this---that everything is dependent
on that good which is God.
Reply to Objection 3: Nature's operation is self-centered not merely
as to certain particular details, but much more as to what is
common; for everything is inclined to preserve not merely its
individuality, but likewise its species. And much more has
everything a natural inclination towards what is the absolutely
universal good.
Reply to Objection 4: God, in so far as He is the universal good, from
Whom every natural good depends, is loved by everything with
natural love. So far as He is the good which of its very nature
beatifies all with supernatural beatitude, He is love with the love of
charity.
Reply to Objection 5: Since God's substance and universal
goodness are one and the same, all who behold God's essence are
by the same movement of love moved towards the Divine essence as
it is distinct from other things, and according as it is the universal
good. And because He is naturally loved by all so far as He is the
universal good, it is impossible that whoever sees Him in His
essence should not love Him. But such as do not behold His
essence, know Him by some particular effects, which are sometimes
opposed to their will. So in this way they are said to hate God; yet
nevertheless, so far as He is the universal good of all, every thing
naturally loves God more than itself.