body, but subsistent by themselves, to be individual beings and still intelligible. What is
inconsistent with intelligibility is materiality: as is shown by this consideration, that for
the forms of material things to become actually intelligible, abstraction has to be made
from the particular matter in which they are lodged; and therefore in cases in
which individuation is due to particular matter involving particular dimensions, the
things so individualised are not actually intelligible. But where individuation is not due to
matter, such individual things may without difficulty be actually intelligible. Now
intellectual impressions, like all other forms, are individualised by their subject, which is
the potential intellect; and since the potential intellect is not material, it does not stand in
the way of the actual intelligibility of the impressions individualised by it.
But though we have said that the intellectual impression, received in the potential
intellect, is not that which is understood, but that whereby we understand, still it remains
true that by reflection the intellect understands itself and its own intellectual act and the
impression whereby it understands. Its own intellectual act it understands in two ways, - in one way, in particular, for it understands that it is now understanding; in another
way, in general, inasmuch as it reasons about the said act. And likewise it understands
intellect and the impression in intellect in two ways, -- by remarking that itself is and has
an intellectual impression, which is particular knowledge; and by studying its own nature
and the nature of the intellectual impression, which is knowledge of the universal.
According to this latter way we treat of intellect and of the intelligible in science.
Arg. 3. The master transfuses the knowledge which he has into the scholar. Either then
the knowledge transfused is the same in number, or different in number, though the
same in species. The latter alternative seems impossible: because it supposes the
master to cause his own knowledge in the scholar in the same way that an agent
causes its own form in another being, by generating a nature specifically like its own;
which seems proper to material agents. It must be then that numerically the same
knowledge is caused in the scholar that was in the master; which would be impossible,
were there not one potential intellect of them both.
Reply. The saying that the knowledge in master and scholar is numerically one, is partly
true and partly not: it is numerically one in point of the thing known, but not in point of
the intellectual impressions whereby the thing is known, nor in point of the habit of
knowledge itself. It is to be observed however that, as Aristotle (Metaph. VII, ix)
teaches, there are arts in whose subject matter there is not any principle active in
producing the effect of the art, as is clear in the building art: for in wood and stones
there is no active power moving to the erection of a house, but only a passive aptitude.
But there is an art in whose subject matter there is an active principle moving in the
direction of the effect of the art, as is clear in the healing art: for in the sick subject there
is an active principle tending to health. And therefore the effect of the former kind of art
is never produced by nature, but always by art, as every house is a work of art:
but the effect of the latter kind is produced as well by art as by nature without art: for
many are healed by the operation of nature without the art of medicine. In these things
that can be done both by art and nature, art imitates nature: thus if one is sick of a chill,
nature heals him by warming him: hence the physician also, if he is to cure him, heals