so made a noble stand. For he knew the fiends that were wrestling with him.
Wherefore also he shone forth brightly at once from the beginning, from the very
starting-post, and even to the end he continued the same; yea, rather he even
increased the intensity of his pursuit as he drew nearer to the prize. And what
surely is wonderful is that though suffering and doing such great things, he knew
how to maintain an exceeding modesty. For when he was driven upon the
necessity of relating his own good deeds, he ran quickly over them all; although
he might have filled books without number, had he wished to unfold in detail
every thing he mentioned; if he had specified the Churches he was in care for, if
his prisons and his achievements in them, if of the other things one by one, the
besetments , the assaults. But he would not. Knowing then these things, let us
also learn to be modest and not to glory at any time in wealth or other worldly
things, but in the reproaches we suffer for Christ's sake, and in these, only when
need compels; for if there be nothing urging it, let us not mention these even,
(lest we be puffed up,) but our sins only. For so shall we both easily be released
from them and shall have God propitious to us, and shall attain the life to come;
whereunto may we all attain through the grace and love towards men of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might,
honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 26 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 12:1
It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory, [for] I will come to visions and
revelations of the Lord.
What is this? Does he who has spoken such great things say, [It is not
expedient] "doubtless to glory?" as if he had said nothing? No; not as if he had
said nothing: but because he is going to pass to another species of boasting,
which is not intended indeed by so great a reward, but which to the many
(though not to careful examiners) seems to set him off in brighter colors , he
says, "It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory." For truly the great grounds
of boasting were those which he had recounted, those of his trials; he has
however other things also to tell of, such as concern the revelations, the
unspeakable mysteries. And wherefore, says he, "It is not expedient for me?" he
means, 'lest it lift me up to pride.' What do you say? For if you speak not of
them, yet do you not know of them? But our knowing of them ourselves does not
lift us up so much as our publishing them to others. For it is not the nature of
good deeds that uses to lift a man up, but their being witnessed to, and known of,
by the many. For this cause therefore he says, "It is not expedient for me;" and,
'that I may not implant too great an idea of me in those who hear.' For those men
indeed, the false apostles, said even what was not true about themselves; but this
man hides even what is true, and that too although so great necessity lies upon
him, and says, "It is not expedient for me;" teaching one and all even to
superfluity to avoid any thing of the sort. For this thing is attended with no
advantage, but even with harm, except there be some necessary and useful
reason which induces us thereto. Having then spoken of his perils, trials, snares,
dejections, shipwrecks, he passes to another species of boasting, saying,