but also in their causes, as those individual creatures that are now
generated existed in the first of their kind. Species, also, that are
new, if any such appear, existed beforehand in various active
powers; so that animals, and perhaps even new species of animals,
are produced by putrefaction by the power which the stars and
elements received at the beginning. Again, animals of new kinds
arise occasionally from the connection of individuals belonging to
different species, as the mule is the offspring of an ass and a mare;
but even these existed previously in their causes, in the works of the
six days. Some also existed beforehand by way of similitude, as the
souls now created. And the work of the Incarnation itself was thus
foreshadowed, for as we read (Phil. 2:7), The Son of God "was made
in the likeness of men." And again, the glory that is spiritual was
anticipated in the angels by way of similitude; and that of the body in
the heaven, especially the empyrean. Hence it is written (Eccles.
1:10), "Nothing under the sun is new, for it hath already gone before,
in the ages that were before us."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether God rested on the seventh day from all

His work?
Objection 1: It would seem that God did not rest on the seventh day
from all His work. For it is said (Jn. 5:17), "My Father worketh until
now, and I work." God, then, did not rest on the seventh day from all
His work.
Objection 2: Further, rest is opposed to movement, or to labor, which
movement causes. But, as God produced His work without
movement and without labor, He cannot be said to have rested on
the seventh day from His work.
Objection 3: Further, should it be said that God rested on the
seventh day by causing man to rest; against this it may be argued
that rest is set down in contradistinction to His work; now the words
"God created" or "made" this thing or the other cannot be explained
to mean that He made man create or make these things. Therefore
the resting of God cannot be explained as His making man to rest.
On the contrary, It is said (Gn. 2:2): "God rested on the seventh day
from all the work which He had done."
I answer that, Rest is, properly speaking, opposed to movement, and
consequently to the labor that arises from movement. But although
movement, strictly speaking, is a quality of bodies, yet the word is
applied also to spiritual things, and in a twofold sense. On the one
hand, every operation may be called a movement, and thus the
Divine goodness is said to move and go forth to its object, in
communicating itself to that object, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ii).
On the other hand, the desire that tends to an object outside itself, is
said to move towards it. Hence rest is taken in two senses, in one
sense meaning a cessation from work, in the other, the satisfying of
desire. Now, in either sense God is said to have rested on the
seventh day. First, because He ceased from creating new creatures
on that day, for, as said above (Article 1, ad 3), He made nothing
afterwards that had not existed previously, in some degree, in the
first works; secondly, because He Himself had no need of the things
that He had made, but was happy in the fruition of Himself. Hence,
when all things were made He is not said to have rested "in" His
works, as though needing them for His own happiness, but to have