Jer. ix. 24.

words." "For the fat and the fat flesh shall not take away from thee thine unrighteousness."
"This is the fast which I have chosen, saith the Lord. Loose every band of wickedness, dissolve the
connections of violent agreements, give rest to those that are shaken, and cancel every unjust
document. Deal thy bread to the hungry willingly, and lead into thy house the roofless stranger. If
thou hast seen the naked, cover him, and thou shalt not despise those of thine own flesh and blood
(domesticos seminis tui). Then shall thy morning light break forth, and thy health shall spring forth
more speedily; and righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall surround
thee: and whilst thou art yet speaking, I will say, Behold, here I am." And Zechariah also, among
the twelve prophets, pointing out to the people the will of God, says: "These things does the Lord
Omnipotent declare: Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion each one to his
brother. And oppress not the widow, and the orphan, and the proselyte, and the poor; and let none
imagine evil against your brother in his heart." And again, he says: "These are the words which
ye shall utter. Speak ye the truth every man to his neighbour, and execute peaceful judgment in
your gates, and let none of you imagine evil in his heart against his brother, and ye shall not love
false swearing: for all these things I hate, saith the Lord Almighty." Moreover, David also says
in like manner: "What man is there who desireth life, and would fain see good days? Keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile. Shun evil, and do good: seek peace, and
pursue it."
4. From all these it is evident that God did not seek sacrifices and holocausts from them, but
faith, and obedience, and righteousness, because of their salvation. As God, when teaching them
His will in Hosea the prophet, said, "I desire mercy rather than sacrifice, and the knowledge of God
more than burnt-offerings." Besides, our Lord also exhorted them to the same effect, when He
said, "But if ye had known what [this] meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not
have condemned the guiltless." Thus does He bear witness to the prophets, that they preached
the truth; but accuses these men (His hearers) of being foolish through their own fault.

Zech. vii. 9, 10.

Matt. xii. 7.

5. Again, giving directions to His disciples to offer to God the first-fruits of His own, created
things—not as if He stood in need of them, but that they might be themselves neither unfruitful nor
ungrateful—He took that created thing, bread, and gave thanks, and said, "This is My body."
And the cup likewise, which is part of that creation to which we belong, He confessed to be His
blood, and taught the new oblation of the new covenant; which the Church receiving from the
apostles, offers to God throughout all the world, to Him who gives us as the means of subsistence
the first-fruits of His own gifts in the New Testament, concerning which Malachi, among the twelve
prophets, thus spoke beforehand: "I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord Omnipotent, and I will
not accept sacrifice at your hands. For from the rising of the sun, unto the going down [of the same],
My name is glorified among the Gentiles, and in every place incense is offered to My name, and
a pure sacrifice; for great is My name among the Gentiles, saith the Lord
Omnipotent;"—indicating in the plainest manner, by these words, that the former people [the
Jews] shall indeed cease to make offerings to God, but that in every place sacrifice shall be offered
to Him, and that a pure one; and His name is glorified among the Gentiles.
6. But what other name is there which is glorified among the Gentiles than that of our Lord, by
whom the Father is glorified, and man also? And because it is [the name] of His own Son, who
was made man by Him, He calls it His own. Just as a king, if he himself paints a likeness of his
son, is right in calling this likeness his own, for both these reasons, because it is [the likeness] of
his son, and because it is his own production; so also does the Father confess the name of Jesus
Christ, which is throughout all the world glorified in the Church, to be His own, both because it is
that of His Son, and because He who thus describes it gave Him for the salvation of men. Since,
therefore, the name of the Son belongs to the Father, and since in the omnipotent God the Church
makes offerings through Jesus Christ, He says well on both these grounds, "And in every place
incense is offered to My name, and a pure sacrifice." Now John, in the Apocalypse, declares that
the "incense" is "the prayers of the saints."