And that you may learn that this is the reason of the things spoken, I would
ask you this question: Does an additional "subjection" at that time befal the Son?
And how can this be other than impious and unworthy of God? For the greatest
subjection and obedience is this, that He who is God took the form of a servant.
How then will He be "subjected?" Do you see, that to take away the impious
notion, he used this expression? And this too in a suitable though reserved
sense? For he becomes a Son and a divine Person, so He obeys; not humanly, but
as one acting freely and having all authority. Otherwise how is he co-enthroned?
How, "as the Father raises up, even so He, whom He will?" [John 5:21] How are
"all things that the Father has His," and all that He has, the Father's? [John
16:15] For these phrases indicate to us an authority exactly measured by that of
Him that begot Him.
11. But what is this, "When He shall deliver up the kingdom?" The
Scripture acknowledges two kingdoms of God, the one by appropriation , the
other by creation. Thus, He is King over all, both Greeks and Jews and devils
and His adversaries, in respect of His creation: but He is King of the faithful and
willing and subject, in respect of His making them His own. This is the kingdom
which is said also to have a beginning. For concerning this He says also in the
second Psalm, "Ask of Me, and I shall give You the heathen for Your
inheritance." [Psalm 2:8] Touching this also, He Himself said to His disciples,
"All authority has been given unto Me by My father," [Matthew 28:18] referring
all to Him that begot Him, not as though of Himself He were not sufficient, but
to signify that He is a Son, and not unbegotten. This kingdom then He does
"deliver up," i.e., "bring to a right end."
"What then," says one, "can be the reason why He spoke nothing of the
Spirit?" Because of Him he was not discoursing now, nor does he confound all
things together. Since also where he says, "There is one God the Father, and one
Lord Jesus," undoubtedly not as allowing the Spirit to be inferior, is he therefore
silent, but because for the time it was not urgent, he so expressed himself. For he
is wont also to make mention of the Father only, yet we must not therefore cast

out the Son: he is wont to speak also of the Son and of the Spirit only, yet not for
this are we to deny the Father.
But what is, "that God may be all in all?" That all things may be dependent
upon Him, that none may suppose two authorities without a beginning, nor
another kingdom separated off; that nothing may exist independent of him. For
when the enemies shall be lying under the feet of the Son, and He having them
cast under His feet be at no variance with His Father, but at concord with Him in
entire perfection, then He shall Himself "be all in all."
But some say that he spoke this to declare the removal of wickedness, as
though all would yield thenceforth and none would resist nor do iniquity. For
when there is no sin, it is evident that "God shall be all in all."
12. But if bodies do not rise again, how are these things true? For the worst
enemy of all, death, remains, having wrought whatever he listed. "Nay," says
one, "for they shall sin no more." And what of that? For he is not discoursing
here of the death of the soul, but of that of the body? How then is he "put
down?" For victory is this, the winning of those things which have been carried
off and detained. But if men's bodies are to be detained in the earth, it follows
that the tyranny of death remains, these bodies for their part being holden, and
there being no other body for him to be vanquished in. But if this which Paul
spoke of, ensue, as undoubtedly it will ensue, God's victory will appear, and that
a glorious one, in His being able to raise again the bodies which were holden
thereby. Since an enemy too is then vanquished, when a man takes the spoils, not
when he suffers them to remain in the other's possession: but unless one venture
to take what is his, how can we say that he is vanquished? After this manner of
victory does Christ Himself say in the Gospels that He has been victorious, thus
speaking, "When he shall bind the strong man, then shall he also spoil his
goods." [Matthew 12:29] Since if this were not so, it would not be at all a
manifest victory. For as in the death of the soul, "he that has died is justified
from sin;" [Romans 6:7] (and yet we cannot say that this is a victory, for he is
not the victor who adds no more to his wickedness, but he who has done away