where that which is greater than all is the divine nature, wherein the Son is equal to the
Father.
6. Hence it appears how the Son is said to be taught (John v, 20: xv, 15), although He is
not ignorant. It has been shown above that, in God, understanding and being are the
same (B. I, Chap.XLV): hence the communication of the divine nature is also a
communication of intelligence. But a communication of intelligence may be called a
'showing,' or 'speaking,' or `teaching.' By the fact, then, of the Son having received the
divine nature of His Father at His birth, He is said to have `heard' from His Father, or the
Father to have 'shown' Him: not that the Son was in ignorance before, and afterwards
the Father taught Him: for the Apostle confesses Christ the power of God and wisdom
of God (1 Cor. i, 24); and wisdom cannot be ignorant, or power weak.
7. The text, The Son cannot do anything of himself (John v, 19), argues no weakness in
the Son; but since with God to act is no other thing than to be, it is here said that the
Son cannot act of Himself, but has His action of the Father, as He cannot be of Himself,
but only of the Father. Were He to be `of Himself,' He could not be the Son. But
because the Son receives the same nature that the Father has, and consequently the
same power, therefore though He neither is `of Himself' (a se) nor acts of Himself, still
He is `by Himself' (per se) and acts by Himself, since He at once is by His own nature,
which He has received from the Father, and acts by His own nature received from the
Father. Hence, to show that though the Son does not act `of Himself,'
nevertheless He acts `by Himself,' the verse goes on: Whatsoever things he (the
Father) doeth, these the Son also doeth in like manner.
8. All the texts about the Father giving commandment to the Son, and the Son obeying
the Father, or praying to the Father, are to be understood of the Son as He is subject to
His Father, which is only in point of the humanity which He has assumed (John xiv, 31:
xv, 10: Phil. ii, 8), as the Apostle shows (Heb. v, 7: Gal. iv, 4).
10. His saying, To sit on my right or left hand is not mine to give you, but to them for
whom it is prepared (Matt. xx, 23), does not show that the Son has no power of
distributing the seats in heaven, or the participation of life everlasting, which He
expressly says does belong to Him to bestow: I give them life everlasting (John x, 27);
and again it is said: The Father hath given all judgement to the Son (John v, 22): He will
set the sheep on his right hand and the goats on his left (Matt. xxv, 33): it belongs then
to the power of the Son to set any one on His right or on His left, whether both
designations mark different degrees of glory; or the one refers to glory, the other to
punishment. We must look to the context, whereby it appears that the mother of the
sons of Zebedee rested on some confidence of kindred with the man Christ. The
Lord then by His answer did not mean that it was not in His power to give what was
asked, but that it was not in His power to give to them for whom it was asked: for it
did not belong to Him to give inasmuch as He was the Son of the Virgin, but inasmuch
as He was the Son of God; and therefore it was not His to give to any for their
connexion with Him according to fleshly kindred, as He was the Son of the Virgin, but it