Let us then at length come to our sober senses again, let us watch. For I fear
not so much the battle without, as the fight within; for the root also, when it is
well fitted into the ground, will suffer no damage from the winds; but if it be
itself shaken, a worm gnawing through it from within, the tree will fall, even
though none molest it. How long gnaw we the root of the Church like worms?
For of earth such imaginings are begotten also, or rather not of earth, but of
dung, having corruption for their mother; and they cease not from the detestable
flattery that is from women. Let us at length be generous men, let us be
champions of philosophy, let us drive back the violent career of these evils. For I
behold the mass of the Church prostrate now, as though it were a corpse. And as
in a body newly dead, one may see eyes and hands and feet and neck and head,
and yet no one limb performing its proper office; so, truly, here also, all who are
here are of the faithful, but their faith is not active; for we have quenched its
warmth and made the body of Christ a corpse. Now if this sounds awful when
said, it is much more awful when it appears in actions. For we have indeed the
name of brothers, but do the deeds of foes; and while all are called members, we
are divided against each other like wild beasts. I have said this not from a desire
to parade our condition, but to shame you and make you desist. Such and such a
man goes into a house; honor is paid to him; you ought to give God thanks
because your member is honored and God is glorified; but you do the contrary:
you speak evil of him to the man that honored him, so that you trip up the heels
of both, and, besides, disgracest yourself. And wherefore, wretched and
miserable one? Have you heard your brother praised, either among men or
women? Add to his praises, for so you shall praise yourself also. But if you
overthrow the praise, first, you have spoken evil of yourself, having so acquired
an ill character, and you have raised him the higher. When you hear one praised,
become thou a partner in what is said; if not in your life and virtue, yet still in
rejoicing over his excellencies. Hath such an one praised? Do thou too admire:
so shall he praise you also as good and candid. Fear not, as though you were
ruining your own interest by your praises of another: for this is [rather] the result

of accusation of him. For mankind is of a contentious spirit; and when it sees
you speaking ill of any, it heaps on its praises, wishing to mortify by so doing;
and reprobates those that are accusers, both in its own mind and to others. Do
you see what disgrace we are the causes of to ourselves? How we destroy and
rend the flock? Let us at length be members (of one another), let us become one
body. And let him that is praised repudiate the praises, and transfer the
encomium to his brother; and let him that hears another praised, feel pleasure to
himself. If we thus come together ourselves, we shall also draw unto ourselves
the Head; but if we live parted from each other, we shall also put from us the aid
which comes from thence; and when that is put aside, the body will receive great
damage, not being bound together from above. That this then may not happen,
let us, banishing ill will and envy, and despising what the many may think of us,
embrace love and concord. For thus we shall obtain both the present good things
and those to come; whereunto may we all attain, through the grace and love
towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father together with
the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and forever, and world without end.
Amen.