Further, a superior can do whatever his subject can do. But the
priest himself can give his parishioner permission to confess to
another. Much more, therefore, can his superior do this.
Further, the power which a priest has among his people, comes to
him from the bishop. Now it is through that power that he can hear
confessions. Therefore, in like manner, another can do so, to whom
the bishop gives the same power.
I answer that, A priest may be hindered in two ways from hearing a
man's confession: first, through lack of jurisdiction; secondly,
through being prevented from exercising his order, as those who are
excommunicate, degraded, and so forth. Now whoever has
jurisdiction, can depute to another whatever comes under his
jurisdiction; so that if a priest is hindered from hearing a man's
confession through want of jurisdiction, anyone who has immediate
jurisdiction over that man, priest, bishop, or Pope, can depute that
priest to hear his confession and absolve him. If, on the other hand,
the priest cannot hear the confession, on account of an impediment
to the exercise of his order, anyone who has the power to remove
that impediment can permit him to hear confessions.
Reply to Objection 1: No wrong is done to a person unless what is
taken away from him was granted for his own benefit. Now the power
of jurisdiction is not granted a man for his own benefit, but for the
good of the people and for the glory of God. Wherefore if the higher
prelates deem it expedient for the furthering of the people's salvation
and God's glory, to commit matters of jurisdiction to others, no
wrong is done to the inferior prelates, except to those who "seek the
things that are their own; not the things that are Jesus
Christ's" (Phil. 2:21), and who rule their flock, not by feeding it, but
by feeding on it.
Reply to Objection 2: The rector of a church should "know the
countenance of his own cattle" in two ways. First, by an assiduous
attention to their external conduct, so as to watch over the flock
committed to his care: and in acquiring this knowledge he should
not believe his subject, but, as far as possible, inquire into the truth
of facts. Secondly, by the manifestation of confession; and with
regard to this knowledge, he cannot arrive at any greater certainty
than by believing his subject, because this is necessary that he may
help his subject's conscience. Consequently in the tribunal of

confession, the penitent is believed whether he speak for himself or
against himself, but not in the court of external judgment: wherefore
it suffices for this knowledge that he believe the penitent when he
says that he has confessed to one who could absolve him. It is
therefore clear that this knowledge of the flock is not hindered by a
privilege granted to another to hear confessions.
Reply to Objection 3: It would be inconvenient, if two men were
placed equally over the same people, but there is no inconvenience
if over the same people two are placed one of whom is over the
other. In this way the parish priest, the bishop, and the Pope are
placed immediately over the same people, and each of them can
commit matters of jurisdiction to some other. Now a higher superior
delegates a man in two ways: first, so that the latter takes the
superior's place, as when the Pope or a bishop appoints his
penitentiaries; and then the man thus delegated is higher than the
inferior prelate, as the Pope's penitentiary is higher than a bishop,
and the bishop's penitentiary than a parish priest, and the penitent is
bound to obey the former rather than the latter. Secondly, so that the
delegate is appointed the coadjutor of this other priest; and since a
co-adjutor is subordinate to the person he is appointed to help, he
holds a lower rank, and the penitent is not so bound to obey him as
his own priest.
Reply to Objection 4: No man is bound to confess sins that he has
no longer. Consequently, if a man has confessed to the bishop's
penitentiary, or to someone else having faculties from the bishop,
his sins are forgiven both before the Church and before God, so that
he is not bound to confess them to his own priest, however much
the latter may insist: but on account of the Ecclesiastical precept (De
Poenit. et Remiss., Cap. Omnis utriusque) which prescribes
confession to be made once a year to one's own priest, he is under
the same obligation as one who has committed none but venial sins.
For such a one, according to some, is bound to confess none but
venial sins, or he must declare that he is free from mortal sin, and
the priest, in the tribunal of conscience, ought, and is bound, to
believe him. If, however, he were bound to confess again, his first
confession would not be useless, because the more priests one
confesses to, the more is the punishment remitted, both by reason of
the shame in confessing, which is reckoned as a satisfactory
punishment, and by reason of the power of the keys: so that one
might confess so often as to be delivered from all punishment. Nor is
repetition derogatory to a sacrament, except in those wherein there