faith's sake, and by miracles, which you performed through faith, had ascended
to the highest heaven, should suddenly be brought to such a depth of degradation
as to be drawn aside to circumcision or sabbaths, and should rely wholly upon
Judaizers? Hence in the beginning he says, "I marvel that you are so quickly
removing," and here, "I am perplexed about you," as if he said, What am I to
speak? What am I to utter? What am I to think? I am bitterly perplexed. And so
he must needs weep, as the prophets do when in perplexity; for not only
admonition but mourning also is a form in which solicitous attention is often
manifested. And what he said in his speech to those at Miletus, "By the space of
three years I ceased not to warn every one...with tears," he says here also, "and
to change my voice." [Acts 20:31] When we find ourselves overcome by
perplexity and helplessness which come contrary to expectation, we are driven to
tears; and so Paul admonished them sharply, and endeavored to shame them,
then in turn soothed them, and lastly he wept. And this weeping is not only a
reproof but a blandishment; it does not exasperate like reproof, nor relax like
indulgent treatment, but is a mixed remedy, and of great efficacy in the way of
exhortation. Having thus softened and powerfully engaged their hearts by his
tears, he again advances to the contest, and lays down a larger proposition,
proving that the Law itself was opposed to its being kept. Before, he produced
the example of Abraham, but now (what is more cogent) he brings forward the
Law itself enjoining them not to keep itself, but to leave off. So that, says he,
you must abandon the Law, if you would obey it, for this is its own wish: this
however he does not say expressly, but enforces it in another mode, mixing up
with it an account of facts.
Ver. 21. "Tell me," he says, "you that desire to be under the Law, do you not
hear the Law?"
He says rightly, "you that desire," for the matter was not one of a proper
and orderly succession of things but of their own unseasonable contentiousness.
It is the Book of Creation which he here calls the Law, which name he often
gives to the whole Old Testament.

Ver. 22. "For it is written, [Genesis 15:16] that Abraham had two sons, one
by the hand-maid and the other by the freewoman."
He returns again to Abraham, not in the way of repetition, but, inasmuch as
the Patriarch's fame was great among the Jews, to show that the types had their
origin from thence, and that present events were pictured aforetime in him.
Having previously shown that the Galatians were sons of Abraham, now, in that
the Patriarch's sons were not of equal dignity, one being by a bondwoman, the
other by a free-woman, he shows that they were not only his sons, but sons in the
same sense as he that was freeborn and noble. Such is the power of Faith.
Ver. 23. "Howbeit the son by the handmaid is born after the flesh; but the
son by the freewoman is born through promise."
What is the meaning of "after the flesh?" Having said that Faith united us to
Abraham, and it having seemed incredible to his hearers, that those who were
not begotten by Abraham should be called his sons, he proves that this paradox
had actually happened long ago; for that Isaac, born not according to the order of
nature, nor the law of marriage, nor the power of the flesh, was yet truly his own
son. He was the issue of bodies that were dead, and of a womb that was dead; his
conception was not by the flesh, nor his birth by the seed, for the womb was
dead both through age and barrenness, but the Word of God fashioned Him. Not
so in the case of the bondman; He came by virtue of the laws of nature, and after
the manner of marriage. Nevertheless, he that was not according to the flesh was
more honorable than he that was born after the flesh. Therefore let it not disturb
you that you are not born after the flesh; for from the very reason that you are
not so born, are you most of all Abraham's kindred. The being born after the
flesh renders one not more honorable, but less so, for a birth not after the flesh is
more marvellous and more spiritual. And this is plain from the case of those who
were born of old time; Ishmael, for instance, who was born according to the
flesh, was not only a bondman, but was cast out of his father's house; but Isaac,
who was born according to the promise, being a true son and free, was lord of
all.