SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.6.

Article 4), to which consideration man is directed by study; for which
reason it is said in praise of the righteous (Ps. 1:2) that "he shall
meditate day and night" on the law of the Lord, and (Ecclus. 39:1):
"The wise man will seek out the wisdom of all the ancients, and will
be occupied in the prophets." In another way the study of letters is a
help to the contemplative life indirectly, by removing the obstacles to
contemplation, namely the errors which in the contemplation of
divine things frequently beset those who are ignorant of the
scriptures. Thus we read in the Conferences of the Fathers (Coll. x,
3) that the Abbot Serapion through simplicity fell into the error of the
Anthropomorphites, who thought that God had a human shape.
Hence Gregory says (Moral. vi) that "some through seeking in
contemplation more than they are able to grasp, fall away into
perverse doctrines, and by failing to be the humble disciples of truth
become the masters of error." Hence it is written (Eccles. 2:3): "I
thought in my heart to withdraw my flesh from wine, that I might turn
my mind to wisdom and might avoid folly."
Secondly, the study of letters is necessary in those religious orders
that are founded for preaching and other like works; wherefore the
Apostle (Titus 1:9), speaking of bishops to whose office these acts
belong, says: "Embracing that faithful word which is according to
doctrine, that he may be able to exhort in sound doctrine and to
convince the gainsayers." Nor does it matter that the apostles were
sent to preach without having studied letters, because, as Jerome
says (Ep. liii ad Paulin.), "whatever others acquire by exercise and
daily meditation in God's law, was taught them by the Holy Ghost."
Thirdly, the study of letters is becoming to religious as regards that
which is common to all religious orders. For it helps us to avoid the
lusts of the flesh; wherefore Jerome says (Ep. cxxv ad Rust.
Monach.): "Love the science of the Scriptures and thou shalt have no
love for carnal vice." For it turns the mind away from lustful
thoughts, and tames the flesh on account of the toil that study
entails according to Ecclus. 31:1, "Watching for riches consumeth
the flesh.". It also helps to remove the desire of riches, wherefore it
is written (Wis. 7:8): "I . . . esteemed riches nothing in comparison
with her," and (1 Macc. 12:9): "We needed none of these things,"
namely assistance from without, "having for our comfort the holy
books that are in our hands." It also helps to teach obedience,
wherefore Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xvii): "What sort of
perverseness is this, to wish to read, but not to obey what one
reads?" Hence it is clearly fitting that a religious order be

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.6.