stronger it is: and (then) also the soul is more vigorous. In fact, it is like
charioteer and horse. But there you see, just as in the case of men giving
themselves to luxury, and making themselves plump, so the plump horses are
unwieldy, and give the driver much ado. One may think one's self ([ἀ]
[γαπητὸν]) well off, even with a horse obedient to the rein and well-limbed, to be
able to carry off the prize: but when the driver is forced to drag the horse along,
and when the horse falls, though he goad him ever so much, he cannot make him
get up, be he ever so skilful himself, he will be deprived of the victory. Then let
us not endure to see our soul wronged because of the body, but let us make the
soul herself more clear-sighted, let us make her wing light, her bonds looser: let
us feed her with discourse, with frugality, (feeding) the body only so much that it
may be healthy, that it may be vigorous, that it may rejoice and not be in pain:
that having in this sort well ordered our concerns, we may be enabled to lay hold
upon the highest virtue, and to attain unto the eternal good things by the grace
and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom, to the Father and
Holy Ghost together, be glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.

Homily 28 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XIII. 4, 5
"So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and
from thence they sailed to Cyprus. And when they were at Salamis, they
preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews: and they had also John
to their minister."
As soon as they were ordained they went forth, and hasted to Cyprus, that
being a place where was no ill-design hatching against them, and where
moreover the Word had been sown already. In Antioch there were (teachers)
enough, and Phœnice too was near to Palestine; but Cyprus not so. However,
you are not to make a question of the why and wherefore, when it is the Spirit
that directs their movements: for they were not only ordained by the Spirit, but
sent forth by Him likewise. "And when they had come to Salamis, they preached
the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews." Do you mark how they make a
point of preaching the word to them first, not to make them more contentious?
The persons mentioned before "spoke to none but to Jews only" [Acts 11:19],
and so here they betook them to the synagogues. "And when they had gone
through the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a
Jew, whose name was Bar-jesus: which was with the deputy of the country,
Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired
to hear the word of God. But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by
interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn away the deputy from the faith."
[Acts 13:6-8] Again a Jew sorcerer, as was Simon. And observe this man, how,
while they preached to the others, he did not take it much amiss, but only when
they approached the proconsul. And then in respect of the proconsul the wonder
is, that although prepossessed by the man's sorcery, he was nevertheless willing
to hear the Apostles. So it was with the Samaritans: and from the competition