THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.3.

be to the west of it: but having reached the western edge of the sun
returned towards the east: so that the last portion of the sun to be
eclipsed was the first to reappear. Consequently the eclipse began
towards the east, whereas the sun began to reappear towards the
west. And to this he refers by saying: "Again we observed that the
occultation and emersion did not begin from the same point," i.e. on
the same side of the sun, "but on opposite sides."
Chrysostom adds a fifth miracle (Hom. lxxxviii in Matth.), saying that
"the darkness in this case lasted for three hours, whereas an eclipse
of the sun lasts but a short time, for it is soon over, as those know
who have seen one." Hence we are given to understand that the
moon was stationary below the sun, except we prefer to say that the
duration of the darkness was measured from the first moment of
occultation of the sun to the moment when the sun had completely
emerged from the eclipse.
But, as Origen says (on Mt. 27:45), "against this the children of this
world object: How is it such a phenomenal occurrence is not related
by any writer, whether Greek or barbarian?" And he says that
someone of the name of Phlegon "relates in his chronicles that this
took place during the reign of Tiberius Caesar, but he does not say
that it occurred at the full moon." It may be, therefore, that because it
was not the time for an eclipse, the various astronomers living then
throughout the world were not on the look-out for one, and that they
ascribed this darkness to some disturbance of the atmosphere. But
in Egypt, where clouds are few on account of the tranquillity of the
air, Dionysius and his companions were considerably astonished so
as to make the aforesaid observations about this darkness.
Reply to Objection 3: Then, above all, was there need for miraculous
proof of Christ's Godhead, when the weakness of human nature was
most apparent in Him. Hence it was that at His birth a new star
appeared in the heavens. Wherefore Maximus says (Serm. de Nativ.
viii): "If thou disdain the manger, raise thine eyes a little and gaze on
the new star in the heavens, proclaiming to the world the birth of our
Lord." But in His Passion yet greater weakness appeared in His
manhood. Therefore there was need for yet greater miracles in the
greater lights of the world. And, as Chrysostom says (Hom. lxxxviii
in Matth.): "This is the sign which He promised to them who sought
for one saying: 'An evil and adulterous generation seeketh a sign;
and a sign shall not be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet,'
referring to His Cross . . . and Resurrection . . . For it was much more

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.3.

wonderful that this should happen when He was crucified than when
He was walking on earth."