that it was not only their own assurance ([ἀ] [σφαλείαν]) that they sought: but
that they might not be put to shame, but that they might speak with boldness.
"The place was shaken," and that made them all the more unshaken. For this is
sometimes a token of wrath, sometimes of favor and providence, but on the
present occasion, of wrath. For in those times it took place in an unusual manner.
Thus, at the Crucifixion, the earth was shaken: and the Lord Himself says, "Then
there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in various places."
[Matthew 24:7] But then the wrath of which it was a sign was against the
adversaries: as for the disciples, it filled them with the Spirit. Observe, even the
Apostles, after the prayer, are "filled with the Holy Ghost." "And the multitudes
of them that believed," etc. [Acts 4:32] Great, you perceive, is the virtue of this
thing, seeing their was need of this (grace) even in that Company. For this is the
foundation of all that is good, this of which he now for the second time makes
mention, exhorting all men to the contempt of riches: "Neither said any of them
that anything of the things he possessed was his own," "but they had all things
common." For that this was in consequence not merely of the miraculous signs,
but of their own purpose, is manifest by the case of Sapphira and Ananias. "And
with great power gave the Apostles witness," etc. [Acts 4:33] Not in word, but
with power the Apostles exhibited their testimony of the Resurrection: just as
Paul says, "And my preaching was not with persuasive words of human wisdom,
but with manifestation of the Spirit and of power." And it is not merely, With
power, but, "With great power." [1 Corinthians 2:4] "And great grace," it says,
"was upon them all; for neither was there any among them that lacked." [Acts
4:34] This is why the grace (was upon them all,) for that "there was none that
lacked:" that is, from the exceeding ardor of the givers, none was in want. For
they did not give in part, and in part reserve: nor yet in giving all, give it as their
own. And they lived moreover in great abundance: they removed all inequality
from among them, and made a goodly order. "For as many as were possessors,"
etc. And with great respect they did this: for they did not presume to give into
their hands, nor did they ostentatiously present, but brought to the Apostles' feet.

To them they left it to be the dispensers, made them the owners, that thenceforth
all should be defrayed as from common, not from private, property. This was
also a help to them against vain-glory. If this were done now, we should live
more pleasant lives, both rich and poor, nor would it be more pleasant to the
poor than to the rich themselves. And if you please, let us now for awhile depict
it in words, and derive at least this pleasure from it, since you have no mind for
it in your actions. For at any rate this is evident, even from the facts which took
place then, that by selling their possessions they did not come to be in need, but
made them rich that were in need. However, let us now depict this state of things
in words, and let all sell their possessions, and bring them into the common stock
— in words, I mean: let none be excited, rich or poor. How much gold think you
would be collected? For my part, I conjecture— for of course it is not possible to
speak exactly— that supposing all here, men and women, to empty out their
whole property, lands, possessions, houses—for I will not speak of slaves, since
at that time there was no such thing, but doubtless such as were slaves they sat at
liberty—perhaps ten hundred thousand pounds weight of gold would be the
amount collected: nay, twice or thrice as much. For consider; at what number of
" juga" (yokes) is our city rated? How many (of the population) shall we say are
Christians? Shall we say an hundred thousand, and the rest Greeks and Jews?
Then what thousands (of pounds) of gold would be collected! And what is the
number of poor? I do not think more than fifty thousand. Then to feed that
number daily, what abundance there would be! And yet if the food were received
in common, all taking their meals together, it would require no such great outlay
after all. But, you will ask, what should we do after the money was spent? And
do you think it ever could be spent? Would not the grace of God be ten thousand
fold greater? Would not the grace of God be indeed richly poured out? Nay,
should we not make it a heaven upon earth? If, where the numbers were three
thousand and five thousand, the doing of this thing had such splendid success,
and none of them complained of poverty, how much more glorious would this be
in so vast a multitude? And even of those that are without, who would not