be our way of seeing God in His essence, because by whatever other
form our intellect were informed, it could not be led thereby to the
Divine essence. This, however, must not be understood as though
the Divine essence were in reality the form of our intellect, or as
though from its conjunction with our intellect there resulted one
being simply, as in natural things from the natural form and matter:
but the meaning is that the proportion of the Divine essence to our
intellect is as the proportion of form to matter. For whenever two
things, one of which is the perfection of the other, are received into
the same recipient, the proportion of one to the other, namely of the
more perfect to the less perfect, is as the proportion of form to
matter: thus light and color are received into a transparent object,
light being to color as form to matter. When therefore intellectual
light is received into the soul, together with the indwelling Divine
essence, though they are not received in the same way, the Divine
essence will be to the intellect as form to matter: and that this
suffices for the intellect to be able to see the Divine essence by the
Divine essence itself may be shown as follows.
As from the natural form (whereby a thing has being) and matter,
there results one thing simply, so from the form whereby the intellect
understands, and the intellect itself, there results one thing
intelligibly. Now in natural things a self-subsistent thing cannot be
the form of any matter, if that thing has matter as one of its parts,
since it is impossible for matter to be the form of a thing. But if this
self-subsistent thing be a mere form, nothing hinders it from being
the form of some matter and becoming that whereby the composite
itself is as instanced in the soul. Now in the intellect we must take
the intellect itself in potentiality as matter, and the intelligible
species as form; so that the intellect actually understanding will be
the composite as it were resulting from both. Hence if there be a selfsubsistent thing, that has nothing in itself besides that which is
intelligible, such a thing can by itself be the form whereby the
intellect understands. Now a thing is intelligible in respect of its
actuality and not of its potentiality (Met. ix): in proof of which an
intelligible form needs to be abstracted from matter and from all the
properties of matter. Therefore, since the Divine essence is pure act,
it will be possible for it to be the form whereby the intellect
understands: and this will be the beatific vision. Hence the Master
says (Sent. ii, D, 1) that the union of the body with the soul is an
illustration of the blissful union of the spirit with God.
Reply to Objection 1: The words quoted can be explained in three

ways, according to Augustine (De Videndo Deo: Ep. cxlvii). In one
way as excluding corporeal vision, whereby no one ever saw or will
see God in His essence; secondly, as excluding intellectual vision of
God in His essence from those who dwell in this mortal flesh; thirdly,
as excluding the vision of comprehension from a created intellect. It
is thus that Chrysostom understands the saying wherefore he adds:
"By seeing, the evangelist means a most clear perception, and such
a comprehension as the Father has of the Son." This also is the
meaning of the evangelist, since he adds: "The Only-begotten Son
Who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him": his
intention being to prove the Son to be God from His comprehending
God.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as God, by His infinite essence, surpasses
all existing things which have a determinate being, so His
knowledge, whereby He knows, is above all knowledge. Wherefore
as our knowledge is to our created essence, so is the Divine
knowledge to His infinite essence. Now two things contribute to
knowledge, to wit, the knower and the thing known. Again, the vision
whereby we shall see God in His essence is the same whereby God
sees Himself, as regards that whereby He is seen, because as He
sees Himself in His essence so shall we also see Him. But as regards
the knower there is the difference that is between the Divine intellect
and ours. Now in the order of knowledge the object known follows
the form by which we know, since by the form of a stone we see a
stone: whereas the efficacy of knowledge follows the power of the
knower: thus he who has stronger sight sees more clearly.
Consequently in that vision we shall see the same thing that God
sees, namely His essence, but not so effectively.
Reply to Objection 3: Dionysius is speaking there of the knowledge
whereby wayfarers know God by a created form, whereby our
intellect is informed so as to see God. But as Augustine says (De
Videndo Deo: Ep. cxlvii), "God evades every form of our intellect,"
because whatever form our intellect conceive, that form is out of
proportion to the Divine essence. Hence He cannot be fathomed by
our intellect: but our most perfect knowledge of Him as wayfarers is
to know that He is above all that our intellect can conceive, and thus
we are united to Him as to something unknown. In heaven, however,
we shall see Him by a form which is His essence, and we shall be
united to Him as to something known.
Reply to Objection 4: God is light (Jn. 1:9). Now illumination is the