Nay, how shall we be able to have wisdom at all, when so many waves are
drenching us all over? For let a sheep be ever so wise, when it is in the midst of
wolves, and so many wolves, what will it be able to do? Let the dove be ever so
harmless, what will it profit, when so many hawks are assailing it?" In the brutes
indeed, not at all: but in you as much as possible.
But let us see what manner of wisdom He here requires. That of the serpent,
He says. For even as that animal gives up everything, and if its very body must
be cut off, does not very earnestly defend it, so that it may save its head; in like
manner do thou also, says He, give up every thing but the faith; though goods,
body, life itself, must be yielded. For that is the head and the root; and if that be
preserved, though thou lose all, you will recover all with so much the more
splendor.
On this account then He neither commanded to be merely a simple and
single-hearted sort of person, nor merely wise; but has mixed up both these, so
that they may become virtue; taking in the wisdom of the serpent that we may
not be wounded in our vitals; and the harmlessness of the dove, that we may not
retaliate on our wrongdoers, nor avenge ourselves on them that lay snares; since
wisdom again is useless, except this be added. Now what, I ask, could be more
strict than these injunctions? Why, was it not enough to suffer wrong? Nay, says
He, but I do not permit you so much as to be indignant. For this is "the dove." As
though one should cast a reed into fire, and command it not to be burnt by the
fire, but to quench it.
However, let us not be troubled; nay, for these things have come to pass,
and have had an accomplishment, and have been shown in very deed, and men
became wise as serpents, and harmless as doves; not being of another nature, but
of the same with us.
Let not then any one account His injunctions impracticable. For He beyond
all others knows the nature of things; He knows that fierceness is not quenched
by fierceness, but by gentleness. And if in men's actual deeds too you would see
this result, read the book of the Acts of the Apostles, and you will see how often,

when the people of the Jews had risen up against them and were sharpening their
teeth, these men, imitating the dove, and answering with suitable meekness, did
away with their wrath, quenched their madness, broke their impetuosity. As
when they said, "Did not we strictly command you, that you should not speak in
this name?" [Acts 5:28] although able to work any number of miracles, they
neither said nor did anything harsh, but answered for themselves with all
meekness, saying, "Whether it be right to hearken unto you more than unto God,
judge ye." [Acts 4:19]
Have you seen the harmlessness of the dove? Behold the wisdom of the
serpent. "For we cannot but speak the things, which we know and have heard."
[Acts 4:20] Do you see how we must be perfect on all points, so as neither to be
abased by dangers, nor provoked by anger?
4. Therefore He said also, [Matthew 10:17-18]
"Beware of men, for they shall deliver you up to councils, and they shall
scourge you in their synagogues: and you shall be brought before governors and
kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and the Gentiles."
Thus again is He preparing them to be vigilant, in every case assigning to
them the sufferance of wrong, and permitting the infliction of it to others; to
teach you that the victory is in suffering evil, and that His glorious trophies are
thereby set up. For He said not at all, "Fight ye also, and resist them that would
vex you," but only, "You shall suffer the utmost ills."
O how great is the power of Him that speaks! How great the self-command
of them that hear! For indeed we have great cause to marvel, how they did not
straightway dart away from Him on hearing these things, apt as they were to be
startled at every sound, and such as had never gone further than that lake, around
which they used to fish; and how they did not reflect, and say to themselves,
"And whither after all this are we to flee? The courts of justice against us, the
kings against us, the governors, the synagogues of the Jews, the nations of the
Gentiles, the rulers, and the ruled." (For hereby He not only forewarned them of
Palestine, and the ills therein, but discovered also the wars throughout the world,