then, I ask, was wanting further in this noble deed? For did Abraham foreknow
what would happen? Did he bargain for the mercy of God? For even though he
were a prophet, yet the prophet knows not all things. So the actual sacrifice
afterwards was superfluous and unworthy of God. And if it was fit he should
learn that God was able to raise from the dead, by the womb he had learned this
much more marvellously, or rather he learned it even before that proof, for he
had faith.
7. Do not then only admire this righteous man, but also imitate him, and
when you see him amid so great uproar and surge of waves sailing as in a calm,
take thou in hand in like way the helm of obedience and fortitude. For look, pray,
not only at this that he built up the altar and the wood; but remember too the
voice of the lad, and reflect what hosts like snow storms assaulted him to dismay
him, when he heard the lad say, "My father, where is the lamb?" Bethink you
how many thoughts were then stirred up armed not with iron, but with darts of
flame; and piercing into and cutting him through on every side. If even now
many, and those not parents, are broken down , and would have wept, did they
not know the end: and many, I see, do weep, though they know it; what must it
be thought he would feel, who begot, who nurtured him, in old age had him, had
him only, him such an one, who sees, who hears him, and is presently about to
slay him? What intelligence in the words! What meekness in the question! Who
then is here at work? The Devil that he might set nature in a flame? God forbid!
But God, the more to prove the golden soul of the righteous man. For when
indeed the wife of Job speaks, a Devil is at work. For of such sort the advice is.
But this one utters nothing blasphemous, but what is both very devout and
thoughtful; and great the grace that overspread the words, much the honey that
dropped therefrom, flowing from a calm and gentle soul. Even a heart of stone
these words were enough to soften. But they turned not aside, nay, shook not that
adamant. Nor said he, 'Why do you call him father, who in a little while will not
be your father, yea, who has already lost that title of honor?' And why does the
lad ask the question? Not of impertinence merely, not of curiosity, but as anxious

about what was proposed. For he reflected that had his father not meant to make
him a partner in what was done, he would not have left the servants below, and
taken him only with him. For this reason, too, surely, it is that when they were
alone, then he asks him, when none heard what was said. So great was the
judgment of the lad. Are you not all warmed towards him, both men and
women? Does not each one of you mentally infold and kiss the child, and marvel
at his judgment; and venerate the piety which, when he was both bound and laid
on the wood, made him not be dismayed nor struggle nor accuse his father as
mad; but he was even bound and lifted up and laid upon it, and endured all in
silence, like a lamb, yea, rather like the common Lord of all. For of Him he both
imitated the gentleness, and kept to the type. For "He was led like a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep dumb before his shearer." [Isaiah 53:7] And yet Isaac
spoke; for his Lord spoke also. How dumb then? This means, he spoke nothing
wilful or harsh, but all was sweet and mild, and the words more than the silence
manifested his gentleness. For Christ also said, "If I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil; but if well, why do you smite Me?" [John 18:23] and
manifested His gentleness more than if He had held His peace. And as this one
speaks with his father from the altar, so too does He from the Cross, saying,
"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." What then said the
Patriarch? [Genesis 22:8] "God will provide Himself a lamb for a burnt-offering,
my son." Either uses the names of nature; the former, father; the latter, son; and
on either side arduous is the war stirred up, and mighty the storm, and yet wreck
no where: for religion triumphed over all. Then after he heard of God, he spoke
no further word nor was impertinently curious. Of such judgment was the child
even in the very bloom of youth. Do you see the king, over how many armies, in
how many battles which beset him, he has been victorious? For the barbarians
were not so fearful to the city of Jerusalem when they assaulted her oftentimes,
as were to this man the thoughts on every side besieging him: but still he
overcame all. Would you see the priest also? The instance is at hand. For when
you have seen him with fire and a knife; and standing over an altar, what do you