may receive you into their everlasting habitations," but added also the manner?
For saying, "of the mammon of unrighteousness," He points out that we must
make friends of them by means of our possessions, showing that mere friendship
will not protect us, unless we have good works, unless we spend righteously the
wealth unrighteously gathered.
Moreover, this our discourse, of Almsgiving I mean, fits not only the rich,
but also the needy. Yea even if there be any person who supports himself by
begging, even for him is this word. For there is no one, so poverty-stricken,
however exceeding poor he may be, as not to be able to provide "two mites."
[Luke 21:2] It is therefore possible that a person giving a small sum from small
means, should surpass those who have large possessions and give more; as that
widow did. For not by the measure of what is given, but by the means and
willingness of the givers is the extent of the alms-deed estimated. In all cases the
will is needed, in all, a right disposition; in all, love towards God. If with this we
do all things, though having little we give little, God will not turn away His face,
but will receive it as great and admirable: for He regards the will, not the gifts:
and if He see that to be great, He assigns His decrees and judges accordingly,
and makes them partakers of His everlasting benefits.
Which may God grant us all to obtain, by the grace and love of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory,
power, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 2 on Hebrews

Hebrews 1:3
"Who being the brightness of His Glory and the express Image of His
person, and upholding all things by the word of His power, when He had by
Himself purged our sins."
1. Everywhere indeed a reverential mind is requisite, but especially when
we say or hear anything of God: Since neither can tongue speak nor thought hear
anything suitable to our God. And why speak I of tongue or thought? For not
even the understanding which far excels these, will be able to comprehend
anything accurately, when we desire to utter anything concerning God. For if
"the peace of God surpasses all understanding" [Philippians 4:7], and "the
things which are prepared for them that love Him have not entered into the heart
of man" [1 Corinthians 2:9]; much more He Himself, the God of peace, the
Creator of all things, does by a wide measure exceed our reasoning. We ought
therefore to receive all things with faith and reverence, and when our discourse
fails through weakness, and is not able to set forth accurately the things which
are spoken, then especially to glorify God, for that we have such a God,
surpassing both our thought and our conception. For many of our conceptions
about God, we are unable to express, as also many things we express, but have
not strength to conceive of them. As for instance:— That God is everywhere, we
know; but how, we no longer understand. That there is a certain incorporeal
power the cause of all our good things, we know: but how it is, or what it is, we
know not. Lo! We speak, and do not understand. I said, That He is everywhere,
but I do not understand it. I said, That He is without beginning, but I do not
understand it. I said, That He begot from Himself, and again I know not how I
shall understand it. And some things there are which we may not even speak—