the heart: yet others know them, in so far as these are revealed to
them, either by their vision of the Word or by any other means.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether we ought to call upon the saints to pray

for us?
Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to call upon the saints
to pray for us. For no man asks anyone's friends to pray for him,
except in so far as he believes he will more easily find favor with
them. But God is infinitely more merciful than any saint, and
consequently His will is more easily inclined to give us a gracious
hearing, than the will of a saint. Therefore it would seem
unnecessary to make the saints mediators between us and God, that
they may intercede for us.
Objection 2: Further, if we ought to beseech them to pray for us, this
is only because we know their prayer to be acceptable to God. Now
among the saints the holier a man is, the more is his prayer
acceptable to God. Therefore we ought always to bespeak the
greater saints to intercede for us with God, and never the lesser
ones.
Objection 3: Further, Christ, even as man, is called the "Holy of
Holies," and, as man, it is competent to Him to pray. Yet we never
call upon Christ to pray for us. Therefore neither should we ask the
other saints to do so.
Objection 4: Further, whenever one person intercedes for another at
the latter's request, he presents his petition to the one with whom he
intercedes for him. Now it is unnecessary to present anything to one
to whom all things are present. Therefore it is unnecessary to make
the saints our intercessors with God.
Objection 5: Further, it is unnecessary to do a thing if, without doing
it, the purpose for which it is done would be achieved in the same
way, or else not achieved at all. Now the saints would pray for us just
the same, or would not pray for us at all, whether we pray to them or
not: for if we be worthy of their prayers, they would pray for us even
though we prayed not to them, while if we be unworthy they pray not
for us even though we ask them to. Therefore it seems altogether
unnecessary to call on them to pray for us.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 5:1): "Call . . . if there be any that
will answer thee, and turn to some of the saints." Now, as Gregory

says (Moral. v, 30) on this passage, "we call upon God when we
beseech Him in humble prayer." Therefore when we wish to pray
God, we should turn to the saints, that they may pray God for us.
Further, the saints who are in heaven are more acceptable to God
than those who are on the way. Now we should make the saints, who
are on the way, our intercessors with God, after the example of the
Apostle, who said (Rm. 15:30): "I beseech you . . . brethren, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the charity of the Holy Ghost, that you
help me in your prayers for me to God." Much more, therefore,
should we ask the saints who are in heaven to help us by their
prayers to God.
Further, an additional argument is provided by the common custom
of the Church which asks for the prayers of the saints in the Litany.
I answer that, According to Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v) the order
established by God among things is that "the last should be led to
God by those that are midway between." Wherefore, since the saints
who are in heaven are nearest to God, the order of the Divine law
requires that we, who while we remain in the body are pilgrims from
the Lord, should be brought back to God by the saints who are
between us and Him: and this happens when the Divine goodness
pours forth its effect into us through them. And since our return to
God should correspond to the outflow of His boons upon us, just as
the Divine favors reach us by means of the saints intercession, so
should we, by their means, be brought back to God, that we may
receive His favors again. Hence it is that we make them our
intercessors with God, and our mediators as it were, when we ask
them to pray for us.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not on account of any defect in God's
power that He works by means of second causes, but it is for the
perfection of the order of the universe, and the more manifold
outpouring of His goodness on things, through His bestowing on
them not only the goodness which is proper to them, but also the
faculty of causing goodness in others. Even so it is not through any
defect in His mercy, that we need to bespeak His clemency through
the prayers of the saints, but to the end that the aforesaid order in
things be observed.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the greater saints are more