pushing your own salvation into a pit, and art rushing down a precipice, by
striking your enemy before the king's eyes. For even if you do not this with the
hands, with your words you strike him, the thing which you dare not do even in
the case of your fellow-slaves. At least dare to do this in a ruler's presence, and
though you have done countless public services, you will straightway surely be
led away to execution. Then (I ask) in the presence of a ruler do you not dare to
insult your equal, but when doing this in God's presence, tell me, do you not
shudder, nor fear when in the time of entreaty and prayer being so savage and
turning yourself into a wild beast; and displaying greater want of feeling than he
who demanded payment of the hundred pence? [Matthew 18:28] For that you are
more insolent than he, listen to the story itself. A certain man owed ten thousand
talents to his master; then, not having (wherewith) to pay, he entreated him to be
long-suffering, in order that, his wife having been sold and his house and his
children, he might settle his master's claim. And the master seeing him lamenting
had compassion on him, and remitted the ten thousand talents. He having gone
out and found another servant owing him a hundred pence, seizing his throat
demanded them with great cruelty and inhumanity. The Master having heard this
threw him into the prison, and laid on him again the debt of the ten thousand
talents which he had before remitted; and he paid the penalty of the cruelty
shown towards his fellow-servant.
12. Now do thou consider in how much more unfeeling and insensible in a
way you have acted even than he, praying against your enemies. He did not beg
his master to demand, but he himself demanded, the hundred pence; whereas
thou even callest on the Master for this shameless and forbidden demand. And
he seized his fellow-servant's throat not before his lord's eyes, but outside; while
thou in the very moment of prayer, standing in the King's presence, doest this.
And if he, for doing this without either having urged his master to the demand,
and after going forth, met with no forgiveness; thou, both stirring up the Master
to (exacting) this forbidden payment, and doing this before his eyes, what sort of
penalty will thou have to pay? Tell me. But your mind is inflamed by the

memory of the enmity, and swells, and your heart rises, and when recurring in
memory to him who has caused pain, you are unable to reduce the swelling of
your thought. But set against this inflammation the memory resulting from your
own sins committed the fear resulting from the punishment to come. Recall to
memory for how many things you are accountable to your master, and that for all
those things you owe Him satisfaction; and this fear will surely overcome that
anger; since indeed this is far more powerful than that passion. Recall the
memory of hell and punishment and vengeance during the time of your prayer;
and you will not be able even to receive your enemy into your mind. Make your
mind contrite, humble your soul by the memory of the offenses committed by
you, and wrath will not be able even to trouble you. But the cause of all these
evils is this, that we scrutinise the sins of all others with great exactitude; while
we let our own pass with great remissness. Whereas we ought to do the contrary
— to keep our own faults unforgotten; but never even to admit a thought of those
of others. If we do this we shall both have God propitious, and shall cease
cherishing immortal anger against our neighbours, and we shall never have any
one as an enemy; and even if we should have at any time we shall both quickly
put an end to his enmity, and should obtain speedy pardon for our own sins. For
just as he who treasures up the memory of wrong against his neighbour does not
permit the punishment upon his own sins to be done away; so he who is clear of
anger will speedily be clear of sins also. For if we, wicked as we are and
enslaved to passion, on account of the commandment of God overlook all the
faults committed against us, much more will He who is a lover of mankind, and
good, and free from any passion, overlook our delinquencies, rendering to us the
recompense of our kindly spirit towards our neighbour in the forgiveness of our
own sins: which God grant that we may attain, by the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory and the dominion, to the ages of
the ages. Amen.