then five crowns, from the importance of the office, from the dignity of those
who ordained to it, from the difficulty of the time, from the size of the city, from
the virtue of him who transmitted the episcopate to him. Having woven all these,
it was lawful to speak of a sixth, and seventh, and more than these; but in order
that we may not, by spending the whole time on the consideration of the
episcopate, miss the details about the martyr, come from this point, let us pass to
that conflict. At one time a grievous warfare was rekindled against the Church,
and as though a most grievous tyranny overspread the earth, all were carried off
from the midst of the market-place. Not indeed charged with anything
monstrous, but because being freed from error, they hastened to piety; because
they abstained from the service of demons, because they recognized the true
God, and worshipped his only begotten Son, and for things for which they ought
to have been crowned, and admired and honoured, for these they were punished
and encountered countless tortures, all who embraced the faith, and much more
they who had the oversight of the churches. For the devil, being crafty, and apt to
contrive plots of this kind, expected that if he took away the shepherds, he would
easily be able to scatter the flocks. But He who takes the wise in their craftiness,
wishing to show him that men do not govern His church, but that it is He himself
who everywhere tends those who believe in Him, agreed that this should be, that
he might see, when they were taken away, that the cause of piety was not
defeated, nor the word of preaching quenched, but rather increased; that by these
very works he might learn both himself, and all those who minister to him, that
our affairs are not of men, but that the subject of our teaching has its root on
high, from the heavens; and that it is God who everywhere leads the Church, and
that it is not possible for him who fights against God, ever to win the day. But
the Devil did not only work this evil, but another also not less than this. For not
only in the cities over which they presided, did he suffer the Bishops to be
slaughtered; but he took them into foreign territory and slew them; and he did
this, in anxiety at once to take them when destitute of friends, and hoping to
render them weaker with the toil of their journey, which accordingly he did with

this saint. For he called him away from our city to Rome, making the course
twice as long, expecting to depress his mind both by the length of the way and
the number of the days, and not knowing that having Jesus with him, as a fellow
traveller, and fellow exile on so long a journey, he rather became the stronger,
and afforded more proof of the power that was with him, and to a greater degree
knit the Churches together. For the cities which were on the road running
together from all sides, encouraged the athlete, and sped him on his way with
many supplies, sharing in his conflict by their prayers, and intercessions. And
they derived no little comfort when they saw the martyr hastening to death with
so much readiness, as is consistent in one called to the realms which are in the
heaven, and by means of the works themselves, by the readiness and by the
joyousness of that noble man, that it was not death to which he was hastening,
but a kind of long journey and migration from this world, and ascension to
heaven; and he departed teaching these things in every city, both by his words,
and by his deeds, and as happened in the case of the Jews, when they bound
Paul, and sent him to Rome, and thought that they were sending him to death,
they were sending a teacher to the Jews who dwelt there. This indeed
accordingly happened in the case of Ignatius in larger measure. For not to those
alone who dwell in Rome, but to all the cities lying in the intervening space, he
went forth as a wonderful teacher, persuading them to despise the present life,
and to think naught of the things which are seen, and to love those which are to
come, to look towards heaven, and to pay no regard to any of the terrors of this
present life. For on this and on more than this, by means of his works, he went
on his way instructing them, as a sun rising from the east, and hastening to the
west. But rather more brilliant than this, for this is wont to run on high, bringing
material light, but Ignatius shone below, imparting to men's souls the intellectual
light of doctrine. And that light on departing into the regions of the west, is
hidden and straightway causes the night to come on. But this on departing to the
regions of the west, shone there more brilliantly, conferring the greatest benefits
to all along the road. And when he arrived at the city, even that he instructed in