FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.6.

person it is said (Job 21:14): "We desire not the knowledge of Thy
ways." Thirdly, a particular truth is hated, as being repugnant,
inasmuch as it is in the intellect of another man: as, for instance,
when a man wishes to remain hidden in his sin, he hates that anyone
should know the truth about his sin. In this respect, Augustine says
(Confess. x, 23) that men "love truth when it enlightens, they hate it
when it reproves." This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: The knowledge of truth is lovable in itself:
hence Augustine says that men love it when it enlightens. But
accidentally, the knowledge of truth may become hateful, in so far as
it hinders one from accomplishing one's desire.
Reply to Objection 3: The reason why we love those who are
straightforward is that they make known the truth, and the
knowledge of the truth, considered in itself, is a desirable thing.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether anything can be an object of universal

hatred?
Objection 1: It would seem that a thing cannot be an object of
universal hatred. Because hatred is a passion of the sensitive
appetite, which is moved by an apprehension in the senses. But the
senses cannot apprehend the universal. Therefore a thing cannot be
an object of universal hatred.
Objection 2: Further, hatred is caused by disagreement; and where
there is disagreement, there is nothing in common. But the notion of
universality implies something in common. Therefore nothing can be
the object of universal hatred.
Objection 3: Further, the object of hatred is evil. But "evil is in things,
and not in the mind" (Metaph. vi, 4). Since therefore the universal is
in the mind only, which abstracts the universal from the particular, it
would seem that hatred cannot have a universal object.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 4) that "anger is
directed to something singular, whereas hatred is also directed to a
thing in general; for everybody hates the thief and the backbiter."
I answer that, There are two ways of speaking of the universal: first,
as considered under the aspect of universality; secondly, as
considered in the nature to which it is ascribed: for it is one thing to
consider the universal man, and another to consider a man as man.
If, therefore, we take the universal, in the first way, no sensitive
power, whether of apprehension or of appetite, can attain the
universal: because the universal is obtained by abstraction from
individual matter, on which every sensitive power is based.
Nevertheless the sensitive powers, both of apprehension and of
appetite, can tend to something universally. Thus we say that the
object of sight is color considered generically; not that the sight is
cognizant of universal color, but because the fact that color is
cognizant by the sight, is attributed to color, not as being this
particular color, but simply because it is color. Accordingly hatred in
the sensitive faculty can regard something universally: because this
thing, by reason of its common nature, and not merely as an
individual, is hostile to the animal---for instance, a wolf in regard to a