guards them with the needful carefulness: and that most malicious and ferocious
demon is aware of this. For this cause also he robbed Job of his substance, not to
make him poor, but that he might force him into uttering some blasphemous
speech; and he tortured his body, not to subject him to infirmity, but to upset the
virtue of his soul. But nevertheless when he had set all his devices in motion,
and turned him from a rich man into a poor one (that calamity which seems to us
the most terrible of all), and had made him childless who was once surrounded
by many children, and had scarified his whole body more cruelly than the
executioners do in the public tribunals (for their nails do not lacerate the sides of
those who fall into their hands so severely as the gnawing of the worms lacerated
his body), and when he had fastened a bad reputation upon him (for Job's friends
who were present with him said "you have not received the chastisement which
your sins deserve," and directed many words of accusation against him), and
after he had not merely expelled him from city and home and transferred him to
another city, but had actually made the dunghill serve as his home and city; after
all this, he not only did him no damage but rendered him more glorious by the
designs which he formed against him. And he not only failed to rob him of any
of his possessions although he had robbed him of so many things, but he even
increased the wealth of his virtue. For after these things he enjoyed greater
confidence inasmuch as he had contended in a more severe contest. Now if he
who underwent such sufferings, and this not at the hand of man, but at the hand
of the devil who is more wicked than all men, sustained no injury, which of
those persons who say such and such a man injured and damaged me will have
any defence to make in future? For if the devil who is full of such great malice,
after having set all his instruments in motion, and discharged all his weapons,
and poured out all the evils incident to man, in a superlative degree upon the
family and the person of that righteous man nevertheless did him no injury, but
as I was saying rather profited him: how shall certain be able to accuse such and
such a man alleging that they have suffered injury at their hands, not at their
own?

4. What then? Some one will say, did he not inflict injury on Adam, and
upset him, and cast him out of paradise? No: he did it not, but the cause was the
listlessness of him who was injured, and his want of temperance and vigilance.
For he who applied such powerful and manifold devices and yet was not able to
subdue Job, how could he by inferior means have mastered Adam, had not
Adam betrayed himself through his own listlessness? What then? Has not he
been injured who has been exposed to slander, and suffered confiscation of his
property, having been deprived of all his goods, and is thrown out of his
patrimony, and struggles with extreme poverty? No! He has not been injured, but
has even profited, if he be sober. For, tell me, what harm did this do the apostles?
Were they not continually struggling with hunger, and thirst and nakedness? And
this was the very reason why they were so illustrious, and distinguished, and
won for themselves much help from God. Again what harm was done to Lazarus
by his disease, and sores, and poverty and dearth of protectors? Were they not
the reasons why garlands of victory were more abundantly woven for him? Or
what harm was done to Joseph by his getting evil reported of, both in his own
land, and in the land of strangers for he was supposed to be both an adulterer and
fornicator: or what harm did servitude do him or expatriation? Is it not specially
on account of these things that we regard him with admiration and astonishment?
And why do I speak of removal into a foreign land, and poverty, and evil report,
and bondage? For what harm did death itself inflict on Abel, although it was a
violent and untimely death, and perpetrated by a brother's hand? Is not this the
reason why his praise is sounded throughout the whole world? Do you see how
the discourse has demonstrated even more than it promised? For not only has it
disclosed the fact that no one is injured by anybody, but also that they who take
heed to themselves derive the greater gain (from such assaults). What is the
purpose then it will be said of penalties and punishments? What is the purpose of
hell? What is the purpose of such great threatenings, if no one is either injured or
injures? What is it you say? Why do you confuse the argument? For I did not say
that no one injures, but that no one is injured. And how is it possible, you will