9. Since, then, a blessed life consists of these two things, and is known to
all, and dear to all; what can we think to be the cause why, when they
cannot have both, men choose, out of these two, to have all things that
they will, rather than to will all things well, even although they do not
have them? Is it the depravity itself of the human race, in such wise that,
while they are not unaware that neither is he blessed who has not what he
wills, nor he who has what he wills wrongly, but he who both has
whatsoever good things he wills, and wills no evil ones, yet, when both
are not granted of those two things in which the blessed life consists, that
is rather chosen by which one is withdrawn the more from a blessed life
(since he certainly is further from it who obtains things which he
wickedly desired, than he who only does not obtain the things which he
desired); whereas the good will ought rather to be chosen, and to be
preferred, even if it do not obtain the things which it seeks? For he comes
near to being a blessed man, who wills well whatsoever he wills, and wills
things, which when he obtains, he will be blessed. And certainly not bad
things, but good, make men blessed, when they do so make them. And of
good things he already has something, and that, too, a something not to
be lightly esteemed,—namely, the very good will itself; who longs to
rejoice in those good things of which human nature is capable, and not in

the performance or the attainment of any evil; and who follows diligently,
and attains as much as he can, with a prudent, temperate, courageous,
and right mind, such good things as are possible in the present miserable
life; so as to be good even in evils, and when all evils have been put an
end to, and all good things fulfilled, then to be blessed.

### CHAP. 7.—FAITH IS NECESSARY, THAT MAN MAY AT SOME TIME BE BLESSED, WHICH HE WILL ONLY ATTAIN IN THE FUTURE LIFE. THE BLESSEDNESS OF PROUD PHILOSOPHERS RIDICULOUS AND PITIABLE.

10. And on this account, faith, by which men believe in God, is above all
things necessary in this mortal life, most full as it is of errors and
hardships. For there are no good things whatever, and above all, not
those by which any one is made good, or those by which he will become
blessed, of which any other source can be found whence they come to
man, and are added to man, unless it be from God. But when he who is
good and faithful in these miseries shall have come from this life to the
blessed life, then will truly come to pass what now is absolutely
impossible,—namely, that a man may live as he will. For he will not will
to live badly in the midst of that felicity, nor will he will anything that will
be wanting, nor will there be wanting anything which he shall have
willed. Whatever shall be loved, will be present; nor will that be longed
for, which shall not be present. Everything which will be there will be
good, and the supreme God will be the supreme good and will be present
for those to enjoy who love Him; and what altogether is most blessed, it
will be certain that it will be so forever. But now, indeed, philosophers
have made for themselves, according to the pleasure of each, their own
ideals of a blessed life; that they might be able, as it were by their own
power, to do that, which by the common conditions of mortals they were
not able to do,—namely, to live as they would. For they felt that no one
could be blessed otherwise than by having what he would, and by
suffering nothing which he would not. And who would not will, that the
life whatsoever it be, with which he is delighted, and which he therefore
calls blessed, were so in his own power, that he could have it continually?
And yet who is in this condition? Who wills to suffer troubles in order
that he may endure them manfully, although he both wills and is able to