THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.5.

The third part commemorates the heavenly glory, to the possession
of which, after this life of misery, we are tending, in the words, "Glory
be to God on high," which are sung on festival days, on which the
heavenly glory is commemorated, but are omitted in those sorrowful
offices which commemorate our unhappy state.
The fourth part contains the prayer which the priest makes for the
people, that they may be made worthy of such great mysteries.
There precedes, in the second place, the instruction of the faithful,
because this sacrament is "a mystery of faith," as stated above
(Question 78, Article 3, ad 5). Now this instruction is given
"dispositively," when the Lectors and Sub-deacons read aloud in the
church the teachings of the prophets and apostles: after this
"lesson," the choir sing the "Gradual," which signifies progress in
life; then the "Alleluia" is intoned, and this denotes spiritual joy; or in
mournful offices the "Tract", expressive of spiritual sighing; for all
these things ought to result from the aforesaid teaching. But the
people are instructed "perfectly" by Christ's teaching contained in
the Gospel, which is read by the higher ministers, that is, by the
Deacons. And because we believe Christ as the Divine truth,
according to Jn. 8:46, "If I tell you the truth, why do you not believe
Me?" after the Gospel has been read, the "Creed" is sung in which
the people show that they assent by faith to Christ's doctrine. And it
is sung on those festivals of which mention is made therein, as on
the festivals of Christ, of the Blessed Virgin, and of the apostles, who
laid the foundations of this faith, and on other such days.
So then, after the people have been prepared and instructed, the
next step is to proceed to the celebration of the mystery, which is
both offered as a sacrifice, and consecrated and received as a
sacrament: since first we have the oblation; then the consecration of
the matter offered; and thirdly, its reception.
In regard to the oblation, two things are done, namely, the people's
praise in singing the "offertory," expressing the joy of the offerers,
and the priest's prayer asking for the people's oblation to be made
acceptable to God. Hence David said (1 Para 29:17): "In the simplicity
of my heart, I have . . . offered all these things: and I have seen with
great joy Thy people which are here present, offer Thee their
offerings": and then he makes the following prayer: "O Lord God . . .
keep . . . this will."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.5.

Then, regarding the consecration, performed by supernatural power,
the people are first of all excited to devotion in the "Preface," hence
they are admonished "to lift up their hearts to the Lord," and
therefore when the "Preface" is ended the people devoutly praise
Christ's Godhead, saying with the angels: "Holy, Holy, Holy"; and His
humanity, saying with the children: "Blessed is he that cometh." In
the next place the priest makes a "commemoration," first of those for
whom this sacrifice is offered, namely, for the whole Church, and
"for those set in high places" (1 Tim. 2:2), and, in a special manner,
of them "who offer, or for whom the mass is offered." Secondly, he
commemorates the saints, invoking their patronage for those
mentioned above, when he says: "Communicating with, and
honoring the memory," etc. Thirdly, he concludes the petition when
he says: "Wherefore that this oblation," etc., in order that the
oblation may be salutary to them for whom it is offered.
Then he comes to the consecration itself. Here he asks first of all for
the effect of the consecration, when he says: "Which oblation do
Thou, O God," etc. Secondly, he performs the consecration using
our Saviour's words, when he says: "Who the day before," etc.
Thirdly, he makes excuse for his presumption in obeying Christ's
command, saying: "Wherefore, calling to mind," etc. Fourthly, he
asks that the sacrifice accomplished may find favor with God, when
he says: "Look down upon them with a propitious," etc. Fifthly, he
begs for the effect of this sacrifice and sacrament, first for the
partakers, saying: "We humbly beseech Thee"; then for the dead,
who can no longer receive it, saying: "Be mindful also, O Lord," etc.;
thirdly, for the priests themselves who offer, saying: "And to us
sinners," etc.
Then follows the act of receiving the sacrament. First of all, the
people are prepared for Communion; first, by the common prayer of
the congregation, which is the Lord's Prayer, in which we ask for our
daily bread to be given us; and also by private prayer, which the
priest puts up specially for the people, when he says: "Deliver us, we
beseech Thee, O Lord," etc. Secondly, the people are prepared by
the "Pax" which is given with the words, "Lamb of God," etc.,
because this is the sacrament of unity and peace, as stated above
(Question 73, Article 4; Question 79, Article 1). But in masses for the
dead, in which the sacrifice is offered not for present peace, but for
the repose of the dead, the "Pax" is omitted.