But to the blessing uttered by that woman upon her who was his mother according to the
flesh, Jesus replies in a significant way: "Blessed rather are those who hear the word of
God and keep it" (Lk. 11:28). He wishes to divert attention from motherhood understood
only as a fleshly bond, in order to direct it towards those mysterious bonds of the spirit
which develop from hearing and keeping God's word.

This same shift into the sphere of spiritual values is seen even more clearly in another
response of Jesus reported by all the Synoptics. When Jesus is told that "his mother and
brothers are standing outside and wish to see him," he replies: "My mother and my
brothers are those who hear the word of God and do it" (cf. Lk. 8:20-21). This he said,
"looking around on those who sat about him," as we read in Mark (3:34) or, according to
Matthew (12:49), "stretching out his hand towards his disciples."

These statements seem to fit in with the reply which the twelve- year-old Jesus gave to
Mary and Joseph when he was found after three days in the Temple at Jerusalem.

Now, when Jesus left Nazareth and began his public life throughout Palestine, he was
completely and exclusively "concerned with his Father's business" (cf. Lk. 2:49). He
announced the Kingdom: the "Kingdom of God" and "his Father's business," which add a
new dimension and meaning to everything human, and therefore to every human bond,
insofar as these things relate to the goals and tasks assigned to every human being.
Within this new dimension, also a bond such as that of "brotherhood" means something
different from "brotherhood according to the flesh" deriving from a common origin from
the same set of parents. "Motherhood," too, in the dimension of the Kingdom of God and
in the radius of the fatherhood of God himself, takes on another meaning. In the words
reported by Luke, Jesus teaches precisely this new meaning of motherhood.

Is Jesus thereby distancing himself from his mother according to the flesh? Does he
perhaps wish to leave her in the hidden obscurity which she herself has chosen? If this
seems to be the case from the tone of those words, one must nevertheless note that the
new and different motherhood which Jesus speaks of to his disciples refers precisely to
Mary in a very special way. Is not Mary the first of "those who hear the word of God and
do it"? And therefore does not the blessing uttered by Jesus in response to the woman in
the crowd refer primarily to her? Without any doubt, Mary is worthy of blessing by the
very fact that she became the mother of Jesus according to the flesh ("Blessed is the
womb that bore you, and the breasts that you sucked"), but also and especially because
already at the Annunciation she accepted the word of God, because she believed it,
because she was obedient to God, and because she "kept" the word and "pondered it in
her heart" (cf. Lk. 1:, 45; 2:, 51) and by means of her whole life accomplished it.
Thus we can say that the blessing proclaimed by Jesus is not in opposition, despite
appearances, to the blessing uttered by the unknown woman, but rather coincides with
that blessing in the person of this Virgin Mother, who called herself only "the handmaid
of the Lord" (Lk. 1:38). If it is true that "all generations will call her blessed" (cf. Lk.
1:48), then it can be said that the unnamed woman was the first to confirm unwittingly
that prophetic phrase of Mary's Magnificat and to begin the Magnificat of the ages.