2 Corinthians 12:7
"And that I should not be exalted overmuch, through the exceeding
greatness of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a
messenger of Satan, to buffet me."
What do you say? He that counted not the kingdom to be any thing; no, nor
yet hell in respect of his longing after Christ; did he deem honor from the many
to be any thing, so as both to be lifted up and to need that curb continually? For
he did not say, 'that he "might" buffet me,' but "that he" may "buffet me." Yet
who is there would say this? What then is the meaning of what is said? When we
have explained what is meant at all by the "thorn," and who is this "messenger of
Satan," then will we declare this also. There are some then who have said that he
means a kind of pain in the head which was inflicted of the devil; but God
forbid! For the body of Paul never could have been given over to the hands of
the devil, seeing that the devil himself submitted to the same Paul at his mere
bidding; and he set him laws and bounds, when he delivered over the fornicator
for the destruction of the flesh, and he dared not to transgress them. What then is
the meaning of what is said? An adversary is called, in the Hebrew, Satan; and in
the third Book of Kings the Scripture has so termed such as were adversaries;
and speaking of Solomon, says, 'In his days there was no Satan,' that is, no
adversary, enemy, or opponent. [1 Kings 5:4] What he says then is this: God
would not permit the Preaching to progress, in order to check our high thoughts;
but permitted the adversaries to set upon us. For this indeed was enough to pluck
down his high thoughts; not so that, pains in the head. And so by the "messenger
of Satan," he means Alexander the coppersmith, the party of Hymenæus and
Philetus, all the adversaries of the word; those who contended with and fought
against him, those that cast him into a prison, those that beat him, that led him
away to death ; for they did Satan's business. As then he calls those Jews

children of the devil, who were imitating his deeds, so also he calls a "messenger
of Satan" every one that opposes. He says therefore, "There was given to me a
thorn to buffet me;" not as if God puts arms into such men's hands, God forbid!
not that He does chastise or punish, but for the time allows and permits them.

2 Corinthians 12:8
3. "Concerning this thing I besought the Lord thrice."
That is, oftentimes. This also is a mark of great lowliness of mind, his not
concealing that he could not bear those insidious plottings, that he fainted under
them and was reduced to pray for deliverance.

2 Corinthians 12:9
"And He said unto me, My grace is sufficient for you; for my power is made
perfect in weakness."
That is to say, 'It is sufficient for you that you raise the dead, that you cure
the blind, that you cleanse lepers, that you work those other miracles; seek not
also exemption from danger and fear and to preach without annoyances. But are
you pained and dejected lest it should seem to be owing to My weakness, that
there are many who plot against and beat you and harass and scourge you? Why
this very thing does show My power. "For My power," He says, "is made perfect
in weakness," when being persecuted ye overcome your persecutors; when being
harassed ye get the better of them that harass you; when being put in bonds ye
convert them that put you in bonds. Seek not then more than is needed.' Do you
see how he himself assigns one reason, and God another? For he himself says,
"Lest I should be exalted overmuch, there was given to me a thorn;" but he says
that God said He permitted it in order to show His power. 'You seek therefore a
thing which is not only not needed, but which also obscures the glory of My
power.' For by the words, "is sufficient for you," He would signify this, that
nothing else need be added, but the whole was complete. So that from this also it
is plain that he does not intend pains in the head; for in truth they did not preach
when they were sick, for they could not preach when ill; but that harassed and
persecuted, they overcame all. 'After having heard this then,' he says,
"Most gladly therefore will I glory in my weaknesses." For that they may
not sink down, when those false Apostles are glorying over their contrary lot and
these are suffering persecution, he shows that he shines all the brighter for this,
and that thus the power of God shines forth the rather, and what happens is just
matter for glorying. Wherefore he says, "Most gladly therefore will I glory." 'Not
as therefore sorrowing did I speak of the things which I enumerated, or of that