shall not be moved to desire the pleasures of this world, nor find it hard to bear
its sorrows; but we shall laugh at these and the like, and nothing will be able to
enslave or lift us up, if only we direct our longing there, and look to that love.
And why say I that we shall not grieve at present troubles? We shall henceforth
not even appear to see them. Such a thing is strong desire. Those, for instance,
who are not at present with us, but being absent are loved, we image every day.
For mighty is the sovereignty of love, it alienates the soul from all things else,
and chains to the desired object. If thus we love Christ, all things here will seem
to be a shadow, an image, a dream. We too shall say, "Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress?" [Romans 8:35] He said
not, "money, or wealth, or beauty," (these are very mean and contemptible,) but
he has put the things which seem to be grievous, famines, persecutions, deaths.
He then spat on these even, as being nought; but we for the sake of money
separate ourselves from our life, and cut ourselves off from the light. And Paul
indeed prefers "neither death, nor life, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor any other creature," to the love which is towards Him; but we, if we see a
little portion of gold, are fired, and trample on His laws. And if these things are
intolerable when spoken of, much more are they so when done. For the terrible
thing is this, that we shudder to hear, but do not shudder to do: we swear readily,
and perjure ourselves, and plunder, and exact usury, care nothing for sobriety,
desist from exactness in prayer, transgress most of the commandments, and for
the sake of money make no account of our own members. For he that loves
wealth will work ten thousand mischiefs to his neighbor, and to himself as well.
He will easily be angry with him, and revile him, and call him fool, and swear
and perjure himself, and does not even preserve the measures of the old law. For
he that loves gold will not love his neighbor; yet we, for the Kingdom's sake, are
bidden to love even our enemies. Now if by fulfilling the old commandments,
we shall not be able to enter the Kingdom of heaven, unless our righteousness
exceed and go beyond them, when we transgress even these, what excuse shall
we obtain? He that loves money, not only will not love his enemies, but will

even treat his friends as enemies.
4. But why speak I of friends? The lovers of money have often ignored
nature itself. Such a one knows not kindred, remembers not companionship,
reverences not age, has no friend, but will be ill-disposed towards all, and above
all others to himself, not only by destroying his soul, but by racking himself with
ten thousand cares, and toils, and sorrows. For he will endure foreign travels,
hatreds, dangers, plots, anything whatever, only that he may have in his house
the root of all evil, and may count much gold. What then can be more grievous
than this disease? It is void of any luxury or pleasure, for the sake of which men
often sin, it is void of honor or glory. For the lover of money suspects that he has
tens of thousands, and really has many, who accuse, and envy, and slander, and
plot against him. Those whom he has wronged hate him as having been ill-used;
those who have not yet suffered, fearing least they may suffer, and sympathizing
with those who have, manifest the same hostility; while the greater and more
powerful, being stung and indignant on account of the humbler sort, and at the
same time also envying him, are his enemies and haters. And why speak I of
men? For when one has God also made his enemy, what hope shall there then be
for him? What consolation? What comfort? He that loves riches will never be
able to use them; he will be their slave and keeper, not their master. For, being
ever anxious to make them more, he will never be willing to spend them; but he
will cut short himself, and be in poorer state than any poor man, as nowhere
stopping in his desire. Yet riches are made not that we should keep, but that we
should use them; but if we are going to bury them for others, what can be more
miserable than we, who run about desiring to get together the possessions of all
men, that we may shut them up within, and cut them off from common use? But
there is another malady not less than this. Some men bury their money in the
earth, others in their bellies, and in pleasure and drunkenness; together with
injustice adding to themselves the punishment of wantonness. Some minister
with their substance to parasites and flatterers, others to dice and harlots, others
to different expenses of the same kind, cutting out for themselves ten thousand