cast it off; if any "wrinkle," if any stain, if any "spot," let us wash it away and
become fair [Ephesians 5:27]: that "the King may desire our beauty." [Psalm
45:11]
It is possible even for him who has fallen into the extremest deformity to
recover that beauty of which David says that the King shall desire your beauty.
"Hearken, O daughter, and consider; forget also your own people and your
father's house: so shall the King greatly desire your beauty." [Psalm 45:10-11]
And yet forgetting does not produce beauty. Yea, beauty is of the soul. What sort
of forgetting? That of sins. For he is speaking about the Church from among the
Gentiles, exhorting her not to remember the things of her fathers, that is [of]
those that sacrificed to idols; for from such was it gathered.
And he said not, "Go not after them," but what is more, Do not admit them
into your mind; which he says also in another place, "I will not mention their
names through my lips." [Psalm 16:4] And again, "That my mouth may not talk
of the deeds of men." [Psalm 17:3-4] As yet is this no great virtue; nay, rather, it
is indeed great, but not such as this [which is here spoken of]. For what does he
say there? He says not; "Talk not of the things of men, neither speak of the things
of your fathers"; but, neither remember them, nor admit them into your mind.
You see to how great a distance he would have us keep away from wickedness.
For he that remembers not [a matter] will not think of it, and he that does not
think, will not speak of it: and he that does not speak of it, will not do it. Do you
see from how many paths he has walled us off? By what great intervals he has
removed us, even to a very great [distance]?
9. Let us then also "hearken and forget" our own evils. I do not say our sins,
for (He says) "Remember first, and I will not remember." [Isaiah 43:26
Septuagint] I mean for instance, Let us no longer remember rapacity, but even
restore the former [plunder]. This is to forget wickedness, and to cast out the
thought of rapacity, and never at any time to admit it, but to wipe away also the
things already done amiss.
Whence may the forgetfulness of wickedness come to us? From the

remembrance of good things, from the remembrance of God. If we continually
remember God, we cannot remember those things also. For (he says) "When I
remembered You upon my bed, I thought upon You in the morning dawn." [Psalm
63:6] We ought then to have God always in remembrance, but then especially,
when thought is undisturbed, when by means of that remembrance [a man] is
able to condemn himself, when he can retain [things] in memory. For in the
daytime indeed, if we do remember, other cares and troubles entering in, drive
the thought out again: but in the night it is possible to remember continually,
when the soul is calm and at rest; when it is in the haven, and under a serene sky.
"The things which you say in your hearts be ye grieved for on your beds," he
says. [Psalm 4:4, Septuagint] For it were indeed right to retain this remembrance
through the day also. But inasmuch as you are always full of cares, and
distracted amidst the things of this life, at least then remember God on your bed;
at the morning dawn meditate upon Him.
If at the morning dawn we meditate on these things, we shall go forth to our
business with much security. If we have first made God propitious by prayer and
supplication, going forth thus we shall have no enemy. Or if you should, you will
laugh him to scorn, having God propitious. There is war in the market place; the
affairs of every day are a fight, they are a tempest and a storm. We therefore
need arms: and prayer is a great weapon. We need favorable winds; we need to
learn everything, so as to go through the length of the day without shipwrecks
and without wounds. For every single day the rocks are many, and oftentimes the
boat strikes and is sunk. Therefore have we especially need of prayer early and
by night.
10. Many of you have often beheld the Olympic games: and not only have
beheld but have been zealous partisans and admirers of the combatants, one of
this [combatant], one of that. You know then that both during the days of the
contests, and during those nights, all night long the herald thinks of nothing else,
has no other anxiety, than that the combatant should not disgrace himself when
he goes forth. For those who sit by the trumpeter admonish him not to speak to