who counsels and advises you? Is any one reduced to need, and he from
inability, or some other hindrance, has not lent a hand? No allowance is made for
him, the reproaches in this case are worse than in the other. This then is
government! And he cannot avenge himself. For they are his own bowels, and as
though the bowels be swollen, and though they give pain to the head and the rest
of the body, we venture not on revenge, we cannot take a sword and pierce them;
so if one of those under our rule be of such sort, and create trouble and disorder
by these accusations, we dare not avenge ourselves, for this would be far from
the disposition of a father, but we must endure the grief till he becomes sound
and well.
The slave bought with money has an appointed work, which when he has
performed, he is afterwards his own master. But the Bishop is distracted on
every side and is expected to do many things that are beyond his power. If he
knows not how to speak, there is great murmuring; and if he can speak, then he
is accused of bring vainglorious. If he cannot raise the dead, he is of no worth,
they say: such an one is pious, but this man is not. If he eats a moderate meal, for
this he is accused, he ought to be strangled, they say. If he is seen at the bath, he
is much censured. In short, he ought not to look upon the sun! If he does the
same things that I do, if he bathes, eats and drinks, and wears the same clothing,
and has the care of a house and servants, on what account is he set over me? But
he has domestics to minister to him, and an ass to ride upon, why then is he set
over me? But say, ought he then to have no one to wait upon him? Ought he
himself to light his own fire, to draw water, to cleave wood, to go to market?
How great a degradation would this be! Even the holy Apostles would not that
any ministers of the word should attend upon the tables of the widows, but they
considered it a business unworthy of them: and would you degrade them to the
offices of your own domestics? Why dost not thou, who commandest these
things, come and perform these services? Tell me, does not he minister to you a
better service than yours, which is bodily? Why do you not send your domestic
to wait upon him? Christ washed the feet of His disciples; is it a great thing for

you to give this service to your Teacher? But you are not willing to render it
yourself, and you grudge it to him. Ought he then to draw his livelihood from
heaven? But God wills not so.
But you say, "Had the Apostles free men to serve them?" Would you then
hear how the Apostles lived? They made long journeys, and free men and
honorable women laid down their lives and souls for their relief. But hear this
blessed Apostle thus exhorting; "Hold such in reputation" [Philippians 2:29-30]:
and again, "Because for the work of Christ he was near unto death, not
regarding his life, to supply your lack of service toward me." See what he says!
But you have not a word to throw away upon your spiritual father, much less will
you submit to any danger in his behalf. But you say, "He ought not to frequent
the bath." And where is this forbidden? There is nothing honorable in being
unclean.
These are not the things we find blamed or applauded at all. For the
qualities which a Bishop is required to possess are different, as to be blameless,
sober, orderly, hospitable, apt to teach. These the Apostle requires, and these we
ought to look for in a ruler of the Church, but nothing further. You are not more
strict than Paul, or rather more strict than the Spirit. If he be a striker, or violent,
or cruel, and unmerciful, accuse him. These things are unworthy of a Bishop. If
he be luxurious, this also is censurable. But if he takes care of his body that he
may minister to you, if he attends to his health that he may be useful, ought he
for this to be accused? Do you not know that bodily infirmity no less than
infirmity of soul injures both us and the Church? Why, otherwise, does Paul
attend to this matter, in writing to Timothy, "Use a little wine for your stomach's
sake, and your often infirmities"? [1 Timothy 5:23] For if we could practice
virtue with the soul alone, we need not take care of the body. And why then were
we born at all? But if this has contributed a great share, is it not the extreme of
folly to neglect it?
For suppose a man honored with the Bishopric, and entrusted with a public
charge of the Church, and let him in other respects be virtuous, and have every