John 3:9-10
"How can these things be?" Christ now speaks to him more chidingly; "Are you
a master in Israel, and know not these things?"
Observe how He nowhere accuses the man of wickedness, but only of
weakness and simplicity. "And what," one may ask, "has this birth in common
with Jewish matters?" Tell me rather what has it that is not in common with
them? For the first-created man, and the woman formed from his side, and the
barren women, and the things accomplished by water, I mean what relates to the
fountain on which Elisha made the iron tool to swim, to the Red Sea which the
Jews passed over, to the pool which the Angel troubled, to Naaman the Syrian
who was cleansed in Jordan, all these proclaimed beforehand, as by a figure, the
Birth and the purification which were to be. And the words of the Prophet allude
to the manner of this Birth, as, "It shall be announced unto the Lord a generation
which comes, and they shall announce His righteousness unto a people that shall
be born, whom the Lord has made" [Psalm 22:30; 30:31, Septuagint]; and, "Your
youth shall be renewed as an eagle's" [Psalm 103:5, Septuagint]; and, "Shine, O
Jerusalem; behold, Your King comes!" [Isaiah 60:1; Zechariah 9:9]; and,
"Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven." [Psalm 32:1, Septuagint] Isaac
also was a type of this Birth. For tell me, Nicodemus, how was he born? Was it
according to the law of nature? By no means; the mode of his generation was
midway between this of which we speak and the natural; the natural, because he
was begotten by cohabitation; the other, because he was begotten not of blood,
(but by the will of God.) I shall show that these figures proclaimed beforehand
not only this birth, but also that from the Virgin. For, because no one would
easily have believed that a virgin could bear a child, barren women first did so,
then such as were not only barren, but aged also. That a woman should be made
from a rib was indeed far more wonderful than that the barren should conceive;
but because that was of early and old time, another figure, new and fresh, was

given, that of the barren women; to prepare the way for belief in the Virgin's
travail. To remind him then of these things, Jesus said, "Are you a master in
Israel, and know not these things?"

John 3:11
"We speak that We do know, and testify that We have seen, and none receives Our
witness."
This He added, making His words credible by another argument, and
condescending in His speech to the other's infirmity.
3. And what is this that He says, "We speak that We do know, and testify
that We have seen"? Because with us the sight is the most trustworthy of the
senses, and if we desire to gain a person's belief, we speak thus, that we saw it
with our eyes, not that we know it by hearsay; Christ therefore speaks to him
rather after the manner of men, gaining belief for His words by this means also.
And that this is so, and that He desires to establish nothing else, and refers not to
sensual vision, is clear from this; after saying, "That which is born of the flesh is
flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit," He adds, "We speak that we
do know, and testify that we have seen." Now this (of the Spirit) was not yet born
; how then says He, "what we have seen"? Is it not plain that He speaks of a
knowledge not otherwise than exact?
"And none receives our witness." The expression "we know," He uses then
either concerning Himself and His Father, or concerning Himself alone; and "no
man receives," is the expression not of one displeased, but of one who declares a
fact: for He said not, "What can be more senseless than you who receive not
what is so exactly declared by us?" but displaying all gentleness, both by His
works and His words, He uttered nothing like this; mildly and kindly He foretold
what should come to pass, so guiding us too to all gentleness, and teaching us
when we converse with any and do not persuade them, not to be annoyed or
made savage; for it is impossible for one out of temper to accomplish his
purpose, he must make him to whom he speaks still more incredulous.
Wherefore we must abstain from anger, and make our words in every way
credible by avoiding not only wrath, but also loud speaking for loud speaking is