1 Corinthians 9:11
6. "If we sowed unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall reap
your carnal things?"
Lo, he adds also a fourth argument for the duty of yielding support. For
since he had said, "What soldier ever serves at his own charges?" and, "who
plants a vineyard?" and, "who feeds a flock?" and introduced the ox that treads
the grain; he points out likewise another most reasonable cause on account of
which they might justly receive; viz. having bestowed much greater gifts, no
more as having labored only. What is it then? "if we sowed unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things?" Do you see a
most just allegation and fuller of reason than all the former? For "in those
instances," says he, "carnal is the seed, carnal also is the fruit; but here not so,
but the seed is spiritual, the return carnal." Thus, to prevent high thoughts in
those who contribute to their teachers, he signified that they receive more than
they give. As if he had said, "Husbandmen, whatsoever they sow, this also do
they receive; but we, sowing in your souls spiritual things, do reap carnal." For
such is the kind of support given by them. Further, and still more to put them to
the blush.

1 Corinthians 9:12
"If others partake of this right over you, do not we yet more?"
See also again another argument, and this too from examples though not of
the same kind. For it is not Peter whom he mentions here nor the Apostles, but
certain other spurious ones, with whom he afterwards enters into combat, and
concerning whom he says, [2 Corinthians 11:20] "If a man devour you, if he take
you captive, if he exalt himself, if he smite you on the face," and already he is
sounding the prelude to the fight with them. Wherefore neither did he say, "If
others take of you," but pointing out their insolence and tyranny and trafficking,
he says, "if others partake of this right over you," i.e., "rule you, exercise
authority, use you as servants, not taking you captive only, but with much
authority." Wherefore he added "do not we yet more?" which he would not have
said if the discourse were concerning the Apostles. But it is evident that he hints
at certain pestilent men, and deceivers of them. "So that besides the law of
Moses even ye yourselves have made a law in behalf of the duty of contribution."
And having said, "do not we yet more?" he does not prove why yet more,
but leaves it to their consciences to convince them of that, wishing at the same
time both to alarm and to abash them more thoroughly.
7. Nevertheless, we did not use this right; i.e., "did not receive." Do you
see, when he had by so many reasons before proved that receiving is not
unlawful, how he next says, "we receive not," that he might not seem to abstain
as from a thing forbidden? "For not because it is unlawful," says he, "do I not
receive; for it is lawful and this we have many ways shown: from the Apostles;
from the affairs of life, the soldier, the husbandman, and the shepherd; from the
law of Moses; from the very nature of the case, in that we have sown unto you
spiritual things; from what yourselves have done to others." But as he had laid
down these things, lest he should seem to put to shame the Apostles who were in