THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.5.

He has judgment over all men; and on this account the Apostle adds
(Rm. 14:10): "We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ":
and (Dan. 7:14) it is written that "He gave Him power, and glory, and
a kingdom; and all peoples, tribes, and tongues shall serve Him."
Thirdly, the same thing is evident from comparison of human affairs
with the end of human salvation. For, to whomsoever the substance
is entrusted, the accessory is likewise committed. Now all human
affairs are ordered for the end of beatitude, which is everlasting
salvation, to which men are admitted, or from which they are
excluded by Christ's judgment, as is evident from Mt. 25:31,40.
Consequently, it is manifest that all human affairs are included in
Christ's judiciary power.
Reply to Objection 1: As was said above (Article 3, Objection 1),
judiciary power goes with royal dignity. Now Christ, although
established king by God, did not wish while living on earth to govern
temporarily an earthly kingdom; consequently He said (Jn. 18:36):
"My kingdom is not of this world." In like fashion He did not wish to
exercise judiciary power over temporal concerns, since He came to
raise men to Divine things. Hence Ambrose observes on this
passage in Luke: "It is well that He who came down with a Divine
purpose should hold Himself aloof from temporal concerns; nor
does He deign to be a judge of quarrels and an arbiter of property,
since He is judge of the quick and the dead, and the arbitrator of
merits."
Reply to Objection 2: All things are subject to Christ in respect of
that power, which He received from the Father, over all things,
according to Mt. 28:18: "All power is given to Me in heaven and in
earth." But as to the exercise of this power, all things are not yet
subject to Him: this will come to pass in the future, when He shall
fulfil His will regarding all things, by saving some and punishing
others.
Reply to Objection 3: Judgments of this kind were exercised by
Christ before His Incarnation, inasmuch as He is the Word of God:
and the soul united with Him personally became a partaker of this
power by the Incarnation.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.5.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether after the Judgment that takes place in the

present time, there remains yet another General Judgment?
Objection 1: It would seem that after the Judgment that takes place
in the present time, there does not remain another General
Judgment. For a judgment serves no purpose after the final
allotment of rewards and punishments. But rewards and
punishments are allotted in this present time: for our Lord said to the
thief on the cross (Lk. 23:43): "This day thou shalt be with Me in
paradise": and (Lk. 16:22) it is said that "the rich man died and was
buried in hell." Therefore it is useless to look forward to a final
Judgment.
Objection 2: Further, according to another (the Septuagint) version
of Nahum 1:9, "God shall not judge the same thing a second time."
But in the present time God judges both temporal and spiritual
matters. Therefore, it does not seem that another final judgment is to
be expected.
Objection 3: Further, reward and punishment correspond with merit
and demerit. But merit and demerit bear relation to the body only in
so far as it is the instrument of the soul. Therefore reward or
punishment is not due to the body save as the soul's instrument.
Therefore no other Judgment is called for at the end (of the world) to
requite man with reward or punishment in the body, besides that
Judgment in which souls are now punished or rewarded.
On the contrary, It is said in Jn. 12:48: "The word that I have spoken,
the same shall judge you in the last day." Therefore there will be a
Judgment at the last day besides that which takes place in the
present time.
I answer that, Judgment cannot be passed perfectly upon any
changeable subject before its consummation: just as judgment
cannot be given perfectly regarding the quality of any action before
its completion in itself and in its results: because many actions
appear to be profitable, which in their effects prove to be hurtful. And
in the same way perfect judgment cannot be passed upon any man
before the close of his life, since he can be changed in many
respects from good to evil, or conversely, or from good to better, or
from evil to worse. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. 9:27): "It is