not seen Him even risen: when they were told that this same person was God and
equal with the Father, how should they, of all men, be otherwise than shocked
and revolted? Therefore it is that gently and little by little they carry them on,
with much consideration and forbearance letting themselves down to their low
attainments, themselves the while enjoying in more plentiful measure the grace
of the Spirit, and doing greater works in Christ's name than Christ Himself did,
that they may at once raise them up from their grovelling apprehensions, and
confirm the saying, that Christ was raised from the dead. For this, in fact, is just
what this Book is: a Demonstration of the Resurrection: this being once
believed, the rest would come in due course. The subject then and entire scope of
this Book, in the main, is just what I have said. And now let us hear the Preface
itself.
"The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began
both to do and to teach." [Acts 1:1] Why does he put him in mind of the Gospel?
To intimate how strictly he may be depended upon. For at the outset of the
former work he says, "It seemed good to me also, having had perfect
understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto you in order." [Luke
1:3] Neither is he content with his own testimony, but refers the whole matter to
the Apostles, saying, "Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the
beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word." [Luke 1:2] Having then
accredited his account in the former instance, he has no need to put forth his
credentials afresh for this treatise, seeing his disciple has been once for all
satisfied, and by the mention of that former work he has reminded him of the
strict reliance to be placed in him for the truth. For if a person has shown himself
competent and trustworthy to write of things which he has heard, and moreover
has obtained our confidence, much more will he have a right to our confidence
when he has composed an account, not of things which he has received from
others, but of things which he has seen and heard. For you received what relates
to Christ; much more will you receive what concerns the Apostles.
What then, (it may be asked), is it a question only of history, with which the

Holy Spirit has nothing to do? Not so. For, if "those delivered it unto us, who
from the beginning were eyewitnesses and ministers of the word;" then, what he
says, is theirs. And why did he not say, 'As they who were counted worthy of the
Holy Spirit delivered them unto us;' but "Those who were eyewitnesses?"
Because, in matter of belief, the very thing that gives one a right to be believed,
is the having learned from eyewitnesses: whereas the other appears to foolish
persons mere parade and pretension. And therefore John also speaks thus: "I saw,
and bare record that this is the Son of God." [John 1:34] And Christ expresses
Himself in the same way to Nicodemus, while he was dull of apprehension, "We
speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen; and no one receives our
witness." [John 3:11] Accordingly, He gave them leave to rest their testimony in
many particulars on the fact of their having seen them, when He said, "And do ye
bear witness concerning Me, because you have been with Me from the
beginning." [John 15:27] The Apostles themselves also often speak in a similar
manner; "We are witnesses, and the Holy Spirit which God has given to those
that obey Him." [Acts 2:32]; and on a subsequent occasion, Peter, still giving
assurance of the Resurrection, said, "Seeing we ate and drank with Him." [Acts
10:41] For they more readily received the testimony of persons who had been
His companions, because the notion of the Spirit was as yet very much beyond
them. Therefore John also at that time, in his Gospel, speaking of the blood and
water, said, he himself saw it, making the fact of his having seen it equivalent,
for them, to the highest testimony, although the witness of the Spirit is more
certain than the evidence of sight, but not so with unbelievers. Now that Luke
was a partaker of the Spirit, is abundantly clear, both from the miracles which
even now take place; and from the fact that in those times even ordinary persons
were gifted with the Holy Ghost; and again from the testimony of Paul, in these
words, "Whose praise is in the Gospel" [2 Corinthians 8:18]; and from the
appointment to which he was chosen: for having said this, the Apostle adds, "But
also appointed of the Churches to travel with us with this grace which is
administered by us."