## Homily 3 on Philemon

Philemon i. 17-19
"If you count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself. If he has
wronged you at all, or owes you anything, put that to mine account; I Paul write
it with my own hand, I will repay it: that I say not to you how you owe unto me
even your own self besides."
No procedure is so apt to gain a hearing, as not to ask for everything at
once. For see after how many praises, after how much preparation he has
introduced this great matter. After having said that he is "my son," that he is a
partaker of the Gospel, that he is "my bowels," that you receive him back "as a
brother," and "hold him as a brother," then he has added "as myself." And Paul
was not ashamed to do this. For he who was not ashamed to be called the servant
of the faithful, but confesses that he was such, much more would he not refuse
this. But what he says is to this effect. If you are of the same mind with me, if
you run upon the same terms, if you consider me a friend, receive him as myself.
"If he has wronged you at all." See where and when he has introduced the
mention of the injury; last, after having said so many things in his behalf. For
since the loss of money is particularly apt to annoy men, that he might not
accuse him of this, (for it was most likely that it was spent,) then he brings in
this, and says, "If he has wronged you." He does not say, If he has stolen
anything; but what? "If he has wronged you." At the same time he both
confessed the offense, and not as if it were the offense of a servant, but of a
friend against a friend, making use of the expression of "wrong" rather than of
theft.
"Put that to mine account," he says, that is, reckon the debt to me, "I will
repay it." Then also with that spiritual pleasantry,
"I Paul write it with my own hand." At once movingly and pleasantly; if

when Paul did not refuse to execute a bond for him, he should refuse to receive
him! This would both shame Philemon into compliance, and bring Onesimus out
of trouble. "I write it," he says, "with my own hand." Nothing is more
affectionate than these "bowels," nothing more earnest, nothing more zealous.
See what great concern he bestows in behalf of one man. "Albeit I do not say to
you how you owe unto me even your own self besides." Then that it might not
appear insulting to him, whom he requests, if he had not the confidence to ask
and obtain in behalf of a theft, he in some measure relieves this, saying, "That I
say not unto you how you owe to me even your own self besides." Not only your
own things, but yourself also. And this proceeded from love, and was according
to the rule of friendship, and was a proof of his great confidence. See how he
everywhere provides for both, that he may ask with great security, and that this
may not seem a sign of too little confidence in him.
Ver. 20. "Yea, brother."
What is, "Yea, brother"? Receive him, he says. For this we must understand
though unexpressed. For dismissing all pleasantry, he again pursues his former
considerations, that is, serious ones. And yet even these are serious. For the
things that proceed from Saints are of themselves serious, even when they are
pleasantry.
"Yea, brother, let me have joy of you in the Lord, refresh my heart in
Christ."
That is, you grant the favor to the Lord, not to me. "My heart," that is,
toward yourself.
Ver. 21. "Having confidence in your obedience, I write unto you."
What stone would not these things have softened? What wild beast would
not these things have rendered mild, and prepared to receive him heartily? After
having borne witness to him by so many great testimonies of his goodness, he is
not ashamed again to excuse himself. He says, Not barely requesting it, nor as
commanding it, nor arbitrarily, but "having confidence in your obedience I wrote
unto you." What he had said at the beginning, "having confidence," that he also