1 Corinthians 11:3
"But I would have ye know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the
head of every woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God."
This is his account of the reason of the thing, and he states it to make the
weaker more attentive. He indeed that is faithful, as he ought to be, and
steadfast, does not require any reason or cause of those things which are
commanded him, but is content with the ordinance alone. But he that is weaker,
when he also learns the cause, then both retains what is said with more care and
obeys with much readiness.
Wherefore neither did he state the cause until he saw the commandment
transgressed. What then is the cause? "The head of every man is Christ." Is He
then Head of the Gentile also? In no wise. For if "we are the Body of Christ, and
severally members thereof," [1 Corinthians 12:27] and in this way He is our
head, He cannot be the head of them who are not in the Body and rank not
among the members. So that when he says, "of every man," one must understand
it of the believer. Perceivest thou how every where he appeals to the hearer's
shame by arguing from on high? Thus both when he was discoursing on love,
and when on humility, and when on almsgiving, it was from thence that he drew
his examples.
3. "But the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God."
Here the heretics rush upon us with a certain declaration of inferiority, which out
of these words they contrive against the Son. But they stumble against
themselves. For if "the man be the head of the woman," and the head be of the
same substance with the body, and "the head of Christ is God," the Son is of the
same substance with the Father. "Nay," say they, "it is not His being of another
substance which we intend to show from hence, but that He is under subjection."
What then are we to say to this? In the first place, when any thing lowly is said

of him conjoined as He is with the Flesh, there is no disparagement of the
Godhead in what is said, the Economy admitting the expression. However, tell
me how you intend to prove this from the passage? Why, as the man governs the
wife, says he, "so also the Father, Christ." Therefore also as Christ governs the
man, so likewise the Father, the Son. "For the head of every man," we read, "is
Christ." And who could ever admit this? For if the superiority of the Son
compared with us, be the measure of the Father's compared with the Son,
consider to what meanness you will bring Him. So that we must not try all things
by like measure in respect of ourselves and of God, though the language used
concerning them be similar; but we must assign to God a certain appropriate
excellency, and so great as belongs to God. For should they not grant this, many
absurdities will follow. As thus; "the head of Christ is God:" and, "Christ is the
head of the man, and he of the woman." Therefore if we choose to take the term,
"head," in the like sense in all the clauses, the Son will be as far removed from
the Father as we are from Him. Nay, and the woman will be as far removed from
us as we are from the Word of God. And what the Son is to the Father, this both
we are to the Son and the woman again to the man. And who will endure this?
But do you understand the term "head" differently in the case of the man
and the woman, from what thou dost in the case of Christ? Therefore in the case
of the Father and the Son, must we understand it differently also. "How
understand it differently?" says the objector. According to the occasion. For had
Paul meant to speak of rule and subjection, as you say, he would not have
brought forward the instance of a wife, but rather of a slave and a master. For
what if the wife be under subjection to us? It is as a wife, as free, as equal in
honor. And the Son also, though He did become obedient to the Father, it was as
the Son of God, it was as God. For as the obedience of the Son to the Father is
greater than we find in men towards the authors of their being, so also His liberty
is greater. Since it will not of course be said that the circumstances of the Son's
relation to the Father are greater and more intimate than among men, and of the
Father's to the Son, less. For if we admire the Son that He was obedient so as to