4. Further, it is also a most absurd and groundless thing for them to say that the seed was, by
being thus deposited, reduced to form and increased, and so was prepared for all the reception of
perfect rationality. For there will be in it an admixture of matter —that substance which they hold
to have been derived from ignorance and defect; [and this will prove itself] more apt and useful
than was the light of their Father, if indeed, when born, according to the contemplation of that
[light], it was without form or figure, but derived from this [matter], form, and appearance, and
increase, and perfection. For if that light which proceeds from the Pleroma was the cause to a
spiritual being that it possessed neither form, nor appearance, nor its own special magnitude, while
its descent to this world added all these things to it, and brought it to perfection, then a sojourn here
(which they also term darkness) would seem much more efficacious and useful than was the light
of their Father. But how can it be regarded as other than ridiculous, to affirm that their mother ran
the risk of being almost extinguished in matter, and was almost on the point of being destroyed by
it, had she not then with difficulty stretched herself outwards, and leaped, [as it were,] out of herself,
receiving assistance from the Father; but that her seed increased in this same matter, and received
a form, and was made fit for the reception of perfect rationality; and this, too, while "bubbling up"
among substances dissimilar and unfamiliar to itself, according to their own declaration that the
earthly is opposed to the spiritual, and the spiritual to the earthly? How, then, could "a little
particle," as they say, increase, and receive shape, and reach perfection, in the midst of substances
contrary to and unfamiliar to itself?
5. But further, and in addition to what has been said, the question occurs, Did their mother,
when she beheld the angels, bring forth the seed all at once, or only one by one [in succession]? If
she brought forth the whole simultaneously and at once, that which was thus produced cannot now
be of an infantile character: its descent, therefore, into those men who now exist must be
superfluous. But if one by one, then she did not form her conception according to the figure of
those angels whom she beheld; for, contemplating them all together, and once for all, so as to
conceive by them, she ought to have brought forth once for all the offspring of those from whose
forms she had once for all conceived.
6. Why was it, too, that, beholding the angels along with the Saviour, she did indeed conceive
their images, but not that of the Saviour, who is far more beautiful than they? Did He not please
her; and did she not, on that account, conceive after His likeness?3092 How was it, too, that the
Demiurge, whom they can call an animal being, having, as they maintain, his own special magnitude
and figure, was produced perfect as respects his substance; while that which is spiritual, which also
ought to be more effective than that which is animal, was sent forth imperfect, and he required to
descend into a soul, that in it he might obtain form, and thus becoming perfect, might be rendered