THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.4.

headship, and the fulness of His habitual grace: and yet He obtained
it from merit, so that, in accordance with the Divine justice, He
should be judge who fought for God's justice, and conquered, and
was unjustly condemned. Hence He Himself says (Apoc. 3:21): "I
have overcome and am set down in My Father's throne." Now
judiciary power is understood by "throne," according to Ps. 9:5:
"Thou hast sat on the throne, who judgest justice."
Reply to Objection 1: This argument holds good of judiciary power
according as it is due to Christ by reason of the union with the Word
of God.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument is based on the ground of His
grace as Head.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument holds good in regard to habitual
grace, which perfects Christ's soul. But although judiciary power be
Christ's due in these ways, it is not hindered from being His due
from merit.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.59, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether judiciary power belongs to Christ with

respect to all human affairs?
Objection 1: It would seem that judiciary power concerning all
human affairs does not belong to Christ. For as we read in Lk.
12:13,14, when one of the crowd said to Christ: "Speak to my brother
that he divide the inheritance with me; He said to him: Man, who hath
appointed Me judge, or divider over you?" Consequently, He does
not exercise judgment over all human affairs.
Objection 2: Further, no one exercises judgment except over his own
subjects. But, according to Heb. 2:8, "we see not as yet all things
subject to" Christ. Therefore it seems that Christ has not judgment
over all human affairs.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx) that it is part of
Divine judgment for the good to be afflicted sometimes in this world,
and sometimes to prosper, and in like manner the wicked. But the
same was the case also before the Incarnation. Consequently, not all
God's judgments regarding human affairs are included in Christ's
judiciary power.
On the contrary, It is said (Jn. 5:22): "The Father hath given all
judgment to the Son."
I answer that, If we speak of Christ according to His Divine Nature, it
is evident that every judgment of the Father belongs to the Son; for,
as the Father does all things through His Word, so He judges all
things through His Word.
But if we speak of Christ in His human nature, thus again is it evident
that all things are subject to His judgment. This is made clear if we
consider first of all the relationship subsisting between Christ's soul
and the Word of God; for, if "the spiritual man judgeth all things," as
is said in 1 Cor. 2:15, inasmuch as his soul clings to the Word of
God, how much more Christ's soul, which is filled with the truth of
the Word of God, passes judgment upon all things.
Secondly, the same appears from the merit of His death; because,
according to Rm. 14:9: "To this end Christ died and rose again; that
He might be Lord both of the dead and of the living." And therefore