John 3:27
"A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from above."
Marvel not, if he speak of Christ in a lowly strain; it was impossible to
teach all at once, and from the very beginning, men so pre-occupied by passion.
But he desires to strike them for a while with awe and terror, and to show them
that they warred against none other than God Himself, when they warred against
Christ. And here he secretly establishes that truth, which Gamaliel asserted, "You
cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found even to fight against God." [Acts
5:39] For to say, "None can receive anything, except it be given him from
heaven," was nothing else than declaring that they were attempting
impossibilities, and so would be found to fight against God. "Well, but did not
Theudas and his followers 'receive' from themselves?" They did, but they
straightway were scattered and destroyed, not so what belonged to Christ.
By this also he gently consoles them, showing them that it was not a man,
but God, who surpassed them in honor; and that therefore they must not wonder
if what belonged to Him was glorious, and if "all men came unto Him": for that
this was the nature of divine things, and that it was God who brought them to
pass, because no man ever yet had power to do such deeds. All human things are
easily seen through, and rotten, and quickly melt away and perish; these were
not such, therefore not human. Observe too how when they said, "to whom you
bore witness," he turned against themselves that which they thought they had put
forward to lower Christ, and silences them after showing that Jesus' glory came
not from his testimony; "A man cannot," he says, "receive anything of himself,
except it be given him from heaven." "If you hold at all to my testimony, and
believe it to be true, know that by that testimony you ought to prefer not me to
Him, but Him to me. For what was it that I testified? I call you yourselves to
witness."

John 3:28
"You yourselves bear me witness that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am
sent before Him."
"If then you hold to my testimony, (and you even now produce it when you
say, 'to whom you bore witness,') He is not only not diminished by receiving my
witness, but rather is increased by it; besides, the testimony was not mine, but
God's. So that if I seem to you to be trustworthy, I said this among other things,
that 'I am sent before Him.'" Do you see how he shows little by little that this
Voice was divine? For what he says is of this kind: "I am a servant, and say the
words of Him that sent me, not flattering Christ through human favor, but
serving His Father who sent me. I gave not the testimony as a gift, but what I
was sent to speak, I spoke. Do not then because of this suppose that I am great,
for it shows that He is great. He is Lord of all things." This he goes on to
declare, and says,