THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.4.

been sanctified by contact with our Lord's body." And again, our
Lord Himself "taking bread . . . blessed . . . and in like manner the
chalice" (Mt. 26:26,27; Lk. 22:19, 20). For this reason there is no need
for the matter of these sacraments to be blessed previously, since
Christ's blessing is enough. And if any blessing be used, it belongs
to the solemnity of the sacrament, not to its essence. But Christ did
not make use of visible anointings, so as not to slight the invisible
unction whereby He was "anointed above" His "fellows" (Ps. 44:8).
And hence both chrism, and the holy oil, and the oil of the sick are
blessed before being put to sacramental use. This suffices for the
reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: Each consecration of the chrism has not the
same object. For just as an instrument derives instrumental power in
two ways, viz. when it receives the form of an instrument, and when
it is moved by the principal agent; so too the sacramental matter
needs a twofold sanctification, by one of which it becomes fit matter
for the sacrament, while by the other it is applied to the production
of the effect.
Reply to Objection 3: Corporeal matter is receptive of grace, not so
as to be the subject of grace, but only as the instrument of grace, as
explained above (Question 62, Article 3). And this sacramental
matter is consecrated, either by Christ, or by a bishop, who, in the
Church, impersonates Christ.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the proper form of this sacrament is: "I

sign thee with the sign of the cross," etc.?
Objection 1: It seems that the proper form of this sacrament is not: "I
sign thee with the sign of the cross, I confirm thee with the chrism of
salvation, in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen." For the use of the sacraments is derived from Christ
and the apostles. But neither did Christ institute this form, nor do we
read of the apostles making use of it. Therefore it is not the proper
form of this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, just as the sacrament is the same everywhere,
so should the form be the same: because everything has unity, just
as it has being, from its form. But this form is not used by all: for
some say: "I confirm thee with the chrism of sanctification."
Therefore the above is not the proper form of this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, this sacrament should be conformed to
Baptism, as the perfect to the thing perfected, as stated above
(Article 2, Objection 2). But in the form of Baptism no mention is
made of signing the character; nor again of the cross of Christ,
though in Baptism man dies with Christ, as the Apostle says (Rm.
6:3-8); nor of the effect which is salvation, though Baptism is
necessary for salvation. Again, in the baptismal form, only one
action is included; and the person of the baptizer is expressed in the
words: "I baptize thee, whereas the contrary is to be observed in the
above form." Therefore this is not the proper form of this sacrament.
On the contrary, Is the authority of the Church, who always uses this
form.
I answer that, The above form is appropriate to this sacrament. For
just as the form of a natural thing gives it its species, so a
sacramental form should contain whatever belongs to the species of
the sacrament. Now as is evident from what has been already said
(Articles 1,2), in this sacrament the Holy Ghost is given for strength
in the spiritual combat. Wherefore in this sacrament three things are
necessary; and they are contained in the above form. The first of
these is the cause conferring fulness of spiritual strength which
cause is the Blessed Trinity: and this is expressed in the words, "In
the name of the Father," etc. The second is the spiritual strength