word "nature" has been applied to every principle of movement
existing in that which is moved. Now it is manifest that the active and
passive principles of the generation of living things are the seeds
from which living things are generated. Therefore Augustine fittingly
gave the name of "seminal virtues" [seminales rationes] to all those
active and passive virtues which are the principles of natural
generation and movement.
These active and passive virtues may be considered in several
orders. For in the first place, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. vi, 10),
they are principally and originally in the Word of God, as "typal
ideas." Secondly, they are in the elements of the world, where they
were produced altogether at the beginning, as in "universal causes."
Thirdly, they are in those things which, in the succession of time, are
produced by universal causes, for instance in this plant, and in that
animal, as in "particular causes." Fourthly, they are in the "seeds"
produced from animals and plants. And these again are compared to
further particular effects, as the primordial universal causes to the
first effects produced.
Reply to Objection 1: These active and passive virtues of natural
things, thought not called "virtues" [rationes] by reason of their
being in corporeal matter, can nevertheless be so called in respect of
their origin, forasmuch as they are the effect of the typal ideas
[rationes ideales].
Reply to Objection 2: These active and passive virtues are in certain
parts of corporeal things: and when they are employed with local
movement for the production of certain results, we speak of the
demons as employing seeds.
Reply to Objection 3: The seed of the male is the active principle in
the generation of an animal. But that can be called seed also which
the female contributes as the passive principle. And thus the word
"seed" covers both active and passive principles.
Reply to Objection 4: From the words of Augustine when speaking of
these seminal virtues, it is easy to gather that they are also causal
virtues, just as seed is a kind of cause: for he says (De Trin. iii, 9)
that, "as a mother is pregnant with the unborn offspring, so is the
world itself pregnant with the causes of unborn things."
Nevertheless, the "typal ideas" can be called "causal virtues," but

not, strictly speaking, "seminal virtues," because seed is not a
separate principle; and because miracles are not wrought outside
the scope of causal virtues. Likewise neither are miracles wrought
outside the scope of the passive virtues so implanted in the creature,
that the latter can be used to any purpose that God commands. But
miracles are said to be wrought outside the scope of the natural
active virtues, and the passive potentialities which are ordered to
such active virtues, and this is what is meant when we say that they
are wrought outside the scope of seminal virtues.