and more would have been their remarks at the outset. But after undertaking the
ministry I should not have been able day by day to defend myself against
accusers, even if I had done everything faultlessly, to say nothing of the many
mistakes which I must have made owing to my youth and inexperience. But now
I have saved the electors from this kind of accusation also, whereas in the other
case I should have involved them in innumerable reproaches. For what would
not the world have said? "They have committed affairs of such vast interest and
importance to thoughtless youths, they have defiled the flock of God, and
Christian affairs have become a jest and a laughing-stock." But now "all
iniquity shall stop her mouth." For although they may say these things on your
account, you will speedily teach them by your acts that understanding is not to
be estimated by age, and the grey head is not to be the test of an elder— that the
young man ought not to be absolutely excluded from the ministry, but only the
novice: and the difference between the two is great.

## On the Priesthood — Book III
1. Chrysostom: As regards the insult to those who have done me honor,
what I have already said might be sufficient to prove that in avoiding this office I
had no desire to put them to shame; but I will now endeavor to make it evident,
to the best of my ability, that I was not puffed up by arrogance of any kind. For if
the choice of a generalship or a kingdom had been submitted to me, and I had
then formed this resolution, any one might naturally have suspected me of this
fault, or rather I should have been found guilty by all men, not of arrogance, but
of senseless folly. But when the priesthood is offered to me, which exceeds a
kingdom as much as the spirit differs from the flesh, will any one dare to accuse
me of disdain? And is it not preposterous to charge with folly those who reject
small things, but when any do this in matters of pre-eminent importance, to
exempt such persons from accusations of mental derangement, and yet subject
them to the charge of pride? It is just as if one were to accuse, not of pride, but of
insanity, a man who looked with contempt on a herd of oxen and refused to be a
herdsman, and yet were to say that a man who declined the empire of the world,
and the command of all the armies of the earth, was not mad, but inflated with
pride. But this assuredly is not the case; and they who say such things do not
injure me more than they injure themselves. For merely to imagine it possible for
human nature to despise this dignity is an evidence against those who bring this
charge of the estimate which they have formed of the office. For if they did not
consider it to be an ordinary thing of no great account, such a suspicion as this
would never have entered their heads. For why is it that no one has ever dared to
entertain such a suspicion with reference to the dignity of the angels, and to say
that arrogance is the reason why human nature would not aspire to the rank of
the angelic nature? It is because we imagine great things concerning those
powers, and this does not suffer us to believe that a man can conceive anything