FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.5.

Reply to Objection 2: An act of virtue is perfected not only in that it is
an act of the sensuality, but still more in the fact of its being an act of
reason and will, whose function it is to choose: for the act of moral
virtue is not without the exercise of choice: wherefore the act of
moral virtue, which perfects the appetitive power, is always
accompanied by an act of prudence, which perfects the rational
power; and the same applies to mortal sin, as stated (ad 1).
Reply to Objection 3: A disposition may be related in three ways to
that to which it disposes: for sometimes it is the same thing and is in
the same subject; thus inchoate science is a disposition to perfect
science: sometimes it is in the same subject, but is not the same
thing; thus heat is a disposition to the form of fire: sometimes it is
neither the same thing, nor in the same subject, as in those things
which are subordinate to one another in such a way that we can
arrive at one through the other, e.g. goodness of the imagination is a
disposition to science which is in the intellect. In this way the venial
sin that is in the sensuality, may be a disposition to mortal sin, which
is in the reason.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether sin can be in the reason?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin cannot be in the reason. For the
sin of any power is a defect thereof. But the fault of the reason is not
a sin, on the contrary, it excuses sin: for a man is excused from sin
on account of ignorance. Therefore sin cannot be in the reason.
Objection 2: Further, the primary object of sin is the will, as stated
above (Article 1). Now reason precedes the will, since it directs it.
Therefore sin cannot be in the reason.
Objection 3: Further, there can be no sin except about things which
are under our control. Now perfection and defect of reason are not
among those things which are under our control: since by nature
some are mentally deficient, and some shrewd-minded. Therefore no
sin is in the reason.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 12) that sin is in the
lower and in the higher reason.
I answer that, The sin of any power is an act of that power, as we
have clearly shown (Articles 1,2,3). Now reason has a twofold act:
one is its proper act in respect of its proper object, and this is the act
of knowing the truth; the other is the act of reason as directing the
other powers. Now in both of these ways there may be sin in the
reason. First, in so far as it errs in the knowledge of truth, which
error is imputed to the reason as a sin, when it is in ignorance or
error about what it is able and ought to know: secondly, when it
either commands the inordinate movements of the lower powers, or
deliberately fails to check them.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument considers the defect in the
proper act of the reason in respect of its proper object, and with
regard to the case when it is a defect of knowledge about something
which one is unable to know: for then this defect of reason is not a
sin, and excuses from sin, as is evident with regard to the actions of
madmen. If, however, the defect of reason be about something which
a man is able and ought to know, he is not altogether excused from
sin, and the defect is imputed to him as a sin. The defect which
belongs only to the act of directing the other powers, is always
imputed to reason as a sin, because it can always obviate this defect