spirits." [1 Corinthians 12:10] For the devil, of his vile craft, wished through this
gift of grace to subvert everything pertaining to the Church. For since both the
demon and the Spirit prophesied concerning the future, the one indeed uttering
falsehood, and the other truth, and it was not possible from any quarter to receive
a proof of one or the other, but each spoke without being called to account, as
Jeremiah and Ezekiel had done, but when the time came they were convicted, He
gave also the "discernings of spirits." Since therefore then also among the
Thessalonians many were prophesying, glancing at whom he says, "Neither by
word, nor by epistle, as from us, as that the day of the Lord is now present" [2
Thessalonians 2:2], he says this here. That is, do not, because there are false
prophets among you, on their account prohibit also these, and turn away from
them; "quench" them "not," that is, "despise not prophesyings."
Do you see that this is what he means by, "Prove all things"? Because he
had said, "Despise not prophesyings," lest they should think that he opened the
pulpit to all, he says, "Prove all things," that is, such as are really prophecies;
"and hold fast that which is good. Abstain from every form of evil"; not from this
or that, but from all; that you may by proof distinguish both the true things and
the false, and abstain from the latter, and hold fast the former. For thus both the
hatred of the one will be vehement and the love of the other arises, when we do
all things not carelessly, nor without examination, but with careful investigation.
Ver. 23. "And the God of peace Himself sanctify you wholly; and may your
spirit and soul and body be preserved entire, without blame at the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ."
Observe the affection of the Teacher. After the admonition he adds a prayer;
not only that, but even introduces it in his letter. For we need both counsel and
prayer. For this reason we also first giving you counsel, then offer prayers for
you. And this the Initiated know. But Paul indeed did this with good reason,
having great confidence towards God, whereas we are confounded with shame,
and have no freedom of speech. But because we were appointed to this we do it,
being unworthy even to stand in His presence, and to hold the place of the lowest

disciples. But because grace works even through the unworthy, not for our own
sakes but for theirs who are about to be benefited, we contribute our parts.
"Sanctify you wholly," he says, and may "your spirit and soul and body be
preserved entire, without blame at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ." What
does he here call the spirit? The gift of grace. For if we depart hence having our
lamps bright, we shall enter into the bridechamber. But if they are quenched, it
will not be so. For this reason he says "your spirit." For if that remains pure, the
other remains also. "And soul and body," he says. For neither the one nor the
other then admits anything evil.
Ver. 24. "Faithful is He that calls you, who will also do it."
Observe his humility. For, because he had prayed, Think not, he says, that
this happens from my prayers, but from the purpose, with which He called you.
For if He called you to salvation, and He is true, He will certainly save you, in
that He wills it.
Ver. 25. "Brethren, pray for us also."
Strange! What humility is here! But he indeed said this for the sake of
humility, but we, not from humility, but for the sake of great benefit, and wishing
to gain some great profit from you, say, "Pray for us also." For although you do
not receive any great or wonderful benefit from us, do it nevertheless for the
sake of the honor and the title itself. Some one has had children, and even if they
had not been benefited by him, nevertheless, because he has been their father, he
perhaps sets this before them, saying, "For one day I have not been called father
by you." On this account we too say, "Pray for us also." I am not merely saying
this, but really desiring your prayers. For if I have become responsible for this
presidency over you all, and shall have to render an account, much more ought I
to have the benefit of your prayers. On your account my responsibilities are
greater, therefore the help also from you should be greater.
Ver. 26. "Salute all the brethren with a holy kiss."
Oh! What fervor! Oh! What mad passion is here! Because being absent he
could not greet them with the kiss, he greets them through others, as when we