word but because all our doings are 'in power.'" As therefore in war success is
not for those who talk much but those who effect much; so also in this case, not
speakers, but doers have the victory. "You," says he, "art proud of this fine
speaking. Well, if it were a contest and a time for orators, you might reasonably
be elated thereat: but if of Apostles preaching truth, and by signs confirming the
same, why are you puffed up for a thing superfluous and unreal, and to the
present purpose utterly inefficient? For what could a display of words avail
towards raising the dead, or expelling evil spirits, or working any other such
deed of wonder? But these are what we want now, and by these our cause
stands." Whereupon also he adds,

1 Corinthians 4:20
"For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power." By signs, says he,
not by fine speaking, we have prevailed: and that our teaching is divine and
really announces the Kingdom of Heaven we give the greater proof, namely, our
signs which we work by the power of the Spirit. If those who are now puffed up
desire to be some great ones; as soon as I have come, let them show whether
they have any such power. And let me not find them sheltering themselves
behind a pomp of words: for that kind of art is nothing to us.

1 Corinthians 4:21
4. "What will you? Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love and a spirit
of meekness?"
There is much both of terror and of gentleness in this saying. For to say, "I
will know," was the language of one as yet withholding himself: but to say,
"What will you? Must I come unto you with a rod?" are the words of one
thenceforth ascending the teacher's seat, and from thence holding discourses
with them and taking upon him all his authority.
What means, "with a rod?" With punishment, with vengeance: that is, I will
destroy; I will strike with blindness: the kind of thing which Peter did in the case
of Sapphira, and himself in the case of Elymas the sorcerer. For henceforth he no
longer speaks as bringing himself into a close comparison with the other
teachers, but with authority. And in the second Epistle too he appears to say the
same, when he writes, "Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me."
"Shall I come with a rod, or in love?" What then? To come with a rod, was
it not an instance of love? Of love it was surely. But because through his great
love he shrinks back in punishing, therefore he so expresses himself.
Further; when he spoke about punishment, he said not, "in a spirit of
meekness," but, [simply,] "with a rod:" and yet of that too the Spirit was author.
For there is a spirit of meekness, and a spirit of severity. He does not, however,
choose so to call it, but from its milder aspect ([ἀπὸ τῶν χρηστοτέρων].) And for
a like reason also, God, although avenging Himself, has it often affirmed of Him
that He is "gracious and long-suffering, and rich in mercy and pity:" but that He
is apt to punish, once perhaps or twice, and sparingly, and that upon some urgent
cause.
5. Consider then the wisdom of Paul; holding the authority in his own
hands, he leaves both his and that in the power of others, saying, "What will