those who have anticipated the truth, and make allowances for those who only
follow in their track) since the dowry then depended on hearing— (and what is
meant by hearing? faith: for "faith comes by hearing" faith as opposed to
fruition, and actual experience) I said before that He divided the dowry into two,
and gave some portion to the bride for an earnest, while He promised others in
the future. What did He give her? He gave her forgiveness of sins, remission of
punishment, righteousness, sanctification, redemption, the body of the Lord, the
divine, spiritual Table, the resurrection of the dead. For all these things the
Apostles had. Therefore He gave some parts and promised others. Of some there
was experience and fruition, others depended upon hope and faith. Now listen.
What did He bestow? Baptism and the Sacrifice. Of these there is experience.
What did He promise? Resurrection, immortality of the body, union with angels,
a place in the joyful company of archangels, and as a citizen in His kingdom,
immaculate life, the good things "which eye has not seen, nor ear heard nor
have entered into the heart of man, things which God has prepared for them that
love Him."
16. Understand what is said, lest ye lose it: I am labouring to enable you to
perceive it. The dowry of the bride then was divided into two portions consisting
of things present and things to come; things seen and things heard, things given
and things taken on trust, things experienced, and things to be enjoyed hereafter;
things belonging to present life, and things to come after the resurrection. The
former things you see, the latter you hear. Observe then what He says to her that
you may not suppose that she received the former things only, though they be
great and ineffable, and surpassing all understanding. "Hearken O daughter and
behold;" hear the latter things and behold the former that you may not say "am I
again to depend on hope, again on faith, again on the future?" See now: I give
some things, and I promise others: the latter indeed depend on hope, but do thou
receive the others as pledges, as an earnest, as a proof of the remainder. I
promise you a kingdom: and let present things be the ground of your trust, your
trust in me. Do you promise me a kingdom? Yea. I have given you the greater

part, even the Lord of the kingdom, for "he who spared not his own son, but
gave him up for us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things?"
[Romans 8:32] Do you give me the resurrection of the body? Yea; I have given
you the greater part. What is the nature of it? Release from sins. How is that the
greater part? Because sin brought forth death. I have destroyed the parent, and
shall I not destroy the offspring? I have dried up the root, and shall I not destroy
the produce. "Hearken O daughter and behold." What am I to behold? Dead
men raised to life, lepers cleansed, the sea restrained, the paralytic braced up into
vigour, paradise opened, loaves poured forth in abundance, sins remitted, the
lame man leaping, the robber made a citizen of paradise, the publican turned into
an evangelist, the harlot become more modest than the maid. Hear and behold.
Hear of the former things and behold these. Accept from present things a proof
of the others; concerning those I have given you pledges, things which are better
than they are. "What is the meaning of this your saying?" These things are mine.
"Hearken O daughter and behold." These things are my dower to you. And what
does the bride contribute? Let us see. What I pray you do you bring that you may
not be portionless? What can I, she answers, bring to you from heathen altars,
and the steam of sacrifices and from devils? What have I to contribute? What?
Do you say? Your will and your faith. "Hearken O daughter and behold." And
what will you have me do? "Forget your own people." What kind of people? The
devils, the idols, the sacrificial smoke, and steam, and blood. "Forget your own
people, and your father's house." Leave your father and come after me. I left my
Father, and came to you, and will you not leave your father? But when the word
leave is used in reference to the Son do not understand by it an actual leaving.
What He means is "I condescended, I accommodated myself to you, I assumed
human flesh." This is the duty of the bridegroom, and of the bride, that you
should abandon your parents, and that we should be wedded to one another.
"Hearken O daughter and behold, and forget your own people, and your father's
house." And what do you give me if I do forget them? "and the king shall desire
your beauty." You have the Lord for your lover. If you have Him for your lover,