SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.6.

and a pleasing savor and likewise odor in food. Hence temperance is
chiefly about the pleasure of touch, that results essentially from the
use of these necessary things, which use is in all cases attained by
the touch. Secondarily, however, temperance and intemperance are
about pleasures of the taste, smell, or sight, inasmuch as the
sensible objects of these senses conduce to the pleasurable use of
the necessary things that have relation to the touch. But since the
taste is more akin to the touch than the other senses are, it follows
that temperance is more about the taste than about the other senses.
Reply to Objection 1: The use of food and the pleasure that
essentially results therefrom pertain to the touch. Hence the
Philosopher says (De Anima ii, 3) that "touch is the sense of food, for
food is hot or cold, wet or dry." To the taste belongs the discernment
of savors, which make the food pleasant to eat, in so far as they are
signs of its being suitable for nourishment.
Reply to Objection 2: The pleasure resulting from savor is additional,
so to speak, whereas the pleasure of touch results essentially from
the use of food and drink.
Reply to Objection 3: Delicacy regards principally the substance of
the food, but secondarily it regards its delicious savor and the way in
which it is served.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the rule of temperance depends on the

need of the present life?
Objection 1: It would seem that the rule of temperance does not
depend on the needs of the present life. For higher things are not
regulated according to lower. Now, as temperance is a virtue of the
soul, it is above the needs of the body. Therefore the rule of
temperance does not depend on the needs of the body.
Objection 2: Further, whoever exceeds a rule sins. Therefore if the
needs of the body were the rule of temperance, it would be a sin
against temperance to indulge in any other pleasure than those
required by nature, which is content with very little. But this would
seem unreasonable.
Objection 3: Further, no one sins in observing a rule. Therefore if the
need of the body were the rule of temperance, there would be no sin
in using any pleasure for the needs of the body, for instance, for the
sake of health. But this is apparently false. Therefore the need of the
body is not the rule of temperance.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Morib. Eccl. xxi): "In both
Testaments the temperate man finds confirmation of the rule
forbidding him to love the things of this life, or to deem any of them
desirable for its own sake, and commanding him to avail himself of
those things with the moderation of a user not the attachment of a
lover, in so far as they are requisite for the needs of this life and of
his station."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1; Question 109, Article 2;
Question 123, Article 12), the good of moral virtue consists chiefly in
the order of reason: because "man's good is to be in accord with
reason," as Dionysius asserts (Div. Nom. iv). Now the principal order
of reason is that by which it directs certain things towards their end,
and the good of reason consists chiefly in this order; since good has
the aspect of end, and the end is the rule of whatever is directed to
the end. Now all the pleasurable objects that are at man's disposal,
are directed to some necessity of this life as to their end. Wherefore
temperance takes the need of this life, as the rule of the pleasurable
objects of which it makes use, and uses them only for as much as
the need of this life requires.