## Homily 6 on First Thessalonians

[1 Thessalonians 4:9, 10]
"But concerning love of the brethren we have no need to write unto you: for
you yourselves are taught of God to love one another; for indeed you do it
toward all the brethren, and those which are in all Macedonia."
Why then having discoursed with them earnestly concerning chastity, and
being about to discourse about the duty of working, and about the not sorrowing
for the departed, does he introduce that which was the principal of all good
things, love, as if he were passing it over, saying, "We have no need to write to
you"? This also is from his great wisdom, and belongs to spiritual instruction.
For here he shows two things. First, that the thing is so necessary, as not to
require instruction. For things that are very important are manifest to all. And
secondly, by saying this he makes them more ashamed than if he had
admonished them. For he who thinks that they have behaved aright, and
therefore does not admonish them, even if they had not behaved aright, would
the sooner lead them to it. And observe, he does not speak of love towards all,
but of that towards the brethren. "We have no need to write unto you." He ought
then to have been silent, and to say nothing, if there was no need. But now by
saying there is no need, he has done a greater thing, than if he had said it.
"For you yourselves are taught of God." And see with how high a praise he
has made God their Teacher in this matter. You need not, he says, to learn from
man. Which also the prophet says, "and they shall all be taught of God." [Isaiah
54:13] "For you yourselves," he says, "are taught of God to love one another.
For indeed ye do it toward all the brethren, and those which are in all
Macedonia"; and toward all the others, he means. These words are very
encouraging to make them do so. And I do not merely say, that you are taught of
God, but I know it from the things which you do. And in this respect he bore

many testimonies to them.
"But we exhort you, brethren, that you abound more and more, and study;"
that is, increase and study.
Ver. 11, 12. "To be quiet, and to do your own business, and to work with
your hands, even as we charged you: that you may walk honestly toward them
that are without, and may have need of nothing."
He shows of how many evils idleness is the cause, and of how many
benefits industry. And this he makes manifest from things which happen among
us, as he often does, and that wisely. For by these things the majority are led on
more than by spiritual things. For it is a mark of love to our neighbors not to
receive from them, but to impart to them. And observe. Being about to exhort
and admonish, he places in the middle their good conduct, both that they may
recover even from the preceding admonition, and from the threat, when he said,
"He therefore that rejects, rejects not man, but God," and that they may not be
restive at this. And this is the effect of working, that one does not receive of
others, nor live idly, but by working imparts to others. For it is said, "It is more
blessed to give than to receive." [Acts 20:35] "And to work," he says, "with your
hands." Where are those, who look out for work that is spiritual? Do you see
how he takes from them every excuse, saying, "with your hands"? But does one
practice fasting with his hands? Or watchings all night? Or lyings on the ground?
This no one can say. But he is speaking of spiritual work. For it is truly spiritual,
that one should by working impart to others, and there is nothing equal to this.
"That ye may walk," he says, "becomingly." Do you see whence he touches
them? He has not said, that you may not be shamed by begging. But he has
indeed insinuated the same, yet he puts it in a milder way, so as both to strike
and not to do this severely. For if those who are among us are offended at these
things, much more those who are without, finding numberless accusations and
handles, when they see a man who is in good health and able to support himself,
begging and asking help of others. Wherefore also they call us Christ-mongers.
On this account, he means, "the name of God is blasphemed." [Romans 2:24]