1 Corinthians 12:5
"And there are diversities of ministrations, but the same Lord."
Thus, enriching the consolation, he adds mention of the Son also, and of the
Father. And again, he calls these gifts by another name, designing by this also an
increase of consolation. Wherefore also he thus said: "there are diversities of
ministrations, but the same Lord." For he that hears of "a gift," and has received
a less share, perhaps might grieve; but when we speak of "a ministration," the
case is different. For the thing implies labor and sweat. "Why do you grieve
then," says he, "if he has bidden another labor more, sparing you?"

1 Corinthians 12:6
"And there are diversities of workings, but the same God who works all
things in all."

1 Corinthians 12:7
"But to each one is given the manifestation of the Spirit to profit withal."
"And what," says one, "is a working?" and what "a gift?" and what "a
ministration?" They are mere differences of names, since the things are the
same. For what "a gift" is, that is "a ministration," that he calls "an operation"
also. Thus fulfil your ministry; [2 Timothy 4:5. ministry] and, "I magnify my
ministration:" [Romans 11:13. office] and writing to Timothy, he says, Therefore
I put you in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in you. [2
Timothy 1:6] And again, writing to the Galatians, he said, for he that wrought in
Peter to the Apostleship, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles.
[Galatians 2:8] Do you see that he implies that there is no difference in the gifts
of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost? Not confounding the Persons,
God forbid! But declaring the equal honor of the Essence. For that which the
Spirit bestows, this he says that God also works; this, that the Son likewise
ordains and grants. Yet surely if the one were inferior to the other, or the other to
it, he would not have thus set it down nor would this have been his way of
consoling the person who was vexed.
5. Now after this, he comforts him also in another kind of way; by the
consideration that the measure vouchsafed is profitable to him, even though it be
not so large. For having said, that it is "the same Spirit," and "the same Lord,"
and "the same God," and having thereby recovered him, he brings in again
another consolation, thus saying, "but to each one is given the manifestation of
the Spirit to profit withal." For lest one should say, "what if there be the same
Lord, the same Spirit, the same God? Yet I have received less:" he says, that thus
it was profitable.
But he calls miracles a "manifestation of the Spirit," with evident reason.
For to me who am a believer, he that has the Spirit is manifest from his having

been baptized: but to the unbeliever this will in no way be manifest, except from
the miracles: so that hence also again there is no small consolation. For though
there be a difference of gifts, yet the evidence is one: since whether you have
much or little, you are equally manifest. So that if you desire to show this, that
you have the Spirit, you have a sufficient demonstration.
Wherefore, now that both the Giver is one and the thing given a pure favor,
and the manifestation takes place thereby, and this is more profitable for you;
grieve not as if despised. For not to dishonor you has God done it, nor to declare
you inferior to another, but to spare you and with a view to your welfare. To
receive more than one has ability to bear, this rather is unprofitable, and
injurious, and a fit cause of dejection.