2 Corinthians 8:3
"For according to their power, I bear witness." Trustworthy is the witness.
"And beyond their power." That is, it "abounded unto the riches of their
liberality." Or rather, he makes this plain, not by this expression alone, but also
by all that follows; for he says, "of their own accord." Lo! Yet another
excessiveness.

2 Corinthians 8:4
"With much intreaty." Lo! Yet a third and a fourth. "Praying us." Lo! even a
fifth. And when they were in affliction and in poverty. Here are a sixth and
seventh. And they gave with excessiveness. Then since this is what he most of
all wishes to provide for in the Corinthians' case, namely, the giving deliberately,
he dwells especially upon it, saying, "with much intreaty," and "praying us." 'We
prayed not them, but they us.' Pray us what? "That the grace and the fellowship
in the ministering to the saints." Do you see how he again exalts the deed,
calling it by venerable names. For since they were ambitious of spiritual gifts ,
he calls it by the name grace that they might eagerly pursue it; and again by that
of "fellowship," that they might learn that they receive, not give only. 'This
therefore they intreated us,' he says, 'that we would take upon us such a ministry.
'

2 Corinthians 8:5
"And" this, "not as we hoped." This he says with reference both to the
amount and to their afflictions. 'For we could never have hoped,' he says, 'that
while in so great affliction and poverty, they would even have urged us and so
greatly intreated us.' He showed also their carefulness of life in other respects, by
saying,
"But first they gave their own selves to the Lord, and to us by the will of
God."
'For in everything their obedience was beyond our expectations; nor
because they showed mercy did they neglect the other virtues,' "but first gave
themselves to the Lord." What is, "gave themselves to the Lord?" 'They offered
up [themselves]; they showed themselves approved in faith; they displayed much
fortitude in their trials, order, goodness, love, in all things both readiness and
zeal.' What means, "and to us?" 'They were tractable to the rein, loved, obeyed
us; both fulfilling the laws of God and bound unto us by love.' And observe how
here also he again shows their earnestness , saying, "gave themselves to the
Lord." They did not in some things obey God, and in some the world; but in all
things Him; and gave themselves wholly unto God. For neither because they
showed mercy were they filled up with senseless pride, but displaying much
lowlymindedness, much obedience, much reverence, much heavenly wisdom,
they so wrought their almsdeeds also. But what is, "by the will of God?" Since
he had said, they "gave themselves to us," yet was it not "to us," after the manner
of men, but they did this also according to the mind of God.