have recourse to diviners, you bear not to receive, rather than so to receive it. For
as he from the fear of God has given all to the needy, so thou also from fear of
God, when they have plundered you, hast not recovered it.
We are the masters of injuring or not injuring ourselves. And if you will, let
us make the whole matter plain in the case of theft itself. The thief has cut
through the wall, he has rushed into the chamber, he has carried off costly golden
vessels, and precious stones, in short, he has cleared your whole treasure, and
has not been taken. The fact is grievous, and it seems to be a loss; still as yet it is
not so but it depends on you to make it either a loss or a gain. And how, do you
say, can this be a gain? I will endeavor to show you how, if you are willing, it
will be a great gain, but if unwilling, the loss will be severer than that which has
taken place. For as in the case of artificers, when material is before them, he who
is skilled in his art uses it to good purpose, but he that is unskillful spoils it, and
makes it a loss to him, so also in these matters. How then will it be a gain? If you
give thanks to God, if you dost not wail bitterly, if you utter the words of Job,
"The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away. Naked came I out of my mother's
womb, naked shall I also go away." [Job 1:21, Septuagint]
"What?" do you say, "the Lord has taken away? The thief has taken away,
and how can you say, the Lord has taken away?" Wonder not, for even Job, of
things which the devil took away, said, These the Lord has taken away? And
shall not thou say of what the thief took, The Lord has taken away? Tell me,
whom do you admire? Him who has bestowed all his goods upon the poor, or
Job for these words? Is he, who did not then give, inferior to him, who has given
alms? For say not, "I feel no thankfulness. The matter was not done with my
consent, or knowledge, or will. The robber took it. What will be my reward?"
Neither did these things happen with Job's knowledge or will. For how could it
be? Nevertheless, he wrestled.
And it is in your power to receive as great a reward, as if you had cast it
away willingly. And perhaps we admire this man more, who thankfully suffers
wrongs, than him who gives spontaneously. And why? Because the latter indeed

is fed with praises, and supported by conscience, and has good hopes; and
having before borne manfully the privation of his goods, he then cast them away;
but the former, while yet bound to them, was forcibly deprived of them. And it is
not the same thing, having first been induced to part with riches, in that way to
bestow them, as it is while yet longing to be deprived of them. If you will say
these words, you will receive many times as much, and even more than Job. For
he received twice as much here, but to you Christ has promised a hundred fold.
From the fear of God, you have not blasphemed? You have not had recourse to
diviners? Suffering wrong, you have been thankful? You are like one who
despises wealth, for you could not do this, had you not first despised it. And it is
not the same thing in a long time to practice the contempt of riches, and all at
once to bear a loss that has happened. Thus the loss becomes gain, and you will
not be injured, but even benefited by the devil.
But how does the loss also become grievous? When you lose your soul! Tell
me, the thief has deprived you of your possessions: will you deprive yourself of
salvation? Wherefore, grieving at the evils which you have suffered from others,
do you plunge yourself into more evils? He perhaps has involved you in poverty:
but thou perversely injurest yourself in things that are fatal. He has deprived you
of things that are without you, and that hereafter would spring away from you
even against your will. But you deprive yourself of the eternal riches. The devil
has grieved you by taking away your wealth; do thou also grieve him, and do not
delight him. If you have recourse to diviners, you delight him. If you render
thanks to God, you give him his death-blow.
And see what happens. You will not still find it, if you go to the diviners,
for it is not in their power to know; and even if by any chance they have told
you, thou both losest your own soul besides, and you will be derided by your
brethren, and again wilt lose it wretchedly. For the demon, knowing that you can
not bear your loss, but for the sake of these things deniest even your God, again
gives you wealth, that he may have an opportunity of deceiving you again, and
making you fall away. And if the diviners should tell you, wonder not. The