common to all. In another way it inclines to that which is necessary
for the perfection of the community; and since there are many things
of this kind, one of which hinders another, such an inclination does
not bind each man by way of precept; else each man would be
bound to husbandry and building and to such offices as are
necessary to the human community; but the inclination of nature is
satisfied by the accomplishment of those various offices by various
individuals. Accordingly, since the perfection of the human
community requires that some should devote themselves to the
contemplative life to which marriage is a very great obstacle, the
natural inclination to marriage is not binding by way of precept even
according to the philosophers. Hence Theophrastus proves that it is
not advisable for a wise man to marry, as Jerome relates (Contra
Jovin. i).
Reply to Objection 1: This precept has not been recalled, and yet it is
not binding on each individual, for the reason given above, except at
that time when the paucity of men required each one to betake
himself to the begetting of children.
The Replies to objections 2 and 3 are clear from what has been said.
Reply to Objection 4: Human nature has a general inclination to
various offices and acts, as already stated. But since it is variously
in various subjects, as individualized in this or that one, it inclines
one subject more to one of those offices, and another subject more
to another, according to the difference of temperament of various
individuals. And it is owing to this difference, as well as to Divine
providence which governs all, that one person chooses one office
such as husbandry, and another person another. And so it is too that
some choose the married life and some the contemplative.
Wherefore no danger threatens.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the marriage act is always sinful?

Objection 1: It would seem that the marriage act is always sinful. For
it is written (1 Cor. 7:29): "That they . . . who have wives, be as if they
had none." But those who are not married do not perform the
marriage act. Therefore even those who are married sin in that act.
Objection 2: Further, "Your iniquities have divided between you and
your God." Now the marriage act divides man from God wherefore
the people who were to see God (Ex. 19:11) were commanded not to
go near their wives (Ex. 19:20); and Jerome says (Ep. ad Ageruch.:
Contra Jovini, 18) that in the marriage act "the Holy Ghost touches
not the hearts of the prophets." Therefore it is sinful.
Objection 3: Further, that which is shameful in itself can by no
means be well done. Now the marriage act is always connected with
concupiscence, which is always shameful. Therefore it is always
sinful.
Objection 4: Further, nothing is the object of excuse save sin. Now
the marriage act needs to be excused by the marriage blessings, as
the Master says (Sent. iv, D, 26). Therefore it is a sin.
Objection 5: Further, things alike in species are judged alike. But
marriage intercourse is of the same species as the act of adultery,
since its end is the same, namely the human species. Therefore
since the act of adultery is a sin, the marriage act is likewise.
Objection 6: Further, excess in the passions corrupts virtue. Now
there is always excess of pleasure in the marriage act, so much so
that it absorbs the reason which is man's principal good, wherefore
the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 11) that "in that act it is impossible
to understand anything." Therefore the marriage act is always a sin.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 7:28): "If a virgin marry she hath
not sinned," and (1 Tim. 5:14): "I will . . . that the younger should
marry," and "bear children." But there can be no bearing of children
without carnal union. Therefore the marriage act is not a sin; else the
Apostle would not have approved of it.
Further, no sin is a matter of precept. But the marriage act is a matter