From Rome.

# 21. TO THOSE SENT TO MINISTER TO OTHERS

Principles for Ministry

Rome, October 8, 1552

As the Society grew in membership Ignatius found it somewhat easier to send Jesuits, not only to foreign countries, but also to the major European cities where reigning princes had expressed a desire for a Jesuit college to be founded, for example, Ingolstadt, Vienna, Ferrara, Naples, Messina. In October 1552 Ignatius jotted down the principles that ought to guide the Jesuits in their ministries, and he divides his short instruction into three parts: principles concerning oneself, the neighbor, and the Society. Success in the ministry depends on complete purity of soul, faithfulness to exercises of piety, understanding the persons with whom they are to deal, establishing a hierarchy of values among the works they are to perform. At the same time the Jesuits are to be guided by the Holy Spirit and their superiors, and are to try to attract suitable young men to the Society. The headings in the instruction, originally written in Italian, have been added [Ep . 12:251-253].

Jhs

Whoever in this Society is sent to labor in the vineyard of the Lord, should keep three things in mind: the first concerns himself, the second concerns the neighbor with whom he deals, and the third, the head and the whole body of the Society of which he is a member.

Principles Concerning Oneself

With regard to the first, that is with respect to himself, he should not be forgetful of himself because of his interest in the neighbor. He should refuse to commit even the slightest sin to further the greatest apostolic gain in the world, and not even place himself in danger of committing one. He will find it a help if he avoids dealing with persons from whom he has reason to fear danger, and if he does deal with them, it should be rarely and in public. He should make little account of external appearances, and look upon creatures not as fair or attractive, but as bathed in the blood of Christ, as images of God, temples of the Holy Spirit, and so on. He should defend himself from all evil and acquire every virtue; and the more perfectly he possesses them, the more successfully will he be able to draw others to them. To this end, it will be helpful daily to assign some time for the examination of conscience, prayer, and the reception of the sacraments, etc. He should take into account his own health and his body's strength.

Principles Concerning the Neighbor

With regard to the neighbor, which is the second point, we must be careful with whom we deal. They should be persons from whom we can expect greater fruit, since we cannot deal with everyone. They should be such as are in greater need, and those in high position who exert an influence because of their learning or their temporal possessions; those who are suited to be apostolic workers and, generally speaking, all those who, if helped, will be better able to help others for God's glory.