SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.5.

be numbered among the poor of Christ, have a claim on the
community and on brotherly love to receive a livelihood in return.
They are to be commended indeed if they work with their hands, but
if they be unwilling, who will dare to force them? Nor does it matter,
as he goes on to say, to which monasteries, or in what place any one
of them has bestowed his goods on his needy brethren; for all
Christians belong to one commonwealth."
On the other hand, in the default of any necessity, or of their
affording any profit to others, it is unlawful for religious to wish to
live in idleness on the alms given to the poor. Hence Augustine says
(De oper. Monach. xxii): "Sometimes those who enter the profession
of God's service come from a servile condition of life, from tilling the
soil or working at some trade or lowly occupation. In their case it is
not so clear whether they came with the purpose of serving God, or
of evading a life of want and toil with a view to being fed and clothed
in idleness, and furthermore to being honored by those by whom
they were wont to be despised and downtrodden. Such persons
surely cannot excuse themselves from work on the score of bodily
weakness, for their former mode of life is evidence against them."
And he adds further on (De oper. Monach. xxv): "If they be unwilling
to work, neither let them eat. For if the rich humble themselves to
piety, it is not that the poor may be exalted to pride; since it is
altogether unseemly that in a life wherein senators become laborers,
laborers should become idle, and that where the lords of the manor
have come after renouncing their ease, the serfs should live in
comfort."
Reply to Objection 1: These authorities must be understood as
referring to cases of necessity, that is to say, when there is no other
means of succoring the poor: for then they would be bound not only
to refrain from accepting alms, but also to give what they have for
the support of the needy.
Reply to Objection 2: Prelates are competent to preach in virtue of
their office, but religious may be competent to do so in virtue of
delegation; and thus when they work in the field of the Lord, they
may make their living thereby, according to 2 Tim. 2:6, "The
husbandman that laboreth must first partake of the fruits," which a
gloss explains thus, "that is to say, the preacher, who in the field of
the Church tills the hearts of his hearers with the plough of God's
word." Those also who minister to the preachers may live on alms.
Hence a gloss on Rm. 15:27, "If the Gentiles have been made

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.5.

partakers of their spiritual things, they ought also in carnal things to
minister to them," says, "namely, to the Jews who sent preachers
from Jerusalem." There are moreover other reasons for which a
person has a claim to live at the charge of the faithful, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 3: Other things being equal, it is more perfect to
give than to receive. Nevertheless to give or to give up all one's
possessions for Christ's sake, and to receive a little for one's
livelihood is better than to give to the poor part by part, as stated
above (Question 186, Article 3, ad 6).
Reply to Objection 4: To receive gifts so as to increase one's wealth,
or to accept a livelihood from another without having a claim to it,
and without profit to others or being in need oneself, affords an
occasion of sin. But this does not apply to religious, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 5: Whenever there is evident necessity for
religious living on alms without doing any manual work, as well as
an evident profit to be derived by others, it is not the weak who are
scandalized, but those who are full of malice like the Pharisees,
whose scandal our Lord teaches us to despise (Mt. 15:12-14). If,
however, these motives of necessity and profit be lacking, the weak
might possibly be scandalized thereby; and this should be avoided.
Yet the same scandal might be occasioned through those who live in
idleness on the common revenues.