3. All inequality is reducible to prior equality, as multitude is reducible to unity: but between God
and first created being there is inequality; there must, therefore, be some preceding equality, but
this could be no other than that of a plurality; therefore there must be some plurality in the Divine
Being.

4. Anything that is equivocal is reducible to what is univocal: but the issuing forth of creatures
from God isequivocal; it is needful, therefore, to presume as prior to it a univocal procession, by
which God proceeds from God, by reason of which a Trinity of persons ensues.

5. Without companionship, there can be no joy in the possession of any good: but in God there is
from all eternity a most joyful possession of good; therefore, He possesses eternal
companionship; but this could be no other than the companionship of divine persons, since no
creature is eternal. Therefore, it is necessary to suppose a plurality of persons in the Deity.

6. It is possible to know from natural reason that God is intelligent; but from the fact that He is
intelligent it follows that He conceives the Word, since this is common to every intelligence;
therefore by natural reason it is possible to know of the generation of the Son and, in the same

way, of the procession of love (between Father and Son: the Holy Spirit).

7. Richard of St. Victor in his De Trinitate says: "I believe without any doubt that in the case of
whatever things are necessary there cannot be wanting reasons to explain them, not only
probable arguments, but necessary ones"; but that God is three and one is a necessary truth, since
He is eternal; therefore in proof of this there are necessary arguments of reason, and so the
conclusion is as the previous one.

8. The Platonists had no knowledge of God except through reason: but they held that there were
at least two persons: namely, the Father and the Mind generated by the Father, and this Mind
contained the ideas of all thingsÑa truth which we claim in regard to the Son; therefore by
natural reason a plurality of persons can be known.

9. The Philosopher at the beginning of De coelo et mundo says: "Through this same number
(three) we ourselves are accustomed to call upon God the Creator"; and so the conclusion is the
same.

10. In this life we can in no way know what God is but only that He is: but there is a way in
which we know that God is three and one, since we know it by faith; therefore this truth does not
pertain to a quidditative knowledge of God, but only to an entitative knowledge. But by natural
reason we can know God entitatively; therefore it is possible by natural reason to know that God
is three and one.

#### Sed contra

Faith is of things that are not apparent to reason, as is clear from Heb. 11:1; but that God is three
and one is an article of faith; therefore reason does not suffice for knowing this.