FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

these words, and wrote the decalogue of Moses on a parchment, and
tied it on their foreheads like a wreath, so that it moved in front of
their eyes": whereas the intention of the Lord in giving this
commandment was that they should be bound in their hands, i.e. in
their works; and that they should be before their eyes, i.e. in their
thoughts. The violet-colored fillets which were inserted in their
cloaks signify the godly intention which should accompany our
every deed. It may, however, be said that, because they were a
carnal-minded and stiff-necked people, it was necessary for them to
be stirred by these sensible things to the observance of the Law.
Reply to Objection 8: Affection in man is twofold: it may be an
affection of reason, or it may be an affection of passion. If a man's
affection be one of reason, it matters not how man behaves to
animals, because God has subjected all things to man's power,
according to Ps. 8:8: "Thou hast subjected all things under his feet":
and it is in this sense that the Apostle says that "God has no care for
oxen"; because God does not ask of man what he does with oxen or
other animals.
But if man's affection be one of passion, then it is moved also in
regard to other animals: for since the passion of pity is caused by
the afflictions of others; and since it happens that even irrational
animals are sensible to pain, it is possible for the affection of pity to
arise in a man with regard to the sufferings of animals. Now it is
evident that if a man practice a pitiful affection for animals, he is all
the more disposed to take pity on his fellow-men: wherefore it is
written (Prov. 11:10): "The just regardeth the lives of his beasts: but
the bowels of the wicked are cruel." Consequently the Lord, in order
to inculcate pity to the Jewish people, who were prone to cruelty,
wished them to practice pity even with regard to dumb animals, and
forbade them to do certain things savoring of cruelty to animals.
Hence He prohibited them to "boil a kid in the milk of its dam"; and
to "muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn"; and to slay "the dam
with her young." It may, nevertheless, be also said that these
prohibitions were made in hatred of idolatry. For the Egyptians held
it to be wicked to allow the ox to eat of the grain while threshing the
corn. Moreover certain sorcerers were wont to ensnare the mother
bird with her young during incubation, and to employ them for the
purpose of securing fruitfulness and good luck in bringing up
children: also because it was held to be a good omen to find the
mother sitting on her young.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.7.

As to the mingling of animals of divers species, the literal reason
may have been threefold. The first was to show detestation for the
idolatry of the Egyptians, who employed various mixtures in
worshipping the planets, which produce various effects, and on
various kinds of things according to their various conjunctions. The
second reason was in condemnation of unnatural sins. The third
reason was the entire removal of all occasions of concupiscence.
Because animals of different species do not easily breed, unless this
be brought about by man; and movements of lust are aroused by
seeing such things. Wherefore in the Jewish traditions we find it
prescribed as stated by Rabbi Moses that men shall turn away their
eyes from such sights.
The figurative reason for these things is that the necessities of life
should not be withdrawn from the ox that treadeth the corn, i.e. from
the preacher bearing the sheaves of doctrine, as the Apostle states
(1 Cor. 9:4, seqq.). Again, we should not take the dam with her
young: because in certain things we have to keep the spiritual
senses, i.e. the offspring, and set aside the observance of the letter, i.
e. the mother, for instance, in all the ceremonies of the Law. It is also
forbidden that beast of burden, i.e. any of the common people,
should be allowed to engender, i.e. to have any connection, with
animals of another kind, i.e. with Gentiles or Jews.
Reply to Objection 9: All these minglings were forbidden in
agriculture; literally, in detestation of idolatry. For the Egyptians in
worshipping the stars employed various combinations of seeds,
animals and garments, in order to represent the various connections
of the stars. Or else all these minglings were forbidden in detestation
of the unnatural vice.
They have, however, a figurative reason. For the prohibition: "Thou
shalt not sow thy field with different seeds," is to be understood, in
the spiritual sense, of the prohibition to sow strange doctrine in the
Church, which is a spiritual vineyard. Likewise "the field," i.e. the
Church, must not be sown "with different seeds," i.e. with Catholic
and heretical doctrines. Neither is it allowed to plough "with an ox
and an ass together"; thus a fool should not accompany a wise man
in preaching, for one would hinder the other.
Reply to Objection 1: Silver and gold were reasonably forbidden (Dt.
7) not as though they were not subject to the power of man, but
because, like the idols themselves, all materials out of which idols