FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.2.

of several passions. Because the movement of anger does not arise
save on account of some pain inflicted, and unless there be desire
and hope of revenge: for, as the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 2), "the
angry man hopes to punish; since he craves for revenge as being
possible." Consequently if the person, who inflicted the injury, excel
very much, anger does not ensue, but only sorrow, as Avicenna
states (De Anima iv, 6).
Reply to Objection 1: The irascible power takes its name from
"ira" [anger], not because every movement of that power is one of
anger; but because all its movements terminate in anger; and
because, of all these movements, anger is the most patent.
Reply to Objection 2: From the very fact that anger is caused by
contrary passions, i.e. by hope, which is of good, and by sorrow,
which is of evil, it includes in itself contrariety: and consequently it
has no contrary outside itself. Thus also in mixed colors there is no
contrariety, except that of the simple colors from which they are
made.
Reply to Objection 3: Anger includes several passions, not indeed as
a genus includes several species; but rather according to the
inclusion of cause and effect.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the object of anger is good or evil?

Objection 1: It would seem that the object of anger is evil. For
Gregory of Nyssa says [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxi.] that anger is
"the sword-bearer of desire," inasmuch, to wit, as it assails whatever
obstacle stands in the way of desire. But an obstacle has the
character of evil. Therefore anger regards evil as its object.
Objection 2: Further, anger and hatred agree in their effect, since
each seeks to inflict harm on another. But hatred regards evil as its
object, as stated above (Question 29, Article 1). Therefore anger
does also.
Objection 3: Further, anger arises from sorrow; wherefore the
Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 6) that "anger acts with sorrow." But
evil is the object of sorrow. Therefore it is also the object of anger.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Confess. ii, 6) that "anger craves
for revenge." But the desire for revenge is a desire for something
good: since revenge belongs to justice. Therefore the object of anger
is good.
Moreover, anger is always accompanied by hope, wherefore it
causes pleasure, as the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 2). But the object
of hope and of pleasure is good. Therefore good is also the object of
anger.
I answer that, The movement of the appetitive power follows an act
of the apprehensive power. Now the apprehensive power
apprehends a thing in two ways. First, by way of an incomplex
object, as when we understand what a man is; secondly, by way of a
complex object, as when we understand that whiteness is in a man.
Consequently in each of these ways the appetitive power can tend to
both good and evil: by way of a simple and incomplex object, when
the appetite simply follows and adheres to good, or recoils from evil:
and such movements are desire, hope, pleasure, sorrow, and so
forth: by way of a complex object, as when the appetite is concerned
with some good or evil being in, or being done to, another, either
seeking this or recoiling from it. This is evident in the case of love
and hatred: for we love someone, in so far as we wish some good to
be in him; and we hate someone, in so far as we wish some evil to be