# 31. TO FATHER JERÓNIMO DOMÉNECH

On Preferring the Universal Good of the Society over that of a Particular Province

Rome, January 13, 1554

Jerónimo Doménech 1 was provincial of Sicily and was concerned about the lack of Jesuits to staff the various positions in his province. He wrote to Ignatius complaining of the few men who had been sent him for a harvest so vast, and had commented to some that the founder was not sending men to Sicily because he had little interest in the place. Ignatius heard of this remark and directed Polanco to write this letter of reproof. Polanco writes that Ignatius did not appreciate the provincial's comment, informs him that the other houses in Italy are likewise suffering from lack of men, and reminds him that Ignatius has to consider the universal good of the Society rather than that of any single province. By enumerating the several Italian colleges that were understaffed, Polanco shows that Sicily is the best provided of all. Doménech is, of course, to make his needs known to Ignatius, but he is then to leave everything in the general's hands. Polanco's letter was written in Spanish [ Ep . 6:178-180].

The peace of Christ.

My dear father in Christ: I would much prefer to write in a way that would console you rather than offend you, but your reverence must refrain from giving occasion. Indeed, if our Father were not kept busy by other pressing matters, he would show in a much more effective manner his dislike of your reverence's complaints, which reflect, discredit on him, not only because you do not submit your own judgment to his in his appointments but because, in the presence of others, you also condemn them as being bad. This is clearly seen in the instance of the three who had recently come from Spain.2 You tried to keep Master Pierre Chanel3 and you complained to him that, while our Father in the beginning sent you outstanding men of the Society, he later withdrew all of them, and so forth. Your reverence overlooks the fact that some recompense had been made for those who were taken away, and you fail to see (something still more surprising) that our Father is obliged to keep the universal good in mind. Thus, besides providing you with enough men to carry on the works you have undertaken, he must assist others in places where our Lord wishes to make use of the Society and its members. The college of Venice has only one priest4 who has no knowledge of philosophy or theology; that of Padua has two5 who are weak in literature and without advanced training; that of Modena has two6 who are only average in Latin and still mere youths. At Ferrara, Pelletier7 was alone until another was sent to help him, who does not know a great deal of literature or higher studies.8 Father Francesco Palmio9 is at Bologna, but no other priest can be sent as companion to him, since there is no other. Master Louis10 is at Florence, and another11 who has only with difficulty completed his literary studies. There are two at Gubbio,12 but neither of them is a theologian. There is a single theologian at Perugia13 and another who is no theologian.14 And I think that there is an equal or even greater lack of schoolmasters in these places. But this does not prevent them from producing fruit, God making up for what our poor efforts cannot accomplish. If we compare conditions in Sicily with conditions in all of Italy, there is no doubt that it is better provided than any other place, even after making all necessary allowances. Now, despite all this, our Father does not wish that your reverence fail to declare your mind. Rather it is his wish that you do so, but he does not wish that your reverence allow any word to escape that would seem to indicate that you are complaining of what he does. Do not broadcast your needs abroad. He will be content if you make them known to him, and then leave everything to him. You should prefer the general good to the particular, and convince yourself that our Father, once he has been informed simply, and without any attempt to use pressure, will decide what will be to the greater service of God our Lord and the general good. Indeed, this should be the aim of all, even though local angels have a special preference for their particular provinces or localities.