FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.4.

reason, as though it listened but imperfectly to reason, on account of
the commotion of the heat urging to instant action, which commotion
is the material element of anger. In this respect it hinders the
judgment of reason.
Reply to Objection 2: An angry man is said to be open, not because
it is clear to him what he ought to do, but because he acts openly,
without thought of hiding himself. This is due partly to the reason
being hindered, so as not to discern what should be hidden and what
done openly, nor to devise the means of hiding; and partly to the
dilatation of the heart which pertains to magnanimity which is an
effect of anger: wherefore the Philosopher says of the magnanimous
man (Ethic. iv, 3) that "he is open in his hatreds and his
friendships . . . and speaks and acts openly." Desire, on the other
hand, is said to lie low and to be cunning, because, in many cases,
the pleasurable things that are desired, savor of shame and
voluptuousness, wherein man wishes not to be seen. But in those
things that savor of manliness and excellence, such as matters of
vengeance, man seeks to be in the open.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (ad 1), the movement of anger
begins in the reason, wherefore the juxtaposition of one contrary
with another facilitates the judgment of reason, on the same grounds
as it increases anger. For when a man who is possessed of honor or
wealth, suffers a loss therein, the loss seems all the greater, both on
account of the contrast, and because it was unforeseen.
Consequently it causes greater grief: just as a great good, through
being received unexpectedly, causes greater delight. And in
proportion to the increase of the grief that precedes, anger is
increased also.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether anger above all causes taciturnity?

Objection 1: It would seem that anger does not cause taciturnity.
Because taciturnity is opposed to speech. But increase in anger
conduces to speech; as is evident from the degrees of anger laid
down by Our Lord (Mt. 5:22): where He says: "Whosoever is angry
with his brother"; and " . . . whosoever shall say to his brother,
'Raca'"; and " . . . whosoever shall say to his brother, 'Thou fool.'"
Therefore anger does not cause taciturnity.
Objection 2: Further, through failing to obey reason, man sometimes
breaks out into unbecoming words: hence it is written (Prov. 25:28):
"As a city that lieth open and is not compassed with walls, so is a
man that cannot refrain his own spirit in speaking." But anger, above
all, hinders the judgment of reason, as stated above (Article 3).
Consequently above all it makes one break out into unbecoming
words. Therefore it does not cause taciturnity.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Mt. 12:34): "Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaketh." But anger, above all, causes a
disturbance in the heart, as stated above (Article 2). Therefore above
all it conduces to speech. Therefore it does not cause taciturnity.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. v, 30) that "when anger does
not vent itself outwardly by the lips, inwardly it burns the more
fiercely."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 3; Question 46, Article 4),
anger both follows an act of reason, and hinders the reason: and in
both respects it may cause taciturnity. On the part of the reason,
when the judgment of reason prevails so far, that although it does
not curb the appetite in its inordinate desire for vengeance, yet it
curbs the tongue from unbridled speech. Wherefore Gregory says
(Moral. v, 30): "Sometimes when the mind is disturbed, anger, as if in
judgment, commands silence." On the part of the impediment to
reason because, as stated above (Article 2), the disturbance of anger
reaches to the outward members, and chiefly to those members
which reflect more distinctly the emotions of the heart, such as the
eyes, face and tongue; wherefore, as observed above (Article 2), "the
tongue stammers, the countenance takes fire, the eyes grow fierce."
Consequently anger may cause such a disturbance, that the tongue