baptism, and in all the rest. Therefore Paul also cries with a clear voice, "God
forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ."
Whence it is clear, that they who are diseased in Marcion's way are children
of the devil, blotting out these truths, to avoid the annulling whereof Christ did
so many things, while to have them annulled the devil took such manifold pains:
I mean, His cross and His passion.
3. Therefore He said elsewhere also, "Destroy this temple, and in three days
I will raise it up:" [John 2:19] and, The days will come when the Bridegroom
shall be taken away from them: [Matthew 9:15] and here, "There shall no sign
be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet:" declaring both that He should die
and "the ox that knows his owner, and the ass that remembers his crib."
[Isaiah 1:3] Even so here too, when He had by a comparison set forth their
perverseness, He speaks afterwards of their punishment also.
What then can the saying mean? As the possessed, says He, when delivered
from that infirmity, should they be at all remiss, draw upon themselves their
delusion more grievous than ever: even so is it with you. For before also you
were possessed by a devil, when you were worshipping idols, and were slaying
your sons to the devils, exhibiting great madness; nevertheless I forsook you not,
but cast out that devil by the prophets; and again in my own person I have come,
willing to cleanse you more entirely. Since then you will not attend, but have
wrecked yourselves in greater wickedness (for to kill prophets was a crime not
nearly so great and grievous as to slay Him); therefore your sufferings will be
more grievous than the former, those at Babylon, I mean, and in Egypt, and
under the first Antiochus. Because what things befell them in the time of
Vespasian and Titus, were very far more grievous than those. Wherefore also He
said, "There shall be great tribulation, such as never was, neither shall be."
[Matthew 24:21] But not this only does the illustration declare, but that they
should be also utterly destitute of all virtue, and more assailable by the power of
the devils, than at that time. For then even although they sinned, yet were there
also among them such as acted uprightly, and God's providence was present with

them, and the grace of the Spirit, tending, correcting, fulfilling all its part; but
now of this guardianship too they shall be utterly deprived; so He tells them; so
that there is now both a greater scarcity of virtue, and a more intense affliction,
and a more tyrannical operation of the devils.
You know accordingly even in our generation, when he who surpassed all
in impiety, I mean Julian, was transported with his fury, how they ranged
themselves with the heathens, how they courted their party. So that, even if they
seem to be in some small degree chastened now, the fear of the emperors makes
them quiet; since, if it were not for that, far worse than the former had been their
daring. For in all their other evil works they surpass their predecessors; sorceries,
magic arts, impurities, they exhibit in great excess. And among the rest,
moreover, strong as is the curb which holds them down, they have often made
seditions, and risen up against kings, which has resulted in their being pierced
through with the worst of evils.
Where now are they that seek after signs? Let them hear that a considerate
mind is needed, and if this be wanting, signs are of no profit. See, for instance,
how the Ninevites without signs believed, while these, after so many miracles,
grew worse, and made themselves an habitation of innumerable devils, and
brought on themselves ten thousand calamities; and very naturally. For when a
man, being once delivered from his ills, fails to be corrected, he will suffer far
worse than before. Yea, therefore He said, "he finds no rest," to indicate, that
positively and of necessity such an one will be overtaken by the ambush of the
devils. Since surely by these two things he ought to have been sobered, by his
former sufferings, and by his deliverance; or rather a third thing also is added,
the threat of having still worse to endure. But yet by none of these were they
made better.
5. All this might be seasonably said, not of them only, but of us also, when
after having been enlightened, [Hebrews 6:4] and delivered from our former ills,
we again cleave unto the same wickedness, for more grievous also thenceforth
will be the punishment of our subsequent sins. Therefore to the sick of the palsy