## Homily 35 on Matthew

Matt. X. 34.
" Think not that I have come to send peace on earth; I am not come to send
peace, but a sword."
Again, He sets forth the things that are more painful, and that with great
aggravation: and the objection they were sure to meet Him with, He prevents
them by stating. I mean, lest hearing this, they should say, "For, this then are You
come, to destroy both us, and them that obey us, and to fill the earth with war?"
He first says Himself, "I am not come to send peace on earth."
How then did He enjoin them to pronounce peace on entering into each
house? And again, how did the angels say, "Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace"? [Luke 2:14] And how came all the prophets too to publish it for
good tidings? Because this more than anything is peace, when the diseased is cut
off, when the mutinous is removed. For thus it is possible for Heaven to be
united to earth. Since the physician too in this way preserves the rest of the body,
when he amputates the incurable part; and the general, when he has brought to a
separation them that were agreed in mischief. Thus it came to pass also in the
case of that famous tower; for their evil peace [Genesis 11:7-8] was ended by
their good discord, and peace made thereby. Thus Paul also divided them that
were conspiring against him. [Acts 23:6-7] And in Naboth's case that agreement
was at the same time more grievous than any war. [1 Kings xxi] For concord is
not in every case a good thing, since even robbers agree together.
The war is not then the effect of His purpose, but of their temper. For His
will indeed was that all should agree in the word of godliness; but because they
fell to dissension, war arises. Yet He spoke not so; but what says He? "I am not
come to send peace;" comforting them. As if He said, For think not that you are
to blame for these things; it is I who order them so, because men are so disposed.

Be not ye therefore confounded, as though the events happened against
expectation. To this end am I come, to send war among men; for this is my will.
Be not ye therefore troubled, when the earth is at war, as though it were subject
to some hostile device. For when the worse part is rent away, then after that
Heaven is knit unto the better.
And these things He says, as strengthening them against the evil suspicion
of the multitude.
And He said not "war," but what was more grievous than it, "a sword." And
if there be somewhat painful in these expressions, and of an alarming emphasis,
marvel not. For, it being His will to train their ears by the severity of His words,
lest in their difficult circumstances they should start aside, He fashioned His
discourse accordingly; lest any one should say it was by flattery He persuaded
them, and by concealing the hardships; therefore even to those things which
merited to be otherwise expressed, He gave by His words the more galling and
painful turn. For it is better to see persons' gentleness in things, than in words.
2. Wherefore neither with this was He satisfied, but unfolds also the very
nature of the war, signifying it to be far more grievous even than a civil war; and
He says, "I have come to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law against her mother-inlaw."
For not friends only, says He, nor fellow citizens, but even kinsmen shall
stand against one another, and nature shall be divided against herself. "For I
have come," says He, "to set a man at variance against his father, and the
daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law."
That is, not merely among those of the same household is the war, but among
those that are dearest, and extremely near to each other. And this more than
anything signifies His power, that hearing these things, they both accepted Him,
and set about persuading all others.
Yet was it not He that did this: of course not: but the wickedness of the
other sort: nevertheless He says it is His own doing. For such is the custom of