underwent, to the proof of the things mentioned; and by his narrative all but
says, "If you doubt me, and if you suspect my testimony, believe her husband."
For "Joseph," says he, "her husband, being a just man." By "a just man" in this
place he means him that is virtuous in all things. For both freedom from
covetousness is justice, and universal virtue is also justice; and it is mostly in
this latter sense that the Scripture uses the name of justice; as when it says, "a
man that was just and true;" [Job 1:1] and again, "they were both just."
[Luke 1:6] Being then "just," that is good and considerate, "he was minded to put
her away privily." For this intent he tells what took place before Joseph's being
fully informed, that you might not mistrust what was done after he knew.
However, such a one was not liable to be made a public example only, but that
she should also be punished was the command of the law. Whereas Joseph
remitted not only that greater punishment, but the less likewise, namely, the
disgrace. For so far from punishing, he was not minded even to make an
example of her. Do you see a man under self-restraint, and freed from the most
tyrannical of passions. For you know how great a thing jealousy is: and therefore
He said, to whom these things are clearly known, "For full of jealousy is the
rage of a husband;" [Proverbs 6:34] "he will not spare in the day of vengeance:"
and "jealousy is cruel as the grave." [Song of Songs 8:6] And we too know of
many that have chosen to give up their lives rather than fall under the suspicion
of jealousy. But in this case it was not so little as suspicion, the burden of the
womb entirely convicting her. But nevertheless he was so free from passion as to
be unwilling to grieve the Virgin even in the least matters. Thus, whereas to keep
her in his house seemed like a transgression of the law, but to expose and bring
her to trial would constrain him to deliver her to die; he does none of these
things, but conducts himself now by a higher rule than the law. For grace having
come, there must needs henceforth be many tokens of that exalted citizenship.
For as the sun, though as yet he show not his beams, does from afar by his light
illumine more than half the world; so likewise Christ, when about to rise from
that womb, even before He came forth, shone over all the world. Wherefore,

even before her travail, prophets danced for joy, and women foretold what was to
come, and John, when he had not yet come forth from the belly, leaped from the
very womb. Hence also this man exhibited great self-command, in that he
neither accused nor upbraided, but only set about putting her away.
8. The matter then being in this state, and all at their wits' end, the angel
comes to solve all their difficulties. But it is worth inquiring, why the angel did
not speak sooner, before the husband had such thoughts: but, "when he thought
on it," not until then, he came; for it is said, "While he thought on these things,
the angel" comes. And yet to her he declares the good tidings even before she
conceived. And this again contains another difficulty; for even though the angel
had not spoken, wherefore was the Virgin silent, who had been informed by the
angel; and why, when she saw her betrothed husband in trouble, did she not put
an end to his perplexity?
Wherefore then did not the angel speak before Joseph became troubled. For
we must needs explain the former difficulty first. For what reason then did he not
speak? Lest Joseph should be unbelieving, and the same happen to him as to
Zacharias. For when the thing was visible, belief was thenceforth easy; but when
it had not yet a beginning, it was not equally easy to receive his saying. For this
reason the angel spoke not at the first, and through the same cause the Virgin too
held her peace. For she did not think to obtain credit with her betrothed husband,
in declaring to him a thing unheard of, but rather that she should provoke him
the more, as though she were cloking a sin that had been committed. Since if she
herself, who was to receive so great a favor, is affected somewhat after the
manner of man, and says, "How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?"
[Luke 1:34] much more would he have doubted; and especially when hearing it
from the woman who was under suspicion. Wherefore the Virgin says nothing to
him, but the angel, the time demanding it, presents himself to him.
9. Why then, it may be asked, did he not so in the Virgin's case also, and
declare the good tidings to her after the conception? Lest she should be in
agitation and great trouble. For it were likely that she, not knowing the certainty,