impeachment of their wickedness! "But a Tabernacle," say you, "there was (the
Tabernacle) 'of Witness.'" [Acts 7:44] (Yes,) this is why it was: that they should
have God for Witness: this was all. "According to the fashion," it says, "that was
shown you on the mount:" so that on the mount was the Original. And this
Tabernacle, moreover, "in the wilderness," was carried about, and not locally
fixed. And he calls it, "Tabernacle of witness:" i.e. (for witness) of the miracles,
of the statutes. This is the reason why both it and those (the fathers) had no
Temple. "As He had appointed, that spoke unto Moses, that he should make it
according to the fashion that he had seen." Again, it was none other than He
(Christ) that gave the fashion itself. "Until the days of David" [Acts 7:45]: and
there was no temple! And yet the Gentiles also had been driven out: for that is
why he mentions this: "Whom God drove out," he says, "before the face of our
fathers. Whom He drove out," he says: and even then, no Temple! And so many
wonders, and no mention of a Temple! So that, although first there is a
Tabernacle, yet nowhere a Temple. "Until the days of David," he says: even
David, and no Temple! "And he sought to find favor before God" [Acts 7:46]:
and built not:— so far was the Temple from being a great matter! "But Solomon
built Him an house." [Acts 7:47] They thought Solomon was great: but that he
was not better than his father, nay not even equal to him, is manifest. "Howbeit
the Most High dwells not in temples made with hands; as says the prophet,
Heaven is My throne, and earth is My footstool." (v. 48, 49.) Nay, not even these
are worthy of God, forasmuch as they are made, seeing they are creatures, the
works of His hand. See how he leads them on little by little (showing) that not
even these are to be mentioned. And again the prophecy says openly, "What
house will you build Me?" etc. [Acts 7:50]
What is the reason that at this point he speaks in the tone of invective
([καταφορικὥς])? Great was his boldness of speech, when at the point to die: for
in fact I think he knew that this was the case. "You stiffnecked," he says, "and
uncircumcised in heart and ears." This also is from the prophets: nothing is of
himself. "You do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye."

[Acts 7:51] When it was not His will that sacrifices should be, you sacrifice:
when it is His will, then again ye do not sacrifice: when He would not give you
commandments, you drew them to you: when you got them, you neglected them.
Again, when the Temple stood, you worshipped idols: when it is His will to be
worshipped without a Temple, you do the opposite. Observe, he says not, "You
resist God," but, "the Spirit:" so far was he from knowing any difference
between Them. And, what is greater: "As your fathers did," he says, "so do ye."
Thus also did Christ (reproach them), forasmuch as they were always boasting
much of their fathers. "Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted?
And they have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One:"
he still says, "the Just One," wishing to check them: "of Whom you have been
now the betrayers and murderers"— two charges he lays against them — "who
have received the Law by the disposition of Angels, and have not kept it." [Acts
7:52] How, "By the disposition of Angels?" Some say (The Law), disposed by
Angels; or, put into his hand by the Angel Who appeared to him in the bush; for
was He man? No wonder that He who wrought those works, should also have
wrought these. "You slew them who preached of Him," much more Himself. He
shows them disobedient both to God, and to Angels, and the Prophets, and the
Spirit, and to all: as also Scripture says elsewhere: "Lord, they have slain Your
Prophets, and thrown down Your altars." [1 Kings 19:10] They, then, stand up
for the Law, and say, "He blasphemes against Moses:" he shows, therefore, that
it is they who blaspheme, and that (their blasphemy is not only against Moses,
but) against God; shows that "they" from the very beginning have been doing
this: that "they" have themselves destroyed their "customs," that there is no need
of these: that while accusing him, and saying that he opposed Moses, they
themselves were opposing the Spirit: and not merely opposing, but with murder
added to it: and that they had their enmity all along from the very beginning. Do
you see, that he shows them to be acting in opposition both to Moses and to all
others, and not keeping the Law? And yet Moses had said, A Prophet shall the
Lord raise up unto you: and the rest also told of this (Christ) that He would