Him, and the Holy Spirit love for Him, but He Himself understand only
both for Himself and them; nor likewise that the Holy Spirit should
neither remember nor understand for Himself, but the Father should
remember for Him, and the Son understand for Him, while He Himself
should love only both for Himself and for them; but rather in this way,
that both all and each have all three each in His own nature. Nor that
these things should differ in them, as in us memory is one thing,
understanding another, love or charity another, but should be some one
thing that is equivalent to all, as wisdom itself; and should be so
contained in the nature of each, as that He who has it is that which He
has, as being an unchangeable and simple substance. If all this, then, has
been understood, and so far as is granted to us to see or conjecture in
things so great, has been made patently true, I know not why both the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit should not be called Love, and all
together one love, just as both the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit
is called Wisdom, and all together not three, but one wisdom. For so also
both the Father is God, and the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and all
three together one God.
29. And yet it is not to no purpose that in this Trinity the Son and none
other is called the Word of God, and the Holy Spirit and none other the
Gift of God, and God the Father alone is He from whom the Word is born,
and from whom the Holy Spirit principally proceeds. And therefore I
have added the word principally, because we find that the Holy Spirit
proceeds from the Son also. But the Father gave Him this too, not as to
one already existing, and not yet having it; but whatever He gave to the
only-begotten Word, He gave by begetting Him. Therefore He so begat
Him as that the common Gift should proceed from Him also, and the
Holy Spirit should be the Spirit of both. This distinction, then, of the
inseparable Trinity is not to be merely accepted in passing, but to be
carefully considered; for hence it was that the Word of God was specially
called also the Wisdom of God, although both Father and Holy Spirit are
wisdom. If, then, any one of the three is to be specially called Love, what
more fitting than that it should be the Holy Spirit?—namely, that in that
simple and highest nature, substance should not be one thing and love
another, but that substance itself should be love, and love itself should be
substance, whether in the Father, or in the Son, or in the Holy Spirit; and

yet that the Holy Spirit should be specially called Love.
30. Just as sometimes all the utterances of the Old Testament together in
the Holy Scriptures are signified by the name of the Law. For the apostle,
in citing a text from the prophet Isaiah, where he says, "With divers
tongues and with divers lips will I speak to this people," yet prefaced it by,
"It is written in the Law." And the Lord Himself says, "It is written in
their Law, They hated me without a cause," whereas this is read in the
Psalm. And sometimes that which was given by Moses is specially called
the Law: as it is said, "The Law and the Prophets were until John;" and,
"On these two commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets." Here,
certainly, that is specially called the Law which was from Mount Sinai.
And the Psalms, too, are signified under the name of the Prophets; and
yet in another place the Saviour Himself says, "All things must needs be
fulfilled, which are written in the Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms
concerning me." Here, on the other side, He meant the name of
Prophets to be taken as not including the Psalms. Therefore the Law with
the Prophets and the Psalms taken together is called the Law universally,
and the Law is also specially so called which was given by Moses.
Likewise the Prophets are so called in common together with the Psalms,
and they are also specially so called exclusive of the Psalms. And man
other instances might be adduced to teach us, that many names of things
are both put universally, and also specially applied to particular things,
were it not that a long discourse is to be avoided in a plain case. I have
said so much, lest any one should think that it was therefore unsuitable
for us to call the Holy Spirit Love, because both God the Father and God
the Son can be called Love.
31. As, then, we call the only Word of God specially by the name of
Wisdom, although universally both the Holy Spirit and the Father
Himself is wisdom; so the Holy Spirit is specially called by the name of
Love, although universally both the Father and the Son are love. But the
Word of God, i.e. the only-begotten Son of God, is expressly called the
Wisdom of God by the mouth of the apostle, where he says, "Christ the
power of God, and the wisdom of God." But where the Holy Spirit is
called Love, is to be found by careful scrutiny of the language of John the
apostle, who, after saying, "Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of