THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.89, C.3.

To the argument advanced in the contrary sense it must be replied
that in one and the same man proficient grace is greater than
incipient grace, but this is not necessarily the case in different men,
for one begins with a greater grace than another has in the state of
proficiency: thus Gregory says (Dial. ii, 1): "Let all, both now and
hereafter, acknowledge how perfectly the boy Benedict turned to the
life of grace from the very beginning."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.89, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether, by Penance, man is restored to his

former dignity?
Objection 1: It would seem that man is not restored by Penance to
his former dignity: because a gloss on Amos 5:2, "The virgin of
Israel is cast down," observes: "It is not said that she cannot rise up,
but that the virgin of Israel shall not rise; because the sheep that has
once strayed, although the shepherd bring it back on his shoulder,
has not the same glory as if it had never strayed." Therefore man
does not, through Penance, recover his former dignity.
Objection 2: Further, Jerome says: "Whoever fail to preserve the
dignity of the sacred order, must be content with saving their souls;
for it is a difficult thing to return to their former degree." Again, Pope
Innocent I says (Ep. vi ad Agapit.) that "the canons framed at the
council of Nicaea exclude penitents from even the lowest orders of
clerics." Therefore man does not, through Penance, recover his
former dignity.
Objection 3: Further, before sinning a man can advance to a higher
sacred order. But this is not permitted to a penitent after his sin, for
it is written (Ezech. 44:10,13): "The Levites that went away . . . from
Me . . . shall never come near to Me, to do the office of priest": and as
laid down in the Decretals (Dist. 1, ch. 52), and taken from the
council of Lerida: "If those who serve at the Holy Altar fall suddenly
into some deplorable weakness of the flesh, and by God's mercy do
proper penance, let them return to their duties, yet so as not to
receive further promotion." Therefore Penance does not restore man
to his former dignity.
On the contrary, As we read in the same Distinction, Gregory writing
to Secundinus (Regist. vii) says: "We consider that when a man has
made proper satisfaction, he may return to his honorable position":
and moreover we read in the acts of the council of Agde:
"Contumacious clerics, so far as their position allows, should be
corrected by their bishops. so that when Penance has reformed
them, they may recover their degree and dignity."
I answer that, By sin, man loses a twofold dignity, one in respect of
God, the other in respect of the Church. In respect of God he again
loses a twofold dignity. one is his principal dignity, whereby he was