but, just as in a night-battle, it leads him, with eyes blindfolded and ears stopped
up, where it will. Then let us rid ourselves of this demon, at its first beginning let
us quell it, let us put the sign of the Cross on our breast, as it were a curb. Wrath
is a shameless dog: but let it learn to hear the law. If there be in a sheep-fold a
dog so savage as not to obey the command of the shepherd, nor to know his
voice, all is lost and ruined. He is kept along with the sheep: but if he makes a
meal on the sheep, he is useless, and is put to death. If he has learned to obey
you, feed your dog: he is useful when it is against the wolves, against robbers,
and against the captain of the robbers that he barks, not against the sheep, not
against friends. If he does not obey he ruins all: if he learns not to mind you, he
destroys all. The mildness in you let not wrath consume, but let it guard it, and
feed it up. And it will guard it, that it may feed in much security, if it destroy
wicked and evil thoughts, if it chase away the devil from every side. So is
gentleness preserved, when evil works are nowhere admitted: so we become
worthy of respect, when we learn not to be shameless. For nothing renders a man
so shameless, as an evil conscience. Why are harlots without shame? Why are
virgins shamefaced? Is it not from their sin that the former, from their chastity
that the latter, are such? For nothing makes a person so shameless, as sin. "And
yet on the contrary," say you, "it puts to shame." Yes; him who condemns
himself: but him that is past blushing, it renders even more reckless: for
desperation makes daring. For "the wicked," says the Scripture, "when he has
come into the depths of evils, despises." [Proverbs 18:3] But he that is shameless,
will also be reckless, and he that is reckless, will be daring.
See in what way gentleness is destroyed, when evil thoughts gnaw at it.
This is why there is such a dog, barking mightily: we have also sling and stone
(ye know what I mean): we have also spear and enclosure and cattle-fold: let us
guard our thoughts unhurt. If the dog be gentle ([σαίνῃ]) with the sheep, but
savage against those without, and keep vigilant watch, this is the excellence of a
dog: and, be he ever so famished, not to devour the sheep; be he ever so full, not
to spare the wolves. Such too is anger meant to be: however provoked, not to

forsake gentleness; however at quiet, to be on the alert against evil thoughts: to
acknowledge the friend, and not for any beating forsake him, and for all his
caressing, to fly at the intruder. The devil uses caressing full oft: let the dog
know at sight that he is an intruder. So also let us caress ([σαίνωμεν]) Virtue,
though she put us to pain, and show our aversion to Vice, though she give us
pleasure. Let us not be worse than the dogs, which, even when whipped and
throttled, do not desert their master: but if the stranger also feed them, even so
they do hurt. There are times when anger is useful; but this is when it barks
against strangers. What means it, "Whosoever is angry with his brother without a
cause?" [Matthew 5:22] It means, Stand not up in your own quarrel, neither
avenge yourself: if you see another suffering deadly wrong, stretch out your
hand to help him. This is no longer passion, when you are clear of all feeling for
yourself alone. David had gotten Saul into his power, and was not moved by
passion, did not thrust the spear into him, the enemy he had in his power; but
took his revenge upon the Devil. [1 Samuel 26:7] Moses, when he saw a stranger
doing an injury, even slew him [Exodus 2:22]: but when one of his own people,
he did not so: them that were brethren he would have reconciled; the others not
so. That "most meek" [Numbers 12:3] Moses, as Scripture witnesses of him, see
how he was roused! But not so, we: on the contrary, where we ought to show
meekness, no wild beast so fierce as we: but where we ought to be roused, none
so dull and sluggish. (Hom. vi. de laud. Pauli, ad fin.) On no occasion do we use
our faculties to the purpose they were meant for: and therefore it is that our life
is spent to no purpose. For even in the case of implements; if one use them, one
instead of other, all is spoilt: if one take his sword, and then, where he should use
it and cut with it, uses only his hand, he does no good: again, where he should
use his hand, by taking the sword in hand he spoils all. In like manner also the
physician, if where he ought to cut, he cuts not, and where he ought not, he does
cut, mars all. Wherefore, I beseech you, let us use the thing ([τᾥ πράγματι]) at its
proper time. The proper time for anger is never, where we move in our own
quarrel: but if it is our duty to correct others, then is the time to use it, that we