But not even so does he endure. Therefore having come down, he becomes
dizzy; for he was afraid. And this the surf caused, but his fear was wrought by
the wind.
But John says, that "they willingly received Him into the ship; and
immediately the ship was at the land whither they went," relating this same
circumstance. So that when they were on the point of arriving at the land, He
entered the ship.
Peter then having come down from the ship went unto Him, not rejoicing so
much in walking on the water, as in coming unto Him. And when he had
prevailed over the greater, he was on the point of suffering evil from the less,
from the violence of the wind, I mean, not of the sea. For such a thing is human
nature; not seldom effecting great things, it exposes itself in the less; as Elias felt
toward Jezebel, as Moses toward the Egyptian, as David toward Bathsheba.
Even so then this man also; while their fear was yet at the height, he took
courage to walk upon the water, but against the assault of the wind he was no
longer able to stand; and this, being near Christ. So absolutely nothing does it
avail to be near Christ, not being near Him by faith.
And this also showed the difference between the Master and the disciple,
and allayed the feelings of the others. For if in the case of the two brethren they
had indignation, much more here; for they had not yet the Spirit vouchsafed unto
them.
But afterwards they were not like this. On every occasion, for example,
they give up the first honors to Peter, and put him forward in their addresses to
the people, although of a rougher vein than any of them.
And wherefore did He not command the winds to cease, but Himself
stretched forth His hand and took hold of him? Because in him faith was
required. For when our part is wanting, then God's part also is at a stand.
Signifying therefore that not the assault of the wind, but his want of faith
had wrought his overthrow, He says, "Wherefore did you doubt, O thou of little
faith?" So that if his faith had not been weak, he would have stood easily against

the wind also. And for this reason, you see, even when He had caught hold of
Him, He suffers the wind to blow, showing that no hurt comes thereby, when
faith is steadfast.
And as when a nestling has come out of the nest before the time, and is on
the point of falling, its mother bears it on her wings, and brings it back to the
nest; even so did Christ.
"And when they had come into the ship, then the wind ceased."
[Matthew 14:32]
Whereas before this they had said, "What manner of man is this, that even
the winds and the sea obey Him!" [Matthew 8:27] now it is not so. For "they that
were in the ship," it is said, "came and worshipped Him, saying, Of a truth You
are Son of God." [Matthew 14:33] Do you see, how by degrees he was leading
them all higher and higher? For both by His walking on the sea, and by His
commanding another to do so, and preserving him in jeopardy; their faith was
henceforth great. For then indeed He rebuked the sea, but now He rebukes it not,
in another way signifying His power more abundantly. Wherefore also they said,
"Of a truth You are Son of God."
What then? Did He rebuke them on their so speaking? Nay, quite the
contrary, He rather confirmed what they said, with greater authority healing such
as approached Him, and not as before.
"And when they had gone over," so it is said, "they came into the land of
Gennesaret. And when the men of that place had knowledge of Him, they sent
out into all that country round about, and brought unto Him all that were
diseased; and besought Him that they might touch the hem of His garment; and
as many as touched were made perfectly whole."
For neither did they approach Him as before, dragging Him into their
houses, and seeking a touch of His hand, and directions from Him in words; but
in a far higher strain, and with more of self-denial, and with a more abundant
faith did they try to win themselves a cure; for she that had the issue of blood
taught them all to be severe in seeking wisdom.