seemed to speak against Himself. He said then, that Philip had "called" him; but
what Philip had said to him or he to Philip, He omitted, leaving it to his own
conscience, and not desiring farther to rebuke him.
3. Was it then only "before Philip called him" that He "saw" him? Did He
not see him before this with His sleepless eye? He saw him, and none could
gainsay it; but this is what it was needful to say at the time. And what did
Nathanael? When he had received an unquestionable proof of His
foreknowledge, he hastened to confess Him, showing by his previous delay his
caution, and his fairness by his assent afterwards. For, said the Evangelist,

John 1:49
"He answered and says unto Him, Rabbi, You are the Son of God, You are the
King of Israel:"
Do you see how his soul is filled at once with exceeding joy, and embraces
Jesus with words? "You are," says he, "that expected, that sought-for One." Do
you see how he is amazed, how he marvels? How he leaps and dances with
delight?
So ought we also to rejoice, who have been thought worthy to know the
Son of God; to rejoice, not in thought alone, but to show it also by our actions.
And what must they do who rejoice? Obey Him who has been made known to
them; and they who obey, must do whatever He wills. For if we are going to do
what angers Him, how shall we show that we rejoice? Do you not see in our
houses when a man entertains one whom he loves, how gladly he exerts himself,
running about in every direction, and though it be needful to spend all that he
has, sparing nothing so that he please his visitor? But if one who invites should
not attend to his guest, and not do such things as would procure him ease, though
he should say ten thousand times that he rejoices at his coming, he could never
be believed by him. And justly; for this should be shown by actions. Let us then,
since Christ has come to us, show that we rejoice, and do nothing that may anger
him; let us garnish the abode to which He has come, for this they do who rejoice;
let us set before Him the meal which He desires to eat, for this they do who hold
festival. And what is this meal? He says Himself; "My meat is, that I may do the
will of Him that sent me." [John 4:34] When He is hungry, let us feed Him; when
He is thirsty, let us give Him drink: though thou give Him but a cup of cold
water, He receives it; for He loves you, and to one who loves, the offerings of
the beloved, though they be small, appear great. Only be not thou slothful;
though you cast in but two farthings, He refuses them not, but receives them as
great riches. For since He is without wants, and receives these offerings, not

because He needs them, it is reasonable that all distinction should be not in the
quantity of the gifts, but the intention of the giver. Only show that you love Him
who has come, that for His sake you are giving all diligence, that you rejoice at
His coming. See how He is disposed toward you. He came for you, He laid down
His life for you, and after all this He does not refuse even to entreat you. "We are
ambassadors," says Paul, "for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us." [2
Corinthians 5:20] "And who is so mad," says some one, "as not to love his own
Master?" I say so too, and I know that not one of us would deny this in words or
intention; but one who is beloved desires love to be shown, not by words only,
but by deeds also. For to say that we love, and not to act like lovers, is
ridiculous, not only before God, but even in the sight of men. Since then to
confess Him in word only, while in deeds we oppose Him, is not only
unprofitable, but also hurtful to us; let us, I entreat you, also make confession by
our works; that we also may obtain a confession from Him in that day, when
before His Father He shall confess those who are worthy in Christ Jesus our
Lord, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now
and ever, and world without end. Amen.