SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether it is lawful for religious to beg?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for religious to beg. For
Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xxviii): "The most cunning foe has
scattered on all sides a great number of hypocrites wearing the
monastic habit, who go wandering about the country," and
afterwards he adds: "They all ask, they all demand to be supported
in their profitable penury, or to be paid for a pretended holiness."
Therefore it would seem that the life of mendicant religious is to be
condemned.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (1 Thess. 4:11): "That you . . . work
with your own hands as we commanded you, and that you walk
honestly towards them that are without: and that you want nothing of
any man's": and a gloss on this passage says: "You must work and
not be idle, because work is both honorable and a light to the
unbeliever: and you must not covet that which belongs to another
and much less beg or take anything." Again a gloss [St. Augustine,
(De oper. Monach. iii)] on 2 Thess. 3:10, "If any man will not work,"
etc. says: "He wishes the servants of God to work with the body, so
as to gain a livelihood, and not be compelled by want to ask for
necessaries." Now this is to beg. Therefore it would seem unlawful to
beg while omitting to work with one's hands.
Objection 3: Further, that which is forbidden by law and contrary to
justice, is unbecoming to religious. Now begging is forbidden in the
divine law; for it is written (Dt. 15:4): "There shall be no poor nor
beggar among you," and (Ps. 36:25): "I have not seen the just
forsaken, nor his seed seeking bread." Moreover an able-bodied
mendicant is punished by civil law, according to the law (XI, xxvi, de
Valid. Mendicant.). Therefore it is unfitting for religious to beg.
Objection 4: Further, "Shame is about that which is disgraceful," as
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 15). Now Ambrose says (De Offic.
i, 30) that "to be ashamed to beg is a sign of good birth." Therefore it
is disgraceful to beg: and consequently this is unbecoming to
religious.
Objection 5: Further, according to our Lord's command it is
especially becoming to preachers of the Gospel to live on alms, as
stated above (Article 4). Yet it is not becoming that they should beg,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.186, C.6.

since a gloss on 2 Tim. 2:6, "The husbandman, that laboreth," etc.
says: "The Apostle wishes the gospeler to understand that to accept
necessaries from those among whom he labors is not mendicancy
but a right." Therefore it would seem unbecoming for religious to
beg.
On the contrary, It becomes religious to live in imitation of Christ.
Now Christ was a mendicant, according to Ps. 39:18, "But I am a
beggar and poor"; where a gloss says: "Christ said this of Himself as
bearing the 'form of a servant,'" and further on: "A beggar is one who
entreats another, and a poor man is one who has not enough for
himself." Again it is written (Ps. 69:6): "I am needy and poor"; where
a gloss says: "'Needy,' that is a suppliant; 'and poor,' that is, not
having enough for myself, because I have no worldly wealth." And
Jerome says in a letter: "Beware lest whereas thy Lord," i.e. Christ,
"begged, thou amass other people's wealth." Therefore it becomes
religious to beg.
I answer that, Two things may be considered in reference to
mendicancy. The first is on the part of the act itself of begging,
which has a certain abasement attaching to it; since of all men those
would seem most abased who are not only poor, but are so needy
that they have to receive their meat from others. In this way some
deserve praise for begging out of humility, just as they abase
themselves in other ways, as being the most efficacious remedy
against pride which they desire to quench either in themselves or in
others by their example. For just as a disease that arises from
excessive heat is most efficaciously healed by things that excel in
cold, so proneness to pride is most efficaciously healed by those
things which savor most of abasement. Hence it is said in the
Decretals (II, cap. Si quis semel, de Paenitentia): "To condescend to
the humblest duties, and to devote oneself to the lowliest service is
an exercise of humility; for thus one is able to heal the disease of
pride and human glory." Hence Jerome praises Fabiola (Ep. lxxvii ad
ocean.) for that she desired "to receive alms, having poured forth all
her wealth for Christ's sake." The Blessed Alexis acted in like
manner, for, having renounced all his possessions for Christ's sake
he rejoiced in receiving alms even from his own servants. It is also
related of the Blessed Arsenius in the Lives of the Fathers (v, 6) that
he gave thanks because he was forced by necessity to ask for alms.
Hence it is enjoined to some people as a penance for grievous sins
to go on a pilgrimage begging. Since, however, humility like the
other virtues should not be without discretion, it behooves one to be