and now she does not give me hers." [From 2 Kings 6:28] What can be more
dreadful than this calamity? Again, in another place the Prophet says, "The
hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children." [Lamentations 4:10]
The Jews then suffered such punishment, and shall we not much rather suffer?
Would you also hear other calamities of theirs? Read over Josephus, and
you will learn that whole tragedy, if perchance we may persuade you from these
things, that there is a hell. For consider, if they were punished, why are we not
punished? Or how is it reasonable that we are not now punished, who sin more
grievously than they? Is it not manifest that it is, because the punishment is kept
in store for us? And, if you please, I will tell you in the person of every
individual how they were punished. Cain murdered his brother. A horrible sin
indeed, who can deny it? But he suffered punishment; and a heavy one,
equivalent to ten thousand deaths, for he would rather have died ten thousand
times. For hear him saying, "If Thou castest me out from the land, and I shall be
hidden from Your face, then it will happen that every one who finds me will slay
me." [Genesis 4:14, Septuagint] Tell me then, do not many even now do the
same things that he did? For when you slay not your brother according to the
flesh, but your spiritual brother, do you not do the same? For what, though not
by the sword? Yet by some other means; when being able to relieve his hunger,
you neglect him. What then? Has no one now envied his brother? Has no one
plunged him into dangers? But here they have not suffered punishment, yet they
will suffer it. Then he, who never heard the written laws, nor the prophets, nor
saw great miracles suffered such great vengeance; and shall he who has done the
same things in another way, and was not rendered wise by so many examples,
shall he go unpunished? Where then is the justice of God, and where His
goodness?
Again, a certain one for having gathered sticks on the Sabbath was stoned,
and yet this was a small commandment, and less weighty than circumcision. He
then who gathered sticks on the Sabbath was stoned; but those who often
commit ten thousand things contrary to the Law have gone off unpunished! If

then there be not a hell, where is His justice, where His impartiality, that respects
not persons? And yet He lays to their charge many such things, that they did not
observe the Sabbath.
Again, another, Charmi, having stolen a devoted thing, was stoned with all
his family. What then? Has no one from that time committed sacrilege? Saul,
again, having spared contrary to the command of God, suffered so great
punishment. Has no one from that time spared? Would indeed that it were so!
Have we not, worse than wild beasts, devoured one another contrary to the
command of God, and yet no one has fallen in war? Again, the sons of Eli,
because they ate before the incense was offered, suffered the most severe
punishment together with their father. Has no father then been neglectful with
respect to his children? And are there no wicked sons? But no one has suffered
punishment. Where will they suffer it then, if there be no hell?
Again, numberless instances one might enumerate. What? Ananias and
Sapphira were immediately punished, because they stole part of what they had
offered. Has no one then since that time been guilty of this? How was it then that
they did not suffer the same punishment?
Do we then persuade you that there is a hell, or do you need more
examples? Therefore we will proceed also to things that are unwritten, such as
now take place in life. For it is necessary that this idea should be gathered by us
from every quarter, that we may not, by vainly gratifying ourselves, do ourselves
harm. Do you not see many visited by calamities, maimed in their bodies,
suffering infinite troubles, but others in good repute? For what reason do some
suffer punishment for murders, and others not? Hear Paul saying, "Some men's
sins are evident,...and some men they follow after." [1 Timothy 5:24] How many
murderers have escaped! How many violators of the tombs! But let these things
pass. How many do you not see visited with the severest punishment? Some
have been delivered to a long disease, others to continued tortures, and others to
numberless other ills. When therefore you see one who has been guilty of the
same things as they, or even much worse— and yet not suffering punishment,