THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.7.

regards their exterior guidance, can belong to others; and in this way
others may be called heads of the Church, according to Amos 6:1,
"Ye great men, heads of the people"; differently, however, from
Christ. First, inasmuch as Christ is the Head of all who pertain to the
Church in every place and time and state; but all other men are
called heads with reference to certain special places, as bishops of
their Churches. Or with reference to a determined time as the Pope is
the head of the whole Church, viz. during the time of his Pontificate,
and with reference to a determined state, inasmuch as they are in the
state of wayfarers. Secondly, because Christ is the Head of the
Church by His own power and authority; while others are called
heads, as taking Christ's place, according to 2 Cor. 2:10, "For what I
have pardoned, if I have pardoned anything, for your sakes I have
done it in the person of Christ," and 2 Cor. 5:20, "For Christ therefore
we are ambassadors, God, as it were, exhorting by us."
Reply to Objection 1: The word "head" is employed in that passage
in regard to exterior government; as a king is said to be the head of
his kingdom.
Reply to Objection 2: Man does not distribute grace by interior influx,
but by exteriorly persuading to the effects of grace.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Tract. xlvi in Joan.): "If the
rulers of the Church are Shepherds, how is there one Shepherd,
except that all these are members of one Shepherd?" So likewise
others may be called foundations and heads, inasmuch as they are
members of the one Head and Foundation. Nevertheless, as
Augustine says (Tract. xlvii), "He gave to His members to be
shepherds; yet none of us calleth himself the Door. He kept this for
Himself alone." And this because by door is implied the principal
authority, inasmuch as it is by the door that all enter the house; and
it is Christ alone by "Whom also we have access . . . into this grace,
wherein we stand" (Rm. 5:2); but by the other names abovementioned there may be implied not merely the principal but also the
secondary authority.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the devil is the head of all the wicked?

Objection 1: It would seem that the devil is not the head of the
wicked. For it belongs to the head to diffuse sense and movement
into the members, as a gloss says, on Eph. 1:22, "And made Him
head," etc. But the devil has no power of spreading the evil of sin,
which proceeds from the will of the sinner. Therefore the devil
cannot be called the head of the wicked.
Objection 2: Further, by every sin a man is made evil. But not every
sin is from the devil; and this is plain as regards the demons, who
did not sin through the persuasion of another; so likewise not every
sin of man proceeds from the devil, for it is said (De Eccles. Dogm.
lxxxii): "Not all our wicked thoughts are always raised up by the
suggestion of the devil; but sometimes they spring from the
movement of our will." Therefore the devil is not the head of all the
wicked.
Objection 3: Further, one head is placed on one body. But the whole
multitude of the wicked do not seem to have anything in which they
are united, for evil is contrary to evil and springs from divers defects,
as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv). Therefore the devil cannot be
called the head of all the wicked.
On the contrary, A gloss [St. Gregory, Moral. xiv] on Job 18:17, "Let
the memory of him perish from the earth," says: "This is said of
every evil one, yet so as to be referred to the head," i.e. the devil.
I answer that, As was said above (Article 6), the head not only
influences the members interiorly, but also governs them exteriorly,
directing their actions to an end. Hence it may be said that anyone is
the head of a multitude, either as regards both, i.e. by interior
influence and exterior governance, and thus Christ is the Head of the
Church, as was stated (Article 6); or as regards exterior governance,
and thus every prince or prelate is head of the multitude subject to
him. And in this way the devil is head of all the wicked. For, as is
written (Job 41:25): "He is king over all the children of pride." Now it
belongs to a governor to lead those whom he governs to their end.
But the end of the devil is the aversion of the rational creature from
God; hence from the beginning he has endeavored to lead man from
obeying the Divine precept. But aversion from God has the nature of