that our silence has not been due to negligence, we have now at last after a long
time secured our most honoured and beloved John the presbyter, and Paul the
deacon, and we send a letter through them, and continue to express our gratitude
to you, that you have surpassed even affectionate parents in your good will and
zeal concerning us. And indeed so far as your Piety is concerned all things
would have been duly amended, and the accumulation of evils and offenses have
been swept away, and the Churches would have enjoyed peace and a glassy
calm, and all things would have floated along with a smooth stream, and the
despised laws and violated decrees of the fathers would have been vindicated.
But since in reality none of these things has taken place, they who perpetrated
the former deeds striving to aggravate their former iniquities, I omit any detailed
narrative of their subsequent proceedings: for the narrative would exceed the
limits not merely of a letter but even of a history; only this I beseech your
vigilant soul, even if they who have filled everything with confusion be
impenitently and incurably corrupt, let not those who have undertaken to cure
them become faint-hearted or despondent, when they consider the magnitude of
the thing to be accomplished. For the contest now before you has to be fought on
behalf of nearly the whole world, on behalf of Churches humbled to the ground,
of people dispersed, of clergy assaulted, of bishops sent into exile, of ancestral
laws violated. Wherefore we beseech your Diligence, once, twice, yea many
times, in proportion as the storm increases, to manifest still greater zeal. For we
expect that something more will be done for the purpose of amending these
wrongs. But even if this should not take place, you at least have your crown
made ready for you by the merciful God, and the resistance offered by your love
will be no small consolation to those who are wronged: for now that we are
passing the third year of our sojourn in exile exposed to famine, pestilence, wars,
continual sieges, indescribable solitude, daily death, and Isaurian swords, we are
not a little encouraged and comforted by the constant and abiding nature of your
disposition and confidence, and by revelling in your abundant and genuine love.
This is our wall of defence, this is our security, this our calm haven, this our

treasure of infinite blessings, this our gladness, and ground of much joy. And
even if we should be carried off again to some spot more desolate than this, we
shall carry this love away with us as no small consolation of our sufferings.

From Innocent to John
To the beloved brother John, Innocent
Although the innocent man ought to expect all good things, and to crave
mercy from God, nevertheless we also, counselling resignation, have sent an
appropriate letter by the hands of Cyriacus the deacon; so that insolence may not
have more power in oppressing, than a good conscience has in retaining hope.
For thou who art the teacher and pastor of so many people needest not to be
taught that the best men are ever frequently put to the test whether they will
persevere in the perfection of patience, and not succumb to any toil of distress:
and certainly conscience is a strong defence against all things which unjustly
befall us: and unless any one conquer these by patient endurance he supplies an
argument for evil surmising. For he ought to endure all things who trusts first of
all in God, and then in his own conscience; seeing that the noble and good man
can be specially trained to endurance, inasmuch as the holy Scriptures guard his
mind; and the sacred lessons which we deliver to the people abound in examples,
testifying as they do that nearly all the saints have been continually oppressed in
various ways, and are tested as by a kind of scrutiny, and so attain to the crown
of patience. Let conscience itself console your love, most honoured brother,
which in affliction supplies the consolation of virtue. For under the eye of the
Master Christ, the conscience, having been purged, will find rest in the haven of
peace.