it aright. 'But not so we,' he says, 'but in the Spirit also, that is, in the gifts also,
we have been blameless.'
"In love unfeigned." This was the cause of all those good things; this made
him what he was; this caused the Spirit also to abide with him, by Whose aid
also all things were rightly done of him.

2 Corinthians 6:7
"In the word of truth."
A thing he says in many places, that 'we continued neither to handle the
word of God deceitfully nor to adulterate it.'
"In the power of God." That which he always does ascribing nothing to
himself but the whole to God, and imputing whatsoever he has done aright to
Him, this he has done here also. For since he uttered great things, and affirmed
that he had manifested in all things an irreproachable life and exalted wisdom, he
ascribes this to the Spirit and to God. For neither were those commonplace
things which he had said. For if it be a difficult thing even for one who lives in
quiet to do aright and be irreproachable, consider him who was harassed by so
great temptations, and yet shone forth through all, what a spirit he was of! And
yet he underwent not these alone, but even far more than these, as he mentions
next. And what is indeed marvelous is, not that he was irreproachable though
sailing in such mighty waves, nor that he endured all nobly, but all with pleasure
even. Which things, all, he makes clear to us by the next words, saying,
"By the armor of righteousness on the right and the left."
3. Do you see his self-possession of soul and well-strung spirit? For he
shows that afflictions are arms not only which strike not down, but do even
fortify and make stronger. And he calls those things 'left,' which seem to be
painful; for such those are which bring with them the reward. Wherefore then
does he call them thus? Either in conformity with the conception of the
generality, or because God commanded us to pray that we enter not into
temptation.

2 Corinthians 6:8
"By glory and dishonor, by evil report and good report."
What saying thou? That you enjoy honor, and setting down this as a great
thing? 'Yes,' he says. Why, forsooth? For to bear dishonor indeed is a great thing,
but to partake of honor requires not a vigorous soul. Nay, it needs a vigorous and
exceeding great soul, that he who enjoys it may not be thrown and break his
neck. Wherefore he glories in this as well as in that, for he shone equally in both.
But how is it a weapon of righteousness? Because that the teachers are held in
honor induces many unto godliness. And besides, this is a proof of good works,
and this glorifies God. And this is, further, an instance of the wise contrivance of
God, that by things which are opposite He brings in the Preaching. For consider.
Was Paul bound? This too was on behalf of the Gospel. For, says he, "the things
which happened unto me have fallen out unto the progress of the Gospel; so that
most of the brethren, being confident through my bonds, are more abundantly
bold to speak the word without fear." [Philippians 1:12-14] Again, did he enjoy
honor? This too again rendered them more forward. "By evil report and good
report." For not only did he bear those things nobly which happen to the body,
the 'afflictions,' and whatever he enumerated, but those also which touch the
soul; for neither are these wont to disturb slightly. Jeremiah at least having borne
many temptations, gave in upon these, and when he was reproached, said, "I will
not prophesy, neither will I name the Name of the Lord. " [Jeremiah 20:9] And
David too many places complains of reproach. Isaiah also, after many things,
exhorts concerning this, saying, "Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye
overcome by their reviling." [Isaiah 51:7. Septuagint] And again, Christ also to
His disciples; "When they shall speak all manner of evil against you falsely,
rejoice and be exceeding glad," [Matthew 5:11-12] He says, "for great is your
reward in heaven." Elsewhere too He says, And leap for joy. [Luke 6:23] But He