15. Moreover, they assert that when Catholic doctrine has been reduced to this condition, a way will
be found to satisfy modern needs, that will permit of dogma being expressed also by the concepts of
modern philosophy, whether of immanentism or idealism or existentialism or any other system. Some
more audacious affirm that his can and must be done, because they hold that the mysteries of faith
are never expressed by truly adequate concepts but only by approximate and ever changeable
notions, in which the truth is to some extent expressed, but is necessarily distorted. Wherefore they do not consider it absurd, but altogether necessary, that theology should substitute new concepts in
place of the old ones in keeping with the various philosophies which in the course of time it uses as its
instruments, so that it should give human expression to divine truths in various ways which are even
somewhat opposed, but still equivalent, as they say. They add that the history of dogmas consists in
the reporting of the various forms in which revealed truth has been clothed, forms that have
succeeded one another in accordance with the different teachings and opinions that have arisen over
the course of the centuries.

16. It is evident from what We have already said, that such tentatives not only lead to what they call
dogmatic relativism, but that they actually contain it. The contempt of doctrine commonly taught and
of the terms in which it is expressed strongly favor it. Everyone is aware that the terminology
employed in the schools and even that used by the Teaching Authority of the Church itself is capable
of being perfected and polished; and we know also that the Church itself has not always used the
same terms in the same way. It is also manifest that the Church cannot be bound to every system of
philosophy that has existed for a short space of time. Nevertheless, the things that have been
composed through common effort by Catholic teachers over the course of the centuries to bring about
some understanding of dogma are certainly not based on any such weak foundation. These things are
based on principles and notions deduced from a true knowledge of created things. In the process of
deducing, this knowledge, like a star, gave enlightenment to the human mind through the Church.
Hence it is not astonishing that some of these notions have not only been used by the Oecumenical
Councils, but even sanctioned by them, so that it is wrong to depart from them.

17. Hence to neglect, or to reject,or to devalue so many and such great resources which have been
conceived, expressed and perfected so often by the age-old work of men endowed with no common
talent and holiness, working under the vigilant supervision of the holy magisterium and with the light
and leadership of the Holy Ghost in order to state the truths of the faith ever more accurately, to do
this so that these things may be replaced by conjectural notions and by some formless and unstable
tenets of a new philosophy, tenets which, like the flowers of the field, are in existence today and die
tomorrow; this is supreme imprudence and something that would make dogma itself a reed shaken by
the wind. The contempt for terms and notions habitually used by scholastic theologians leads of itself
to the weakening of what they call speculative theology, a discipline which these men consider devoid
of true certitude because it is based on theological reasoning.