SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.3.

in the former case is praiseworthy, in the latter sinful. Accordingly it
is lawful for the accused to defend himself by withholding the truth
that he is not bound to avow, by suitable means, for instance by not
answering such questions as he is not bound to answer. This is not
to defend himself with calumnies, but to escape prudently. But it is
unlawful for him, either to utter a falsehood, or to withhold a truth
that he is bound to avow, or to employ guile or fraud, because fraud
and guile have the force of a lie, and so to use them would be to
defend oneself with calumnies.
Reply to Objection 1: Human laws leave many things unpunished,
which according to the Divine judgment are sins, as, for example,
simple fornication; because human law does not exact perfect virtue
from man, for such virtue belongs to few and cannot be found in so
great a number of people as human law has to direct. That a man is
sometimes unwilling to commit a sin in order to escape from the
death of the body, the danger of which threatens the accused who is
on trial for his life, is an act of perfect virtue, since "death is the most
fearful of all temporal things" (Ethic. iii, 6). Wherefore if the accused,
who is on trial for his life, bribes his adversary, he sins indeed by
inducing him to do what is unlawful, yet the civil law does not punish
this sin, and in this sense it is said to be lawful.
Reply to Objection 2: If the accuser is guilty of collusion with the
accused and the latter is guilty, he incurs punishment, and so it is
evident that he sins. Wherefore, since it is a sin to induce a man to
sin, or to take part in a sin in any way---for the Apostle says (Rm.
1:32), that "they . . . are worthy of death . . . that consent" to those
who sin---it is evident that the accused also sins if he is guilty of
collusion with his adversary. Nevertheless according to human laws
no punishment is inflicted on him, for the reason given above.
Reply to Objection 3: The wise man hides himself not by slandering
others but by exercising prudence.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is lawful for the accused to escape

judgment by appealing?
Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for the accused to escape
judgment by appealing. The Apostle says (Rm. 13:1): "Let every soul
be subject to the higher powers." Now the accused by appealing
refuses to be subject to a higher power, viz. the judge. Therefore he
commits a sin.
Objection 2: Further, ordinary authority is more binding than that
which we choose for ourselves. Now according to the Decretals (II,
qu. vi, cap. A judicibus) it is unlawful to appeal from the judges
chosen by common consent. Much less therefore is it lawful to
appeal from ordinary judges.
Objection 3: Further, whatever is lawful once is always lawful. But it
is not lawful to appeal after the tenth day [Can. Anteriorum, caus. ii,
qu. 6], nor a third time on the same point [Can. Si autem, caus. ii, qu.
6]. Therefore it would seem that an appeal is unlawful in itself.
On the contrary, Paul appealed to Caesar (Acts 25).
I answer that, There are two motives for which a man appeals. First
through confidence in the justice of his cause, seeing that he is
unjustly oppressed by the judge, and then it is lawful for him to
appeal, because this is a prudent means of escape. Hence it is laid
down (Decret. II, qu. vi, can. Omnis oppressus): "All those who are
oppressed are free, if they so wish, to appeal to the judgment of the
priests, and no man may stand in their way." Secondly, a man
appeals in order to cause a delay, lest a just sentence be
pronounced against him. This is to defend oneself calumniously, and
is unlawful as stated above (Article 2). For he inflicts an injury both
on the judge, whom he hinders in the exercise of his office, and on
his adversary, whose justice he disturbs as far as he is able. Hence it
is laid down (II, qu. vi, can. Omnino puniendus): "Without doubt a
man should be punished if his appeal be declared unjust."
Reply to Objection 1: A man should submit to the lower authority in
so far as the latter observes the order of the higher authority. If the
lower authority departs from the order of the higher, we ought not to
submit to it, for instance "if the proconsul order one thing and the