SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.4.

thyself, follow Christ poor."
Reply to Objection 4: Happiness or felicity is twofold. One is perfect,
to which we look forward in the life to come; the other is imperfect,
in respect of which some are said to be happy in this life. The
happiness of this life is twofold, one is according to the active life,
the other according to the contemplative life, as the Philosopher
asserts (Ethic. x, 7,8). Now wealth conduces instrumentally to the
happiness of the active life which consists in external actions,
because as the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 8) "we do many things by
friends, by riches, by political influence, as it were by instruments."
On the other hand, it does not conduce to the happiness of the
contemplative life, rather is it an obstacle thereto, inasmuch as the
anxiety it involves disturbs the quiet of the soul, which is most
necessary to one who contemplates. Hence it is that the Philosopher
asserts (Ethic. x, 8) that "for actions many things are needed, but the
contemplative man needs no such things," namely external goods,
"for his operation; in fact they are obstacles to his contemplation."
Man is directed to future happiness by charity; and since voluntary
poverty is an efficient exercise for the attaining of perfect charity, it
follows that it is of great avail in acquiring the happiness of heaven.
Wherefore our Lord said (Mt. 19:21): "Go, sell all thou hast, and give
to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven." Now riches
once they are possessed are in themselves of a nature to hinder the
perfection of charity, especially by enticing and distracting the mind.
Hence it is written (Mt. 13:22) that "the care of this world and the
deceitfulness of riches choketh up the word" of God, for as Gregory
says (Hom. xv in Ev.) by "preventing the good desire from entering
into the heart, they destroy life at its very outset." Consequently it is
difficult to safeguard charity amidst riches: wherefore our Lord said
(Mt. 19:23) that "a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven," which we must understand as referring to one who actually
has wealth, since He says that this is impossible for him who places
his affection in riches, according to the explanation of Chrysostom
(Hom. lxiii in Matth.), for He adds (Mt. 19:24): "It is easier for a camel
to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of heaven." Hence it is not said simply that the "rich
man" is blessed, but "the rich man that is found without blemish,
and that hath not gone after gold," and this because he has done a
difficult thing, wherefore the text continues (Mt. 19:9): "Who is he?
and we will praise him; for he hath done wonderful things in his life,"
namely by not loving riches though placed in the midst of them.