not simply a phantom of the imagination, therefore "while he prayed" (the Lord)
stood by him. And he shows that it was not from fear of their dangers that he
fled, but because they would "not receive" his "testimony." [Acts 22:18] But why
said he "They know I imprisoned?" [Acts 22:19] Not to gainsay Christ, but
because he wished to learn this which was so contrary to all reasonable
expectation. Christ, however, did not teach him (this), but only bade him depart,
and he obeys: so obedient is he. "And they lifted up their voices," it says, "and
said, Away with him: it is not fit that this fellow should live." [Acts 22:22] Nay,
you are the persons not fit to live; not he, who in everything obeys God. O
villains and murderers! "And shaking out their clothes," it says, "they threw dust
into the air" [Acts 22:23], to make insurrection more fierce, because they wished
to frighten the governor. And observe; they do not say what the charge was, as in
fact they had nothing to allege, but only think to strike terror by their shouting.
"The tribune commanded," etc. and yet he ought to have learned from the
accusers, "wherefore they cried so against him. And as they bound him, etc. And
the chief captain was afraid, after he learned that he was a Roman." Why then it
was no falsehood. "On the morrow, because he would know the certainty
wherefore he was accused of the Jews, etc., he brought him down before the
council." [Acts 22:24-30] This he should have done at the outset. He brought
him in, loosed. This above all the Jews would not know what to make of. "And
Paul," it says, "earnestly beholding them." It shows his boldness, and how it
awed them ([τὸ ἐντρεπτικόν]). "Then the high priest Ananias." etc. [ch. 23:1, 2]
Why, what has he said that was affronting? What is he beaten for? Why what
hardihood, what shamelessness! Therefore (Paul) set him down (with a rebuke):
"God shall smite you thou whited wall." [Acts 23:3] Accordingly (Ananias)
himself is put to a stand, and dares not say a word: only those about him could
not bear Paul's boldness. They saw a man ready to die * * * for if this was the
case, (Paul) had but to hold his peace, and the tribune would have taken him, and
gone his way; he would have sacrificed him to them. He both shows that he
suffers willingly what he suffers, and thus excuses himself before them, not that

he wished to excuse himself to them— since as for those, he even strongly
condemns them— but for the sake of the people. "Violating the law, do you
command me to be beaten?" Well may he say so: for to kill a man who had done
(them) no injury, and that an innocent person, was a violating of the law. For
neither was it abuse that was spoken by him, unless one would call Christ's
words abusive, when He says, "Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, for you are
like whited walls." [Matthew 23:27] True, you will say: but if he had said it
before he had been beaten, it would have betokened not anger, but boldness. But
I have mentioned the reason of this. And (at this rate) we often find Christ
Himself "speaking abusively" to the Jews when abused by them; as when He
says, "Do not think that I will accuse you." [John 5:45] But this is not abuse,
God forbid. See, with what gentleness he addresses these men: "I knew not," he
says, "that he was God's high priest" (v. 4, 5): and, (to show) that he was not
dissembling ([εἰρωνεύεται]) he adds, "You shall not speak evil of the ruler of
your people." He even confesses him to be still ruler. Let us also learn the
gentleness also, that in both the one and the other we may be perfect. For one
must look narrowly into them, to learn what the one is and what the other:
narrowly, because these virtues have their corresponding vices hard by them:
mere forwardness passing itself off for boldness, mere cowardice for gentleness:
and need being to scan them, lest any person possessing the vice should seem to
have the virtue: which would be just as if a person should fancy that he was
cohabiting with the mistress, and not know that it was the servant-maid. What
then is gentleness, and what mere cowardice? When others are wronged, and we
do not take their part, but hold our peace, this is cowardice: when we are the
persons ill-treated, and we bear it, this is gentleness. What is boldness? Again
the same, when others are the persons for whom we contend. What forwardness?
When it is in our own cause that we are willing to fight. So that magnanimity
and boldness go together, as also (mere) forwardness and (mere) cowardice. For
he that (does not) resent on his own behalf, will hardly but resent on behalf of
others: and he that does not stand up for his own cause, will hardly fail to stand