feast that was spread [Matthew 22:9], according to the Parable of the Gospel,
you are debtors also to share your carnal things with them, and to impart to
them. But he does not say to share, but "to minister" ([λειτουργἥσαι]), so
ranking them with ministers ([διακόνων]), and those that pay the tribute to kings.
And he does not say in your carnal things, as he did in "their spiritual things."
For the spiritual things were theirs. But the carnal belonged not to these alone,
but were the common property of all. For he bade money to be held to belong to
all, not to those who were its possessors only.
Ver. 28. "When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed unto them
this fruit."
That is, when I have laid it up as it were in the royal treasuries, as in a place
secure from robbers and danger. And he does not say alms, but "fruit" again, to
show that those who gave it were gainers by it. "I will come by you into Spain."
He again mentions Spain to show his forwardness ([ἀ] [ό] [κνον]) and warmth
towards them.
Ver. 29. "And I am sure that, when I come unto you, I shall come in the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ."
What is the force of, "In the fullness of the blessing?" Either he speaks of
alms (Gr. money), or generally of good deeds. For blessing is a name he very
commonly gives to alms. As when he says, "As a blessing and not as
covetousness." [2 Corinthians 9:5] And it was customary of old for the thing to
be so called. But as he has here added "of the Gospel," on this ground we assert
that he speaks not of money only, but of all other things. As if he had said, I
know that when I come I shall find you with the honor and freshness of all good
deeds about you, and worthy of countless praises in the Gospel. And this is a
very striking mode of advice, I mean this way of forestalling their attention by
encomiums. For when he entreats them in the way of advice, this is the mode of
setting them right that he adopts.
Ver. 30. "Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and
for the love of the Spirit."

Here he again puts forward Christ and the Spirit, and makes no mention
whatever of the Father. And I say this, that when you find him mentioning the
Father and the Son, or the Father only, you may not despise either the Son or the
Spirit. And he does not say the Spirit, but "the love of the Spirit." For as Christ
loved the world, and as the Father does, so does the Spirit also. And what is it
that you beseech us, let me hear? "To strive together with me in your prayers to
God for me,"
Ver. 31. "That I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judea."
A great struggle then lies before him. And this too is why he calls for their
prayers. And he does not say that I may be engaged in it, but "I may be
delivered," as Christ commanded, to "pray that we enter not into temptation."
[Matthew 26:41] And in saying this he showed, that certain evil wolves would
attack them, and those who were wild beasts rather than men. And out of this he
also found grounds for another thing, namely, for showing that he with good
reason took the office of ministering to the Saints, if, that is, the unbelievers
were in such force that he even prayed to be delivered from them. For they who
were among so many enemies, were in danger of perishing by famine also. And
therefore there was absolute need of aid coming (or "of his going") from other
quarters to them. "And that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be
accepted of the Saints."
That is, that my sacrifice may be accepted, that with cheerfulness they may
receive what is given them. See how he again exalts the dignity of those who
were to receive it. Then he asks for the prayer of so great a people in order to
what was sent being received. And by this he shows another point also, that to
have given alms does not secure its being accepted. For when any one gives it
constrainedly, or out of unjust gains, or for vanity, the fruit of it is gone.
Ver. 32. "That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God."
As he had said at the beginning, "If by any means now at length I might
have a prosperous journey, by the will of God, to come unto you" [Romans 1:10];
so here again he takes refuge in the same Will, and says that this is why I press