THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.3.

so also would it have been if none had been informed of it. Because
in either case faith is destroyed, whether a thing be perfectly
manifest, or whether it be entirely unknown, so that no one can hear
it from another; for "faith cometh by hearing" (Rm. 10:17).
Reply to Objection 2: Mary and Joseph needed to be instructed
concerning Christ's birth before He was born, because it devolved
on them to show reverence to the child conceived in the womb, and
to serve Him even before He was born. But their testimony, being of
a domestic character, would have aroused suspicion in regard to
Christ's greatness: and so it behooved it to be made known to
others, whose testimony could not be suspect.
Reply to Objection 3: The very disturbance that arose when it was
known that Christ was born was becoming to His birth. First,
because thus the heavenly dignity of Christ is made manifest.
Wherefore Gregory says (Hom. x in Evang.): "After the birth of the
King of heaven, the earthly king is troubled: doubtless because
earthly grandeur is covered with confusion when the heavenly
majesty is revealed."
Secondly, thereby the judicial power of Christ was foreshadowed.
Thus Augustine says in a sermon (30 de Temp.) on the Epiphany:
"What will He be like in the judgment-seat; since from His cradle He
struck terror into the heart of a proud king?"
Thirdly, because thus the overthrow of the devil's kingdom was
foreshadowed. For, as Pope Leo says in a sermon on the Epiphany
(Serm. v [Opus Imperfectum in Matth., Hom. ii]): "Herod was not so
much troubled in himself as the devil in Herod. For Herod thought
Him to be a man, but the devil thought Him to be God. Each feared a
successor to his kingdom: the devil, a heavenly successor; Herod,
an earthly successor." But their fear was needless: since Christ had
not come to set up an earthly kingdom, as Pope Leo says,
addressing himself to Herod: "Thy palace cannot hold Christ: nor is
the Lord of the world content with the paltry power of thy scepter."
That the Jews were troubled, who, on the contrary, should have
rejoiced, was either because, as Chrysostom says, "wicked men
could not rejoice at the coming of the Holy one," or because they
wished to court favor with Herod, whom they feared; for "the
populace is inclined to favor too much those whose cruelty it
endures."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.3.

And that the children were slain by Herod was not harmful to them,
but profitable. For Augustine says in a sermon on the Epiphany (66
de Diversis): "It cannot be questioned that Christ, who came to set
man free, rewarded those who were slain for Him; since, while
hanging on the cross, He prayed for those who were putting Him to
death."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.4.