of his. But now so far are they from being called sons, that they are the greatest
possible aliens. You see then that it is not the children of the flesh that are the
children of God, but that even in nature itself the generation by means of
baptism from above was sketched out beforehand. And if you tell me of the
womb, I in return have to tell you of the water. But as in this case all is of the
Spirit, so in the other all was of promise. For the womb was more chilled than
any water owing to barrenness and to old age. Let us then gain accurate
knowledge of our own nobility, and display a life worthy of it. For in it is
nothing fleshly or earthy: hence neither let there be in us. For it was neither
sleep, nor the will of the flesh [John 1:13], nor embraces, nor the madness of
desire, but "God's love toward man," which wrought the whole. [Titus 3:5] And
as in that case it was when the age was past hope, so in this also it was when the
old age of sins had come over us, that Isaac suddenly sprang up in youth, and we
all became the children of God, and the seed of Abraham. [Isaiah 40:31]
Ver. 10. "And not only this; but when Rebecca also had conceived by one,
even by our father Isaac."
The subject in question was an important one. Hence he turns to several
arguments, and endeavors by all means to solve the difficulty. For if it was at
once strange and new for them to be cast out after so great promises, it is much
more strange that we even should come into their good things, who did not
expect anything of the kind. And the case was the same as if a king's son, who
had promises made him that he should succeed to the power he had, were to be
cast into the level of disreputable men, and in his place a condemned man, and
one laden with evils unnumbered, after being taken out of prison, were to come
into the power, which properly was the other's. For he means, what have you to
say? That the son is unworthy? Well, but so is this man unworthy, and much
more so. Hence he ought either to have been punished along with the former, or
to have been honored along with him. Now it was something of this sort which
befell the Jews and the Gentiles, or something far more strange than this. Now
that all were unworthy, he has shown above, where he says, "For all have

sinned, and come short of the glory of God." [Romans 3:23] But the new thing
is, that when all were unworthy, the Gentiles were saved alone. And beside this
there is another difficulty that some one may start, he says. If God had no
intention of fulfilling the promises to them, why make them at all? For men who
know not the future, and are many times deceived, do promise even the
undeserving that they shall have their largesses. But He Who knows beforehand
things to come as well as things present, and has a clear knowledge that they will
make themselves undeserving of the promises, and therefore will not receive any
of the things specified—why should He promise at all? Now what is Paul's way
of meeting all this? It is by showing what the Israel is to whom He made the
promise. For when this has been shown, there is at the same time demonstrated
the fact that the promises were all fulfilled. And to point this out he said, "For
they are not all Israel that are of Israel." And this is why he does not use the
name of Jacob, but that of Israel, which was a sign of the virtue of that just man,
and of a gift from above, and of having seen God. [Genesis 32:28] Yet, "all," he
says, "have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." [Romans 3:23] Now if
all have sinned, how come some to be saved, and some to perish? It is because
all were not minded to come to Him, since for His part all were saved, for all
were called. However, he does not set this down yet awhile, but meets it from an
advantageous position, and from other examples, by bringing before them
another question, and as in the former case meets a difficulty very great, by
another difficulty. For when he was discussing how by Christ being justified all
the rest enjoyed that righteousness, he brought in Adam's case, saying, "For if by
one man's offense death reigned, much more they which receive abundance of
grace shall reign in life." [Romans 5:17]. And the case of Adam, indeed, he does
not clear up, but from it he clears up His (or his own), and shows that it was
more reasonable that He Who died in their behalf should have power over them
at His will. For that when one had sinned all should be punished, does not seem
to be so very reasonable to most men. But that when One had done aright all
should be justified, is at once more reasonable and more suited to God. Yet still