greater things than these." [John 1:50]
Why then is this man blessed? Because he acknowledged Him very Son.
Wherefore you see, that while in those former instances He had said no such
thing, in this case He also signifies who had revealed it. That is, lest his words
might seem to the many (because he was an earnest lover of Christ) to be words
of friendship and flattery, and of a disposition to show favor to Him, he brings
forward the person who had made them ring in his soul; to inform you that Peter
indeed spoke, but the Father suggested, and that you might believe the saying to
be no longer a human opinion, but a divine doctrine.
And wherefore does He not Himself declare it, nor say, "I am the Christ,"
but by His question establish this, bringing them in to confess it? Because so to
do was both more suitable to Him, yea necessary at that time, and it drew them
on the more to the belief of the things that were said.
Do you see how the Father reveals the Son, how the Son the Father? For
"neither knows any man the Father," says He, "save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal Him." It cannot therefore be that one should
learn the Son of any other than of the Father; neither that one should learn the
Father of any other than of the Son. So that even hereby, their sameness of honor
and of substance is manifest.
3. What then says Christ? "You are Simon, the son of Jonas; you shall be
called Cephas." "Thus since you have proclaimed my Father, I too name him that
begot you;" all but saying, "As you are son of Jonas, even so am I of my Father."
Else it were superfluous to say, "You are Son of Jonas;" but since he had said,
"Son of God," to point out that He is so Son of God, as the other son of Jonas, of
the same substance with Him that begot Him, therefore He added this, "And I
say unto you, You are Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church;"
[Matthew 16:18] that is, on the faith of his confession. Hereby He signifies that
many were now on the point of believing, and raises his spirit, and makes him a
shepherd. "And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." "And if not against
it, much more not against me. So be not troubled because you are shortly to hear

that I shall be betrayed and crucified."
Then He mentions also another honor. "And I also will give you the keys of
the heavens." But what is this, "And I also will give you?" "As the Father has
given you to know me, so will I also give you."
And He said not, "I will entreat the Father" (although the manifestation of
His authority was great, and the largeness of the gift unspeakable), but, "I will
give you." What dost Thou give? Tell me. "The keys of the heavens, that
whatsoever you shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever
you shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven." How then is it not "His to
give to sit on His right hand, and on His left," [Matthew 20:23] when He says, "I
will give you"?
Do you see how He, His own self, leads Peter on to high thoughts of Him,
and reveals Himself, and implies that He is Son of God by these two promises?
For those things which are peculiar to God alone, (both to absolve sins, and to
make the church in capable of overthrow in such assailing waves, and to exhibit
a man that is a fisher more solid than any rock, while all the world is at war with
him), these He promises Himself to give; as the Father, speaking to Jeremiah,
said, He would make him as "a brazen pillar, and as a wall;" [Jeremiah 1:18]
but him to one nation only, this man in every part of the world.
I would fain inquire then of those who desire to lessen the dignity of the
Son, which manner of gifts were greater, those which the Father gave to Peter, or
those which the Son gave him? For the Father gave to Peter the revelation of the
Son; but the Son gave him to sow that of the Father and that of Himself in every
part of the world; and to a mortal man He entrusted the authority over all things
in Heaven, giving him the keys; who extended the church to every part of the
world, and declared it to be stronger than heaven. "For heaven and earth shall
pass away, but my word shall not pass away." [Matthew 24:35] How then is He
less, who has given such gifts, has effected such things?
And these things I say, not dividing the works of Father and Son ("for all
things are made by Him, and without Him was nothing made which was made"):