(1) Now there are some objects of speculation that depend on matter for their being, for they

can exist only in matter. And these are subdivided. (a) Some depend on matter both for their
being (+) and for their being understood, as do those things whose definition contains
sensible matter and which, as a consequence, cannot be understood without sensible matter. For
example, it is necessary to include flesh and bones in the definition of man. It is things of this
sort that physics or natural science studies. (b) On the other hand, there are some things that,
although dependent upon matter for their being, do not depend upon it (~) for their being
understood, because sensible matter is not included in their definitions. This is the case with
lines and numbers ! the kind of objects with which mathematics deals. (2) There are still other
objects of speculative knowledge that do not depend upon matter(~) for their being, because they
can exist without matter; (a) either they never exist in matter, as in the case of God and the
angels, or (b) they exist in matter in some instances and not in others, as in the case of substance,
quality, being, potency, act, one and many, and the like. The science that treats of all these is
theology or divine science, which is so called because its principal object is God. By another
name it is called metaphysics; that is to say, "beyond physics", because it ought to be learned by
us after physics; for we have to proceed from sensible things to those that are non-sensible. It is
also called first philosophy, inasmuch as all the other sciences, receiving their principles from it,
come after it. Now there can be nothing that depends upon matter for its being understood but
not for its being, because by it; very nature the intellect is immaterial. So there is no fourth kind
of philosophy besides the ones mentioned.

Reply to the Opposing Arguments:

Reply to 1. ln the Ethics the Philosopher considers the intellectual habits insofar as they are
intellectual virtues. Now they are called virtues because they perfect the intellect in its operation;
for "virtue makes its possessor good and renders his work good." So he distinguishes between
virtues of this sort in as much as speculative habits perfect the intellect in different ways. In one
way the speculative part of the soul is perfected by understanding, which is the habit of
principles, through which some things become known of themselves. In another way it is
perfected by a habit through which conclusions demonstrated from these principles are known,
whether the demonstration proceeds from inferior causes, as in science, or from the highest
causes, as in wisdom. But when sciences are differentiated insofar as they are habits, they must
be distinguished according to their objects, that is, according to the things of which the sciences
treat. And it is in this way that both here and in the Metaphysics speculative philosophy is
distinguished into three parts.