essential to the sacrament, and if they are omitted there is no
sacrament, while certain things belong to the solemnization of the
sacrament, and if these be omitted the sacrament is nevertheless
validly performed, although it is a sin to omit them; so, too, consent
expressed in words of the present between persons lawfully
qualified to contract makes a marriage, because these two
conditions are essential to the sacrament; while all else belongs to
the solemnization of the sacrament, as being done in order that the
marriage may be more fittingly performed. Hence if these be omitted
it is a true marriage, although the contracting parties sin, unless they
have a lawful motive for being excused.
Reply to Objection 1: The maid is in her father's power, not as a
female slave without power over her own body, but as a daughter,
for the purpose of education. Hence, in so far as she is free, she can
give herself into another's power without her father's consent, even
as a son or daughter, since they are free, may enter religion without
their parent's consent.
Reply to Objection 2: In penance our act, although essential to the
sacrament, does not suffice for producing the proximate effect of the
sacrament, namely forgiveness of sins, and consequently it is
necessary that the act of the priest intervene in order that the
sacrament be perfected. But in matrimony our acts are the sufficient
cause for the production of the proximate effect, which is the
marriage bond, because whoever has the right to dispose of himself
can bind himself to another. Consequently the priest's blessing is
not required for matrimony as being essential to the sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: It is also forbidden to receive baptism
otherwise than from a priest, except in a case of necessity. But
matrimony is not a necessary sacrament: and consequently the
comparison fails. However, clandestine marriages are forbidden on
account of the evil results to which they are liable, since it often
happens that one of the parties is guilty of fraud in such marriages;
frequently, too, they have recourse to other nuptials when they
repent of having married in haste; and many other evils result
therefrom, besides which there is something disgraceful about them.
Reply to Objection 4: Clandestine marriages are not forbidden as
though they were contrary to the essentials of marriage, in the same
way as the marriages of unlawful persons, who are undue matter for
this sacrament; and hence there is no comparison.

## QUESTION 46 — OF THE CONSENT TO WHICH AN OATH OR CARNAL

INTERCOURSE IS APPENDED

Prologue
We must now consider the consent to which an oath or carnal
intercourse is appended. Under this head there are two points of
inquiry:
(1) Whether an oath added to the consent that is expressed in words
of the future tense makes a marriage?
(2) Whether carnal intercourse supervening to such a consent makes
a marriage?