THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.5.

up the grace of God which is in thee, by the imposition of my hands."
Now the sacrament of Penance is ordained, not that man may
receive some abundance of grace, but that his sins may be taken
away; and therefore no imposition of hands is required for this
sacrament, as neither is there for Baptism, wherein nevertheless a
fuller remission of sins is bestowed.
Reply to Objection 1: That imposition of hands is not sacramental,
but is intended for the working of miracles, namely, that by the
contact of a sanctified man's hand, even bodily infirmity might be
removed; even as we read of our Lord (Mk. 6:5) that He cured the
sick, "laying His hands upon them," and (Mt. 8:3) that He cleansed a
leper by touching him.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not every reception of the Holy Ghost that
requires an imposition of hands, since even in Baptism man receives
the Holy Ghost, without any imposition of hands: it is at the
reception of the fulness of the Holy Ghost which belongs to
Confirmation that an imposition of hands is required.
Reply to Objection 3: In those sacraments which are perfected in the
use of the matter, the minister has to perform some bodily action on
the recipient of the sacrament, e.g. in Baptism, Confirmation, and
Extreme Unction; whereas this sacrament does not consist in the
use of matter employed outwardly, the matter being supplied by the
part taken by the penitent: wherefore, just as in the Eucharist the
priest perfects the sacrament by merely pronouncing the words over
the matter, so the mere words which the priest while absolving
pronounces over the penitent perfect the sacrament of absolution. If,
indeed, any bodily act were necessary on the part of the priest, the
sign of the cross, which is employed in the Eucharist, would not be
less becoming than the imposition of hands, in token that sins are
forgiven through the blood of Christ crucified; and yet this is not
essential to this sacrament as neither is it to the Eucharist.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether this sacrament is necessary for

salvation?
Objection 1: It would seem that this sacrament is not necessary for
salvation. Because on Ps. 125:5, "They that sow in tears," etc., the
gloss says: "Be not sorrowful, if thou hast a good will, of which
peace is the meed." But sorrow is essential to Penance, according to
2 Cor. 7:10: "The sorrow that is according to God worketh penance
steadfast unto salvation." Therefore a good will without Penance
suffices for salvation.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 10:12): "Charity covereth all
sins," and further on (Prov. 15:27): "By mercy and faith sins are
purged away." But this sacrament is for nothing else but the purging
of sins. Therefore if one has charity, faith, and mercy, one can obtain
salvation, without the sacrament of Penance.
Objection 3: Further, the sacraments of the Church take their origin
from the institution of Christ. But according to Jn. 8 Christ absolved
the adulterous woman without Penance. Therefore it seems that
Penance is not necessary for salvation.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Lk. 13:3): "Unless you shall do
penance, you shall all likewise perish."
I answer that, A thing is necessary for salvation in two ways: first,
absolutely; secondly, on a supposition. A thing is absolutely
necessary for salvation, if no one can obtain salvation without it, as,
for example, the grace of Christ, and the sacrament of Baptism,
whereby a man is born again in Christ. The sacrament of Penance is
necessary on a supposition, for it is necessary, not for all, but for
those who are in sin. For it is written (2 Paral 37 [The prayer of
Manasses, among the Apocrypha]), "Thou, Lord, God of the
righteous, hast not appointed repentance to the righteous, to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, nor to those who sinned not against
Thee." But "sin, when it is completed, begetteth death" (James 1:15).
Consequently it is necessary for the sinner's salvation that sin be
taken away from him; which cannot be done without the sacrament
of Penance, wherein the power of Christ's Passion operates through
the priest's absolution and the acts of the penitent, who co-operates
with grace unto the destruction of his sin. For as Augustine says