have told you." Now His being "the Way," they both understood and allowed, but
the rest they knew not. They did not indeed venture to say what they knew not.
Still they gained great consolation from His being "the Way." "If," says He, "I
have sole authority to bring to the Father, you shall surely come there; for
neither is it possible to come by any other way." But by saying before, "No man
can come to Me except the Father draw him"; and again, "If I be lifted up from
the earth, I shall draw all men unto Me" [John 12:32]; and again, "No man
comes to the Father but by Me" [John 14:6]; He shows Himself equal to Him
who begot Him. But how after saying, "Whither I go ye know, and the way ye
know," has He added,

John 14:7
"If you had known Me, you should have known My Father also; and from
henceforth ye know Him, and have seen Him"?
He does not contradict Himself; they knew Him indeed, but not so as they
ought. God they knew, but the Father not yet. For afterwards, the Spirit having
come upon them wrought in them all knowledge. What He says is of this kind.
"Had ye known My Essence and My Dignity, you would have known that of the
Father also; and henceforth you shall know Him, and have seen Him," (the one
belonging to the future, the other to the present,) that is, "by Me." By "sight," He
means knowledge by intellectual perception. For those who are seen we may see
and not know; but those who are known we cannot know and not know.
Wherefore He says, "and you have seen Him"; just as it says, "was seen also of
Angels." [1 Timothy 3:16] Yet the very Essence was not seen; yet it says that He
"was seen," that is, as far as it was possible for them to see. These words are
used, that you may learn that the man who has seen Him knows Him who begot
Him. But they beheld Him not in His unveiled Essence, but clothed with flesh.
He is wont elsewhere to put "sight" for "knowledge"; as when He says, "Blessed
are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." [Matthew 5:8] By "pure," He
means not those who are free from fornication only, but from all sins. For every
sin brings filth upon the soul.
3. Let us then use every means to wipe off the filthiness. But first the font
cleanses, afterwards other ways also, many and of all kinds. For God, being
merciful, has even after this given to us various ways of reconciliation, of all
which the first is that by alms-doing. "By almsdeeds," it says, "and deeds of faith
sins are cleansed away." [Sirach 3:30] By alms-doing I do not mean that which
is maintained by injustice, for this is not alms-doing, but savageness and
inhumanity. What profits it to strip one man and clothe another? For we ought to
begin the action with mercy, but this is inhumanity. If we give away everything

that we have got from other people, it is no gain to us. And this Zacchæus
shows, who on that occasion said, that he propitiated God by giving four times
as much as he had taken. [Luke 19:8] But we, when we plunder unboundedly,
and give but little, think that we make God propitious, whereas we do rather
exasperate Him. For tell me, if you should drag a dead and rotten ass from the
waysides and lanes, and bring it to the altar, would not all stone you as accursed
and polluted? Well then, if I prove that a sacrifice procured by plunder is more
polluted than this, what defense shall we obtain? Let us suppose that some article
has been obtained by plunder, is it not of fouler scent than a dead ass? Would
you learn how great is the rottenness of sin? Hear the Prophet saying, "My
wounds stank, and were corrupt." [Psalm 38:5, Septuagint] And do you in words
entreat God to forget your misdeeds, and do you by what you yourself do,
robbing and grasping, and placing your sin upon the altar, cause Him to
remember them continually? But now, this is not the only sin, but there is one
more grievous than this, that you defile the souls of the saints. For the altar is but
a stone, and is consecrated, but they ever bear with them Christ Himself; and do
you dare to send there any of such impurity? "No," says one, "not the same
money, but other." Mockery this, and trifling. Do you not know, that if one drop
of injustice fall on a great quantity of wealth, the whole is defiled? And just as a
man by casting dung into a pure fountain makes it all unclean, so also in the case
of riches, anything ill-gotten entering in makes them to be tainted with the ill
savor from itself. Then we wash our hands when we enter into church, but our
hearts not so. Why, do our hands send forth a voice? It is the soul that utters the
words: to that God looks; cleanness of the body is of no use, while that is
defiled. What profits it, if you wipe clean your outward hands, while you have
those within impure? For the terrible thing and that which subverts all good is
this, that while we are fearful about trifles, we care not for important matters. To
pray with unwashed hands is a matter indifferent; but to do it with an unwashed
mind, this is the extreme of all evils. Hear what was said to the Jews who busied
themselves about such outward impurities. "Wash your heart from wickedness,