THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.19, C.2.

by the Virgin conceiving supernaturally and by the unstable waters
bearing up the weight of bodily feet." Now it is clear that to be
begotten belongs to human nature, and likewise to walk; yet both
were in Christ supernaturally. So, too, He wrought Divine things
humanly, as when He healed the leper with a touch. Hence in the
same epistle he adds: "He performed Divine works not as God does,
and human works not as man does, but, God having been made
man, by a new operation of God and man."
Now, that he understood two operations in Christ, one of the Divine
and the other of the human nature, is clear from what he says, Div.
Nom. ii: "Whatever pertains to His human operation the Father and
the Holy Ghost no-wise share in, except, as one might say, by their
most gracious and merciful will," i.e. inasmuch as the Father and the
Holy Ghost in their mercy wished Christ to do and to suffer human
things. And he adds: "He is truly the unchangeable God, and God's
Word by the sublime and unspeakable operation of God, which,
being made man for us, He wrought." Hence it is clear that the
human operation, in which the Father and the Holy Ghost do not
share, except by Their merciful consent, is distinct from His
operation, as the Word of God, wherein the Father and the Holy
Ghost share.
Reply to Objection 2: The instrument is said to act through being
moved by the principal agent; and yet, besides this, it can have its
proper operation through its own form, as stated above of fire. And
hence the action of the instrument as instrument is not distinct from
the action of the principal agent; yet it may have another operation,
inasmuch as it is a thing. Hence the operation of Christ's human
nature, as the instrument of the Godhead, is not distinct from the
operation of the Godhead; for the salvation wherewith the manhood
of Christ saves us and that wherewith His Godhead saves us are not
distinct; nevertheless, the human nature in Christ, inasmuch as it is
a certain nature, has a proper operation distinct from the Divine, as
stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: To operate belongs to a subsisting hypostasis;
in accordance, however, with the form and nature from which the
operation receives its species. Hence from the diversity of forms or
natures spring the divers species of operations, but from the unity of
hypostasis springs the numerical unity as regards the operation of
the species: thus fire has two operations specifically different,
namely, to illuminate and to heat, from the difference of light and

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.19, C.2.

heat, and yet the illumination of the fire that illuminates at one and
the same time is numerically one. So, likewise, in Christ there are
necessarily two specifically different operations by reason of His two
natures; nevertheless, each of the operations at one and the same
time is numerically one, as one walking and one healing.
Reply to Objection 4: Being and operation belong to the person by
reason of the nature; yet in a different manner. For being belongs to
the very constitution of the person, and in this respect it has the
nature of a term; consequently, unity of person requires unity of the
complete and personal being. But operation is an effect of the
person by reason of a form or nature. Hence plurality of operations
is not incompatible with personal unity.
Reply to Objection 5: The proper work of the Divine operation is
different from the proper work of the human operation. Thus to heal
a leper is a proper work of the Divine operation, but to touch him is
the proper work of the human operation. Now both these operations
concur in one work, inasmuch as one nature acts in union with the
other.