Are these too but threatening words? Are these but the sound of words? For
to me indeed the former things were not incredible, but things not seen were
equally credible with things that were seen. But even to the unbeliever these are
sufficient to produce faith. If any one disbelieves hell, let him consider Sodom,
let him reflect upon Gomorrha, the vengeance that has been inflicted, and which
yet remains. This is a proof of the eternity of punishment. Are these things
grievous? And is it not grievous, when you say that there is no hell, but that God
has merely threatened it? When you slack the hands of the people? It is thou who
disbelievest that compellest me to say these things; it is thou that hast drawn me
out into these words. If you believed the words of Christ I should not be
compelled to bring forward facts to induce belief. But since you have evaded
them, you shall be persuaded henceforth, whether willing or unwilling. For what
have you to say concerning Sodom? Would you wish also to know the cause, for
which these things were then done? It was one sin, a grievous and accursed one
certainly, yet but one. The men of that time had a passion for boys, and on that
account they suffered this punishment. But now ten thousand sins equal and even
more grievous than these are committed. Then He who for one sin poured forth
so much anger, and neither regarded the supplication of Abraham, nor yet Lot
who dwelt among them, the man who from honor to His servants offered his
own daughters to insult, will He spare, when there are so many sins? These
things truly are ridiculous, trifling, delusion, and diabolical deceit!
Do you wish that I should also bring forward another? You have certainly
heard of Pharaoh, king of the Egyptians; you know therefore the punishment
also which he suffered, how even with his whole host, chariots and horses and
all, he was engulfed in the Erythræan sea. Would you hear also other examples?
He perhaps was an impious man, or rather not perhaps, but certainly he was an
impious man. Would you see those also punished, who were of the number of
believers, and who held fast to God, but were not of upright life? Hear Paul
saying, "Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell
in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither let us murmur, as some of them

murmured, and perished by the destroyer. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of
them tempted, and perished by the serpents." [1 Corinthians 10:8-10] And if
fornication, and if murmuring had such power, what will not be the effect of our
sins?
And if you dost not now pay the penalty, do not wonder. For they knew not
of a hell, therefore they were visited with punishments following close at their
heels. But you, whatever sins thou commit, though you should escape present
penalty, wilt pay for it all There. Did he so punish those who were nearly in the
state of children, and who did not sin so greatly— and will He spare us? It would
not be reasonable. For if we commit the same sins with them, we shall deserve a
greater punishment than they did. Wherefore? Because we have enjoyed more
grace. But when our offenses are numerous, and more heinous than theirs, what
vengeance shall we not undergo? They— and let no one think I say it as
admiring them, or excusing them; far be it: for when God punishes, he who
passes a contrary sentence, does it at the suggestion of the devil; I say this
therefore, not praising them nor excusing them, but showing our wickedness—
they therefore, although they murmured, were, however, traveling a wilderness
road: but we murmur though we have a country, and are in our own houses.
They, although they committed fornication, yet it was just after they came out of
the evils of Egypt, and had hardly heard of such a law. But we do it, having
previously received from our forefathers the doctrine of salvation, so that we are
deserving of greater punishment.
Would you hear also of other things? What were their sufferings in
Palestine, famines, pestilences, wars, captivities, under the Babylonians, and
under the Assyrians, and their miseries from the Macedonians, and those under
Hadrian and Vespasian? I have something that I wish, beloved, to relate to you;
nay, do not run away! Or rather I will tell you another thing before it. There was
once a famine, it says, and the king was walking upon the wall; then a woman
came to him and uttered these words: "O king, this woman said to me, Let us
roast your son today, and eat him— tomorrow mine. And we roasted and ate,