have I to do with thee? mine hour is not yet come"— waiting for that hour which was foreknown
by the Father. This is also the reason why, when men were often desirous to take Him, it is said,
"No man laid hands upon Him, for the hour of His being taken was not yet come;" nor the time
of His passion, which had been foreknown by the Father; as also says the prophet Habakkuk, "By
this Thou shalt be known when the years have drawn nigh; Thou shalt be set forth when the time
comes; because my soul is disturbed by anger, Thou shalt remember Thy mercy." Paul also says:
"But when the fulness of time came, God sent forth His Son." By which is made manifest, that
all things which had been foreknown of the Father, our Lord did accomplish in their order, season,
and hour, foreknown and fitting, being indeed one and the same, but rich and great. For He fulfils
the bountiful and comprehensive will of His Father, inasmuch as He is Himself the Saviour of those
who are saved, and the Lord of those who are under authority, and the God of all those things which
have been formed, the only-begotten of the Father, Christ who was announced, and the Word of
God, who became incarnate when the fulness of time had come, at which the Son of God had to
become the Son of man.
8. All, therefore, are outside of the [Christian] dispensation, who, under pretext of knowledge,
understand that Jesus was one, and Christ another, and the Only-begotten another, from whom
again is the Word, and that the Saviour is another, whom these disciples of error allege to be a
production of those who were made Æons in a state of degeneracy. Such men are to outward
appearance sheep; for they appear to be like us, by what they say in public, repeating the same
words as we do; but inwardly they are wolves. Their doctrine is homicidal, conjuring up, as it does,
a number of gods, and simulating many Fathers, but lowering and dividing the Son of God in many
ways. These are they against whom the Lord has cautioned us beforehand; and His disciple, in his
Epistle already mentioned, commands us to avoid them, when he says: "For many deceivers are
entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver
and an antichrist. Take heed to them, that ye lose not what ye have wrought." And again does
he say in the Epistle: "Many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit
of God: Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God; and every spirit
which separates Jesus Christ is not of God, but is of antichrist." These words agree with what

Hab. iii. 2.
both readings (Adv. Marc., v. 16). Socrates tells us (vii. 32, p. 381) that the passage had been corrupted by those who wished to
separate the humanity of Christ from His divinity, and that the old copies read, )*+ )+,-.! / 0%,1 #2+ 3456$-+ 7)2 #$- 8,$-