will go off to a courtesan; while [the husband] that is chaste and regular you will
gain not by these means, but by the opposite: yea by these thou even causest him
pain, clothing yourself with the reputation of a lover of the world. For what if
your husband out of respect, and that as a sober-minded man, does not speak, yet
inwardly he will condemn you, and will not conceal ill-will and jealousy. Will
you not drive away all pleasure for the future, by exciting ill-will against
yourself?
15. Possibly you are annoyed at hearing what is said, and are indignant,
saying, 'He irritates husbands still more against their wives.' I say this, not to
irritate your husbands, but I wish that these things should be done by you
willingly, for your own sakes, not for theirs; not to free them from envy but to
free you from the parade of this life.
Do you wish to appear beautiful? I also wish it, but with beauty which God
seeks, which "the King desires." [Psalm 45:11] Whom would you have as a
Lover? God or men? Should thou be beautiful with that beauty, God will "desire
your beauty"; but if with the other apart from this, He will abominate you, and
your lovers will be profligates. For no man who loves a married woman is good.
Consider this even in regard to the adorning that is external. For the other
adorning, I mean that of the soul, attracts God; but this again, profligates. Do
you see that I care for you, that I am anxious for you, that you may be beautiful,
really beautiful, splendid, really splendid, that instead of profligate men, you
may have for your Lover God the Lord of all? And she who has Him for her
Lover, to whom will she be like? She has her place among the choirs of Angels.
For if one who is beloved of a king is accounted happy above all, what will her
dignity be who is beloved of God with much love? Though thou put the whole
world [in the balance against it], there is nothing equivalent to that beauty.
This beauty then let us cultivate; with these embellishments let us adorn
ourselves, that we may pass into the Heavens, into the spiritual chambers, into
the nuptial chamber that is undefiled. For this beauty is liable to be destroyed by
anything; and when it lasts well, and neither disease nor anxiety impair it (which

is impossible), it does not last twenty years. But the other is ever blooming, ever
in its prime. There, there is no change to fear; no old age coming brings a
wrinkle, no undermining disease withers it; no desponding anxiety disfigures it;
but it is far above all these things. But this [earthly beauty] takes flight before it
appears, and if it appears it has not many admirers. For those of well-ordered
minds do not admire it; and those who do admire it, admire with wantonness.
16. Let us not therefore cultivate this [beauty], but the other: let us have
that, so that with bright torches we may pass into the bridal chamber. For not to
virgins only has this been promised, but to virgin souls. For had it belonged
merely to virgins, those five would not have been shut out. This then belongs to
all who are virgins in soul, who are freed from worldly imaginations: for these
imaginations corrupt our souls. If therefore we remain unpolluted, we shall
depart there, and shall be accepted. "For I have espoused you," he says, "to one
husband, to present you a chaste virgin unto Christ." [2 Corinthians 11:2] These
things he said, not with reference to Virgins, but to the whole body of the entire
Church. For the uncorrupt soul is a virgin, though she have a husband: she is a
virgin as to that which is Virginity indeed, that which is worthy of admiration.
For this of the body is but the accompaniment and shadow of the other: while
that is the True Virginity. This let us cultivate, and so shall we be able with
cheerful countenance to behold the Bridegroom, to enter in with bright torches,
if the oil do not fail us, if by melting down our golden ornaments we procure
such oil as makes our lamps bright. And this oil is lovingkindness.
If we impart what we have to others, if we make oil therefrom, then it will
protect us, and we shall not say at that time, "Give us oil, for our lamps are
going out" [Matthew 25:8], nor shall we beg of others, nor shall we be shut out
when we are gone to them that sell, nor shall we hear that fearful and terrible
voice, while we are knocking at the doors, "I know you not." [Matthew 25:12]
But He will acknowledge us, and we shall go in with the Bridegroom, and
having entered into the spiritual Bride-chamber we shall enjoy good things
innumerable.