vision' (notitia visionis). For of the things that are not yet with us, God sees not
only the being that they have in their causes, but also the being that they have in
themselves, inasmuch as His eternity is indivisibly present to all time. We must
remember that God knows the being of everything through His own essence: for His
essence is representable by many things that are not, nor ever shall be, nor ever have
been. That same essence is the type of the power of every cause, in virtue of which
power effects pre-exist in their causes. Again the being of everything, that it has in itself,
is modelled upon the being of the divine essence. Thus then God knows nonentities
inasmuch as in some way they have being, either in the power of God, or in their
(creature) causes, or in themselves.
To this the authority of Holy Scripture also gives testimony: All things are known to the
Lord our God before their creation; as also, after they are fully made, he regardeth all
(Ecclus xxiii, 29): and, Before I formed thee in the womb, I knew thee (Jer. i, 5).

## CHAPTER LXVII--That God knows Individual Contingent Events

occur. As thus known, it should be said to be seen by God as already present in its
existence. Under this aspect, the question of the possibility of the thing never coming to
be can no longer be raised: what already is, in respect of that present instant cannot but
be. The fallacy then arises from this, that the time at which we speak, when we say
`God knows,' co-exists with eternity; or again the last time that is marked when we say
`God knew'; and thus a relation of time, past or present, to future is attributed to eternity,
which attribution does not hold; and thus we have fallacia accidentis.
8. Since everything is known by God as seen by Him in the present, the necessity of
that being true which God knows is like the necessity of Socrates's sitting from the fact
of his being seen seated. This is not necessary absolutely, `by necessity of the
consequent,' as the phrase is, but conditionally, or `by necessity of the consequence.'
For this conditional proposition is necessary: `He is sitting, if he is seen seated.' Change
the conditional proposition into a categorical of this form: `What is seen sitting, is
necessarily seated': it is clear that the proposition is true as a phrase, where its
elements are taken together (compositam), but false as a fact, when its elements are
separated (divisam). All these objections against the divine knowledge of
contingent facts are fallacia compositionis et divisionis.
That God knows future contingencies is shown also by the authority of Holy Scripture:
for it is said of Divine Wisdom, It knows signs and portents beforehand, and the issues
of times and ages (Wisd. viii, 8): and, There is nothing hidden from his eyes: from age to
age he regardeth (Ecclus xxxix, 24, 25).