FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.5, C.4.

Secondly, from a consideration of the specific nature of Happiness,
viz. the vision of the Divine Essence, which man cannot obtain in
this life, as was shown in the FP, Question 12, Article 11. Hence it is
evident that none can attain true and perfect Happiness in this life.
Reply to Objection 1: Some are said to be happy in this life, either on
account of the hope of obtaining Happiness in the life to come,
according to Rm. 8:24: "We are saved by hope"; or on account of a
certain participation of Happiness, by reason of a kind of enjoyment
of the Sovereign Good.
Reply to Objection 2: The imperfection of participated Happiness is
due to one of two causes. First, on the part of the object of
Happiness, which is not seen in Its Essence: and this imperfection
destroys the nature of true Happiness. Secondly, the imperfection
may be on the part of the participator, who indeed attains the object
of Happiness, in itself, namely, God: imperfectly, however, in
comparison with the way in which God enjoys Himself. This
imperfection does not destroy the true nature of Happiness;
because, since Happiness is an operation, as stated above (Question
3, Article 2), the true nature of Happiness is taken from the object,
which specifies the act, and not from the subject.
Reply to Objection 3: Men esteem that there is some kind of
happiness to be had in this life, on account of a certain likeness to
true Happiness. And thus they do not fail altogether in their estimate.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.5, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether happiness once had can be lost?

Objection 1: It would seem that Happiness can be lost. For
Happiness is a perfection. But every perfection is in the thing
perfected according to the mode of the latter. Since then man is, by
his nature, changeable, it seems that Happiness is participated by
man in a changeable manner. And consequently it seems that man
can lose Happiness.
Objection 2: Further, Happiness consists in an act of the intellect;
and the intellect is subject to the will. But the will can be directed to
opposites. Therefore it seems that it can desist from the operation
whereby man is made happy: and thus man will cease to be happy.
Objection 3: Further, the end corresponds to the beginning. But
man's Happiness has a beginning, since man was not always happy.
Therefore it seems that it has an end.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 25:46) of the righteous that "they
shall god . . . into life everlasting," which, as above stated (Article 2),
is the Happiness of the saints. Now what is eternal ceases not.
Therefore Happiness cannot be lost.
I answer that, If we speak of imperfect happiness, such as can be
had in this life, in this sense it can be lost. This is clear of
contemplative happiness, which is lost either by forgetfulness, for
instance, when knowledge is lost through sickness; or again by
certain occupations, whereby a man is altogether withdrawn from
contemplation.
This is also clear of active happiness: since man's will can be
changed so as to fall to vice from the virtue, in whose act that
happiness principally consists. If, however, the virtue remain
unimpaired, outward changes can indeed disturb such like
happiness, in so far as they hinder many acts of virtue; but they
cannot take it away altogether because there still remains an act of
virtue, whereby man bears these trials in a praiseworthy manner.
And since the happiness of this life can be lost, a circumstance that
appears to be contrary to the nature of happiness, therefore did the
Philosopher state (Ethic. i, 10) that some are happy in this life, not
simply, but "as men," whose nature is subject to change.