([παρρησίας]), but "vessels of mercy," to show that the whole is of God. For the
phrase, "it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs," even if it comes in the
course of the objection, still, were it said by Paul, would create no difficulty.
Because when he says, "it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs," he does
not deprive us of free-will, but shows that all is not one's own, for that it requires
grace from above. For it is binding on us to will, and also to run: but to confide
not in our own labors, but in the love of God toward man. And this he has
expressed elsewhere. "Yet not I, but the grace which was with me." [1
Corinthians 15:10] And he well says, "Which He had afore prepared unto glory."
For since they reproached them with this, that they were saved by grace, and
thought to make them ashamed, he far more than sets aside this insinuation. For
if the thing brought glory even to God, much more to them through whom God
was glorified. But observe his forbearance, and unspeakable wisdom. For when
he had it in his power to adduce, as an instance of those punished, not Pharaoh,
but such of the Jews as had sinned, and so make his discourse much clearer, and
show that where there were the same fathers, and the same sins, some perished,
and some had mercy shown them, and persuade them not to be doubtful-minded,
even if some of the Gentiles were saved, while the Jews were perishing; that he
might not make his discourse irksome, the showing forth of the punishment he
draws from the foreigner, so that he may not be forced to call them "vessels of
wrath." But those that obtained mercy he draws from the people of the Jews.
And besides, he also has spoken in a sufficient way in God's behalf, because
though He knew very well that the nation was fitting itself as a vessel of
destruction, still He contributed all on His part, His patience, His long-suffering,
and that not merely long-suffering, but "much long-suffering;" yet still he was
not minded to state it barely against the Jews. Whence then are some vessels of
wrath, and some of mercy? Of their own free choice. God, however, being very
good, shows the same kindness to both. For it was not those in a state of
salvation only to whom He showed mercy, but also Pharaoh, as far as His part
went. For of the same long-suffering, both they and he had the advantage. And if

he was not saved, it was quite owing to his own will: since, as for what concerns
God, he had as much done for him as they who were saved. Having then given to
the question that answer which was furnished by facts, in order to give his
discourse the advantage of other testimony in its favor, he introduces the
prophets also making the same declarations aforetime. For Hosea, he says, of old
put this in writing, as follows:
Ver. 25. "I will call them My people, which were not My people; and her
beloved, which was not beloved."
Here to prevent their saying, that you are deceiving us here with specious
reasoning, he calls Hosea to witness, who cries and says, "I will call them My
people, who were not My people." [Hosea 2:23] Who then are the not-people?
Plainly, the Gentiles. And who the not-beloved? The same again. However, he
says, that they shall become at once people, and beloved, and sons of God.
Ver. 26. "For even they shall be called," he says, "the children of the living
God."
But if they should assert that this was said of those of the Jews who
believed, even then the argument stands. For if with those who after so many
benefits were hard-hearted and estranged, and had lost their being as a people, so
great a change was wrought, what is there to prevent even those who were not
estranged after being taken to Him, but were originally aliens, from being called,
and, provided they obey, from being counted worthy of the same blessings?
Having then done with Hosea, he does not content himself with him only, but
also brings Isaiah in after him. sounding in harmony with him.
Ver. 27. "For Esaias," he says, "cries concerning Israel."
That is, speaks out boldly, and uses no dissimulation. Why then lay a charge
against us, when they afore declared the same thing with more than trumpet's
loudness? And what does Isaiah cry? "Though the number of the children of
Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved." [Isaiah 10:22]
Do you see that he too does not say that all are to be saved, but that those
that are worthy shall? For I regard not the multitude, he means, nor does a race