[Acts 11:27] It was need that the fruit of alms should also be planted there. And
see how of necessity ([ἀ] [ναγκαίως]) (it comes about that) none of the men of
note becomes their teacher. They got for their teachers, men of Cyprus, and
Cyrene, and Paul— though he indeed surpassed (the Apostles) themselves—
since Paul also had for teachers Ananias and Barnabas. But here of necessity
(this was the case). "And there stood up one of them named Agabus, and
signified by the spirit that there would be great dearth throughout the world,
which also came to pass in the days of Claudius Cæsar." [Acts 11:28] "By the
Spirit," it says: for, that they may not imagine that this was the reason why the
famine came, (namely) because Christianity had come in, because the demons
were departed, the Holy Ghost foretells it: this, however, was nothing wonderful,
for in fact Christ predicted it. Not this was the reason, else this must have been
the case from the beginning: but it was because of the evils done to the Apostles
— and God had borne long with them; but, when they pressed upon them, a
great famine ensues, betokening to the Jews the coming woes. "If it was because
of them, in any wise it ought to have stopped (there), when it did exist. What
harm had the Gentiles done, that they should have their share in the evils? They
ought rather to have been marked as approved ([εὐδοκιμἥσαι]), because they
were doing their part, were slaying, punishing, taking vengeance, persecuting on
every side. And mark also at what time the famine comes: precisely when the
Gentiles were thenceforth added to the Church. But if, as you say, it was because
of the evils (done by the Jews), these ought to have been exempted." How so?
Christ, forestalling this objection, said, "You shall have tribulation." [John
16:33] (It is) just as if you should say, They ought not to have been scourged
either. "Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to
send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea." [Acts 11:29] Mark how the
famine becomes to them the means of salvation, an occasion of almsgiving, a
harbinger of many blessing. And (so it might have been) to you, one may say, if
you were so minded, but you would not. But it is predicted, that they might be
prepared beforehand for almsgiving. "Unto the brethren which dwelt in Judæa;"

for they were enduring great hardships, but before this, they were not suffering
from famine. "Which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul." [Acts 11:30] Do you mark them, that no sooner do they
believe than they bring forth fruit, not only for their own but for those afar off?
And Barnabas is sent and Saul, to minister (the same.) Of this occasion
(᾿[Ενταὕθα]) he says (to the Galatians), "And James, Cephas, and John gave to
me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, only" (they would) "that we
should remember the poor." [Galatians 2:9] James was yet living.
"Now they which were scattered abroad upon the persecution," etc.
(Recapitulation.) Do you mark how even in the tribulation instead of falling to
lamentations and tears, as we do, they give themselves up to a great and good
work? "Travelled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch," and there with
more security preached the word. "And some of them, which were men of Cyprus
and Cyrene," etc. [Acts 11:20] And they did not say, "(What), we, Cyrenians and
Cyprians, to attack this splendid and great city!" but trusting in the grace of
God, they applied themselves to the work of teaching, nor did these (Gentiles)
themselves think scorn to learn anything of them. Mark how by small means all
is brought about: mark the preaching how it spreads: mark those in Jerusalem,
having like care for all, holding the whole world as one house. "They heard that
Samaria had received the word, and" [Acts 8:14] to Samaria they send the
Apostles: they heard what had befallen at Antioch, and to Antioch they send
Barnabas: they also send again, and (these) prophets. For the distance was great,
and it was not meet the Apostles at present should separate from thence, that
they might not be thought to be fugitives, and to have fled from their own
people. But then, almost precisely, is the time of their parting from Jerusalem,
when the state (of the Jews) was shown to be past remedy, when the war was
close at hand, and they must needs perish: when the sentence was made absolute.
For, until Paul went to Rome, the Apostles were there (at Jerusalem). But they
depart, not because afraid of the war— how should it be so?— seeing those they
went to, were those that should bring the war: and moreover the war breaks out