pence, and him that was clad in the filthy garments, and others not a few.
2. "And after six days He takes with Him Peter and James and John."
[Matthew 17:1]
Now another says, "after eight," [Luke 9:28] not contradicting this writer,
but most fully agreeing with him. For the one expressed both the very day on
which He spoke, and that on which He led them up; but the other, the days
between them only.
But mark thou, I pray you, the severe goodness of Matthew, not concealing
those who were preferred to himself. This John also often does, recording the
peculiar praises of Peter with great sincerity. For the choir of these holy men was
everywhere pure from envy and vainglory.
Having taken therefore the leaders, "He brings them up into a high
mountain apart, and was transfigured before them: and His face did shine as the
sun, and His raiment was white as the light. And there appeared unto them
Moses and Elias talking with Him." [Matthew 17:2-3]
Wherefore does He take with Him these only? Because these were superior
to the rest. And Peter indeed showed his superiority by exceedingly loving Him;
but John by being exceedingly loved of Him; and James again by his answer
which he answered with his brother, saying, "We are able to drink the cup;" nor
yet by his answer only, but also by his works; both by the rest of them, and by
fulfilling, what he said. For so earnest was he, and grievous to the Jews, that
Herod himself supposed that he had bestowed herein a very great favor on the
Jews, I mean in slaying him.
But wherefore does He not lead them up straightway? To spare the other
disciples any feeling of human weakness: for which cause He omits also the
names of them that are to go up. And this, because the rest would have desired
exceedingly to have followed, being to see a pattern of that glory; and would
have been pained, as overlooked. For though it was somewhat in a corporeal
way that He made the disclosure, yet nevertheless the thing had much in it to be
desired.

Wherefore then does He at all foretell it? That they might be readier to seize
the high meaning, by His foretelling it; and being filled with the more vehement
desire in that round of days, might so be present with their mind quite awake and
full of care.
3. But wherefore does He also bring forward Moses and Elias? One might
mention many reasons. And first of all this: because the multitudes said He was,
some Elias, some Jeremias, some one of the old prophets, He brings the leaders
of His choir, that they might see the difference even hereby between the servants
and the Lord; and that Peter was rightly commended for confessing Him Son of
God.
But besides that, one may mention another reason also: that because men
were continually accusing Him of transgressing the law, and accounting Him to
be a blasphemer, as appropriating to Himself a glory which belonged not to Him,
even the Father's, and were saying, "This Man is not of God, because He keeps
not the Sabbath day;" [John 9:16] and again, "For a good work we stone You
not, but for blasphemy, and because that Thou, being a man, makest Yourself
God:" [John 10:33] that both the charges might be shown to spring from envy,
and He be proved not liable to either; and that neither is His conduct a
transgression of the law, nor His calling Himself equal to the Father an
appropriation of glory not His own; He brings forward them who had shone out
in each of these respects: Moses, because he gave the law, and the Jews might
infer that he would not have overlooked its being trampled on, as they supposed,
nor have shown respect to the transgressor of it, and the enemy of its founder:
Elias too for his part was jealous for the glory of God, and were any man an
adversary of God, and calling himself God, making himself equal to the Father,
while he was not what he said, and had no right to do so; he was not the person
to stand by, and hearken unto him.
And one may mention another reason also, with those which have been
spoken of. Of what kind then is it? To inform them that He has power both of
death and life, is ruler both above and beneath. For this cause He brings forward