ground like a child, and makes a most disgraceful figure, and yet no one puts
curbs on her, and leg-ties, and bits, nor mounts upon her the skilful rider—
Christ, I mean. And therefore it is that all is turned upside down. For when you
both teach dogs to master the craving of the belly, and tame the fury in a lion,
and the unruliness of horses, and teach the birds to speak plainly, how
inconsistent must it not be— to implant achievements of reason in natures that
are without reason, and to import the passions of creatures without reason into
natures endowed with reason? There is no excuse for us, none. All who have
succeeded (in mastering their passions) will accuse us, both believers and
unbelievers: for even unbelievers have so succeeded; yea, and wild beasts, and
dogs, not men only: and we shall accuse our own selves, since we succeed, when
we will, but when we are slothful, we are dragged away. For indeed many even
of those who live a very wicked life, have oftentimes changed themselves when
they wished. But the cause is, as I said, that we go about seeking for what is
good for other things, not what is good for ourselves. If you build a splendid
house, you know what is good for the house, not what is good for yourself: if
you take a beautiful garment, you know what is good for the body, not for
yourself: and if you get a good horse, it is so likewise. None makes it his mark
how his soul shall be beautiful; and yet, when that is beautiful, there is no need
of any of those things: as, if that be not beautiful, there is no good of them. For
like as in the case of a bride, though there be chambers hung with tapestry
wrought with gold, though there be choirs of the fairest and most beautiful
women, though there be roses and garlands, though there be a comely
bridegroom, and the maidservants and female friends, and everybody about them
be handsome, yet, if the bride herself be full of deformity, there is no good of all
those; as on the other hand if she were beautiful, neither would there be any loss
arising from (the want of) those, nay just the contrary; for in the case of an ugly
bride, those would make her look all the uglier, while in the other case, the
beautiful would look all the more beautiful: just so, the soul, when she is
beautiful, not only needs none of those adjuncts, but they even cast a shade over

her beauty. For we shall see the philosopher shine, not so much when in wealth,
as in poverty. For in the former case many will impute it to his riches, that he is
not superior to riches: but when he lives with poverty for his mate, and shines
through all, and will not let himself be compelled to do anything base, then none
claims shares with him in the crown of philosophy. Let us then make our soul
beauteous, if at least we would fain be rich. What profit is it, when your mules
indeed are white and plump and in good condition, but you who are drawn by
them are lean and scurvy and ill-favored? What is the gain, when your carpets
indeed are soft and beautiful, full of rich embroidery and art, and your soul goes
clad in rags, or even naked and foul? What the gain, when the horse indeed has
his paces beautifully ordered, more like dancing than stepping, while the rider,
together with his choral train and adorned with more than bridal ornaments, is
more crooked than the lame, and has no more command over hands and feet than
drunkards and madmen? Tell me now, if some one were to give you a beautiful
horse, and to distort your body, what would be the profit? Now you have your
soul distorted, and care you not for it? Let us at length, I beseech you, have a
care for our own selves. Do not let us make our own selves more worthless than
all beside. If anyone insult us with words, we are annoyed and vexed: but
insulting ourselves as we do by our deeds, we do not give a thought to it. Let us,
though late, come at last to our senses, that we may be enabled by having much
care for our soul, and laying hold upon virtue, to obtain eternal good things,
through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father,
together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and evermore, world
without end. Amen.