would not have made the reward so great, had not the contest been a great one.
For in tortures the body also shares the anguish with the soul; for the pain is both
of the body and of the soul; but here it is of the soul alone. Many at any rate have
fallen by these alone, and have lost their own souls. And to Job also the
reproaches of his friends appeared more grievous than the worms and the sores.
For there is nothing, there is nothing more intolerable to those in affliction than a
word capable of stinging the soul. Wherefore along with the perils and the toils
he names these also, saying, "By glory and dishonor." At any rate, many of the
Jews also on account of glory derived from the many would not believe. For
they feared, not lest they should be punished, but lest they should be put out of
the synagogue. Wherefore He says, "How can you believe which receive glory
one of another?" [John 5:44] And we may see numbers who have indeed
despised all dangers, but have been worsted by glory.
4. "As deceivers, and yet true."
This is, "by evil report and good report."

2 Corinthians 6:9
"As unknown, and yet well known." This is, "by glory and dishonor." For by
some they were well known and much sought after, while others designed not to
know them at all.
"As dying, and behold, we live."
As under sentence of death and condemned; which was itself also matter of
dishonor. But this he said, to show both the unspeakable power of God and their
own patience. For so far as those who plotted against us were concerned, we
died; and this is what all suppose; but by God's aid we escaped the dangers. Then
to manifest also on what account God permits these things, he added, "As
chastened, and not killed."
Showing that the gain accruing to them from their temptations, even before
the rewards, was great, and that their enemies against their will did them service.

2 Corinthians 6:10
"As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing."
For by those that are without, indeed, we are suspected of being in despair;
but we give no heed to them; yea, we have our pleasure at the full. And he said
not "rejoicing" only, but added also its perpetuity, for he says "alway rejoicing."
What then can come up to this life? Wherein, although dangers so great assault,
the joy becomes greater.
"As poor, yet making many rich."
Some indeed affirm that the spiritual riches are spoken of here; but I would
say that the carnal are so too; for they were rich in these also, having, after a new
kind of manner, the houses of all opened to them. And this too he signified by
what follows, saying,
"As having nothing, and yet possessing all things."
And how can this be? Yea rather, how can the opposite be? For he that
possesses many things has nothing; and he that has nothing possesses the goods
of all. And not here only, but also in the other points, contraries were produced
by their contraries. But if you marvel how it is possible for one that has nothing
to have all things, let us bring forth this man himself into the midst, who
commanded the world and was lord not only of their substance, but of their very
eyes even. "If possible," he says, "ye would have plucked out your eyes, and
have given them to me." [Galatians 4:15]
Now these things he says, to instruct us not to be disturbed at the opinions
of the many, though they call us deceivers, though they know us not, though they
count us condemned , and appointed unto death, to be in sorrow, to be in poverty,
to have nothing, to be (us, who are in cheerfulness) desponding: because that the
sun even is not clear to the blind, nor the pleasure of the sane intelligible to the
mad. For the faithful only are right judges of these matters, and are not pleased