## Homily 14 on Matthew

Matt. IV. 12.
"Now when Jesus had heard that John was delivered up, He departed into
Galilee."
1. Wherefore does He depart? Again instructing us not to go to meet
temptations, but to give place and withdraw ourselves. For it is no reproach, the
not casting one's self into danger, but the failing to stand manfully when fallen
into it. To teach us this accordingly, and to soothe the envy of the Jews, He
retires to Capernaum; at once fulfilling the prophecy, and making haste to catch
the teachers of the world: for they, as you know, were abiding there, following
their craft.
But mark, I pray you, how in every case when He is about to depart unto
the Gentiles, He has the occasion given Him by Jews. For so in this instance, by
plotting against His forerunner, and casting him into prison, they thrust out
Christ into the Galilee of the Gentiles. For to show that He neither speaks of the
Jewish nation by a part of it, nor signifies obscurely all the tribes; mark how the
Prophet distinguishes that place, saying "The land of Nephthalim, by the way of
the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles, the people which sat in
darkness, saw great light:" by darkness here not meaning that which is sensible,
but men's errors and ungodliness. Wherefore he also added, "They which sat in
the region and shadow of death, to them light is sprung up." For that you might
learn that neither the light nor the darkness which he speaks of are sensible, in
discoursing of the light, he called it not merely light, but "a great light" which
elsewhere he expresses by the word, True: [John 1:9] and in describing the
darkness, he termed it, "a shadow of death."
Then implying that they did not of themselves seek and find, but that God
showed Himself to them from above, he says to them, "Light is sprung up;" that

is, the light of itself sprang up and shone forth: it was not that they first ran to the
light. For in truth the condition of men was at the worst before Christ's coming.
Since they more than "walked in darkness;" they "sat in darkness;" a kind of
sign that they did not even hope to be delivered. For as persons not even
knowing where to put a step forward, so they sat, overtaken by the darkness, not
being able so much as to stand any more.
2. "From that time Jesus began to preach and to say, Repent; for the
kingdom of heaven is at hand."
"From that time:" what time? After John was cast into prison. And
wherefore did He not preach to them from the beginning? Indeed what occasion
for John at all, when the witness of His works was proclaiming Him?
That hence also you might learn His dignity; namely, that as the Fathers, so
He too has prophets; to which purpose Zacharias also spoke; "And you, child,
shall be called a prophet of the Highest." [Luke 1:76] And that he might leave
no occasion to the shameless Jews; which motive He himself alleged, saying,
"John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, he has a devil. The Son of
Man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluttonous and a
winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But wisdom is justified of her
children."
And moreover it was necessary that what concerned Him should be spoken
by another first and not by Himself. For if even after both testimonies and
demonstrations so many and so great, they said, "You bear record of Yourself,
Your record is not true:" [John 8:13] had He, without John's saying anything,
come into the midst, and first borne record Himself; what would they not have
said? For this cause, neither did He preach before John, nor did He work
miracles, until John was cast into prison; lest in this way the multitude should be
divided. Therefore also John did no miracle at all; that by this means also might
give over the multitude to Jesus, His miracles drawing them unto Him.
Again, if even after so many divine precautions, John's disciples, both
before and after his imprisonment, were jealously disposed towards Him, and the