I answer that, The empyrean heaven rests only on the authority of
Strabus and Bede, and also of Basil; all of whom agree in one
respect, namely, in holding it to be the place of the blessed. Strabus
and Bede say that as soon as created it was filled with angels; and
Basil [Hom. ii. in Hexaem.] says: "Just as the lost are driven into the
lowest darkness, so the reward for worthy deeds is laid up in the
light beyond this world, where the just shall obtain the abode of
rest." But they differ in the reasons on which they base their
statement. Strabus and Bede teach that there is an empyrean
heaven, because the firmament, which they take to mean the sidereal
heaven, is said to have been made, not in the beginning, but on the
second day: whereas the reason given by Basil is that otherwise God
would seem to have made darkness His first work, as the
Manicheans falsely assert, when they call the God of the Old
Testament the God of darkness. These reasons, however, are not
very cogent. For the question of the firmament, said to have been
made on the second day, is solved in one way by Augustine, and in
another by other holy writers. But the question of the darkness is
explained according to Augustine [Gen. ad lit. i; vii.], by supposing
that formlessness, signified by darkness, preceded form not by
duration, but by origin. According to others, however, since
darkness is no creature, but a privation of light, it is a proof of Divine
wisdom, that the things it created from nothing it produced first of all
in an imperfect state, and afterwards brought them to perfection. But
a better reason can be drawn from the state of glory itself. For in the
reward to come a two-fold glory is looked for, spiritual and
corporeal, not only in the human body to be glorified, but in the
whole world which is to be made new. Now the spiritual glory began
with the beginning of the world, in the blessedness of the angels,
equality with whom is promised to the saints. It was fitting, then, that
even from the beginning, there should be made some beginning of
bodily glory in something corporeal, free at the very outset from the
servitude of corruption and change, and wholly luminous, even as
the whole bodily creation, after the Resurrection, is expected to be.
So, then, that heaven is called the empyrean, i.e. fiery, not from its
heat, but from its brightness. It is to be noticed, however, that
Augustine (De Civ. Dei x, 9,27) says that Porphyry sets the demons
apart from the angels by supposing that the former inhabit the air,
the latter the ether, or empyrean. But Porphyry, as a Platonist, held
the heaven, known as sidereal, to be fiery, and therefore called it
empyrean or ethereal, taking ethereal to denote the burning of flame,
and not as Aristotle understands it, swiftness of movement (De Coel.
i, text. 22). This much has been said to prevent anyone from