## Homily 26 on Romans

Rom. XIV. 14
"I know, and am persuaded by (Gr. in) the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing
unclean of itself, but to him that esteems anything to be unclean, to him it is
unclean."
After first rebuking the person who judges his brother, and moving him to
leave off this reproaching, he then explains himself further upon the doctrinal
part, and instructs in a dispassionate tone the weaker sort, displaying in this case
too a great deal of gentleness. For he does not say he shall be punished, nor
anything of the sort, but merely disburdens him of his fears in the matter, and
that with a view to his being more easily persuaded with what he tells him; and
he says, "I know, and am persuaded." And then to prevent any of those who did
not trust him (or "believe," [τὥν οὐ πιστὥν]) saying, And what is it to us if you
are persuaded? For you are no trustworthy evidence to be set in competition with
so great a law, and with oracles brought down from above, he proceeds, "in the
Lord." That is, as having learned from Him, as having my confidence from Him.
The judgment then is not one of the mind of man. What is it that you are
persuaded of and know? Tell us. "That there is nothing unclean of itself." By
nature, he says, nothing is unclean but it becomes so by the spirit in which a man
uses it. Therefore it becomes so to himself only, and not to all. "For to him that
esteems anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean." What then? Why not
correct your brother, that he may think it not unclean? Why not with full
authority call him away from this habit of mind and conception of things, that he
may never make it common? My reason is, he says, I am afraid to grieve him.
Wherefore he proceeds,
Ver. 15. "But if your brother be grieved with your meat, now you do not
walk charitably."

You see how far, for the present, he goes in affection for him, showing that
he makes so great account of him, that with a view not to grieve him he does not
venture even to enjoin things of great urgency, but by yieldingness would rather
draw him to himself, and by charity. For even when he has freed him of his fears,
he does not drag him and force him, but leaves him his own master. For keeping
a person from meats is no such matter as overwhelming with grief. You see how
much he insists upon charity. And this is because he is aware that it can do
everything. And on this ground he makes somewhat larger demand upon them.
For so far he says from its being proper for them to distress you at all, they ought
even, if need be, not to hesitate at condescending to you. Whence he proceeds to
say, "Destroy not him with your meat, for whom Christ died." Or do you not
value your brother enough even to purchase his salvation at the price of
abstinence from meats? And yet Christ refused not to become a slave, nor yet to
die for him; but thou dost not despise even food, that you may save him. And yet
with it all Christ was not to gain all, yet still He died for all; so fulfilling His own
part. But are you aware that by meat you are overthrowing him in the more
important matters, and yet makest a disputing? And him who is the object of
such care unto Christ, do you consider so contemptible, and dishonor one whom
He loves? Yet He died not for the weak only, but even for an enemy. And will
you not refrain from meats even, for him that is weak? Yet Christ did what was
greatest even, but thou not even the less. And He was Master, thou a brother.
These words then were enough to tongue-tie him. For they show him to be of a
little spirit, and after having the benefit of great things from God, not to give in
return even little ones.
Ver. 16, 17. "Let not then your good be evil spoken of. For the kingdom of
God is not meat and drink."
By their "good," he means here either their faith, or the hope of rewards
hereafter, or the perfectness of their religious state. For it is not only that you fail
to profit your brother, he means, but the doctrine itself, and the grace of God,
and His gift, you cause to be evil spoken of. Now when you fight, when you