was the Grace that was poured out on that righteous man, this being not the work
of nature. For observe, the child immediately on its birth appears fair and not
disagreeable to the sight. Whose [work] was this? Not that of nature, but of the
Grace of God, which also stirred up and strengthened that barbarian woman, the
Egyptian, and took and drew her on.
And yet in truth Faith had not a sufficient foundation in their case. For what
was it to believe from sight? But you (he would say) believe from facts and have
many pledges of Faith. For "the receiving with joyfulness the spoiling of their
goods" [Hebrews 10:34], and other such [things], were [evidences] of Faith and
of Patience. But inasmuch as these [Hebrews] also had believed, and yet
afterwards had become faint-hearted, he shows that the Faith of those [saints of
old] also was long continued, as, for instance, that of Abraham, although the
circumstances seemed to contend against it.
"And" (he says) "they were not afraid of the king's commandment,"
although that was in operation, but this [their hope respecting their child] was
simply a kind of bare expectation. And this indeed was [the act] of his parents;
but Moses himself what did he contribute?

Hebrews 11:24-26
4. Next again an example appropriate to them, or rather greater than that.
For, says he, [Hebrews 11:24-26] "by faith Moses when he had come to years,
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; for
he had respect unto the recompense of the reward." As though he had said to
them, 'No one of you has left a palace, yea a splendid palace, nor such treasures;
nor, when he might have been a king's son, has he despised this, as Moses did.'
And that he did not simply leave [these things], he expressed by saying, "he
refused," that is, he hated, he turned away. For when Heaven was set before him,
it was superfluous to admire an Egyptian Palace.
And see how admirably Paul has put it. He did not say, 'Esteeming heaven,
and the things in heaven,' 'greater riches than the treasures of Egypt,' but what?
"The reproach of Christ." For the being reproached for the sake of Christ he
accounted better than being thus at ease; and this itself by itself was reward.
"Choosing rather" (he says) "to suffer affliction with the people of God."
For you indeed suffer on your own account, but he "chose" [to suffer] for others;
and voluntarily threw himself into so many dangers, when it was in his power
both to live religiously, and to enjoy good things.
"Than" (he says) "to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season." He called
unwillingness "to suffer affliction with the" rest "sin": this, he says, [Moses]
accounted to be "sin." If then he accounted it "sin" not to be ready to "suffer
affliction with" the rest, it follows that the suffering affliction must be a great
good since he threw himself into it from the royal palace.
But this he did, seeing some great things before him. "Esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt." What is, "the