During this time of vigil, Mary, through the same faith which made her blessed,
especially from the moment of the Annunciation, is present in the Church's mission,
present in the Church's work of introducing into the world the Kingdom of her Son.

This presence of Mary finds many different expressions in our day, just as it did
throughout the Church's history. It also has a wide field of action. Through the faith and
piety of individual believers; through the traditions of Christian families or "domestic
churches," of parish and missionary communities, religious institutes and dioceses;
through the radiance and attraction of the great shrines where not only individuals or
local groups, but sometimes whole nations and societies, even whole continents, seek to
meet the Mother of the Lord, the one who is blessed because she believed is the first
among believers and therefore became the Mother of Emmanuel. This is the message of
the Land of Palestine, the spiritual homeland of all Christians because it was the
homeland of the Savior of the world and of his Mother. This is the message of the many
churches in Rome and throughout the world which have been raised up in the course of
the centuries by the faith of Christians. This is the message of centers like Guadalupe,
Lourdes, Fatima and the others situated in the various countries. Among them how could
I fail to mention the one in my own native land, Jasna Gora? One could perhaps speak of
a specific "geography" of faith and Marian devotion, which includes all these special
places of pilgrimage where the People of God seek to meet the Mother of God in order to
find, within the radius of the maternal presence of her "who believed," a strengthening of
their own faith. For in Mary's faith, first at the Annunciation and then fully at the foot of
the Cross, an interior space was reopened within humanity which the eternal Father can
fill "with every spiritual blessing." It is the space "of the new and eternal Covenant,"
and it continues to exist in the Church, which in Christ is "a kind of sacrament or sign of
intimate union with God, and of the unity of all mankind."

In the faith which Mary professed at the Annunciation as the "handmaid of the Lord" and
in which she constantly "precedes" the pilgrim People of God throughout the earth, the
Church "strives energetically and constantly to bring all humanity...back to Christ its
Head in the unity of his Spirit."

### 2. The Church's journey and the unity of all Christians
29. "In all of Christ's disciples the Spirit arouses the desire to be peacefully united, in the
manner determined by Christ, as one flock under one shepherd." The journey of the
Church, especially in our own time, is marked by the sign of ecumenism: Christians are
seeking ways to restore that unity which Christ implored from the Father for his disciples
on the day before his Passion: "That they may all be one; even as you, Father, are in me,
and I in you that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that you have sent
me" (Jn. 17:21). The unity of Christ's disciples, therefore, is a great sign given in order to
kindle faith in the world while their division constitutes a scandal.