I answer that, It is not possible to come to any certain conclusion
about the truth of this question. It is, however, the more probable
opinion that the whole of this judgment, whether as regards the
inquiry, or as regards the accusation of the wicked and the approval
of the good or again as regards the sentence on both, will take place
mentally. For if the deeds of each individual were to be related by
word of mouth, this would require an inconceivable length of time.
Thus Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx) that "if we suppose the book,
from the pages of which all will be judged according to Apoc. 20, to
be a material book, who will be able to conceive its size and length?
or the length of time required for the reading of a book that contains
the entire life of every individual?" Nor is less time requisite for
telling by word of mouth the deeds of each individual, than for
reading them if they were written in a material book. Hence, probably
we should understand that the details set forth in Mt. 25 will be
fulfilled not by word of mouth but mentally.
Reply to Objection 1: The reason why Augustine says that "it is
uncertain how many days this judgment will last" is precisely
because it is not certain whether it will take place mentally or by
word of mouth. For if it were to take place by word of mouth, a
considerable time would be necessary. but if mentally, it is possible
for it to be accomplished in an instant.
Reply to Objection 2: Even if the judgment is accomplished solely in
the mind, the saying of Gregory stands, since though all will be
cognizant of their own and of others' deeds, as a result of the Divine
energy which the Gospel describes as speech (Mt. 25:84-46),
nevertheless those who have had the faith which they received
through God's words will be judged from those very words, for it is
written (Rm. 2:12): "Whosoever have sinned in the Law shall be
judged by the Law." Hence in a special way something will be said to
those who had been believers, which will not be said to unbelievers.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ will appear in body, so that the Judge
may be recognized in the body by all, and it is possible for this to
take place suddenly. But speech which is measured by time would
require an immense length of time, if the judgment took place by
word of mouth.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the time of the future judgment is

unknown?
Objection 1: It would seem that the time of the future judgment is not
unknown. For just as the holy Fathers looked forward to the first
coming, so do we look forward to the second. But the holy Fathers
knew the time of the first coming, as proved by the number of weeks
mentioned in Daniel 9: wherefore the Jews are reproached for not
knowing the time of Christ's coming (Lk. 12:56): "You hypocrites,
you know how to discern the face of the heaven and of the earth, but
how is it that you do not discern this time?" Therefore it would seem
that the time of the second coming when God will come to judgment
should also be certified to us.
Objection 2: Further, we arrive by means of signs at the knowledge
of the things signified. Now many signs of the coming judgment are
declared to us in Scripture (Mt. 24, Mk. 13, Lk. 21). Therefore we can
arrive at the knowledge of that time.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:11): "It is on us that
the ends of the world are come," and (1 Jn. 2:18): "Little children, it
is the last hour," etc. Since then it is a long time since these things
were said, it would seem that now at least we can know that the last
judgment is nigh.
Objection 4: Further, there is no need for the time of the judgment to
be hidden, except that each one may be careful to prepare himself
for judgment, being in ignorance of the appointed time. Yet the same
care would still be necessary even were the time known for certain,
because each one is uncertain about the time of his death, of which
Augustine says (Ep. ad Hesych. cxcix) that "as each one's last day
finds him, so will the world's last day find him." Therefore there is no
necessity for the time of the judgment to be uncertain.
On the contrary, It is written (Mk. 13:32): "Of that day or hour no man
knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father."
The Son, however, is said not to know in so far as He does not
impart the knowledge to us.
Further, it is written (1 Thess. 5:2): "The day of the Lord shall so
come as a thief in the night." Therefore seemingly, as the coming of