nature inclined to natural perfection, so is he by merit inclined to
glory. Hence instantly after merit the angel secured beatitude. Now
the merit of beatitude in angel and man alike can be from merely one
act; because man merits beatitude by every act informed by charity.
Hence it remains that an angel was beatified straightway after one
act of charity.
Reply to Objection 1: Man was not intended to secure his ultimate
perfection at once, like the angel. Hence a longer way was assigned
to man than to the angel for securing beatitude.
Reply to Objection 2: The angel is above the time of corporeal
things; hence the various instants regarding the angels are not to be
taken except as reckoning the succession of their acts. Now their act
which merited beatitude could not be in them simultaneously with
the act of beatitude, which is fruition; since the one belongs to
imperfect grace, and the other to consummate grace. Consequently,
it remains for different instants to be conceived, in one of which the
angel merited beatitude, and in another was beatified.
Reply to Objection 3: It is of the nature of an angel instantly to attain
the perfection unto which he is ordained. Consequently, only one
meritorious act is required; which act can so far be called an interval
as through it the angel is brought to beatitude.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the angels receive grace and glory

according to the degree of their natural gifts?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angels did not receive grace and
glory according to the degree of their natural gifts. For grace is
bestowed of God's absolute will. Therefore the degree of grace
depends on God's will, and not on the degree of their natural gifts.
Objection 2: Further, a moral act seems to be more closely allied
with grace than nature is; because a moral act is preparatory to
grace. But grace does not come "of works," as is said Rm. 11:6.
Therefore much less does the degree of grace depend upon the
degree of their natural gifts.
Objection 3: Further, man and angel are alike ordained for beatitude
or grace. But man does not receive more grace according to the
degree of his natural gifts. Therefore neither does the angel.
On the contrary, Is the saying of the Master of the Sentences (Sent.
ii, D, 3) that "those angels who were created with more subtle
natures and of keener intelligence in wisdom, were likewise endowed
with greater gifts of grace."
I answer that, It is reasonable to suppose that gifts of graces and
perfection of beatitude were bestowed on the angels according to
the degree of their natural gifts. The reason for this can be drawn
from two sources. First of all, on the part of God, Who, in the order of
His wisdom, established various degrees in the angelic nature. Now
as the angelic nature was made by God for attaining grace and
beatitude, so likewise the grades of the angelic nature seem to be
ordained for the various degrees of grace and glory; just as when,
for example, the builder chisels the stones for building a house, from
the fact that he prepares some more artistically and more fittingly
than others, it is clear that he is setting them apart for the more
ornate part of the house. So it seems that God destined those angels
for greater gifts of grace and fuller beatitude, whom He made of a
higher nature.
Secondly, the same is evident on the part of the angel. The angel is
not a compound of different natures, so that the inclination of the
one thwarts or retards the tendency of the other; as happens in man,