this Saint conceived his love, but of judgment, and right reasons. So that to be
loved of Paul so earnestly is a proof of one's being something great and
admirable. "And in the defense," he says, "and confirmation of the Gospel." And
what wonder if he had them when in prison, since not even at the moment of
going before the tribunal to make my defense, he says, did ye slip from my
memory. For so imperial a thing is spiritual love, that it gives way to no season,
but ever keeps hold of the soul of him who loves, and allows no trouble or pain
to overcome that soul. For as in the case of the Babylonian furnace, when so vast
a flame was raised, it was a dew to those blessed Children. So too does
friendship occupying the soul of one who loves, and who pleases God, shake off
every flame, and produce a marvelous dew.
"And in the confirmation of the Gospel," he says. So then his bonds were a
confirmation of the Gospel, and a defense. And most truly so. How? For if he
had shunned bonds, he might have been thought a deceiver; but he that endures
every thing, both bonds and affliction, shows that he suffers this for no human
reason, but for God, who rewards. For no one would have been willing to die, or
to incur such great risks, no one would have chosen to come into collision with
such a king, I mean Nero, unless he looked to another far greater King. Truly a
"confirmation of the Gospel" were his bonds. See how he more than succeeded
in turning all things to their opposite. For what they supposed to be a weakness
and a detraction, that he calls a confirmation; and had this not taken place, there
had been a weakness. Then he shows that his love was not of prejudice, but of
judgment. Why? I have you (in my heart), he says, in my bonds, and in my
defense, because of your being "partakers of my grace." What is this? Was this
the "grace" of the Apostle, to be bound, to be driven about, to suffer ten
thousand evils? Yes. For He says, "My grace is sufficient for you, for my power
is made perfect in weakness." [2 Corinthians 12:9] "Wherefore," says he, "I take
pleasure in weaknesses, in injuries." Since then I see you in your actions giving
proof of your virtue, and being partakers of this grace, and that with readiness, I
reasonably suppose thus much. For I that have had trial of you, and more than

any have known you, and your good deeds; how that even when so distant from
us, you strive not to be wanting to us in our troubles, but to partake in our trials
for the Gospel's sake, and to take no less share than myself, who am engaged in
the combat, far off as you are; am doing but justice in witnessing to these things.
And why did he not say "partakers," but "partakers with me" ? I myself
too, he means, share with another, that I may be a partaker of the Gospel; that is,
that I may share in the good things laid up for the Gospel. And the wonder
indeed is that they were all so minded; for he says that "ye all are fellowpartakers of grace." From these beginnings, then, I am confident that such ye
will be even to the end. For it cannot be that so bright a commencement should
be quenched, and fail, but it points to great results.
Since then it is possible also in other ways to partake of grace, and of trials,
and of tribulations, let us also, I beseech you, be partakers. How many of those
who stand here, yea, rather all, would fain share with Paul in the good things to
come! It is in your power if you are willing, on behalf of those who have
succeeded to his ministry, when they suffer any hardship for Christ's sake, to
take their part and succor them. Have you seen your brother in trial? Hold out a
hand! Have you seen your teacher in conflict? Stand by him! But, says one, there
is no one like Paul! now for disdain! now for criticism! So there is no one like
Paul? Well, I grant it. But, "He that receives," says He, "a prophet in the name of
a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward." [Matthew 10:41] For was it for this
that these were honored, that they coöperated with Paul? Not for this, but
because they coöperated with one who had undertaken the preaching. Paul was
honorable for this, that he suffered these things for Christ's sake.
There is indeed no one like Paul. No, not even but a little approaching to
that blessed one. But the preaching is the same as it was then.
And not only in his bonds did they have fellowship with him, but also from
the beginning. For hear him saying, "And ye yourselves also know, you
Philippians, that in the beginning of the Gospel, no Church had fellowship with
me in the matter of giving and receiving, but you only." [Philippians 4:15] And