Homily 35 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XVI. 13, 14
And on the sabbath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer
was wont (Chrys. "was thought likely") to be made; and we sat down, and spoke
unto the women which resorted there. And a certain woman named Lydia, a
seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us: whose
heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were spoken of
Paul.
See again Paul judaizing. "Where it was thought," it says, both from the
time and from the place, "that prayer would be.— Out of the city, by a river
side:" for it is not to be supposed that they prayed only where there was a
synagogue; they also prayed out of synagogue, but then for this purpose they set
apart, as it were, a certain place, because as Jews they were more corporeal—
and, "on the sabbath-day," when it was likely that a multitude would come
together. "And we sat down, and spoke to the women which resorted there."
Mark again the freedom from all pride. "And a certain woman:" a woman and
she of low condition, from her trade too: but mark (in her) a woman of elevated
mind ([φιλόσοφον]). In the first place, the fact of God's calling her bears
testimony to her: "And when she was baptized," it says, "she and her
household"— mark how he persuaded all of them— "she besought us, saying, If
you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide
there. And she constrained us " [Acts 16:15]: then look at her wisdom, how she
importunes ([δυσωπεἵ]), the Apostles how full of humility her words are, how
full of wisdom. "If you have judged me faithful," she says. Nothing could be
more persuasive. Who would not have been softened by these words? She did
not request (or, "claim") did not entreat simply: but she left them to decide, and
(yet) exceedingly forced them: "And she constrained us," it says, by those

words. And again in a different way: for see how she straightway bears fruit, and
accounts it a great gain. "If you have judged me," that is, That ye did judge me is
manifest, by your delivering to me such (holy) mysteries (i.e. sacraments, see p.
225, note 3): and she did not dare to invite them before this. But why was there
any unwillingness on the part of Paul and those with them, that they should need
to be constrained? It was either by way of calling her to greater earnestness of
desire, or because Christ had said, "Enquire who is worthy, and there abide."
[Luke 10:8] (It was not that they were unwilling), but they did it for a purpose.
— "And it came to pass," it says, "as we went to prayer, a certain damsel
possessed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her masters much
gain by soothsaying: the same followed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These
men are the servants of the most high God, which show unto us the way of
salvation." (v. 16, 17.) What may be the reason that both the demon spoke these
words, and Paul forbade him? Both the one acted maliciously, and the other
wisely: the demon wished in fact to make himself credible. For if Paul had
admitted his testimony, he would have deceived many of the believers, as being
received by him: therefore he endures to speak what made against himself, that
he may establish what made for himself: and so the demon himself uses
accommodation ([συγκαταβάσει]) in order to destruction. At first then, Paul
would not admit it, but scorned it, not wishing to cast himself all at once upon
miracles; but when it continued to do this, and pointed to their work ([καὶ τὸ
ἔργον ἐδείκνυ]) "who preach unto us the way of salvation," then he commanded
it to come out. For it says, "Paul being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I
command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out
the same hour. (a) And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains had
gone, they caught Paul and Silas." (v. 18, 19.) (d) So then Paul did all, both
miracles and teaching, but of the dangers Silas also is partaker. And why says it,
"But Paul being grieved?" It means, he saw through the malice of the demon, as
he says, "For we are not ignorant of his devices." [2 Corinthians 2:11] (b) "And
when her masters saw that the hope of their gains had gone." Everywhere