John 9:28
"You are his disciple, but we are Moses' disciples."
"But this cannot be. You are neither Moses' nor this Man's; for were ye
Moses', you would become this Man's also." Wherefore Christ before said unto
them, because they were continually betaking themselves to these speeches,
"Had ye believed Moses, you would have believed Me, for he wrote of Me."
[John 5:46]

John 9:29
"We know that God spoke unto Moses."
By whose word, whose report? "That of our forefathers," says one. Is not
He then more to be believed than your forefathers, who confirms by miracles
that He came from God, and that He speaks things from above? They said not,
"We have heard that God spoke to Moses," but, "We know." Do ye affirm, O
Jews, what you have by hearing, as knowing it, but deem what you have by sight
as less certain than what you have by hearing? Yet the one ye saw not, but heard,
the other ye did not hear, but saw. What then says the blind man?

John 9:30
"Why herein is a marvelous thing, that you know not whence He is, and He does
such miracles."
"That a Man, who is not one of the distinguished or noble or illustrious
among you, can do such things; so that it is in every way clear that He is God,
needing no human aid."

John 9:31
"We know that God hears not sinners."
Since they had been the first to say, "How can a man that is a sinner do
such miracles?" [John 9:16], he now brings forward even their judgment,
reminding them of their own words. "This opinion," says he, "is common to me
and you. Stand fast now to it." And observe, I pray you, his wisdom. He turns
about the miracle in every way, because they could not do away with it, and from
it he draws his inferences. Do you see that at first he said "Whether he be a
sinner or not, I know not"? Not doubting (God forbid!) but knowing that He was
not a sinner. At least now, when he had an opportunity, see how he defended
Him. "We know that God hears not sinners":
"But if any man be a worshiper of God, and does His will."
Here he not only has cleared Him from sin, but declares that He is very
pleasing to God, and does all His will. For since they called themselves
worshipers of God, he added, "and does His will"; "since," says he, "it is not
sufficient to know God: men must also do His will." Then he magnifies what had
been done, saying,

John 9:32
"Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one
that was born blind."
"If now ye acknowledge that God hears not sinners, and this Person has
wrought a miracle, and such a miracle as no man ever wrought, it is clear that
He has surpassed all things in virtue, and that His power is greater than belongs
to man." What then say they?

John 9:34
"You were altogether born in sins, and do you teach us?"
As long as they expected that he would deny Christ, they deemed him
trustworthy, calling upon him once and a second time. If you deemed him not
trustworthy, why did ye call and question him a second time? But when he spoke
the truth, unabashed, then, when they ought most to have admired, they
condemned him. But what is the, "You were altogether born in sins"? They here
unsparingly reproach him with his very blindness, as though they had said, "You
are in sins from your earliest age;" insinuating that on this account he was born
blind; which was contrary to reason. On this point at least Christ comforting him
said, "For judgment I have come into the world, that they which see not might
see, and that they which see might be made blind." [John 9:39]
"You were altogether born in sins, and do you teach us?" Why, what had
the man said? Did he set forth his private opinion? Did he not set forth a
common judgment, saying, "We know that God hears not sinners"? Did he not
produce your own words?
"And they cast him out."
Have you beheld the herald of the truth, how poverty was no hindrance to
his true wisdom? Do you see what reproaches, what sufferings he bare from the
beginning, and how by word and by deed he testified?
4. Now these things are recorded, that we too may imitate them. For if the
blind man, the beggar, who had not even seen Him, straightway showed such
boldness even before he was encouraged by Christ, standing opposed to a whole
people, murderous, possessed, and raving, who desired by means of his voice to
condemn Christ, if he neither yielded nor gave back, but most boldly stopped
their mouths, and chose rather to be cast out than to betray the truth; how much
more ought we, who have lived so long in the faith, who have seen ten thousand
marvels wrought by faith, who have received greater benefits than he, have