Church is scattered throughout all the world, and the "pillar and ground" of the Church is the
Gospel and the spirit of life; it is fitting that she should have four pillars, breathing out immortality
on every side, and vivifying men afresh. From which fact, it is evident that the Word, the Artificer
of all, He that sitteth upon the cherubim, and contains all things, He who was manifested to men,
has given us the Gospel under four aspects, but bound together by one Spirit. As also David says,
when entreating His manifestation, "Thou that sittest between the cherubim, shine forth." For
the cherubim, too, were four-faced, and their faces were images of the dispensation of the Son of
God. For, [as the Scripture] says, "The first living creature was like a lion," symbolizing His
effectual working, His leadership, and royal power; the second [living creature] was like a calf,
signifying [His] sacrificial and sacerdotal order; but "the third had, as it were, the face as of a
man,"—an evident description of His advent as a human being; "the fourth was like a flying eagle,"
pointing out the gift of the Spirit hovering with His wings over the Church. And therefore the
Gospels are in accord with these things, among which Christ Jesus is seated. For that according to
John relates His original, effectual, and glorious generation from the Father, thus declaring, "In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." Also, "all things
were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made." For this reason, too, is that Gospel full
of all confidence, for such is His person. But that according to Luke, taking up [His] priestly
character, commenced with Zacharias the priest offering sacrifice to God. For now was made ready
the fatted calf, about to be immolated for the finding again of the younger son. Matthew, again,
relates His generation as a man, saying, "The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of
David, the son of Abraham;" and also, "The birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise." This, then,
is the Gospel of His humanity; for which reason it is, too, that [the character of] a humble and
meek man is kept up through the whole Gospel. Mark, on the other hand, commences with [a
reference to] the prophetical spirit coming down from on high to men, saying, "The beginning of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as it is written in Esaias the prophet,"—pointing to the winged aspect
of the Gospel; and on this account he made a compendious and cursory narrative, for such is the
prophetical character. And the Word of God Himself used to converse with the ante-Mosaic

John i. 1.

The Greek is !"#$: the Latin, "pro."

The Greek text of this clause, literally rendered, is, "This Gospel, then, is anthropomorphic."

patriarchs, in accordance with His divinity and glory; but for those under the law he instituted a
sacerdotal and liturgical service. Afterwards, being made man for us, He sent the gift of the
celestial Spirit over all the earth, protecting us with His wings. Such, then, as was the course followed
by the Son of God, so was also the form of the living creatures; and such as was the form of the
living creatures, so was also the character of the Gospel. For the living creatures are quadriform,
and the Gospel is quadriform, as is also the course followed by the Lord. For this reason were four
principal (!"#$%&!"') covenants given to the human race: one, prior to the deluge, under Adam;
the second, that after the deluge, under Noah; the third, the giving of the law, under Moses; the
fourth, that which renovates man, and sums up all things in itself by means of the Gospel, raising
and bearing men upon its wings into the heavenly kingdom.
9. These things being so, all who destroy the form of the Gospel are vain, unlearned, and also
audacious; those, [I mean,] who represent the aspects of the Gospel as being either more in number
than as aforesaid, or, on the other hand, fewer. The former class [do so], that they may seem to
have discovered more than is of the truth; the latter, that they may set the dispensations of God
aside. For Marcion, rejecting the entire Gospel, yea rather, cutting himself off from the Gospel,
boasts that he has part in the [blessings of] the Gospel. Others, again (the Montanists), that they
may set at nought the gift of the Spirit, which in the latter times has been, by the good pleasure of
the Father, poured out upon the human race, do not admit that aspect [of the evangelical dispensation]
presented by John's Gospel, in which the Lord promised that He would send the Paraclete; but
set aside at once both the Gospel and the prophetic Spirit. Wretched men indeed! who wish to be
pseudo-prophets, forsooth, but who set aside the gift of prophecy from the Church; acting like those
(the Encratitæ) who, on account of such as come in hypocrisy, hold themselves aloof from the
old Latin "actum" indicates the true reading of the original ()*+&,, and that -.+&, is an error. The earlier editors, however, are
of a contrary opinion.
been given to Noah, at the deluge, under the sign of the rainbow; the second as that given to Abraham, under the sign of
circumcision; the third, as being the giving of the law, under Moses; and the fourth, as that of the Gospel, through our Lord Jesus
Christ. [Paradise with the tree of life, Adam with Shechinah (Gen. iii. 24, Gen. iv. 16), Noah with the rainbow, Abraham with
circumcision, Moses with the ark, Messiah with the sacraments, and heaven with the river of life, seem the complete system.]
gave a sense inconsistent with the Marcionite curtailment of St. Luke. Harvey, however, observes: "But the Gospel, here means
the blessings of the Gospel, in which Marcion certainly claimed a share."