Matt. iii. 10.

one God." For these were two hands, because there were two peoples scattered to the ends of the
earth; but there was one head in the middle, as there is but one God, who is above all, and through
all, and in us all.

### Chapter XVIII.—God the Father and His Word have formed all created things (which They
use) by Their own power and wisdom, not out of defect or ignorance. The Son of God, who
received all power from the Father, would otherwise never have taken flesh upon Him.
1. And such or so important a dispensation He did not bring about by means of the creations
of others, but by His own; neither by those things which were created out of ignorance and defect,
but by those which had their substance from the wisdom and power of His Father. For He was
neither unrighteous, so that He should covet the property of another; nor needy, that He could not
by His own means impart life to His own, and make use of His own creation for the salvation of
man. For indeed the creation could not have sustained Him [on the cross], if He had sent forth
[simply by commission] what was the fruit of ignorance and defect. Now we have repeatedly shown
that the incarnate Word of God was suspended upon a tree, and even the very heretics do
acknowledge that He was crucified. How, then, could the fruit of ignorance and defect sustain Him
who contains the knowledge of all things, and is true and perfect? Or how could that creation which
was concealed from the Father, and far removed from Him, have sustained His Word? And if this
world were made by the angels (it matters not whether we suppose their ignorance or their cognizance
of the Supreme God), when the Lord declared, "For I am in the Father, and the Father in Me,"
how could this workmanship of the angels have borne to be burdened at once with the Father and
the Son? How, again, could that creation which is beyond the Pleroma have contained Him who
contains the entire Pleroma? Inasmuch, then, as all these things are impossible and incapable of
proof, that preaching of the Church is alone true [which proclaims] that His own creation bare Him,
which subsists by the power, the skill, and the wisdom of God; which is sustained, indeed, after an
invisible manner by the Father, but, on the contrary, after a visible manner it bore His Word: and
this is the true [Word].
2. For the Father bears the creation and His own Word simultaneously, and the Word borne by
the Father grants the Spirit to all as the Father wills. To some He gives after the manner of
creation what is made; but to others [He gives] after the manner of adoption, that is, what is from
is here concerned. And the Easterns object to the double procession itself only in so far as any one means thereby to deny "quod
solus Pater est divinarum personarum, Principium et Fons,"—!"#$ %$& '()*. See Procopowicz, De Processione, Gothæ, 1772].