FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.6.

acts, gathered from the observation of heavenly bodies, are fulfilled.
Nevertheless, as Ptolemy says (Centiloquium v), "the wise man
governs the stars"; which is a though to say that by resisting his
passions, he opposes his will, which is free and nowise subject to
the movement of the heavens, to such like effects of the heavenly
bodies.
Or, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ii, 15): "We must confess that
when the truth is foretold by astrologers, this is due to some most
hidden inspiration, to which the human mind is subject without
knowing it. And since this is done in order to deceive man, it must be
the work of the lying spirits."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the will is moved by God alone, as

exterior principle?
Objection 1: It would seem that the will is not moved by God alone as
exterior principle. For it is natural that the inferior be moved by its
superior: thus the lower bodies are moved by the heavenly bodies.
But there is something which is higher than the will of man and
below God, namely, the angel. Therefore man's will can be moved by
an angel also, as exterior principle.
Objection 2: Further, the act of the will follows the act of the intellect.
But man's intellect is reduced to act, not by God alone, but also by
the angel who enlightens it, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv). For
the same reason, therefore, the will also is moved by an angel.
Objection 3: Further, God is not the cause of other than good things,
according to Gn. 1:31: "God saw all the things that He had made, and
they were very good." If, therefore man's will were moved by God
alone, it would never be moved to evil: and yet it is the will whereby
"we sin and whereby we do right," as Augustine says (Retract. i, 9).
On the contrary, It is written (Phil. 2:13): "It is God Who worketh in
us" "both to will and to accomplish."
I answer that, The movement of the will is from within, as also is the
movement of nature. Now although it is possible for something to
move a natural thing, without being the cause of the thing moved,
yet that alone, which is in some way the cause of a thing's nature,
can cause a natural movement in that thing. For a stone is moved
upwards by a man, who is not the cause of the stone's nature, but
this movement is not natural to the stone; but the natural movement
of the stone is caused by no other than the cause of its nature.
Wherefore it is said in Phys. vii, 4, that the generator moves locally
heavy and light things. Accordingly man endowed with a will is
sometimes moved by something that is not his cause; but that his
voluntary movement be from an exterior principle that is not the
cause of his will, is impossible.
Now the cause of the will can be none other than God. And this is
evident for two reasons. First, because the will is a power of the
rational soul, which is caused by God alone, by creation, as was