us provide for the welfare of this in every way. For to cure the body, when
diseased, is not an easy matter to every one; but to cure a sick soul is easy to all;
and the sickness of the body requires medicines, as well as money, for its
healing; but the healing of the soul is a thing that is easy to procure, and devoid
of expense. And the nature of the flesh is with much labour delivered from those
wounds which are troublesome; for very often the knife must be applied, and
medicines that are bitter; but with respect to the soul there is nothing of this kind.
It suffices only to exercise the will, and the desire, and all things are
accomplished. And this has been the work of God's providence. For inasmuch as
from bodily sickness no great injury could arise, (for though we were not
diseased, yet death would in any case come, and destroy and dissolve the body);
but everything depends upon the health of our souls; this being by far the more
precious and necessary, He has made the medicining of it easy, and void of
expense or pain. What excuse therefore, or what pardon shall we obtain, if when
the body is sick, and money must be expended on its behalf, and physicians
called in, and much anguish endured, we make this so much a matter of our care
(though what might result from that sickness could be no great injury to us), and
yet treat the soul with neglect? And this, when we are neither called upon to pay
down money; nor to give others any trouble; nor to sustain any sufferings; but
without any of all these things, by only choosing and willing, have it in our
power to accomplish the entire amendment of it; and knowing assuredly that if
we fail to do this, we shall sustain the extreme sentence, and punishments, and
penalties, which are inexorable! For tell me, if any one promised to teach you the
healing art in a short space of time, without money or labour, would you not
think him a benefactor? Would you not submit both to do and to suffer all things,
whatsoever he who promised these things commanded? Behold, now, it is
permitted you without labour to find a medicine for wounds, not of the body, but
of the soul, and to restore it to a state of health, without any suffering! Let us not
be indifferent to the matter! For pray what is the pain of laying aside anger
against one who has aggrieved you? It is a pain, indeed, to remember injuries,

and not to be reconciled! What labour is it to pray, and to ask for a thousand
good things from God, who is ready to give? What labour is it, not to speak evil
of any one? What difficulty is there in being delivered from envy and ill-will?
What trouble is it to love one's neighbour? What suffering is it not to utter
shameful words, nor to revile, nor to insult another? What fatigue is it not to
swear? For again I return to this same admonition. The labour of swearing is
indeed exceedingly great. Oftentimes, while under the influence of anger or
wrath, we have sworn, perhaps, that we would never be reconciled to those who
have injured us. Yet afterwards, when our wrath was quenched, and our anger
allayed, desiring to be reconciled, and restrained by the obligation of these oaths,
we have suffered the same anguish, as if we were in a snare, and held fast by
indissoluble bonds. Of which fact the Devil being aware, and understanding
clearly that anger is a fire; that it is easily extinguished, and that when it is
extinguished, then reconciliation and love follows; wishing this fire to remain
unquenched, he often binds us by an oath; so that although the anger should
cease, the obligation of the oath remaining may keep up the fire within us; and
that one of these two things may take place, either that being reconciled we are
forsworn, or that not being reconciled we subject ourselves to the penalties of
cherishing malice.
6. Knowing these things then, let us avoid oaths; and let our mouth
continually practise the saying, "Believe me;" and this will be to us a foundation
for all pious behaviour; for the tongue, when it has been disciplined to use this
one expression, is ashamed, and would blush to utter words that are disgraceful
and ugly; and should it at any time be drawn away by habit, it will be checked
again, by having many accusers. For when any one observes him who is not a
swearer giving utterance to foul words, he will take his advantage over him, and
ridicule, and exclaim tauntingly, "You who sayest in all affairs, 'Believe me,' and
venturest not to utter an oath, do you disgrace your tongue with these shameful
expressions?" So that being forcibly urged by those who are with us, even if
unwilling, we shall return again to a pious behaviour. "But what," says one, "if it