been noted in the same discussion, as that a man should choose from the
two things which make him blessed, the being able to do what he wills,
and should neglect to will what he ought; whereas he ought first to have a
good will, but great power afterwards. Further, a good will must be
purged from vices, by which if a man is overcome, he is in such wise
overcome as that he wills evil; and then how will his will be still good? It
is to be wished, then, that power may now be given, but power against
vices, to conquer which men do not wish to be powerful, while they wish
to be so in order to conquer men; and why is this, unless that, being in
truth conquered, they feignedly conquer, and are conquerors not in truth,
but in opinion? Let a man will to be prudent, will to be strong, will to be
temperate, will to be just; and that he may be able to have these things
truly, let him certainly desire power, and seek to be powerful in himself,
and (strange though it be) against himself for himself. But all the other
things which he wills rightly, and yet is not able to have, as, for instance,
immortality and true and full felicity, let him not cease to long for, and let
him patiently expect.

### CHAP. 14.—THE UNOBLIGATED DEATH OF CHRIST HAS FREED THOSE WHO WERE LIABLE TO DEATH.

18. What, then, is the righteousness by which the devil was conquered?
What, except the righteousness of Jesus Christ? And how was he
conquered? Because, when he found in Him nothing worthy of death, yet
he slew Him. And certainly it is just, that we whom he held as debtors,
should be dismissed free by believing in Him whom he slew without any
debt. In this way it is that we are said to be justified in the blood of Christ.
For so that innocent blood was shed for the remission of our sins.
Whence He calls Himself in the Psalms, "Free among the dead." For he
only that is dead is free from the debt of death. Hence also in another
psalm He says, "Then I restored that which I seized not;" meaning sin by
the thing seized, because sin is laid hold of against what is lawful. Whence
also He says, by the mouth of His own Flesh, as is read in the Gospel:
"For the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me," that is, no
sin; but "that the world may know," He says, "that I do the
commandment of the Father; arise, let us go hence." And hence He
proceeds to His passion, that He might pay for us debtors that which He

Himself did not owe. Would then the devil be conquered by this most just
right, if Christ had willed to deal with him by power, not by
righteousness? But He held back what was possible to Him, in order that
He might first do what was fitting. And hence it was necessary that He
should be both man and God. For unless He had been man, He could not
have been slain; unless He had been God, men would not have believed
that He would not do what He could, but that He could not do what He
would; nor should we have thought that righteousness was preferred by
Him to power, but that He lacked power. But now He suffered for us
things belonging to man, because He was man; but if He had been
unwilling, it would have been in His power to not so to suffer, because He
was also God. And righteousness was therefore made more acceptable in
humility, because so great power as was in His Divinity, if He had been
unwilling, would have been able not to suffer humility; and thus by Him
who died, being thus powerful, both righteousness was commended, and
power promised, to us, weak mortals. For He did one of these two things
by dying, the other by rising again. For what is more righteous, than to
come even to the death of the cross for righteousness? And what more
powerful, than to rise from the dead, and to ascend into heaven with that
very flesh in which He was slain? And therefore He conquered the devil
first by righteousness, and afterwards by power: namely, by
righteousness, because He had no sin, and was slain by him most
unjustly; but by power, because having been dead He lived again, never
afterwards to die. But He would have conquered the devil by power, even
though He could not have been slain by him: although it belongs to a
greater power to conquer death itself also by rising again, than to avoid it
by living. But the reason is really a different one, why we are justified in
the blood of Christ, when we are rescued from the power of the devil
through the remission of sins: it pertains to this, that the devil is
conquered by Christ by righteousness, not by power. For Christ was
crucified, not through immortal power, but through the weakness which
He took upon Him in mortal flesh; of which weakness nevertheless the
apostle says, "that the weakness of God is stronger than men."