Reply to Objection 5: Faith here does not denote a virtue, but that
condition of virtue which is a part of justice and is called by the
name of faith.
Reply to Objection 6: Just as the right use of a useful good derives
its rectitude not from the useful but from the reason which causes
the right use, so too direction to a useful good may cause the
goodness of rectitude by virtue of the reason causing the right
direction; and in this way marriage, through being directed to the
offspring, is useful, and nevertheless righteous, inasmuch as it is
directed aright.
Reply to Objection 7: As the Master says (Sent. iv, D, 31), sacrament
here does not mean matrimony itself, but its indissolubility, which is
a sign of the same thing as matrimony is.
We may also reply that although marriage is a sacrament, marriage
as marriage is not the same as marriage as a sacrament, since it was
instituted not only as a sign of a sacred thing, but also as an office of
nature. Hence the sacramental aspect is a condition added to
marriage considered in itself, whence also it derives its rectitude.
Hence its sacramentality, if I may use the term, is reckoned among
the goods which justify marriage; and accordingly this third good of
marriage, the sacrament to wit, denotes not only its indissolubility,
but also whatever pertains to its signification.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the sacrament is the chief of the

marriage goods?
Objection 1: It would seem that the "sacrament" is not the chief of
the marriage goods. For the end is principal in everything. Now the
end of marriage is the offspring. Therefore the offspring is the chief
marriage good.
Objection 2: Further, in the specific nature the difference is more
important than the genus, even as the form is more important than
matter in the composition of a natural thing. Now "sacrament" refers
to marriage on the part of its genus, while "offspring" and "faith"
refer thereto on the part of the difference whereby it is a special kind
of sacrament. Therefore these other two are more important than
sacrament in reference to marriage.
Objection 3: Further, just as we find marriage without "offspring"
and without "faith," so do we find it without indissolubility, as in the
case where one of the parties enters religion before the marriage is
consummated. Therefore neither from this point of view is
"sacrament" the most important marriage good.
Objection 4: Further, an effect cannot be more important than its
cause. Now consent, which is the cause of matrimony, is often
changed. Therefore the marriage also can be dissolved and
consequently inseparability is not always a condition of marriage.
Objection 5: Further, the sacraments which produce an everlasting
effect imprint a character. But no character is imprinted in
matrimony. Therefore it is not conditioned by a lasting inseparability.
Consequently just as there is marriage without "offspring" so is
there marriage without "sacrament," and thus the same conclusion
follows as above.
On the contrary, That which has a place in the definition of a thing is
most essential thereto. Now inseparability, which pertains to
sacrament, is placed in the definition of marriage (Question 44,
Article 3), while offspring and faith are not. Therefore among the
other goods sacrament is the most essential to matrimony.
Further, the Divine power which works in the sacraments is more