shall not depart alone ([μόνος], Cat. and Edd. [μόνον]), but you shall also have
all this boldness of speech. Hereby it was made manifest, not (only) that he
should be saved, but that (he should be so) in order to great crowns in the great
city. But why did He not appear to him before he fell into the danger? Because it
is evermore in the afflictions that God comforts us; for He appears more wishedfor, while even in the dangers He exercises and trains us. Besides, he was then at
ease, when free from bonds; but now great perils were awaiting him. "We have
bound ourselves," they say, "under a curse, that we will not eat nor drink." [Acts
23:14] What is all this zeal? "That he may bring him down," it says, "unto you,
as though ye would enquire into his case more perfectly." [Acts 23:15] Has he
not twice made a speech unto you? Has he not said that he is a Pharisee? What
(would you have) over and above this? So reckless were they and afraid of
nothing, not tribunals, not laws: such their hardihood which shrunk from
nothing. They both declare their purpose, and announce the way of carrying it
into effect. "Paul's sister's son heard of it." [Acts 23:16] This was of God's
providence, their not perceiving that it would be heard. What then did Paul? He
was not alarmed, but perceived that this was God's doing: and casting all upon
Him, so he acquits himself (from further concern about it:) "having called one of
the centurions," etc. [Acts 23:17] He told of the plot, he was believed; he is
saved. If he was acquitted of the charge, why did (the tribune) send the accusers?
That the enquiry might be more strict: that the man might be the more entirely
cleared.
Such are God's ways of ordering: the very things by which we are hurt, by
these same are we benefited. Thus it was with Joseph: his mistress sought to ruin
him: and she seemed indeed to be contriving his ruin, but by her contriving she
placed him in a state of safety: for the house where that wild beast (of a woman)
was kept was a den in comparison with which the prison was gentle. [Genesis
39:1-20] For while he was there, although he was looked up to and courted, he
was in constant fear, lest his mistress should set upon him, and worse than any
prison was the fear that lay upon him: but after the accusation he was in security

and peace, well rid of that beast, of her lewdness and her machinations for his
destruction: for it was better for him to keep company with human creatures in
miserable plight, than with a maddened mistress. Here he comforted himself,
that for chastity's sake he had fallen into it: there he had been in dread, lest he
should receive a death-blow to his soul: for nothing in the world is more
annoying than a woman in love can be to a young man who will not (meet her
advances): nothing more detestable (than a woman in such case), nothing more
fell: all the bonds in the world are light to this. So that the fact was not that he
got into prison, but that he got out of prison. She made his master his foe, but she
made God his friend: brought him into closer relation to Him Who is indeed the
true Master; she cast him out of his stewardship in the family, but made him a
familiar friend to that Master. Again, his brethren sold him [Genesis 37:18]; but
they freed him from having enemies dwelling in the same house with him, from
envy and much ill will, and from daily machinations for his ruin: they placed
him far aloof from them that hated him. For what can be worse than this, to be
compelled to dwell in the same house with brethren that envy one; to be an
object of suspicion, to be a mark for evil designs? So that while they and she
were severally seeking to compass their own ends, far other were the mighty
consequences working out by the Providence of God for that just man. When he
was in honor, then was he in danger; when he was in dishonor, then was he in
safety. The eunuchs did not remember him, and right well it was that they did
not, that the occasion of his deliverance might be more glorious: that the whole
might be ascribed, not to man's favor, but to God's Providence [Genesis 40:23]:
that at the right moment, Pharaoh, reduced to need, might bring him out; that not
as conferring but as receiving a benefit, the king might release him from the
prison. [Genesis 41:40] It behooved to be no servile gift, but that the king should
be reduced to a necessity of doing this: it behooved that it should be made
manifest what wisdom was in him. Therefore it is that the eunuch forgets him,
that Egypt might not forget him, that the king might not be ignorant of him. Had
he been delivered at that time, it is likely he would have desired to depart to his