what treasures we should have passed hastily over, unless in this part of the
Epistle also we had examined it with accuracy, such, I mean, as was in our
power. So if there be found any man of wisdom and spiritual, he will dive even
deeper, and find a greater number of pearls. But since some have often made it a
question wherefore it was that in this Epistle he addressed so many, which thing
he has not done in any other Epistle, we might say that it is owing to his never
having seen the Romans yet, that he does this. And yet one may say, "Well, he
had not seen the Colossians either, and yet he did not do anything of the kind."
But these were more honorable than others, and had come there from other
cities, as to a safer and more royal city. Since then they were living in a foreign
country, and they needed much provision for security, and some of them were of
his acquaintance, but some too were there who had rendered him many
important services, he with reason commends them by letters; for the glory of
Paul was then not little, but so great, that even from his sending them letters,
those who had the happiness to have an Epistle to them, gained much protection.
For men not only reverenced him, but were even afraid of him. Had this not been
so, he would not have said, who had been "a succorer of many, and of myself
also." [Romans 16:2] And again, "I could wish that myself were accursed."
[Romans 9:3] And to Philemon he wrote and said, "as Paul the aged, and a
prisoner of Jesus Christ." [Galatians, "Behold, I Paul say unto you." Galatians
5:2] And, "You received me even as Jesus Christ." [Galatians 4:14] And writing
to the Corinthians he said, "Now some are puffed up, as though I would not come
unto you." [1 Corinthians 4:18] And again, "These things I have in a figure
transferred to myself and to Apollos, that you might learn in us not to think of
men above that which is written." [1 Corinthians 4:6] Now from all these
passages it is clear that all had a great opinion of him. Wishing then that they
should feel on easy terms, and be in honor, he addressed each of them, setting
forth their praise to the best advantage he might. For one he calls beloved,
another kinsman, another both, another fellow-prisoner, another fellow-worker,
another approved, another elect. And of the women one he addresses by her title,

for he does not call her servant of the Church in an undefined way (because if
this were so he would have given Tryphena and Persis this name too), but this
one as having the office of deaconess, and another as helper and assistant,
another as mother, another from the labors she underwent, and some he
addresses from the house they belonged to, some by the name of Brethren, some
by the appellation of Saints. And some he honors by the mere fact of addressing
them, and some by addressing them by name, and some by calling them firstfruits, and some by their precedence in time, but more than all, Priscilla and
Aquila. ([τοὺς περὶ Πρ. κ. ᾿Α].) For even if all were believers, still all were not
alike, but were different in their merits. Wherefore to lead them all to greater
emulation, he keeps no man's encomiums concealed. For when they who labor
more, do not receive the greater reward also, many become more listless. On this
ground even in the kingdom, the honors are not equal, nor among the disciples
were all alike, but the three were preëminent above the rest. And among these
three again there was a great difference. For this is a very exact method observed
by God even to the last. Hence, "one star differs from another star in glory," [1
Corinthians 15:41], it says. And yet all were Apostles and all are to sit on twelve
thrones, and all left their goods, and all companied with Him; still it was the
three He took. And again, to these very three, He said it was possible ([ἐ]
[γχωρεῖν]) that some might even be superior. "For to sit," He says, "on My right
hand and on My left, is not mine to give, save to those for whom it is prepared."
[Mark 10:40] And He sets Peter before them, when He says, "Lovest thou Me
more than these?" [John 21:15] And John too was loved even above the rest. For
there shall be a strict examination of all, and if you be but little better than your
neighbor, if it be even an atom, or anything ever so little, God will not overlook
even this. And this even from of old one might see coming out. For even Lot was
a righteous man, yet not so, as was Abraham; and Hezekiah again, yet not so as
was David: and all the prophets, yet not so as was John.
Where then are they who with all this great exactness in view, yet will not
allow that there is a hell? For if all the righteous are not to enjoy the same lot, if