the brain? Any one can answer this.
Come now, let us illustrate this by an example— as of gripers, I mean the
instruments so called; we say those are well-made, which are able to take up and
hold things, not those which are only handsomely and elegantly shaped. So those
are good teeth which are fit for the service of dividing and chewing our food, not
those which are beautifully set. And applying the same reasoning to other parts
of the body, we shall call those members beautiful, which are sound, and
perform their proper functions aright. So we think any instrument, or plant, or
animal good, not because of its form or color, but because it answers its purpose.
And he is thought a good servant, who is useful and ready for our service, not
one who is comely but dissolute. I trust you now understand how it is in your
power to be beautiful.
And since the greatest and most important benefits are equally enjoyed by
all, we are under no disadvantage. Whether we are beautiful or not, we alike
behold this universe, the sun, the moon, and the stars; we breathe the same air,
we partake alike of water, and the fruits of the earth. And if we may say what
will sound strange, the homely are more healthy than the beautiful. For these, to
preserve their beauty, engage in no labor, but give themselves up to indolence
and delicate living, by which their bodily energies are impaired; while the others,
having no such care, spend all their attention simply and entirely on active
pursuits.
Let us then "glorify God, and take and bear Him in our body." [1
Corinthians 6:20] Let us not affect a beautiful appearance; that care is vain and
unprofitable. Let us not teach our husbands to admire the mere outward form; for
if such be your adornment, his very habit of viewing your face will make him
easy to be captivated by a harlot. But if you teach him to love good manners, and
modesty, he will not be ready to wander, for he will see no attractions in a harlot,
in whom those qualities are not found, but the reverse. Neither teach him to be
captivated by laughter, nor by a loose dress, lest you prepare a poison against
yourself. Accustom him to delight in modesty, and this you will do, if your attire

be modest. But if you have a flaunting air, an unsteady manner, how can you
address him in a serious strain? And who will not hold you in contempt and
derision?
But how is it possible to glorify God in our spirit? By practicing virtue, by
adorning the soul. For such embellishment is not forbidden. Thus we glorify
God, when we are good in every respect, and we shall be glorified by Him in a
much higher degree in that great day. For "I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed
in us." [Romans 8:18] Of which that we may all be partakers, God grant, by the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ.