their rule should increase through their neglect, removing every excuse for
indifference; "In Moses' seat," says He, "sit the Scribes and the Pharisees; all
things, therefore, whatsoever they bid you, these do ye, but do not ye after their
works:" implying, that even if you have a bad teacher, this will not avail you,
should you not attend to the things which are spoken. For not from what your
teacher has done but from what you have heard and disobeyed, from that, I say,
does God pass his sentence upon you. So that if you do the things commanded,
you shall then stand with much boldness: but if you disobey the things spoken,
even though you should show ten thousand corrupt priests, this will not plead for
you at all. Since Judas also was an apostle, but nevertheless this shall never be
any apology for the sacrilegious and covetous. Nor will any be able when
accused to say, "Why the Apostle was a thief and sacrilegious, and a traitor;"
yea, this very thing shall most of all be our punishment and condemnation that
not even by the evils of others were we corrected. For this cause also these
things were written that we might shun all emulation of such things.
Wherefore, leaving this person and that, let us take heed to ourselves. For
"each of us shall give account of himself to God." In order therefore that we may
render up this account with a good defence, let us well order our own lives and
stretch out a liberal hand to the needy, knowing that this only is our defence, the
showing ourselves to have rightly done the things commanded; there is no other
whatever. And if we be able to produce this, we shall escape those intolerable
pains of hell, and obtain the good things to come; unto which may we all attain,
by the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom, to the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.

## Homily 22 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 9:13-14
Do you not know that they which minister about sacred things eat of the
temple? And they which wait upon the altar have their portion with the altar?
Even so did the Lord ordain that they which proclaim the Gospel should live of
the Gospel.
He takes great care to show that the receiving was not forbidden.
Whereupon having said so much before, he was not content but proceeds also to
the Law, furnishing an example closer to the point than the former. For it was not
the same thing to bring forward the oxen and to adduce the law expressly given
concerning priests.
But consider, I pray, in this also the wisdom of Paul, how he mentions the
matter in a way to give it dignity. For he did not say, "They which minister about
sacred things receive of those who offer them." But what? "They eat of the
temple:" so that neither they who receive may be blamed nor they who give may
be lifted up. Wherefore also what follows he has set down in the same way.
For neither did he say, "They which wait upon the altar receive of them
which sacrifice," but, "have their portion with the altar." For the things offered
now no longer belonged to those who offered them, but to the temple and the
altar. And he said not, "They receive the holy things," but, they "eat of the
temple," indicating again their moderation, and that it behooves them not to
make money nor to be rich. And though he say that they have their portion "with
the altar," he does not speak of equal distribution but of relief given them as
their due. And yet the case of the Apostles was much stronger. For in the former
instance the priesthood was an honor, but in the latter it was dangers and
slaughters and violent deaths. Wherefore all the other examples together did not