Referring to Aletheia, which, in Greek, contains seven letters.

"Oh" (!), in honour of the letter in question, so that its cognate soul above may recognise [its
distress], and send down to it relief.
9. Thus it is, that in regard to the whole name, which consists of thirty letters, and Bythus,
who receives his increase from the letters of this [name], and, moreover, the body of Aletheia,
which is composed of twelve members, each of which consists of two letters, and the voice which
she uttered without having spoken at all, and in regard to the analysis of that name which cannot
be expressed in words, and the soul of the world and of man, according as they possess that
arrangement, which is after the image [of things above], he has uttered his nonsensical opinions.
It remains that I relate how the Tetrad showed him from the names a power equal in number; so
that nothing, my friend, which I have received as spoken by him, may remain unknown to thee;
and thus thy request, often proposed to me, may be fulfilled.

### Chapter XV.—Sige relates to Marcus the generation of the twenty-four elements and of Jesus.
Exposure of these absurdities.
1. The all-wise Sige then announced the production of the four-and-twenty elements to him as
follows:—Along with Monotes there coexisted Henotes, from which sprang two productions, as
we have remarked above, Monas and Hen, which, added to the other two, make four, for twice two
are four. And again, two and four, when added together, exhibit the number six. And further, these
six being quadrupled, give rise to the twenty-four forms. And the names of the first Tetrad, which
are understood to be most holy, and not capable of being expressed in words, are known by the
Son alone, while the father also knows what they are. The other names which are to be uttered with
respect, and faith, and reverence, are, according to him, Arrhetos and Sige, Pater and Aletheia.
Now the entire number of this Tetrad amounts to four-and-twenty letters; for the name Arrhetos
contains in itself seven letters, Seige five, Pater five, and Aletheia seven. If all these be added
together—twice five, and twice seven—they complete the number twenty-four. In like manner,
also, the second Tetrad, Logos and Zoe, Anthropos and Ecclesia, reveal the same number of elements.
Moreover, that name of the Saviour which may be pronounced, viz., Jesus ["#$%&'(], consists of
six letters, but His unutterable name comprises four-and-twenty letters. The name Christ the Son
()*+( ,-./%01() comprises twelve letters, but that which is unpronounceable in Christ contains
thirty letters. And for this reason he declares that He is Alpha and Omega, that he may indicate the
dove, inasmuch as that bird has this number [in its name].

That is, the name of Soter, the perfect result of the whole Pleroma.