cleansing, and stopping the shameless mouths of those who asserted that He was
legislating in opposition to God. This also He did in like manner in the case of
the wine; for He did not merely show it to them, but also caused it to be borne to
the governor of the feast, in order that one who knew nothing of what had been
done, by his confession might bear to Him unsuspected testimony; wherefore the
Evangelist says, that the ruler of the feast "knew not whence it was," thus
showing the impartiality of his testimony. And in another place, when He raised
the dead, He said, "Give ye him to eat"; supplying this proof of a real
resurrection, and by these means persuading even the foolish that He was no
deceiver, no dealer in illusions, but that He had come for the salvation of the
common nature of mankind.
2. But why did not Jesus require faith of this man, as He did in the case of
others, saying, "Believest thou that I am able to do this?" It was because the man
did not yet clearly know who He was; and it is not before, but after the working
of miracles that He is seen so doing. For persons who had beheld His power
exerted on others would reasonably have this said to them, while of those who
had not yet learned who He was, but who were to know afterwards by means of
signs, it is after the miracles that faith is required. And therefore Matthew does
not introduce Christ as having said this at the beginning of His miracles, but
when He had healed many, to the two blind men only.
Observe however in this way the faith of the paralytic. When he had heard,
"Take up your bed and walk," he did not mock, nor say, "What can this mean?
An Angel comes down and troubles the water, and heals only one, and do You, a
man, by a bare command and word hope to be able to do greater things than
Angels? This is mere vanity, boasting, mockery." But he neither said nor
imagined anything like this, but at once he heard and arose, and becoming
whole, was not disobedient to Him that gave the command; for immediately he
was made whole, and "took up his bed, and walked." What followed was even
far more admirable. That he believed at first, when no one troubled him, was not
so marvelous, but that afterwards, when the Jews were full of madness and

pressed upon him on all sides, accusing and besieging him and saying, "It is not
lawful for you to take up your bed," that then he gave no heed to their madness,
but most boldly in the midst of the assembly proclaimed his Benefactor and
silenced their shameless tongues, this, I say, was an act of great courage. For
when the Jews arose against him, and said in a reproachful and insolent manner
to him ("It is not lawful . . ."):

John 5:10-11
"It is the Sabbath day, it is not lawful for you to carry your bed . . . He that made
me whole, the Same said unto me, Take up your bed, and walk."
Hear what he says ("He that made me whole . . ."), all but saying, "You are
silly and mad who bid me not to take Him for my Teacher who has delivered me
from a long and grievous malady, and not to obey whatever He may command."
Had he chosen to act in an unfair manner, he might have spoke differently, as
thus, "I do not this of my own will, but at the bidding of another; if this be a
matter of blame, blame him who gave the order, and I will set down the bed."
And he might have concealed the cure, for he well knew that they were vexed
not so much at the breaking of the Sabbath, as at the curing of his infirmity. Yet
he neither concealed this, nor said that, nor asked for pardon, but with loud voice
confessed and proclaimed the benefit. Thus did the paralytic; but consider how
unfairly they acted. For they said not, "Who is it that has made you whole?" on
this point they were silent, but kept on bringing forward the seeming
transgression.