2 Corinthians 7:11
"For behold," he says, "this self-same thing, that you were made sorry after
a godly sort, what earnest care it wrought in you." 'For not only,' he says, 'did
your sorrow not cast you into that condemning of yourselves, as having acted
idly in so doing; but it made you even more careful.' Then he speaks of the
certain tokens of that carefulness;
"Yea," what "clearing of yourselves," towards me. "Yea, what indignation"
against him that had sinned. "Yea, what fear." [2 Corinthians 7:11] For so great
carefulness and very speedy reformation was the part of men who feared
exceedingly. And that he might not seem to be exalting himself, see how quickly
he softened it by saying,
"Yea, what longing," that towards me. "Yea, what zeal," that on God's
behalf. "Yea, what avenging:" for you also avenged the laws of God that had
been outraged.
"In every thing ye approved yourselves to be pure in the matter." Not only
by not having perpetrated, for this was evident before, but also by not consenting
unto it. For since he said in the former Epistle, "and you are puffed up;" [1
Corinthians 5:2] he also says here, 'you have cleared yourselves of this suspicion
also; not only by not praising, but also by rebuking and being indignant.'

2 Corinthians 7:12
3. "So although I wrote unto you," I wrote "not for his cause that did the
wrong, nor for his cause that suffered the wrong." For that they might not say,
Why then do you rebuke us if we were "clear in the matter?" setting himself to
meet this even further above, and disposing of it beforehand , he said what he
said, namely, "I do not regret, though I did regret." 'For so far,' says he, 'am I
from repenting now of what I wrote then, that I repented then more than I do
now when you have approved yourselves.' Do you see again his vehemence and
earnest contention, how he has turned around what was said unto the very
opposite. For what they thought would have made him recant in confusion as
having rebuked them hastily, by reason of their amendment; that he uses as a
proof that it was right in him to speak freely. For neither does he refuse
afterwards to humor them fearlessly, when he finds he can do this. For he that
said farther above such things as these, "He that is joined to an harlot is one
body," [1 Corinthians 6:16] and, "Deliver such an one to Satan for the
destruction of the flesh," [1 Corinthians 5:5] and, "Every sin that a man does is
without the body," [1 Corinthians 6:18] and such like things; how says he here,
"Not for his cause that did the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered the wrong?"
Not contradicting, but being even exceedingly consistent with himself. How
consistent with himself? Because it was a very great point with him to show the
affection he bore towards them. He does not therefore discard concern for him ,
but shows at the same time, as I said, the love he had for them, and that a greater
fear agitated him, [namely] for the whole Church. For he had feared lest the evil
should eat further, and advancing on its way should seize upon the whole
Church. Wherefore also he said, "A little leaven leavens the whole lump." [1
Corinthians 5:6] This however he said at the time; but now that they had well
done, he no longer puts it so but differently: and implies indeed the same thing,