John 21:24
"This is the disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote these things, and
we know that his testimony is true."
Why is it, that then, when none of the others do so, he alone uses these
words, and that for the second time, witnessing to himself? For it seems to be
offensive to the hearers. What then is the cause? He is said to have been the last
who came to writing, Christ having moved and roused him to the work; and on
this account he continually sets forth his love, alluding to the cause by which he
was impelled to write. Therefore also he continually makes mention of it, to
make his record trustworthy, and to show, that, moved from thence, he came to
this work. "And I know," he says, "that the things are true which he says. And if
the many believe not, it is permitted them to believe from this." "From what?"
From that which is said next.

John 21:25
"There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be
written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the
books that should be written."
"Whence it is clear that I could not have written to court favor; for I who,
when the miracles were so many, have not even related so many as the others
have, but omitting most of them, have brought forward the plots of the Jews, the
stonings, the hatred, the insults, the revilings, and have shown how they called
Him a demoniac and a deceiver, certainly could not have acted to gain favor.
For it behooved one who courted favor to do the contrary, to reject the
reproachful, to set forth the glorious." Since then he wrote what he did from full
assurance, he does not decline to produce his own testimony, challenging men
separately to enquire into and scrutinize the circumstances. For it is a custom
with us, when we think that we are speaking exactly true, never to refuse our
testimony; and if we do this, much more would he who wrote by the Spirit. What
then the other Apostles when they preached declared, he also says; "We are
witnesses of the things spoken, and the Spirit which He has given to them that
obey Him." [Acts 5:32] And besides, he was present at all, and did not desert
Him even when being crucified, and had His mother entrusted to him; all which
things are signs of his love for Him, and of his knowing all things exactly. And if
he has said that so many miracles had taken place, marvel thou not, but,
considering the ineffable power of the Doer, receive with faith what is spoken.
For it was as easy for Him to do whatever He would, as it is for us to speak, or
rather much easier; for it sufficed that He should will only, and all followed.
3. Let us then give exact heed to the words, and let us not cease to unfold
and search them through, for it is from continual application that we get some
advantage. So shall we be able to cleanse our life, so to cut up the thorns; for
such a thing is sin and worldly care, fruitless and painful. And as the thorn