wronged, though we be plundered, though we suffer innumerable evils. Let it be
granted us to be approved in Heaven, and all things [are] endurable. Let it be
granted us to fare well there, and things here are of no account. These things are
a shadow, and a dream; whatever they may be, they are nothing either in nature
or in duration, while those are hoped for and expected.
For what would you that we should compare with those fearful things?
What with the unquenchable fire? With the never-dying worm? Which of the
things here can you name in comparison with the "gnashing of teeth," with the
"chains," and the "outer darkness," with the "wrath," the "tribulation," the
"anguish"? But as to duration? Why, what are ten thousand years to ages
boundless and without end? Not so much as a little drop to the boundless ocean.
But what about the good things? There, the superiority is still greater. "Eye
has not seen," (it is said,) "ear has not heard, neither have, entered into the heart
of man" [1 Corinthians 2:9], and these things again shall be during boundless
ages. For the sake of these then were it not well to be cut [by scourging] times
out of number, to be slain, to be burned, to undergo ten thousand deaths, to
endure everything whatsoever that is dreadful both in word and deed? For even
if it were possible for one to live when burning in the fire, ought one not to
endure all for the sake of attaining to those good things promised?
9. But why do I trifle in saying these things to men who do not even choose
to disregard riches, but hold fast to them as though they were immortal? And if
they give a little out of much, think they have done all? This is not Almsgiving.
For Almsgiving is that of the Widow who emptied out "all her living." [Mark
12:44] But if you dost not go on to contribute so much as the widow, yet at least
contribute the whole of your superfluity: keep what is sufficient, not what is
superfluous.
But there is no one who contributes even his superabundance. For so long
as you have many servants, and garments of silk, these things are all
superfluities. Nothing is indispensable or necessary, without which we are able
to live; these things are superfluous, and are simply superadded. Let us then see,

if you please, what we cannot live without. If we have only two servants, we can
live. For whereas some live without servants, what excuse have we, if we are not
content with two? We can also have a house built of brick of three rooms; and
this were sufficient for us. For are there not some with children and wife who
have but one room? Let there be also, if you will, two serving boys.
10. And how is it not a shame (you say) that a gentlewoman should walk
out with [only] two servants? It is no shame, that a gentlewoman should walk
abroad with two servants, but it is a shame that she should go forth with many.
Perhaps you laugh when you hear this. Believe me it is a shame. Do you think it
a great matter to go out with many servants, like dealers in sheep, or dealers in
slaves? This is pride and vainglory, the other is philosophy and respectability.
For a gentlewoman ought not to be known from the multitude of her attendants.
For what virtue is it to have many slaves? This belongs not to the soul, and
whatever is not of the soul does not show gentility. When she is content with a
few things, then is she a gentlewoman indeed; but when she needs many, she is a
servant and inferior to slaves. Tell me, do not the angels go to and fro about the
world alone, and need not any one to follow them? Are they then on this account
inferior to us? They who need no [attendants] to us who need them? If then not
needing an attendant at all, is angelic, who comes nearer to the angelic life, she
who needs many [attendants], or she who [needs] few? Is not this a shame? For a
shame it is to do anything out of place.
Tell me who attracts the attention of those who are in the public places, she
who brings many in her train, or she who [brings but] few? And is not she who is
alone, less conspicuous even than she who is attended by few? Do you see that
this [first-named conduct] is a shame? Who attracts the attention of those in the
public places, she who wears beautiful garments, or she who is dressed simply
and artlessly? Again who attracts those in the public places, she who is borne on
mules, and with trappings ornamented with gold, or she who walks out simply,
and as it may be, with propriety? Or we do not even look at this latter, if we even
see her; but the multitudes not only force their way to see the other, but also ask,