John 8:57
"You are not yet forty years old, and have You seen Abraham?"
So that we conclude that Christ was nearly forty.

John 8:58-59
"Jesus says unto them, Before Abraham was, I Am. Then took they up stones to
cast at Him."
Do you see how He proved Himself to be greater than Abraham? For the
man who rejoiced to see His day, and made this an object of earnest desire,
plainly did so because it was a day that should be for a benefit, and belonging to
one greater than himself. Because they had said, "The carpenter's son" [Matthew
13:55], and imagined nothing more concerning Him, He leads them by degrees
to an exalted notion of Him. Therefore when they heard the words, "You know
not God," they were not grieved; but when they heard, "before Abraham was, I
Am," as though the nobility of their descent were debased, they became furious,
and would have stoned Him.
"He saw My day, and was glad." He shows, that not unwillingly He came to
His Passion, since He praises him who was gladdened at the Cross. For this was
the salvation of the world. But they cast stones at Him; so ready were they for
murder, and they did this of their own accord, without enquiry.
But wherefore said He not, "Before Abraham was, I was," instead of "I
Am"? As the Father uses this expression, "I Am," so also does Christ; for it
signifies continuous Being, irrespective of all time. On which account the
expression seemed to them to be blasphemous. Now if they could not bear the
comparison with Abraham, although this was but a trifling one, had He
continually made Himself equal to the Father, would they ever have ceased
casting stones at Him?
After this, again He flees as a man, and conceals Himself, having laid
before them sufficient instruction: and having accomplished His work, He went
forth from the Temple, and departed to heal the blind, proving by His actions
that He is before Abraham. But perhaps some one will say, "Why did He not
paralyze their strength? So they would have believed." He healed the paralytic,

yet they believed not; nay, He wrought ten thousand wonders; at the very
Passion He cast them to the ground, and darkened their eyes, yet they believed
not; and how would they have believed if He had paralyzed their strength? There
is nothing worse than a soul hardened in desperation; though it see signs and
wonders, it still perseveres in retaining the same shamelessness. Thus Pharaoh,
who received ten thousand strokes, was sobered only while being punished, and
continued of this character until the last day of his life, pursuing those whom he
had let go. Wherefore Paul continually says, "Lest any of you be hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin." [Hebrews 3:13] For as the callosities of the body, when
formed, become dead, and possess no sensation; so the soul, when it is occupied
by many passions, becomes dead to virtue; and apply what you will to it, it gets
no perception of the matter, but whether you threaten punishment or anything
else, continues insensible.
3. Wherefore I beseech you, while we have hopes of salvation, while we
can turn, to use every means to do so. For men who have become past feeling,
are after that in the blind state of despairing pilots, who give up their vessel to
the wind, and themselves contribute no assistance. Thus the envious man looks
to one thing only, that is, to satisfy his lust, and though he be like to be punished
or even slain, still he is possessed solely by that passion; and in like manner the
intemperate and avaricious. But if the sovereignty of the passions be so great,
much greater is that of virtue; if for them we despise death, much more for this;
if they (sinners) regard not their own lives, much less ought we to do so in the
cause of our salvation. For what shall we have to say, if when they who perish
are so active about their own perdition, we for our own salvation manifest not
even an equal activity, but ever continue wasting with envy? Nothing is worse
than envy; to destroy another it destroys itself also. The eye of the envious
wastes away in grief, he lives in a continual death, he deems all men, even those
who have never wronged him, his enemies. He grieves that God is honored, he
rejoices in what the devil rejoices in. Is any honored among men? This is not
honor, envy him not. But is he honored by God? Strive and be thou like him.