On the contrary, this word "God" can of itself be taken for the divine
essence. So, although to say of any of the "supposita" of the divine
nature, "God is the Trinity," is untrue, nevertheless it is true of the
divine essence. This was denied by Porretanus because he did not
take note of this distinction.
Reply to Objection 2: When we say, "God," or "the divine essence is
the Father," the predication is one of identity, and not of the lower in
regard to a higher species: because in God there is no universal and
singular. Hence, as this proposition, "The Father is God" is of itself
true, so this proposition "God is the Father" is true of itself, and by
no means accidentally.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the essential names should be

appropriated to the persons?
Objection 1: It would seem that the essential names should not be
appropriated to the persons. For whatever might verge on error in
faith should be avoided in the treatment of divine things; for, as
Jerome says, "careless words involve risk of heresy" [In substance
Ep. lvii.]. But to appropriate to any one person the names which are
common to the three persons, may verge on error in faith; for it may
be supposed either that such belong only to the person to whom
they are appropriated or that they belong to Him in a fuller degree
than to the others. Therefore the essential attributes should not be
appropriated to the persons.
Objection 2: Further, the essential attributes expressed in the
abstract signify by mode of form. But one person is not as a form to
another; since a form is not distinguished in subject from that of
which it is the form. Therefore the essential attributes, especially
when expressed in the abstract, are not to be appropriated to the
persons.
Objection 3: Further, property is prior to the appropriated, for
property is included in the idea of the appropriated. But the essential
attributes, in our way of understanding, are prior to the persons; as
what is common is prior to what is proper. Therefore the essential
attributes are not to be appropriated to the persons.
On the contrary, the Apostle says: "Christ the power of God and the
wisdom of God" (1 Cor. 1:24).
I answer that, For the manifestation of our faith it is fitting that the
essential attributes should be appropriated to the persons. For
although the trinity of persons cannot be proved by demonstration,
as was above expounded (Question 32, Article 1), nevertheless it is
fitting that it be declared by things which are more known to us. Now
the essential attributes of God are more clear to us from the
standpoint of reason than the personal properties; because we can
derive certain knowledge of the essential attributes from creatures
which are sources of knowledge to us, such as we cannot obtain
regarding the personal properties, as was above explained (Question
32, Article 1). As, therefore, we make use of the likeness of the trace