THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.6.

the baptismal power to the baptizers, saying (1 Cor. 1:12): "I am of
Paul . . . and I of Cephas." Wherefore they use the form: "May the
servant of Christ, N . . ., be baptized, in the name of the Father," etc.
And since the action performed by the minister is expressed with the
invocation of the Trinity, the sacrament is validly conferred. As to the
addition of "Ego" in our form, it is not essential; but it is added in
order to lay greater stress on the intention.
Reply to Objection 2: Since a man may be washed with water for
several reasons, the purpose for which it is done must be expressed
by the words of the form. And this is not done by saying: "In the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost"; because
we are bound to do all things in that Name (Col. 3:17). Wherefore
unless the act of baptizing be expressed, either as we do, or as the
Greeks do, the sacrament is not valid; according to the decretal of
Alexander III: "If anyone dip a child thrice in the water in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen, without
saying, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, Amen, the child is not baptized."
Reply to Objection 3: The words which are uttered in the sacramental
forms, are said not merely for the purpose of signification, but also
for the purpose of efficiency, inasmuch as they derive efficacy from
that Word, by Whom "all things were made." Consequently they are
becomingly addressed not only to men, but also to insensible
creatures; for instance, when we say: "I exorcize thee, creature
salt" (Roman Ritual).
Reply to Objection 4: Several cannot baptize one at the same time:
because an action is multiplied according to the number of the
agents, if it be done perfectly by each. So that if two were to
combine, of whom one were mute, and unable to utter the words,
and the other were without hands, and unable to perform the action,
they could not both baptize at the same time, one saying the words
and the other performing the action.
On the other hand, in a case of necessity, several could be baptized
at the same time; for no single one of them would receive more than
one baptism. But it would be necessary, in that case, to say: "I
baptize ye." Nor would this be a change of form, because "ye" is the
same as "thee and thee." Whereas "we" does not mean "I and I," but
"I and thou"; so that this would be a change of form.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.6.

Likewise it would be a change of form to say, "I baptize myself":
consequently no one can baptize himself. For this reason did Christ
choose to be baptized by John (Extra, De Baptismo et ejus effectu,
cap. Debitum).
Reply to Objection 5: Although Christ's Passion is the principal
cause as compared to the minister, yet it is an instrumental cause as
compared to the Blessed Trinity. For this reason the Trinity is
mentioned rather than Christ's Passion.
Reply to Objection 6: Although there are three personal names of the
three Persons, there is but one essential name. Now the Divine
power which works in Baptism, pertains to the Essence; and
therefore we say, "in the name," and not, "in the names."
Reply to Objection 7: Just as water is used in Baptism, because it is
more commonly employed in washing, so for the purpose of
designating the three Persons, in the form of Baptism, those names
are chosen, which are generally used, in a particular language, to
signify the Persons. Nor is the sacrament valid if conferred in any
other names.