Amen.

## Homily 16 on Ephesians

Ephesians 4:31, 32
"Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and railing be put
away from you, with all malice. And be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted,
forgiving each other, even as God also in Christ forgave you."
If we are to attain to the kingdom of Heaven, it is not enough to abandon
wickedness, but there must be abundant practice of that which is good also. To
be delivered indeed from hell we must abstain from wickedness; but to attain to
the kingdom we must cleave fast to virtue. Do you not know that even in the
tribunals of the heathen, when examination is made of men's deeds, and the
whole city is assembled, this is the case? Nay, there was an ancient custom
among the heathen, to crown with a golden crown, — not the man who had done
no evil to his country, for this were in itself no more than enough to save him
from punishment—but him who had displayed great public services. It was thus
that a man was to be advanced to this distinction. But what I had special need to
say, had, I know not how, well near escaped me. Accordingly having made some
slight correction of what I have said, I retract the first portion of this division.
For as I was saying that the departure from evil is sufficient to prevent our
falling into hell, while I was speaking, there stole upon me a certain awful
sentence, which does not merely bring down vengeance on them that dare to
commit evil, but which also punishes those who omit any opportunity of doing
good. What sentence then is this? When the day, the dreadful day, He says, was
arrived, and the set time had come, the Judge, seated on the judgment seat, set
the sheep on the right hand and the goats on the left; and to the sheep He said,
"Come, you blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and you gave me meat."
[Matthew 25:34] So far, well. For it was meet that for such compassion they

should receive this reward. That those, however, who did not communicate of
their own possessions to them that were in need, that they should be punished,
not merely by the loss of blessings, but by being also sent to hell-fire, what just
reason, I say, can there be in this? Most certainly this too will have a fair show of
reason, no less than the other case: for we are hence instructed, that they that
have done good shall enjoy those good things that are in heaven, but they, who,
though they have no evil indeed to be charged with, yet have omitted to do good,
will be hurried away with them that have done evil into hell-fire. Unless one
might indeed say this, that the very not doing good is a part of wickedness,
inasmuch as it comes of indolence, and indolence is a part of vice, or rather, not
a part, but a source and baneful root of it. For idleness is the teacher of all vice.
Let us not then foolishly ask such questions as these, what place shall he occupy,
who has done neither any evil nor any good? For the very not doing good, is in
itself doing evil. Tell me, if you had a servant, who should neither steal, nor
insult, nor contradict you, who moreover should keep from drunkenness and
every other kind of vice, and yet should sit perpetually in idleness, and not doing
one of those duties which a servant owes to his master, would you not chastise
him, would you not put him to the rack? Tell me. And yet forsooth he has done
no evil. No, but this is in itself doing evil. But let us, if you please, apply this to
other cases in life. Suppose then that of an husbandman. He does no damage to
our property, he lays no plots against us, and he is not a thief, he only ties his
hands behind him, and sits at home, neither sowing, nor cutting a single furrow,
nor harnessing oxen to the yoke, nor looking after a vine, nor in fact discharging
any one of those other labors required in husbandry. Now, I say, should we not
punish such a man? And yet he has done no wrong to any one; we have no
charge to make against him. No, but by this very thing has he done wrong. He
does wrong in that he does not contribute his own share to the common stock of
good. And what again, tell me, if every single artisan or mechanic were only to
do no harm, say to one of a different craft—nay, were to do no harm, even to one
of his own, but only were to be idle, would not our whole life at that rate be