they speak of peace and safety," indicating their insensibility to be such as of
those in Noah's time, for that amid such evils they lived in luxury.
But not so the righteous, but they were passing their time in tribulation and
dejection. Whereby He shows, that when Antichrist has come, the pursuit of
unlawful pleasures shall be more eager among the transgressors, and those that
have learned to despair of their own salvation. Then shall be gluttony, then
revellings, and drunkenness. Wherefore also most of all He puts forth an
example corresponding to the thing. For like as when the ark was making, they
believed not, says He; but while it was set in the midst of them, proclaiming
beforehand the evils that are to come, they, when they saw it, lived in pleasure,
just as though nothing dreadful were about to take place; so also now, Antichrist
indeed shall appear, after whom is the end, and the punishments at the end, and
vengeance intolerable; but they that are held by the intoxication of wickedness
shall not so much as perceive the dreadful nature of the things that are on the
point of being done. Wherefore also Paul says, "as travail upon a woman with
child," even so shall those fearful and incurable evils come upon them.
And wherefore did He not speak of the ills in Sodom? It was His will to
introduce an example embracing all men, and disbelieved after it was foretold.
So therefore, as by the more part the things to come are disbelieved, He confirms
those things by the past, terrifying their minds. And together with the points I
have mentioned, He shows this also, that of the former things also He was the
doer. Then again He sets another sign, by all which things He makes it evident,
that He is not ignorant of the day. And what is the sign? "Then shall two be in
the field; one shall be taken, and one left. Two women shall be grinding at the
mill, one shall be taken, and one left. Watch therefore, for you know not what
hour your Lord does come." And all these things are both proofs that He knew,
and calculated to turn them from their inquiry. So for this cause He spoke also of
the days of Noe, for this cause He said too, "Two shall be on the bed," signifying
this, that He should come upon them thus unexpectedly, when they were thus
without thought, and "two women grinding at the mill," which also of itself is not

the employment of them that are taking thought.
And together with this, He declares that as well servants as masters should
be both taken and left, both those who are at ease, and those in toil, as well from
the one rank as from the other; even as in the Old Testament He says, "From him
that sits upon the throne to the captive woman that is at the mill." For since He
had said, that hardly are the rich saved, He shows that not even these are
altogether lost, neither are the poor saved all of them, but both out of these and
out of those are men saved, and lost.
And to me He seems to declare, that at night will be the advent. For this
Luke too says. [Luke 17:34] Do you see how accurately He knows all things?
After this again, that they may not ask about it, He added, "Watch therefore,
for you know not what hour your Lord does come." [Matthew 24:42] He said not,
"I know not," but, "ye know not." For when He had brought them well near to the
very hour, and had placed them there, again He deters them from the inquiry,
from a desire that they should be striving always. Therefore He says, "Watch,"
showing that for the sake of this, He did not tell it.
"But know this, that if the good man of the house had known in what watch
the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his
house to be broken up. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as you
think not the Son of Man comes."
For this intent He tells them not, in order that they may watch, that they
may be always ready; therefore He says, When ye look not for it, then He will
come, desiring that they should be anxiously waiting, and continually in virtuous
action.
But His meaning is like this: if the common sort of men knew when they
were to die, they would surely strive earnestly at that hour.
3. In order therefore that they may strive, not at that hour only, therefore He
tells them not either the common hour, or the hour of each, desiring them to be
ever looking for this, that they may be always striving. Wherefore He made the
end of each man's life also uncertain.