but are ordered to his natural welfare.
Reply to Objection 3: As already explained (Question 92, Article 3, ad
2), the rib was in Adam as the principle of the human race, as the
semen in man, who is a principle through generation. Hence as man
does not suffer any natural deterioration by seminal issue; so neither
did he through the separation of the rib.
Reply to Objection 4: Man's body in the state of innocence could be
preserved from suffering injury from a hard body; partly by the use
of his reason, whereby he could avoid what was harmful; and partly
also by Divine Providence, so preserving him, that nothing of a
harmful nature could come upon him unawares.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether in the state of innocence man had need

of food?
Objection 1: It would seem that in the state of innocence man did not
require food. For food is necessary for man to restore what he has
lost. But Adam's body suffered no loss, as being incorruptible.
Therefore he had no need of food.
Objection 2: Further, food is needed for nourishment. But
nourishment involves passibility. Since, then, man's body was
impassible; it does not appear how food could be needful to him.
Objection 3: Further, we need food for the preservation of life. But
Adam could preserve his life otherwise; for had he not sinned, he
would not have died. Therefore he did not require food.
Objection 4: Further, the consumption of food involves voiding of the
surplus, which seems unsuitable to the state of innocence. Therefore
it seems that man did not take food in the primitive state.
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 2:16): "Of every tree in paradise ye
shall eat."
I answer that, In the state of innocence man had an animal life
requiring food; but after the resurrection he will have a spiritual life
needing no food. In order to make this clear, we must observe that
the rational soul is both soul and spirit. It is called a soul by reason
of what it possesses in common with other souls---that is, as giving
life to the body; whence it is written (Gn. 2:7): "Man was made into a
living soul"; that is, a soul giving life to the body. But the soul is
called a spirit according to what properly belongs to itself, and not to
other souls, as possessing an intellectual immaterial power.
Thus in the primitive state, the rational soul communicated to the
body what belonged to itself as a soul; and so the body was called
"animal", through having its life from the soul. Now the first principle
of life in these inferior creatures as the Philosopher says (De Anima
ii, 4) is the vegetative soul: the operations of which are the use of
food, generation, and growth. Wherefore such operations befitted
man in the state of innocence. But in the final state, after the
resurrection, the soul will, to a certain extent, communicate to the