will effect nothing so great by teaching him an art, and giving him that outward
learning by which he will gain riches, as if you teach him the art of despising
riches. If you desire to make him rich, do this. For the rich man is not he who
desires great riches, and is encircled with great riches; but the man who has need
of nothing. Discipline your son in this, teach him this. This is the greatest riches.
Seek not how to give him reputation and high character in outward learning, but
consider deeply how you shall teach him to despise the glory that belongs to this
present life. By this means would he become more distinguished and more truly
glorious. This it is possible for the poor man and the rich man alike to
accomplish. These are lessons which a man does not learn from a master, nor by
art, but by means of the divine oracles. Seek not how he shall enjoy a long life
here, but how he shall enjoy a boundless and endless life hereafter. Give him the
great things, not the little things. Hear what Paul says, "Bring them up in the
chastening and admonition of the Lord"; study not to make him an orator, but
train him up to be a philosopher. In the want of the one there will be no harm
whatever; in the absence of the other, all the rhetoric in the world will be of no
advantage. Tempers are wanted, not talking; character, not cleverness; deeds, not
words. These gain a man the kingdom. These confer what are benefits indeed.
Whet not his tongue, but cleanse his soul. I do not say this to prevent your
teaching him these things, but to prevent your attending to them exclusively. Do
not imagine that the monk alone stands in need of these lessons from Scripture.
Of all others, the children just about to enter into the world specially need them.
For just in the same way as the man who is always at anchor in harbor, is not the
man who requires his ship to be fitted out and who needs a pilot and a crew, but
he who is always out at sea; so is it with the man of the world and the monk. The
one is entered as it were into a waveless harbor, and lives an untroubled life, and
far removed from every storm; while the other is ever on the ocean, and lives out
at sea in the very midst of the ocean, battling with billows without number.
And though he may not need it himself, still he ought to be so prepared as
to stop the mouths of others. Thus the more distinguished he is in the present

life, so much the more he stands in need of this education. If he passes his life in
courts, there are many Heathens, and philosophers, and persons puffed up with
the glory of this life. It is like a place full of dropsical people. Such in some sort
is the court. All are, as it were, puffed up, and in a state of inflammation. And
they who are not so are studying to become so. Now then reflect how vast a
benefit it is, that your son on entering there, should enter like an excellent
physician, furnished with instruments which may allay every one's peculiar
inflammation, and should go up to every one, and converse with him, and restore
the diseased body to health, applying the remedies derived from the Scriptures,
and pouring forth discourses of the true philosophy. For with whom is the
recluse to converse? With his wall and his ceiling? Yea, or again with the
wilderness and the woods? Or with the birds and the trees? He therefore has not
so great need of this sort of discipline. Still, however, he makes it his business to
perfect this work, not so much with a view of disciplining others as himself.
There is then every need of much discipline of this sort to those that are to mix
in the present world, because such an one has a stronger temptation to sin than
the other. And if you have a mind to understand it, he will further be a more
useful person even in the world itself. For all will have a reverence for him from
these words, when they see him in the fire without being burnt, and not desirous
of power. But power he will then obtain, when he least desires it, and will be a
still higher object of respect to the king; for it is not possible that such a
character should be hid. Amongst a number of healthy persons, indeed, a healthy
man will not be noticed; but when there is one healthy man among a number of
sick, the report will quickly spread and reach the king's ears, and he will make
him ruler over many nations. Knowing then these things, "bring up your children
in the chastening and admonition of the Lord."
"But suppose a man is poor." Still he will be in no wise more insignificant
than the man who lives in kings' courts, because he is not in kings' courts; no, he
will be held in admiration, and will soon gain that authority which is yielded
voluntarily, and not by any compulsion. For if a set of Greeks, men worthless as