FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.4.

"morality is said properly of man," moral acts properly speaking
receive their species from the end, for moral acts are the same as
human acts.
Reply to Objection 1: The end is not altogether extrinsic to the act,
because it is related to the act as principle or terminus; and thus it
just this that is essential to an act, viz. to proceed from something,
considered as action, and to proceed towards something,
considered as passion.
Reply to Objection 2: The end, in so far as it pre-exists in the
intention, pertains to the will, as stated above (Article 1, ad 1). And it
is thus that it gives the species to the human or moral act.
Reply to Objection 3: One and the same act, in so far as it proceeds
once from the agent, is ordained to but one proximate end, from
which it has its species: but it can be ordained to several remote
ends, of which one is the end of the other. It is possible, however,
that an act which is one in respect of its natural species, be ordained
to several ends of the will: thus this act "to kill a man," which is but
one act in respect of its natural species, can be ordained, as to an
end, to the safeguarding of justice, and to the satisfying of anger: the
result being that there would be several acts in different species of
morality: since in one way there will be an act of virtue, in another,
an act of vice. For a movement does not receive its species from that
which is its terminus accidentally, but only from that which is its "per
se" terminus. Now moral ends are accidental to a natural thing, and
conversely the relation to a natural end is accidental to morality.
Consequently there is no reason why acts which are the same
considered in their natural species, should not be diverse,
considered in their moral species, and conversely.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether there is one last end of human life?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no last end of human life, but
that we proceed to infinity. For good is essentially diffusive, as
Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). Consequently if that which proceeds
from good is itself good, the latter must needs diffuse some other
good: so that the diffusion of good goes on indefinitely. But good
has the nature of an end. Therefore there is an indefinite series of
ends.
Objection 2: Further, things pertaining to the reason can be
multiplied to infinity: thus mathematical quantities have no limit. For
the same reason the species of numbers are infinite, since, given
any number, the reason can think of one yet greater. But desire of
the end is consequent on the apprehension of the reason. Therefore
it seems that there is also an infinite series of ends.
Objection 3: Further, the good and the end is the object of the will.
But the will can react on itself an infinite number of times: for I can
will something, and will to will it, and so on indefinitely. Therefore
there is an infinite series of ends of the human will, and there is no
last end of the human will.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Metaph. ii, 2) that "to
suppose a thing to be indefinite is to deny that it is good." But the
good is that which has the nature of an end. Therefore it is contrary
to the nature of an end to proceed indefinitely. Therefore it is
necessary to fix one last end.
I answer that, Absolutely speaking, it is not possible to proceed
indefinitely in the matter of ends, from any point of view. For in
whatsoever things there is an essential order of one to another, if the
first be removed, those that are ordained to the first, must of
necessity be removed also. Wherefore the Philosopher proves (Phys.
viii, 5) that we cannot proceed to infinitude in causes of movement,
because then there would be no first mover, without which neither
can the others move, since they move only through being moved by
the first mover. Now there is to be observed a twofold order in ends--the order of intention and the order of execution: and in either of
these orders there must be something first. For that which is first in
the order of intention, is the principle, as it were, moving the