for the gift. What do you say? He Himself loosed you from your sins: surely then
He Himself also has brought you near; already he has laid by anticipation the
foundation of his doctrine.
But we must put a close to this discourse, when first we have made one
remark. And what is this? Seeing we have come to enjoy so great a benefit, we
ought to be ever mindful of it, and continually to turn in our minds the free gift
of God, and to reflect upon what we have been delivered from, what we have
obtained; and so we shall be thankful; so we shall heighten our love toward Him.
What do you say, O man? You are called to a kingdom, to the kingdom of the
Son of God— and are you full of yawning, and scratching, and dozing? If need
were that you should leap into ten thousand deaths every day, ought you not to
endure all? For the sake of office you do all manner of things; when then you are
going to share the kingdom of the Only-Begotten, will you not spring down upon
ten thousand swords? Would you not leap into fire? And this is not all that is
strange, but that when about to depart even, you bewail, and wouldest gladly
dwell among the things which are here, being a lover of the body. What fancy is
this? Do you regard even death as a thing of terror? The cause of this is luxury,
ease: for he at least that should live an embittered life would wish even for
wings, and to be loosed from hence. But now it is the same with us as with the
spoiled nestlings, which would willingly remain for ever in the nest. But the
longer they remain, the feebler they become. For the present life is a nest
cemented together with sticks and mire. Yea, should you show me even the great
mansions, yea the royal palace itself glittering with all its gold and precious
stones; I shall think them no better than the nests of swallows, for when the
winter has come they will all fall of themselves. By winter I mean That Day, not
that it will be a winter to all. For God also calls it both night and day; the first in
regard of sinners, the latter of the just. So do I also now call it winter. If in the
summer we have not been well brought up, so as to be able to fly when winter
has come, our mothers will not take us, but will leave us to die of hunger, or to
perish when the nest falls; for easily as it were a nest, or rather more easily, will

God in that day remove all things, undoing and new molding all. But they which
are unfledged, and not able to meet Him in the air, but have been so grossly
brought up that they have no lightness of wing, will suffer those things which
reason is such characters should suffer. Now the brood of swallows, when they
are fallen, perish quickly; but we shall not perish, but be punished for ever. That
season will be winter; or rather, more severe than winter. For, not winter torrents
of water roll down, but rivers of fire; not darkness that rises from clouds is there,
but darkness that cannot be dispelled, and without a ray of light, so that they
cannot see either the heaven, or the air, but are more straitened than those who
have been buried in the earth.
Oftentimes do we say these things, but there are whom we cannot bring to
believe. But it is nothing wonderful if we, men of small account, are thus treated,
when we discourse of such things, since the same happened to the Prophets also;
when they spoke not of such matters only, but also of war and captivity.
[Jeremiah 21:11; 27:12, etc.] And Zedekiah was rebuked by Jeremiah, and was
not ashamed. Therefore the Prophets said, "Woe unto them that say, Let God
hasten with speed His work, that we may see it, and let the counsel of the Holy
One of Israel come, that we may know it." [Isaiah 5:18-19] Let us not wonder at
this. For neither did those believe who were in the days of the ark; they believed,
however, when their belief was of no gain to them; neither did they of Sodom
expect [their fate], howbeit they too believed, when they gained nothing by
believing. And why do I speak of the future? Who would have expected these
things which are now happening in various places; these earthquakes, these
overthrows of cities? And yet were these things easier to believe than those;
those, I mean, which happened in the days of the ark.
Whence is this evident? Because that the men of those times had no other
example to look at, neither had they heard the Scriptures, but with us, on the
other hand, are countless instances that have happened both in our own, and in
former years. But whence arose the unbelief of these persons? From a softened
soul; they drank and ate, and therefore they believed not. For, what a man