[Deuteronomy 23:13] For all the passions are tyrannous in children (for as yet
they have not that which is to bridle them), vainglory, desire, irrationality, anger,
envy; just as in children, so they prevailed; they spat upon, they beat, Moses.
And as a child takes up a stone, and we all exclaim, O do not throw it; so did
they also take up stones against their father; and he fled from them. And as, if a
father have any ornament, the child, being fond of ornament, asks him for it, in
like manner, truly, did the party of Dathan and Abiram act, when they rebelled
for the priesthood. [Numbers 16] And besides, they were of all people the most
envious, and little-minded, and in all respects imperfect.
Ought then Christ, tell me, to have appeared at that time, at that time to
have given them these teachings of true wisdom, when they were raging with
lust, when they were as horses mad for the mare, when they were the slaves of
money, of the belly? Nay, He would but have wasted his lessons of wisdom in
discoursing with those of no understanding; and they would have neither learned
one thing nor the other. And as he who teaches to read before he has taught the
alphabet, will never teach even so much as the alphabet; so indeed would it then
have been also. But not so now, for by the grace of God much forbearance, much
virtue, has been planted everywhere. Let us give thanks then for all things, and
not be over curious. For it is not we that know the due time, but He, The Maker
of the time, and The Creator of the ages.
In everything then yield we to Him: for this is to glorify God, not to
demand of Him an account of what He does. In this way too did Abraham give
glory to God; "And being fully persuaded," we read, "that what He had
promised, He was able to perform." [Romans 4:21] He did not ask about the
future even; but we scrutinize the account even of the past. See how great folly,
how great ingratitude, is here. But let us for the future have done, for no gain
comes of it, but much harm even; and let our minds be gratefully disposed
towards our Master, and let us send up glory to God, that making for all things
an offering of thanksgiving, we may be counted worthy of His lovingkindness,
through the grace and love toward man of His Only-begotten, with whom, etc.

## Homily 5 on Colossians

[Colossians 1:26-28]
"Even the mystery which has been hid from all ages and generations: but
now has it been manifested to His saints, to whom God was pleased to make
known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which
is Christ in you, the hope of glory: whom we proclaim, admonishing every man,
and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ."
Having said what we have come to, and showed the lovingkindness of God
and the honor, by the greatness of the things given, he introduces yet another
consideration that heightens them, namely, that neither before us did any one
know Him. As he does also in the Epistle to the Ephesians, saying, neither
Angels, nor principalities, nor any other created power, but only the Son of God
knew. [Ephesians 3:5-10] And he said, not simply hid, but "quite hid," and that
even if it has but now come to pass, yet it is of old, and from the beginning God
willed these things, and they were so planned out; but why, he says not yet.
"From the ages," from the beginning, as one might say. And with reason he calls
that a mystery, which none knew, save God. And where hid? In Christ; as he
says in the Epistle to the Ephesians [Ephesians 3:9], or as when the Prophet says,
"From everlasting even to everlasting You are." [Psalm 90:2] But now has been
manifested, he says, "to His saints." So that it is altogether of the dispensation of
God. "But now has been manifested," he says. He says not, "has come to pass,"
but, "has been manifested to His saints." So that it is even now still hid, since it
has been manifested to His saints alone.
Let not others therefore deceive you, for they know not. Why to them
alone? "To whom He was pleased," he says. See how everywhere He stops the
mouth of their questions. "To whom God was pleased to make known," he says.