THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.2.

not remain, it seems that these species remain without a subject.
I answer that, The species of the bread and wine, which are
perceived by our senses to remain in this sacrament after
consecration, are not subjected in the substance of the bread and
wine, for that does not remain, as stated above (Question 75, Article
2); nor in the substantial form, for that does not remain (Question 75,
Article 6), and if it did remain, "it could not be a subject," as Boethius
declares (De Trin. i). Furthermore it is manifest that these accidents
are not subjected in the substance of Christ's body and blood,
because the substance of the human body cannot in any way be
affected by such accidents; nor is it possible for Christ's glorious
and impassible body to be altered so as to receive these qualities.
Now there are some who say that they are in the surrounding
atmosphere as in a subject. But even this cannot be: in the first
place, because atmosphere is not susceptive of such accidents.
Secondly, because these accidents are not where the atmosphere is,
nay more, the atmosphere is displaced by the motion of these
species. Thirdly, because accidents do not pass from subject to
subject, so that the same identical accident which was first in one
subject be afterwards in another; because an accident is
individuated by the subject; hence it cannot come to pass for an
accident remaining identically the same to be at one time in one
subject, and at another time in another. Fourthly, since the
atmosphere is not deprived of its own accidents, it would have at the
one time its own accidents and others foreign to it. Nor can it be
maintained that this is done miraculously in virtue of the
consecration, because the words of consecration do not signify this,
and they effect only what they signify.
Therefore it follows that the accidents continue in this sacrament
without a subject. This can be done by Divine power: for since an
effect depends more upon the first cause than on the second, God
Who is the first cause both of substance and accident, can by His
unlimited power preserve an accident in existence when the
substance is withdrawn whereby it was preserved in existence as by
its proper cause, just as without natural causes He can produce
other effects of natural causes, even as He formed a human body in
the Virgin's womb, "without the seed of man" (Hymn for Christmas,
First Vespers).
Reply to Objection 1: There is nothing to hinder the common law of

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.77, C.2.

nature from ordaining a thing, the contrary of which is nevertheless
ordained by a special privilege of grace, as is evident in the raising
of the dead, and in the restoring of sight to the blind: even thus in
human affairs, to some individuals some things are granted by
special privilege which are outside the common law. And so, even
though it be according to the common law of nature for an accident
to be in a subject, still for a special reason, according to the order of
grace, the accidents exist in this sacrament without a subject, on
account of the reasons given above (Question 75, Article 5).
Reply to Objection 2: Since being is not a genus, then being cannot
be of itself the essence of either substance or accident.
Consequently, the definition of substance is not---"a being of itself
without a subject," nor is the definition of accident---"a being in a
subject"; but it belongs to the quiddity or essence of substance "to
have existence not in a subject"; while it belongs to the quiddity or
essence of accident "to have existence in a subject." But in this
sacrament it is not in virtue of their essence that accidents are not in
a subject, but through the Divine power sustaining them; and
consequently they do not cease to be accidents, because neither is
the definition of accident withdrawn from them, nor does the
definition of substance apply to them.
Reply to Objection 3: These accidents acquired individual being in
the substance of the bread and wine; and when this substance is
changed into the body and blood of Christ, they remain in that
individuated being which they possessed before, hence they are
individual and sensible.
Reply to Objection 4: These accidents had no being of their own nor
other accidents, so long as the substance of the bread and wine
remained; but their subjects had "such" being through them, just as
snow is "white" through whiteness. But after the consecration the
accidents which remain have being; hence they are compounded of
existence and essence, as was said of the angels, in the FP,
Question 50, Article 2, ad 3; and besides they have composition of
quantitative parts.