SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.2.

which man desires naturally, wherefore the Philosopher says (Rhet.
ii, 8) that "pity is sorrow for a visible evil, whether corruptive or
distressing." Secondly, such like evils are yet more provocative of
pity if they are contrary to deliberate choice, wherefore the
Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that evil excites our pity "when it is the
result of an accident, as when something turns out ill, whereas we
hoped well of it." Thirdly, they cause yet greater pity, if they are
entirely contrary to the will, as when evil befalls a man who has
always striven to do well: wherefore the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8)
that "we pity most the distress of one who suffers undeservedly."
Reply to Objection 1: It is essential to fault that it be voluntary; and
in this respect it deserves punishment rather than mercy. Since,
however, fault may be, in a way, a punishment, through having
something connected with it that is against the sinner's will, it may,
in this respect, call for mercy. It is in this sense that we pity and
commiserate sinners. Thus Gregory says in a homily (Hom. in
Evang. xxxiv) that "true godliness is not disdainful but
compassionate," and again it is written (Mt. 9:36) that Jesus "seeing
the multitudes, had compassion on them: because they were
distressed, and lying like sheep that have no shepherd."
Reply to Objection 2: Since pity is sympathy for another's distress, it
is directed, properly speaking, towards another, and not to oneself,
except figuratively, like justice, according as a man is considered to
have various parts (Ethic. v, 11). Thus it is written (Ecclus. 30:24):
"Have pity on thy own soul, pleasing God" [Question 106, Article 3,
ad 1].
Accordingly just as, properly speaking, a man does not pity himself,
but suffers in himself, as when we suffer cruel treatment in
ourselves, so too, in the case of those who are so closely united to
us, as to be part of ourselves, such as our children or our parents,
we do not pity their distress, but suffer as for our own sores; in
which sense the Philosopher says that "harshness drives pity away."
Reply to Objection 3: Just as pleasure results from hope and
memory of good things, so does sorrow arise from the prospect or
the recollection of evil things; though not so keenly as when they are
present to the senses. Hence the signs of evil move us to pity, in so
far as they represent as present, the evil that excites our pity.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.29, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the reason for taking pity is a defect in

the person who pities?
Objection 1: It would seem that the reason for taking pity is not a
defect in the person who takes pity. For it is proper to God to be
merciful, wherefore it is written (Ps. 144:9): "His tender mercies are
over all His works." But there is no defect in God. Therefore a defect
cannot be the reason for taking pity.
Objection 2: Further, if a defect is the reason for taking pity, those in
whom there is most defect, must needs take most pity. But this is
false: for the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that "those who are in a
desperate state are pitiless." Therefore it seems that the reason for
taking pity is not a defect in the person who pities.
Objection 3: Further, to be treated with contempt is to be defective.
But the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that "those who are disposed to
contumely are pitiless." Therefore the reason for taking pity, is not a
defect in the person who pities.
On the contrary, Pity is a kind of sorrow. But a defect is the reason of
sorrow, wherefore those who are in bad health give way to sorrow
more easily, as we shall say further on (Question 35, Article 1, ad 2).
Therefore the reason why one takes pity is a defect in oneself.
I answer that, Since pity is grief for another's distress, as stated
above (Article 1), from the very fact that a person takes pity on
anyone, it follows that another's distress grieves him. And since
sorrow or grief is about one's own ills, one grieves or sorrows for
another's distress, in so far as one looks upon another's distress as
one's own.
Now this happens in two ways: first, through union of the affections,
which is the effect of love. For, since he who loves another looks
upon his friend as another self, he counts his friend's hurt as his
own, so that he grieves for his friend's hurt as though he were hurt
himself. Hence the Philosopher (Ethic. ix, 4) reckons "grieving with
one's friend" as being one of the signs of friendship, and the Apostle
says (Rm. 12:15): "Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them
that weep."