observed, "There is no power, but of God, the powers that be are ordained of
God." [Romans 13:1] For what the tie-beams are in houses, that rulers are in
cities; and in the same manner as if you were to take away the former, the walls,
being disunited, would fall in upon one another of their own accord; so were you
to deprive the world of magistrates, and of the fear that comes of them, houses at
once, and cities, and nations, would fall on one another in unrestrained
confusion, there being no one to repress, or repel, or persuade them to be
peaceful, by the fear of punishment!
3. Let us not then be grieved, beloved, by the fear of our rulers, but let us
give thanks to God that He has removed our listlessness, and rendered us more
diligent. For tell me, what harm has arisen from this concern and anxiety? Is it
that we have become more grave, and gentle; more diligent, and attentive? That
we see no one intoxicated, and singing lascivious airs? Or is it that there are
continual supplications, and prayers, and tears? That unseasonable laughter, and
impure words, and all dissoluteness is banished; and that the city is now in all
respects, like the pattern of a modest and virtuous woman? Do you grieve, I ask,
for any of these reasons? For these things, assuredly, it were right to rejoice, and
to be thankful to God, that by the terror of a few days He has put an end to such
stupidity!
"Very true," says some one, "if our danger did not go beyond fear, we
should have reaped a sufficient benefit; but we are now in dread lest the mischief
should proceed much farther, and we should be all placed in the extremest peril."
Nevertheless, I say, fear not. Paul comforts you, saying, "God is faithful,
who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the
temptation also make the way of escape, that you may be able to bear it."
[1 Corinthians 10:13] He indeed Himself has said, "I will never leave you, nor
forsake you." For had He resolved to punish us in deed, and in actual endurance,
He would not have given us over to terror during so many days. For when He
would not punish, He affrights; since if He were intending to punish, fear would
be superfluous, and threatening superfluous. But now, we have sustained a life

more grievous than countless deaths; fearing and trembling during so many days,
and being suspicious of our very shadows; and paying the punishment of Cain;
and in the midst of our sleep, starting up, through constant agony of mind. So
that if we have kindled God's wrath, we have appeased Him in the endurance of
such a punishment. For if we have not paid the satisfaction due to our sins, yet it
has been enough to satisfy the mercy of God.
4. But not this, but many other grounds for confidence ought we to have.
For God has already given us not a few pledges for favourable hopes. And first
of all, those who carried the evil tidings departing hence with the speed of wings,
supposing they should long ere this have reached the camp, are yet delayed in
the midst of their journey. So many hindrances and impediments have arisen;
and they have left their horses, and are now proceeding in vehicles; whence their
arrival must of necessity be retarded. For since God here stirred up our priest,
and common father, and persuaded him to go forth, and undertake this embassy,
he detained the messengers for a while, when they were but half way on their
road, lest arriving before him they might kindle the fire, and make our teacher's
efforts to mend matters useless, when the royal ears had become inflamed. For
that this hindrance on the road, was not without God's interposition is evident
from this. Men who had been familiar with such journeys all their lives, and
whose constant business it was to ride on horseback, now broke down through
the fatigue of this very riding; so that what has now happened is the reverse of
what took place in the case of Jonah. For God hastened him when unwilling, to
go on his mission. But these, who were desirous to go, He hindered. O strange
and wonderful event! He wished not to preach of an overthrow; and God forced
him to go against his will. These men with much haste set forward to be the
bearers of a message of overthrow, and against their will again He has hindered
them! For what reason think you? Why, because in this case the haste was an
injury; but in the other case, haste brought gain. On this account, He hastened
him forward by means of the whale; and detained these by means of their horses.
Do you see the wisdom of God? Through the very means by which each party