Having declared that they who received Him were "born of God," and had
become "sons of God," he adds the cause and reason of this unspeakable honor.
It is that "the Word became Flesh," that the Master took on Him the form of a
servant. For He became Son of man, who was God's own Son, in order that He
might make the sons of men to be children of God. For the high when it
associates with the low touches not at all its own honor, while it raises up the
other from its excessive lowness; and even thus it was with the Lord. He in
nothing diminished His own Nature by this condescension, but raised us, who
had always sat in disgrace and darkness, to glory unspeakable. Thus it may be, a
king, conversing with interest and kindness with a poor mean man, does not at
all shame himself, yet makes the other observed by all and illustrious. Now if in
the case of the adventitious dignity of men, intercourse with the humbler person
in nothing injures the more honorable, much less can it do so in the case of that
simple and blessed Essence which has nothing adventitious, or subject to growth
or decay, but has all good things immovable, and fixed for ever. So that when
you hear that "the Word became Flesh," be not disturbed nor cast down. For that
Essence did not change to flesh, (it is impiety to imagine this,) but continuing
what it is, It so took upon It the form of a servant.
2. Wherefore then does he use the expression, "was made"? To stop the
mouths of the heretics. For since there are some who say that all the
circumstances of the Dispensation were an appearance, a piece of acting, an
allegory, at once to remove beforehand their blasphemy, he has put "was made";
desiring to show thereby not a change of substance, (away with the thought,) but
the assumption of very flesh. For as when (Paul) says, "Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us," he does not mean that His
essence removing from Its proper glory took upon It the being of an accursed
thing, (this not even devils could imagine, nor even the very foolish, nor those
deprived of their natural understanding, such impiety as well as madness does it
contain,) as (St. Paul) does not say this, but that He, taking upon Himself the
curse pronounced against us, leaves us no more under the curse; so also here he

(St. John) says that He "was made Flesh," not by changing His Essence to flesh,
but by taking flesh to Himself, His Essence remained untouched.
If they say that being God, He is Omnipotent, so that He could lower
Himself to the substance of flesh, we will reply to them, that He is Omnipotent
as long as He continues to be God. But if He admit of change, change for the
worse, how could He be God? For change is far from that simple Nature.
Wherefore the Prophet says, "They all shall wax old as does a garment, and as a
vesture shall Thou roll them up, and they shall be changed; but You are the
same, and Your years shall not fail." [Psalm 102:27, Septuagint] For that
Essence is superior to all change. There is nothing better than He, to which He
might advance and reach. Better do I say? No, nor equal to, nor the least
approaching Him. It remains, therefore, that if He change, He must admit a
change for the worse; and this would not be God. But let the blasphemy return
upon the heads of those who utter it. Nay, to show that he uses the expression,'"
was made" only that you should not suppose a mere appearance, hear from what
follows how he clears the argument, and overthrows that wicked suggestion. For
what does he add? "And dwelt among us." All but saying, "Imagine nothing
improper from the word 'was made'; I spoke not of any change of that
unchangeable Nature, but of Its dwelling and inhabiting. But that which dwells
cannot be the same with that in which it dwells, but different; one thing dwells in
a different thing, otherwise it would not be dwelling; for nothing can inhabit
itself. I mean, different as to essence; for by an Union and Conjoining God the
Word and the Flesh are One, not by any confusion or obliteration of substances,
but by a certain union ineffable, and past understanding. Ask not how ; for It
was made, so as He knows."
What then was the tabernacle in which He dwelt? Hear the Prophet say; "I
will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen." [Amos 9:11] It was fallen
indeed, our nature had fallen an incurable fall, and needed only that mighty
Hand. There was no possibility of raising it again, had not He who fashioned it
at first stretched forth to it His Hand, and stamped it anew with His Image, by