FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.5.

different and contrary laws result. In order, therefore, that man may
know without any doubt what he ought to do and what he ought to
avoid, it was necessary for man to be directed in his proper acts by a
law given by God, for it is certain that such a law cannot err.
Thirdly, because man can make laws in those matters of which he is
competent to judge. But man is not competent to judge of interior
movements, that are hidden, but only of exterior acts which appear:
and yet for the perfection of virtue it is necessary for man to conduct
himself aright in both kinds of acts. Consequently human law could
not sufficiently curb and direct interior acts; and it was necessary for
this purpose that a Divine law should supervene.
Fourthly, because, as Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 5,6), human law
cannot punish or forbid all evil deeds: since while aiming at doing
away with all evils, it would do away with many good things, and
would hinder the advance of the common good, which is necessary
for human intercourse. In order, therefore, that no evil might remain
unforbidden and unpunished, it was necessary for the Divine law to
supervene, whereby all sins are forbidden.
And these four causes are touched upon in Ps. 118:8, where it is
said: "The law of the Lord is unspotted," i.e. allowing no foulness of
sin; "converting souls," because it directs not only exterior, but also
interior acts; "the testimony of the Lord is faithful," because of the
certainty of what is true and right; "giving wisdom to little ones," by
directing man to an end supernatural and Divine.
Reply to Objection 1: By the natural law the eternal law is
participated proportionately to the capacity of human nature. But to
his supernatural end man needs to be directed in a yet higher way.
Hence the additional law given by God, whereby man shares more
perfectly in the eternal law.
Reply to Objection 2: Counsel is a kind of inquiry: hence it must
proceed from some principles. Nor is it enough for it to proceed from
principles imparted by nature, which are the precepts of the natural
law, for the reasons given above: but there is need for certain
additional principles, namely, the precepts of the Divine law.
Reply to Objection 3: Irrational creatures are not ordained to an end
higher than that which is proportionate to their natural powers:

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.5.

consequently the comparison fails.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether there is but one Divine law?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is but one Divine law. Because,
where there is one king in one kingdom there is but one law. Now the
whole of mankind is compared to God as to one king, according to
Ps. 46:8: "God is the King of all the earth." Therefore there is but one
Divine law.
Objection 2: Further, every law is directed to the end which the
lawgiver intends for those for whom he makes the law. But God
intends one and the same thing for all men; since according to 1
Tim. 2:4: "He will have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth." Therefore there is but one Divine law.
Objection 3: Further, the Divine law seems to be more akin to the
eternal law, which is one, than the natural law, according as the
revelation of grace is of a higher order than natural knowledge.
Therefore much more is the Divine law but one.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 7:12): "The priesthood being
translated, it is necessary that a translation also be made of the law."
But the priesthood is twofold, as stated in the same passage, viz. the
levitical priesthood, and the priesthood of Christ. Therefore the
Divine law is twofold, namely the Old Law and the New Law.
I answer that, As stated in the FP, Question 30, Article 3, distinction
is the cause of number. Now things may be distinguished in two
ways. First, as those things that are altogether specifically different,
e.g. a horse and an ox. Secondly, as perfect and imperfect in the
same species, e.g. a boy and a man: and in this way the Divine law is
divided into Old and New. Hence the Apostle (Gal. 3:24,25) compares
the state of man under the Old Law to that of a child "under a
pedagogue"; but the state under the New Law, to that of a full grown
man, who is "no longer under a pedagogue."
Now the perfection and imperfection of these two laws is to be taken
in connection with the three conditions pertaining to law, as stated
above. For, in the first place, it belongs to law to be directed to the
common good as to its end, as stated above (Question 90, Article 2).
This good may be twofold. It may be a sensible and earthly good;
and to this, man was directly ordained by the Old Law: wherefore, at