THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.11, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: From Christ is excluded that counsel which is
with doubt; and consequently choice, which essentially includes
such counsel; but the practice of using counsel is not excluded from
Christ.
Reply to Objection 2: This reason rests upon discursion and
comparison, as used to acquire knowledge.
Reply to Objection 3: The blessed are likened to the angels in the
gifts of graces; yet there still remains the difference of natures. And
hence to use comparison and discursion is connatural to the souls
of the blessed, but not to angels.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.11, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether in Christ this knowledge was greater

than the knowledge of the angels?
Objection 1: It would seem that this knowledge was not greater in
Christ than in the angels. For perfection is proportioned to the thing
perfected. But the human soul in the order of nature is below the
angelic nature. Therefore since the knowledge we are now speaking
of is imprinted upon Christ's soul for its perfection, it seems that this
knowledge is less than the knowledge by which the angelic nature is
perfected.
Objection 2: Further, the knowledge of Christ's soul was in a
measure comparative and discursive, which cannot be said of the
angelic knowledge. Therefore the knowledge of Christ's soul was
less than the knowledge of the angels.
Objection 3: Further, the more immaterial knowledge is, the greater it
is. But the knowledge of the angels is more immaterial than the
knowledge of Christ's soul, since the soul of Christ is the act of a
body, and turns to phantasms, which cannot be said of the angels.
Therefore the knowledge of angels is greater than the knowledge of
Christ's soul.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 2:9): "For we see Jesus,
Who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of
death, crowned with glory and honor"; from which it is plain that
Christ is said to be lower than the angels only in regard to the
suffering of death. And hence, not in knowledge.
I answer that, The knowledge imprinted on Christ's soul may be
looked at in two ways: First, as regards what it has from the
inflowing cause; secondly, as regards what it has from the subject
receiving it. Now with regard to the first, the knowledge imprinted
upon the soul of Christ was more excellent than the knowledge of
the angels, both in the number of things known and in the certainty
of the knowledge; since the spiritual light, which is imprinted on the
soul of Christ, is much more excellent than the light which pertains
to the angelic nature. But as regards the second, the knowledge
imprinted on the soul of Christ is less than the angelic knowledge, in
the manner of knowing that is natural to the human soul, i.e. by
turning to phantasms, and by comparison and discursion.