Eph. v. 30.

and blood of Christ; so also our bodies, being nourished by it, and deposited in the earth, and
suffering decomposition there, shall rise at their appointed time, the Word of God granting them
resurrection to the glory of God, even the Father, who freely gives to this mortal immortality, and
to this corruptible incorruption, because the strength of God is made perfect in weakness, in
order that we may never become puffed up, as if we had life from ourselves, and exalted against
God, our minds becoming ungrateful; but learning by experience that we possess eternal duration
from the excelling power of this Being, not from our own nature, we may neither undervalue that
glory which surrounds God as He is, nor be ignorant of our own nature, but that we may know what
God can effect, and what benefits man receives, and thus never wander from the true comprehension
of things as they are, that is, both with regard to God and with regard to man. And might it not be
the case, perhaps, as I have already observed, that for this purpose God permitted our resolution
into the common dust of mortality, that we, being instructed by every mode, may be accurate in
all things for the future, being ignorant neither of God nor of ourselves?

### Chapter III.—The power and glory of God shine forth in the weakness of human flesh, as He
will render our body a participator of the resurrection and of immortality, although He has
formed it from the dust of the earth; He will also bestow upon it the enjoyment of immortality,
just as He grants it this short life in common with the soul.
1. The Apostle Paul has, moreover, in the most lucid manner, pointed out that man has been
delivered over to his own infirmity, lest, being uplifted, he might fall away from the truth. Thus he
says in the second [Epistle] to the Corinthians: "And lest I should be lifted up by the sublimity of
the revelations, there was given unto me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me.
And upon this I besought the Lord three times, that it might depart from me. But he said unto me,
My grace is sufficient for thee; for strength is made perfect in weakness. Gladly therefore shall I
rather glory in infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in me." What, therefore? (as some
may exclaim:) did the Lord wish, in that case, that His apostles should thus undergo buffeting, and
that he should endure such infirmity? Even so it was; the word says it. For strength is made perfect
in weakness, rendering him a better man who by means of his infirmity becomes acquainted with
the power of God. For how could a man have learned that he is himself an infirm being, and mortal
by nature, but that God is immortal and powerful, unless he had learned by experience what is in
resolutionem. See Book iii. cap. xx. 2.