Acts xxi.

Col. iv. 14.

2. But that Paul taught with simplicity what he knew, not only to those who were [employed]
with him, but to those that heard him, he does himself make manifest. For when the bishops and
presbyters who came from Ephesus and the other cities adjoining had assembled in Miletus, since
he was himself hastening to Jerusalem to observe Pentecost, after testifying many things to them,
and declaring what must happen to him at Jerusalem, he added: "I know that ye shall see my face
no more. Therefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all. For I have
not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Take heed, therefore, both to yourselves,
and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has placed you as bishops, to rule the Church of the
Lord, which He has acquired for Himself through His own blood." Then, referring to the evil
teachers who should arise, he said: "I know that after my departure shall grievous wolves come to
you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to
draw away disciples after them." "I have not shunned," he says, "to declare unto you all the counsel
of God." Thus did the apostles simply, and without respect of persons, deliver to all what they had
themselves learned from the Lord. Thus also does Luke, without respect of persons, deliver to us
what he had learned from them, as he has himself testified, saying, "Even as they delivered them
unto us, who from the beginning were eye-witnesses and ministers of the Word."
3. Now if any man set Luke aside, as one who did not know the truth, he will, [by so acting,]
manifestly reject that Gospel of which he claims to be a disciple. For through him we have become
acquainted with very many and important parts of the Gospel; for instance, the generation of John,
the history of Zacharias, the coming of the angel to Mary, the exclamation of Elisabeth, the descent
of the angels to the shepherds, the words spoken by them, the testimony of Anna and of Simeon
with regard to Christ, and that twelve years of age He was left behind at Jerusalem; also the baptism
of John, the number of the Lord's years when He was baptized, and that this occurred in the fifteenth
year of Tiberius Cæsar. And in His office of teacher this is what He has said to the rich: "Woe unto
you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation;" and "Woe unto you that are full, for
ye shall hunger; and ye who laugh now, for ye shall weep;" and, "Woe unto you when all men shall
speak well of you: for so did your fathers to the false prophets." All things of the following kind
we have known through Luke alone (and numerous actions of the Lord we have learned through
him, which also all [the Evangelists] notice): the multitude of fishes which Peter's companions
enclosed, when at the Lord's command they cast the nets; the woman who had suffered for
eighteen years, and was healed on the Sabbath-day; the man who had the dropsy, whom the Lord
The Codex Bezæ has the same reading; but all the other most ancient mss. agree with the received text.