the sinner, but that he should turn unto Him and live."
For in proof that our sin belongs not to nature, nor to necessity and
compulsion, hear what He says to the apostles, "But blessed are your eyes, for
they see, and your ears, for they hear;" [Matthew 13:16] not meaning this kind
of sight nor hearing, but that of the mind. For indeed these too were Jews, and
brought up in the same circumstances; but nevertheless they took no hurt from
the prophecy, because they had the root of His blessings well settled in them,
their principle of choice, I mean, and their judgment.
Do you see that, "unto you it is given," was not of necessity? For neither
would they have been blessed, unless the well-doing had been their own. For tell
me not this, that it was spoken obscurely; for they might have come and asked
Him, as the disciples did: but they would not, being careless and supine. Why
say I, they would not? Nay, they were doing the very opposite, not only
disbelieving, not only not hearkening, but even waging war, and disposed to be
very bitter against all He said: which He brings in the prophet laying to their
charge, in the words, "They heard heavily."
But not such were these; wherefore He also blessed them. And in another
way too He assures them again, saying,
"For verily I say unto you, many prophets and righteous men have desired
to see those things which you see, and have not seen them, and to hear those
things which you hear, and have not heard them;" [Matthew 13:17] my coming,
He means; my very miracles, my voice, my teaching. For here He prefers them
not to these depraved only, but even to such as have done virtuously; yea, and
He affirms them to be more blessed even than they. Why can this be? Because
not only do these see what the Jews saw not, but even what those of old desired
to see. For they indeed beheld by faith only: but these by sight too, and much
more distinctly.
Do you see how again He connects the old dispensation with the new,
signifying that those of old not only knew the things to come but also greatly
desired them? But had they pertained to some strange and opposing God, they

would never have desired them.
"Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower," [Matthew 13:18] says He; and
He speaks what we before mentioned, of carelessness and attention, of
cowardice and fortitude, of wealth and voluntary poverty; pointing out the hurt
from the one, and the benefit from the other.
Then of virtue also He brings forward different forms. For being full of love
to man, He marked out not one only way, nor did He say, "unless one bring forth
an hundred, he is an outcast;" but he that brings forth sixty is saved also, and not
he only, but also the producer of thirty. And this He said, making out salvation to
be easy.
3. And thou then, are you unable to practise virginity? Be chaste in
marriage. Are you unable to strip yourself of your possessions? Give of your
substance. Can you not bear that burden? Share your goods with Christ. Are you
unwilling to yield Him up all? Give Him but the half, but the third part. He is
your brother, and joint-heir, make Him joint-heir with you here too. Whatsoever
you give Him, you will give to yourself. Do you not hear what says the prophet?
"Them that pertain to your seed you shall not overlook." But if we must not
overlook our kinsmen, much less our Lord, having towards you, together with
His authority as Lord, the claim also of kindred, and many more besides. Yea,
for He too has made you a sharer in His goods, having received nothing of you,
but having begun with this unspeakable benefit. What then can it be but extreme
senselessness, not even by this gift to be made kind towards men, not even to
give a return for a free gift, and less things for greater? Thus whereas He has
made you heir of Heaven, do you not impart to Him even of the things on earth?
He, when you had done no good work, but were even an enemy, reconciled you:
and do you not requite Him, being even a friend and benefactor?
Yet surely, even antecedently to the kingdom, and to all the rest, even for
the very fact of His giving, we ought to feel bound to Him. For so servants too,
when bidding their masters to a meal, account themselves not to be giving but
receiving; but here the contrary has taken place: not the servant the Lord, but the