punishment is referred to God as its first author. Nevertheless the
demons who are sent to punish, do so with an intention other than
that for which they are sent; for they punish from hatred or envy;
whereas they are sent by God on account of His justice.
Reply to Objection 2: In order that the conditions of the fight be not
unequal, there is as regards man the promised recompense, to be
gained principally through the grace of God, secondarily through the
guardianship of the angels. Wherefore (4 Kgs. 6:16), Eliseus said to
his servant: "Fear not, for there are more with us than with them."
Reply to Objection 3: The assault of the flesh and the world would
suffice for the exercise of human weakness: but it does not suffice
for the demon's malice, which makes use of both the above in
assailing men. But by the Divine ordinance this tends to the glory of
the elect.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether to tempt is proper to the devil?

Objection 1: It would seem that to tempt is not proper to the devil.
For God is said to tempt, according to Gn. 22:1, "God tempted
Abraham." Moreover man is tempted by the flesh and the world.
Again, man is said to tempt God, and to tempt man. Therefore it is
not proper to the devil to tempt.
Objection 2: Further, to tempt is a sign of ignorance. But the demons
know what happens among men. Therefore the demons do not
tempt.
Objection 3: Further, temptation is the road to sin. Now sin dwells in
the will. Since therefore the demons cannot change man's will, as
appears from what has been said above (Question 111, Article 2), it
seems that it is not in their province to tempt.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Thess. 3:5): "Lest perhaps he that
tempteth should have tempted you": to which the gloss adds, "that
is, the devil, whose office it is to tempt."
I answer that, To tempt is, properly speaking, to make trial of
something. Now we make trial of something in order to know
something about it: hence the immediate end of every tempter is
knowledge. But sometimes another end, either good or bad, is
sought to be acquired through that knowledge; a good end, when,
for instance, one desires to know of someone, what sort of a man he
is as to knowledge, or virtue, with a view to his promotion; a bad
end, when that knowledge is sought with the purpose of deceiving or
ruining him.
From this we can gather how various beings are said to tempt in
various ways. For man is said to tempt, sometimes indeed merely for
the sake of knowing something; and for this reason it is a sin to
tempt God; for man, being uncertain as it were, presumes to make an
experiment of God's power. Sometimes too he tempts in order to
help, sometimes in order to hurt. The devil, however, always tempts
in order to hurt by urging man into sin. In this sense it is said to be
his proper office to tempt: for thought at times man tempts thus, he
does this as minister of the devil. God is said to tempt that He may
know, in the same sense as that is said to know which makes others