have doubted; she would not have believed. So, too, Abraham, if he had chosen
to be curious, would not have received angels. For it cannot, indeed it cannot be,
that one who is exceeding nice in these matters, should ever meet with them. No,
such an one usually lights on impostors; and how that is, I will tell you. The
pious man is not desirous to appear pious, and does not clothe himself in show,
and is likely to be rejected. But the impostor, as he makes a business of it, puts
on a deal of piety that is hard to see through. So that while he who does good,
even to those who seem not pious, will fall in with those who are so, he who
seeks out those who are thought to be pious, will often fall in with those who are
not so. Wherefore, I beseech you, let us do all things in simplicity. For let us
even suppose that he is an impostor that comes; you are not bidden to be curious
about this. For, "Give," says he, "to every one that asks you" [Luke 6:30]; and,
"Forbear not to redeem him that is to be slain." [Proverbs 24:11] Yet most of
those that are slain suffer this for some evil they are convicted of; still he says,
"Forbear not." For in this shall we be like God, thus shall we be admired, and
shall obtain those immortal blessings, which may we all be thought worthy of,
through the grace and lovingkindness of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom, to
the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, power, honor, now and
forever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 2 on Philippians

[Philippians 1:8-11]
"For God is my witness, how I long after you all in the tender mercies of
Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge and all discernment; that you may approve the things that are
excellent; that you may be sincere and void of offense unto the day of Christ;
being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are through Jesus Christ, unto
the glory and praise of God."
He calls not God to witness as though he should be doubted, but does this
from his great affection, and his exceeding persuasion and confidence; for after
saying that they had fellowship with him, he adds this also, "in the tender
mercies of Christ," lest they should think that his longing for them was for this
cause, and not simply for their own sake. And what mean these words, "in the
tender mercies of Christ"? They stand for "according to Christ." Because you
are believers, because ye love Christ, because of the love that is according to
Christ. He does not say "love," but uses a still warmer expression, "the tender
mercies of Christ," as though he had said, "having become as a father to you
through the relationship which is in Christ." For this imparts to us bowels warm
and glowing. For He gives such bowels to His true servants. "In these bowels,"
says He, as though one should say, "I love you with no natural bowels, but with
warmer ones, namely, those of Christ." "How I long after you all." I long after
all, since you are all of this nature; I am unable in words to represent to you my
longing; it is therefore impossible to tell. For this cause I leave it to God, whose
range is in the heart, to know this. Now had he been flattering them, he would
not have called God to witness, for this cannot be done without peril.
Ver. 9. "And this," says he, "I pray, that your love may abound yet more and
more." For this is a good of which there is no satiety; for see, being so loved he