"The Holy Ghost shall come upon you, and the miraculous power of the Most
High shall overshadow you"— thus, he says, you are able to bear. Look not to
the earth; it is from the heavens that the operation will come. That which takes
place is a grace of the Spirit; pray inquire not about nature and laws of marriage.
But since those words were too high for her, he wills to afford also another
demonstration. But do thou, pray, observe how the barren one leads her on the
way to the belief in this. For since that demonstration was too high for the
Virgin's intelligence, hear how he brought down what he said to lower things
also, leading her by the hand by sensible facts. For "behold," he says, "Elizabeth
your kinswoman— she also has conceived a son in her old age; and this month
is the sixth to her who was called barren." Do you see that the barren one was
for the sake of the Virgin? Since with what object did he adduce to her the childbearing of her kinswoman? With what object did he say, "in her old age?" with
what object did he add, "who was called barren?" It was by way of inducing her
by all these things, manifestly, to the believing the glad annunciation. For this
cause he spoke of both the age and the disabling effect of nature; for this cause
he awaited the time also which had elapsed from the conception; for he did not
tell to her the glad tidings immediately from the beginning, but awaited for a sixmonths period to have passed to the barren one, in order that the puerperal
swelling might, for the rest, be a pledge of the pregnancy, and an indisputable
demonstration might arise of the conception. And pray again look at the
intelligence of Gabriel. For he neither reminded her of Sarah, nor of Rebecca,
nor of Rachel; and yet they also were barren, and they had grown old, and that
which took place was a marvel; but the stories were ancient. Now things new
and recent and occurring in our generation are wont to induce us into the belief
of marvels more than those which are old. On this account having let those
women alone, that she should understand from her kinswoman Elizabeth herself
what was coming upon her, he brought it forward; so as from her to lead her to
her own— that most awful and august childbirth. For the child-birth of the
barren one lay between ours and that of the Master less indeed than that of the

Virgin, but greater than ours. On this account it was by Elizabeth lying between,
just as by some bridge, that he lifted up the mind of the Virgin from the travail
which is according to nature, to that which is above nature.
9. I did desire to say more, and to teach you other reasons for which
Rebecca, and Rachel, were barren; but the time does not permit; urging on the
discourse to the power of prayer. For on this account indeed I have mooted all
these points, that you might understand how the prayer of Isaac unbound the
barrenness of his wife; and that prayer for so long a time. "Isaac," it says,
"continually prayed about Rebecca his wife, and God listened to him." For do
not suppose that he invoked God and had immediately been listened to; for he
had spent much time in praying to God. And if you desire to learn how much, I
will tell you this too with exactness. He had spent the number of twenty years in
praying to God. Whence is this manifest? From the sequence itself. For the
Scripture, desiring to point out the faith and the endurance and the love of
wisdom of that righteous man, did not break off and leave untold even the time,
but made it also clear to us, covertly indeed, so as to rouse up our indolence; but
nevertheless did not allow it to be uncertain. Hear then how it covertly indicated
to us the time. "Now Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebecca, a daughter
of Bethuel the Syrian." You hear how many years old he was when he brought
home his wife: "Forty years old," it says, "he was when he took Rebecca." But
since we have learned how many years old he was when he married his wife, let
us learn also when he after all became a father, and how many years old he was
then, when he begot Jacob; and we shall be able to see how long a time his wife
had remained barren; and that during all that time he continued to pray to God.
How many years old then was he when he begot Jacob? "Jacob," it says, "came
forth laying hold with his right hand of his brother's heel: on this account he
called him Jacob, and him Esau. Now Isaac was sixty years old when he begot
them." If therefore when he brought Rebecca home he was forty years old, and
when he begot the sons sixty, it is very plain that his wife had remained barren
for twenty years between, and during all this time Isaac continued to pray to