but manages his expressions more agreeably, saying,
"That our care for you might appear unto you. "
That is, 'that you might know how I love you.' Now this is the same thing as
the former, but being differently expressed seemed to convey another meaning.
For [to convince yourself] that it is the same, unfold his conception and you will
perceive the difference to be nothing. 'For because I love you exceedingly,' says
he, 'I was afraid lest ye should suffer any injury from that quarter, and yourselves
succeed to that sorrow.' As therefore when he says, "Does God take care for
oxen?" [1 Corinthians 9:9] he does not mean that He cares not, (for it is not
possible for any existing thing to consist if deserted by the Providence of God):
but that He did not legislate primarily for oxen, so also here he means to say, 'I
wrote first indeed on your account, but secondly on his also. And I had indeed
that love in myself,' he says, 'even independently of mine Epistle: but I was
desirous of showing it both to you, and in a word to all, by that writing.'

2 Corinthians 7:13
"Therefore we have been comforted."
Since we both showed our care for you and have been wholly successful.
As he said also in another place, "Now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord;" [1
Thessalonians 3:8] and again, "For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? Are not even ye?" [1 Thessalonians 2:19] For this is life, this comfort,
this consolation to a teacher possessed of understanding; the growth of his
disciples.
4. For nothing does so declare him that bears rule as paternal affection for
the ruled. For begetting alone constitutes not a father; but after begetting, also
loving. But if where nature is concerned there is so great need of love, much
more where grace is concerned. In this way were all the ancients distinguished.
As many, for instance, as obtained a good report among the Hebrews, by this
were made manifest. So was Samuel shown to be great, saying, "But God forbid
that I should sin against God in ceasing to pray for you:" [1 Samuel 12:23] so
was David, so Abraham, so Elijah, and so each one of the righteous, those in the
New Testament and those in the Old. For so Moses for the sake of those he ruled
left so great riches and treasures untold, "choosing to suffer affliction with the
people of God," [Hebrews 11:25] and before his appointment was leader of the
people by his actions. Wherefore also very foolishly did that Hebrew say to him,
"Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?" [Exodus 2:14] What do you say?
You see the actions and doubtest of the title? Just as if one seeing a physician
using the knife excellently well, and succoring that limb in the body which was
diseased, should say, 'Who made you a physician and ordered you to use the
knife?' 'Art, my good Sir , and your own ailment.' So too did his knowledge
make him (i.e., Moses,) what he claimed to be. For ruling is an art, not merely a
dignity, and an art above all arts. For if the rule of those without is an art and