incomprehensible. And, according to them, Nous alone took pleasure in contemplating the Father,
and exulting in considering his immeasurable greatness; while he also meditated how he might
communicate to the rest of the Æons the greatness of the Father, revealing to them how vast and
mighty he was, and how he was without beginning,—beyond comprehension, and altogether
incapable of being seen. But, in accordance with the will of the Father, Sige restrained him, because
it was his design to lead them all to an acquaintance with the aforesaid Propator, and to create
within them a desire of investigating his nature. In like manner, the rest of the Æons also, in a kind
of quiet way, had a wish to behold the Author of their being, and to contemplate that First Cause
which had no beginning.
2. But there rushed forth in advance of the rest that Æon who was much the latest of them, and
was the youngest of the Duodecad which sprang from Anthropos and Ecclesia, namely Sophia, and
suffered passion apart from the embrace of her consort Theletos. This passion, indeed, first arose
among those who were connected with Nous and Aletheia, but passed as by contagion to this
degenerate Æon, who acted under a pretence of love, but was in reality influenced by temerity,
because she had not, like Nous, enjoyed communion with the perfect Father. This passion, they
say, consisted in a desire to search into the nature of the Father; for she wished, according to them,
to comprehend his greatness. When she could not attain her end, inasmuch as she aimed at an
impossibility, and thus became involved in an extreme agony of mind, while both on account of
the vast profundity as well as the unsearchable nature of the Father, and on account of the love she
bore him, she was ever stretching herself forward, there was danger lest she should at last have
been absorbed by his sweetness, and resolved into his absolute essence, unless she had met with
that Power which supports all things, and preserves them outside of the unspeakable greatness.
This power they term Horos; by whom, they say, she was restrained and supported; and that then,
having with difficulty been brought back to herself, she was convinced that the Father is
incomprehensible, and so laid aside her original design, along with that passion which had arisen
within her from the overwhelming influence of her admiration.
3. But others of them fabulously describe the passion and restoration of Sophia as follows: They
say that she, having engaged in an impossible and impracticable attempt, brought forth an amorphous
substance, such as her female nature enabled her to produce. When she looked upon it, her first
feeling was one of grief, on account of the imperfection of its generation, and then of fear lest this
should end her own existence. Next she lost, as it were, all command of herself, and was in the
greatest perplexity while endeavouring to discover the cause of all this, and in what way she might
conceal what had happened. Being greatly harassed by these passions, she at last changed her mind,
and endeavoured to return anew to the Father. When, however, she in some measure made the
female Æon, gave to her enthymesis substance alone, without form. Comp. Hippol., Philosop., vi. 30.
31, where the fear referred to is extended to the whole Pleroma.