FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.2.

"will."
Now in each of these appetites, the name "love" is given to the
principle movement towards the end loved. In the natural appetite
the principle of this movement is the appetitive subject's
connaturalness with the thing to which it tends, and may be called
"natural love": thus the connaturalness of a heavy body for the
centre, is by reason of its weight and may be called "natural love." In
like manner the aptitude of the sensitive appetite or of the will to
some good, that is to say, its very complacency in good is called
"sensitive love," or "intellectual" or "rational love." So that sensitive
love is in the sensitive appetite, just as intellectual love is in the
intellectual appetite. And it belongs to the concupiscible power,
because it regards good absolutely, and not under the aspect of
difficulty, which is the object of the irascible faculty.
Reply to Objection 1: The words quoted refer to intellectual or
rational love.
Reply to Objection 2: Love is spoken of as being fear, joy, desire and
sadness, not essentially but causally.
Reply to Objection 3: Natural love is not only in the powers of the
vegetal soul, but in all the soul's powers, and also in all the parts of
the body, and universally in all things: because, as Dionysius says
(Div. Nom. iv), "Beauty and goodness are beloved by all things";
since each single thing has a connaturalness with that which is
naturally suitable to it.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether love is a passion?

Objection 1: It would seem that love is not a passion. For no power is
a passion. But every love is a power, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom.
iv). Therefore love is not a passion.
Objection 2: Further, love is a kind of union or bond, as Augustine
says (De Trin. viii, 10). But a union or bond is not a passion, but
rather a relation. Therefore love is not a passion.
Objection 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 22) that
passion is a movement. But love does not imply the movement of the
appetite; for this is desire, of which movement love is the principle.
Therefore love is not a passion.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 5) that "love is a
passion."
I answer that, Passion is the effect of the agent on the patient. Now a
natural agent produces a twofold effect on the patient: for in the first
place it gives it the form; and secondly it gives it the movement that
results from the form. Thus the generator gives the generated body
both weight and the movement resulting from weight: so that weight,
from being the principle of movement to the place, which is
connatural to that body by reason of its weight, can, in a way, be
called "natural love." In the same way the appetible object gives the
appetite, first, a certain adaptation to itself, which consists in
complacency in that object; and from this follows movement towards
the appetible object. For "the appetitive movement is circular," as
stated in De Anima iii, 10; because the appetible object moves the
appetite, introducing itself, as it were, into its intention; while the
appetite moves towards the realization of the appetible object, so
that the movement ends where it began. Accordingly, the first
change wrought in the appetite by the appetible object is called
"love," and is nothing else than complacency in that object; and
from this complacency results a movement towards that same
object, and this movement is "desire"; and lastly, there is rest which
is "joy." Since, therefore, love consists in a change wrought in the
appetite by the appetible object, it is evident that love is a passion:
properly so called, according as it is in the concupiscible faculty; in
a wider and extended sense, according as it is in the will.