"Ascriberet Deo"—make the property of God.

His holy covenant, the oath which He swore to our father Abraham, that He would grant unto us,
that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, might serve Him without fear, in holiness
and righteousness before Him, all our days." Then he says to John: "And thou, child, shalt be
called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare His ways;
to give knowledge of salvation to His people, for the remission of their sins." For this is the
knowledge of salvation which was wanting to them, that of the Son of God, which John made
known, saying, "Behold the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world. This is He of
whom I said, After me cometh a man who was made before me; because He was prior to me:
and of His fulness have all we received." This, therefore, was the knowledge of salvation; but
[it did not consist in] another God, nor another Father, nor Bythus, nor the Pleroma of thirty Æons,
nor the Mother of the (lower) Ogdoad: but the knowledge of salvation was the knowledge of the
Son of God, who is both called and actually is, salvation, and Saviour, and salutary. Salvation,
indeed, as follows: "I have waited for Thy salvation, O Lord." And then again, Saviour: "Behold
my God, my Saviour, I will put my trust in Him." But as bringing salvation, thus: "God hath
made known His salvation (salutare) in the sight of the heathen." For He is indeed Saviour, as
being the Son and Word of God; but salutary, since [He is] Spirit; for he says: "The Spirit of our
countenance, Christ the Lord." But salvation, as being flesh: for "the Word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us." This knowledge of salvation, therefore, John did impart to those repenting,
and believing in the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the world.
3. And the angel of the Lord, he says, appeared to the shepherds, proclaiming joy to them:
"For there is born in the house of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. Then [appeared]
a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying, Glory in the highest to God, and on
earth peace, to men of good will." The falsely-called Gnostics say that these angels came from

Gen. xlix. 18.

John i. 14.
remark.] There can be no doubt, however, that the reading *+,(-./& is supported by many and weighty ancient authorities. [But

the Ogdoad, and made manifest the descent of the superior Christ. But they are again in error, when
saying that the Christ and Saviour from above was not born, but that also, after the baptism of the
dispensational Jesus, he, [the Christ of the Pleroma,] descended upon him as a dove. Therefore,
according to these men, the angels of the Ogdoad lied, when they said, "For unto you is born this
day a Saviour, who is Christ the Lord, in the city of David." For neither was Christ nor the Saviour
born at that time, by their account; but it was he, the dispensational Jesus, who is of the framer of
the world, the [Demiurge], and upon whom, after his baptism, that is, after [the lapse of] thirty
years, they maintain the Saviour from above descended. But why did [the angels] add, "in the city
of David," if they did not proclaim the glad tidings of the fulfilment of God's promise made to
David, that from the fruit of his body there should be an eternal King? For the Framer [Demiurge]
of the entire universe made promise to David, as David himself declares: "My help is from God,
who made heaven and earth;" and again: "In His hand are the ends of the earth, and the heights
of the mountains are His. For the sea is His, and He did Himself make it; and His hands founded
the dry land. Come ye, let us worship and fall down before Him, and weep in the presence of the
Lord who made us; for He is the Lord our God." The Holy Spirit evidently thus declares by
David to those hearing him, that there shall be those who despise Him who formed us, and who is
God alone. Wherefore he also uttered the foregoing words, meaning to say: See that ye do not err;
besides or above Him there is no other God, to whom ye should rather stretch out [your hands],
thus rendering us pious and grateful towards Him who made, established, and [still] nourishes us.
What, then, shall happen to those who have been the authors of so much blasphemy against their
Creator? This identical truth was also what the angels [proclaimed]. For when they exclaim, "Glory
to God in the highest, and in earth peace," they have glorified with these words Him who is the
Creator of the highest, that is, of super-celestial things, and the Founder of everything on earth:
who has sent to His own handiwork, that is, to men, the blessing of His salvation from heaven.
Wherefore he adds: "The shepherds returned, glorifying God for all which they had heard and seen,
as it was told unto them." For the Israelitish shepherds did not glorify another god, but Him who
had been announced by the law and the prophets, the Maker of all things, whom also the angels
glorified. But if the angels who were from the Ogdoad were accustomed to glorify any other,
different from Him whom the shepherds [adored], these angels from the Ogdoad brought to them
error and not truth.
4. And still further does Luke say in reference to the Lord: "When the days of purification were
accomplished, they brought Him up to Jerusalem, to present Him before the Lord, as it is written
in the law of the Lord, That every male opening the womb shall be called holy to the Lord; and