it by poverty, without any hunger to necessitate you, but that your horse's bridle
may be spattered over with gold enough, or the ceiling of your house, or the
capitals of your pillars. And what hell is there that this conduct would not
deserve, when it is a brother, and one that has shared with yourself in blessings
unutterable, and has been so highly honored by the Lord, whom you, in order
that you may deck out stones, and floors, and the bodies of animals with neither
reason, nor perception of these ornaments, are casting into countless calamities?
And your dog is well attended too, while man, or rather Christ, for the sake of
the hound, and all these things I have named, is straitened with extreme hunger.
What can be worse than such confusion? What more grievous than such
lawlessness as this? What streams of fire will be enough for such a soul? He that
was made in the Image of God stands in unseemly plight, through your
inhumanity; but the faces of the mules that draw your wife glisten with gold in
abundance, as do the skins and woods which compose that canopy. And if it is a
seat that is to be made, or a footstool, they are all made of gold and silver. But
the member of Christ, for whom also He came hither from Heaven, and shed His
precious Blood, does not even enjoy the food that is necessary for him, owing to
your rapaciousness. But the couches are mantled with silver on every side, while
the bodies of the saints are deprived even of necessary clothing. And to you
Christ is less precious than anything else, servants, or mules, or couch, or chair,
or footstool; for I pass over furniture of still meaner use than these, leaving it to
you to know of it. But if you are shocked at hearing this, stand aloof from doing
it, and then the words spoken will not harm you. Stand aloof, and cease from this
madness. For plain madness it is, such eagerness about these things. Wherefore
letting go of these things, let us look up, late as it is, towards Heaven, and let us
call to mind the Day which is coming, let us bethink ourselves of that awful
tribunal, and the exact accounts, and the sentence incorruptible. Let us consider
that God, who sees all these things, sends no lightnings from Heaven; and yet
what is done deserves not thunderbolts merely. Yet He neither does this, nor does
He let the sea loose upon us, nor does He burst the earth in two, He quenches not

the sun, nor does He hurl the heaven with its stars upon us. He does not move
anything from its place, but suffers them to hold their course, and the whole
creation to minister to us. Pondering all this then, let us be awestruck with the
greatness of His love toward man, and let us return to that noble origin which
belongs to us, since at present certainly we are in no better plight than the
creatures without reason, but even in a much worse one. For they do love their
kin, and need but the community of nature to cause affection towards each other.
But thou who besides nature hast countless causes to draw you together and
attach you to the member of yourself; the being honored with the Word, the
partaking in one religion, the sharing in countless blessings; art become of
wilder nature than they, by displaying so much carefulness about profitless
things, and leaving the Temples of God to perish in hunger and nakedness, and
often surrounding them also with a thousand evils. For if it is from love of glory
that you do these things, it is much more binding on you to show your brother
attention, than your horse. For the better the creature that enjoys the act of
kindness, the brighter the crown that is woven for such carefulness. Since now
while you fall into the contrary of all this, you pull upon yourself accusers
without number, yet perceivest it not. For who is there that will not speak ill of
you? Who that will not indite you as guilty of the greatest atrocity and
misanthrophy, when he sees that you disregard the human race, and settest that
of senseless creatures above men, and besides senseless creatures, even the
furniture of your house? Have you not heard the Apostles say, that they who first
received the word sold both "houses and lands" [Acts 4:34], that they might
support the brethren? But you plunder both houses and lands, that you may
adorn a horse or wood-work, or skins, or walls, or a pavement. And what is
worse is, that it is not men only, but women too are afflicted with this madness,
and urge their husbands to this empty sort of pains, by forcing them to lay out
their money upon anything rather than the necessary things. And if any one
accuse them for this, they are practised with a defence, itself loaded with much
to be accused. For both the one and the other are done at once, says one.