SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether charity is the form of faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not the form of faith. For
each thing derives its species from its form. When therefore two
things are opposite members of a division, one cannot be the form of
the other. Now faith and charity are stated to be opposite members
of a division, as different species of virtue (1 Cor. 13:13). Therefore
charity is not the form of faith.
Objection 2: Further, a form and the thing of which it is the form are
in one subject, since together they form one simply. Now faith is in
the intellect, while charity is in the will. Therefore charity is not the
form of faith.
Objection 3: Further, the form of a thing is a principle thereof. Now
obedience, rather than charity, seems to be the principle of
believing, on the part of the will, according to Rm. 1:5: "For
obedience to the faith in all nations." Therefore obedience rather
than charity, is the form of faith.
On the contrary, Each thing works through its form. Now faith works
through charity. Therefore the love of charity is the form of faith.
I answer that, As appears from what has been said above (FS,
Question 1, Article 3; FS, Question 18, Article 6), voluntary acts take
their species from their end which is the will's object. Now that which
gives a thing its species, is after the manner of a form in natural
things. Wherefore the form of any voluntary act is, in a manner, the
end to which that act is directed, both because it takes its species
therefrom, and because the mode of an action should correspond
proportionately to the end. Now it is evident from what has been said
(Article 1), that the act of faith is directed to the object of the will, i.e.
the good, as to its end: and this good which is the end of faith, viz.
the Divine Good, is the proper object of charity. Therefore charity is
called the form of faith in so far as the act of faith is perfected and
formed by charity.
Reply to Objection 1: Charity is called the form of faith because it
quickens the act of faith. Now nothing hinders one act from being
quickened by different habits, so as to be reduced to various species
in a certain order, as stated above (FS, Question 18, Articles 6,7; FS,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.3, C.4.

Question 61, Article 2) when we were treating of human acts in
general.
Reply to Objection 2: This objection is true of an intrinsic form. But it
is not thus that charity is the form of faith, but in the sense that it
quickens the act of faith, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 3: Even obedience, and hope likewise, and
whatever other virtue might precede the act of faith, is quickened by
charity, as we shall show further on (Question 23, Article 8), and
consequently charity is spoken of as the form of faith.