and after this, subdued by pity, imparted even of your own unto him that was in
need? Whence then this change? Is it not quite plain it is from the mind, and the
choice of will?
It is quite plain, and there is no one who would not say this. Wherefore I
entreat you to be in earnest, and to cleave to virtue, and you will have no need of
these questions. For our evils are mere names, if we be willing. Inquire not then
whence are evils, neither perplex yourself; but having found that they are from
remissness only, flee the evil deeds.
And if any one should say, that these things come not from us; whenever
you see him angry with his servants, and provoked with his wife, and blaming a
child, and condemning them who injure him, say to him, how then did you say,
that evils come not from us? For if they be not from us, wherefore do you find
fault? Say again; is it of yourself you revile, and insultest? For if it be not of
yourself, let no man be angry with you; but if it be of yourself, of yourself and of
your remissness are your evil deeds.
But what? Do you think there are some good men? For if indeed no man is
good, whence have you this word? Whence are praises? But if there are good
men, it is quite plain that they will also reprove the bad. Yet if no one is
voluntarily wicked, nor of himself, the good will be found to be unjustly
reproving the bad, and they themselves too will be in this way bad again. For
what can be worse than to subject the guiltless to accusations? But if they
continue in our estimation good men, though reproving, and this especially is a
proof of their goodness, even to the very fools it is hereby plain, that no one is
ever by necessity bad.
But if after all this you would still inquire, whence are evils? I would say,
from remissness, from idleness, from keeping company with the bad, from
contempt of virtue; hence are both the evils themselves, and the fact that some
inquire, whence are the evils. Since of them surely who do right no one inquires
about these things, of them that are purposed to live equitably and temperately;
but they, who dare to commit wicked acts, and wish to devise some foolish

comfort to themselves by these discussions, do weave spiders' webs.
But let us tear these in pieces not by our words only, but by our deeds too.
For neither are these things of necessity. For if they were of necessity, He would
not have said, "Woe to the man, by whom the offense comes." [Matthew 18:7]
For those only does he bewail, who are wicked by their choice.
And if He says "by whom," marvel not. For not as though another were
bringing in it by him, does He say this, but viewing him as himself causing the
whole. For the Scripture is wont to say, "by whom," for "of whom;" as when it
says, "I have gotten a man by God," putting not the second cause, but the first;
and again, "Is not the interpretation of them by God," [Genesis 40:8] and, "God
is faithful, by whom you are called unto the fellowship of His Son."
[1 Corinthians 1:9]
4. And that you may learn that it is not of necessity, hear also what follows.
For after bewailing them, He says, "If your hand, or your foot offend you, cut
them off, and cast them from you: for it is better for you to enter into life halt or
maimed, rather than having two hands or feet to be cast into the fire. And if your
right eye offend you, pluck it out; it is better for you to enter into life with one
eye, than having two eyes to be cast into the furnace of fire;" not saying these
things of limbs; far from it; but of friends, of relations, whom we regard in the
rank of necessary members. This He had both said further back, and now He
says it. For nothing is so hurtful as bad company. For what things compulsion
cannot, friendship can often effect, both for hurt, and for profit. Wherefore with
much earnestness He commands us to cut off them that hurt us, intimating these
that bring the offenses.
Do you see how He has put away the mischief that would result from the
offenses? By foretelling that there surely will be offenses, so that they might find
no one in a state of carelessness, but that looking for them men might be
watchful. By showing the evils to be great (for He would not have said without
purpose, "Woe to the world because of the offenses," but to show that great is the
mischief therefrom), by lamenting again in stronger terms over him that brings