SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: This objection considers the object of fear as
being the evil which a man shuns.
Reply to Objection 2: In God, we may consider both His justice, in
respect of which He punishes those who sin, and His mercy, in
respect of which He sets us free: in us the consideration of His
justice gives rise to fear, but the consideration of His mercy gives
rise to hope, so that, accordingly, God is the object of both hope and
fear, but under different aspects.
Reply to Objection 3: The evil of fault is not from God as its author
but from us, in for far as we forsake God: while the evil of
punishment is from God as its author, in so far as it has character of
a good, since it is something just, through being inflicted on us
justly; although originally this is due to the demerit of sin: thus it is
written (Wis. 1:13,16): "God made not death . . . but the wicked with
works and words have called it to them."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether fear is fittingly divided into filial, initial,

servile and worldly fear?
Objection 1: It would seem that fear is unfittingly divided into filial,
initial, servile and worldly fear. For Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii,
15) that there are six kinds of fear, viz. "laziness, shamefacedness,"
etc. of which we have treated above (FS, Question 41, Article 4), and
which are not mentioned in the division in question. Therefore this
division of fear seems unfitting.
Objection 2: Further, each of these fears is either good or evil. But
there is a fear, viz. natural fear, which is neither morally good, since
it is in the demons, according to James 2:19, "The devils . . . believe
and tremble," nor evil, since it is in Christ, according to Mk. 14:33,
Jesus "began to fear and be heavy." Therefore the aforesaid division
of fear is insufficient.
Objection 3: Further, the relation of son to father differs from that of
wife to husband, and this again from that of servant to master. Now
filial fear, which is that of the son in comparison with his father, is
distinct from servile fear, which is that of the servant in comparison
with his master. Therefore chaste fear, which seems to be that of the
wife in comparison with her husband, ought to be distinguished from
all these other fears.
Objection 4: Further, even as servile fear fears punishment, so do
initial and worldly fear. Therefore no distinction should be made
between them.
Objection 5: Further, even as concupiscence is about some good, so
is fear about some evil. Now "concupiscence of the eyes," which is
the desire for things of this world, is distinct from "concupiscence of
the flesh," which is the desire for one's own pleasure. Therefore
"worldly fear," whereby one fears to lose external goods, is distinct
from "human fear," whereby one fears harm to one's own person.
On the contrary stands the authority of the Master (Sent. iii, D, 34).
I answer that, We are speaking of fear now, in so far as it makes us
turn, so to speak, to God or away from Him. For, since the object of
fear is an evil, sometimes, on account of the evils he fears, man