FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.5.

are infinite in number. Secondly, on account of a natural relationship
of the ends to one another: and it is in this way that most frequently
one vice arises from another, so that this kind of origin can come
under the consideration of art.
Accordingly therefore, those vices are called capital, whose ends
have certain fundamental reasons for moving the appetite; and it is
in respect of these fundamental reasons that the capital vices are
differentiated. Now a thing moves the appetite in two ways. First,
directly and of its very nature: thus good moves the appetite to seek
it, while evil, for the same reason, moves the appetite to avoid it.
Secondly, indirectly and on account of something else, as it were:
thus one seeks an evil on account of some attendant good, or avoids
a good on account of some attendant evil.
Again, man's good is threefold. For, in the first place, there is a
certain good of the soul, which derives its aspect of appetibility,
merely through being apprehended, viz. the excellence of honor and
praise, and this good is sought inordinately by "vainglory."
Secondly, there is the good of the body, and this regards either the
preservation of the individual, e.g. meat and drink, which good is
pursued inordinately by "gluttony," or the preservation of the
species, e.g. sexual intercourse, which good is sought inordinately
by "lust." Thirdly, there is external good, viz. riches, to which
"covetousness" is referred. These same four vices avoid inordinately
the contrary evils.
Or again, good moves the appetite chiefly through possessing some
property of happiness, which all men seek naturally. Now in the first
place happiness implies perfection, since happiness is a perfect
good, to which belongs excellence or renown, which is desired by
"pride" or "vainglory." Secondly, it implies satiety, which
"covetousness" seeks in riches that give promise thereof. Thirdly, it
implies pleasure, without which happiness is impossible, as stated
in Ethic. i, 7; x, 6,7,8 and this "gluttony" and "lust" pursue.
On the other hand, avoidance of good on account of an attendant
evil occurs in two ways. For this happens either in respect of one's
own good, and thus we have "sloth," which is sadness about one's
spiritual good, on account of the attendant bodily labor: or else it
happens in respect of another's good, and this, if it be without
recrimination, belongs to "envy," which is sadness about another's
good as being a hindrance to one's own excellence, while if it be with

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.5.

recrimination with a view to vengeance, it is "anger." Again, these
same vices seek the contrary evils.
Reply to Objection 1: Virtue and vice do not originate in the same
way: since virtue is caused by the subordination of the appetite to
reason, or to the immutable good, which is God, whereas vice arises
from the appetite for mutable good. Wherefore there is no need for
the principal vices to be contrary to the principal virtues.
Reply to Objection 2: Fear and hope are irascible passions. Now all
the passions of the irascible part arise from passions of the
concupiscible part; and these are all, in a way, directed to pleasure
or sorrow. Hence pleasure and sorrow have a prominent place
among the capital sins, as being the most important of the passions,
as stated above (Question 25, Article 4).
Reply to Objection 3: Although anger is not a principal passion, yet it
has a distinct place among the capital vices, because it implies a
special kind of movement in the appetite, in so far as recrimination
against another's good has the aspect of a virtuous good, i.e. of the
right to vengeance.
Reply to Objection 4: Pride is said to be the beginning of every sin,
in the order of the end, as stated above (Article 2): and it is in the
same order that we are to consider the capital sin as being principal.
Wherefore pride, like a universal vice, is not counted along with the
others, but is reckoned as the "queen of them all," as Gregory states
(Moral. xxxi, 27). But covetousness is said to be the root from
another point of view, as stated above (Articles 1,2).
Reply to Objection 5: These vices are called capital because others,
most frequently, arise from them: so that nothing prevents some
sins from arising out of other causes. Nevertheless we might say
that all the sins which are due to ignorance, can be reduced to sloth,
to which pertains the negligence of a man who declines to acquire
spiritual goods on account of the attendant labor; for the ignorance
that can cause sin, is due to negligence, as stated above (Question
76, Article 2). That a man commit a sin with a good intention, seems
to point to ignorance, in so far as he knows not that evil should not
be done that good may come of it.