roads that lead to hell, but leaving the right and sanctioned road which leads to
heaven. And yet it has not greater gain only, but greater pleasure than the things
we have mentioned. For he who gives to harlots is ridiculous and shameful, and
will have many quarrels, and brief pleasure; or rather, not even brief, because,
give what he will to the women his mistresses, they will not thank him for it; for,
"The house of a stranger is a cask with holes." [Proverbs 23:27, Septuagint]
Besides, that sort of persons is impudent, and Solomon has compared their love
to the grave; and then only do they stop, when they see their lover stripped of all.
Or rather, such a woman does not stop even then, but tricks herself out the more,
and tramples on him when he is down, and excites much laughter against him,
and works him so much mischief, as it is not possible even to describe by words.
Not such is the pleasure of the saved; for neither has any there a rival, but all
rejoice and are glad, both they that receive blessings, and they that look on. No
anger, no despondency, no shame, no disgrace, besiege the soul of such a one,
but great is the gladness of his conscience, and great his hope of things to come;
bright his glory, and great his distinction; and more than all is the favor and
safety which is from God, and not one precipice, nor suspicion, but a waveless
harbor, and calm. Considering therefore all these things, and comparing pleasure
with pleasure, let us choose the better, that we may obtain the good things to
come, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 88 on the Gospel of John
John 21:15
"So when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, do you
love Me more than these? He says unto Him, Yea, Lord, You know that I love
You."
1. There are indeed many other things which are able to give us boldness
towards God, and to show us bright and approved, but that which most of all
brings good will from on high, is tender care for our neighbor. Which therefore
Christ requires of Peter. For when their eating was ended, Jesus says to Simon
Peter, "Simon, son of Jonas, do you love Me more than these? He says unto Him,
Yea, Lord, You know that I love You."
"He says unto him, Feed My sheep."
And why, having passed by the others, does He speak with Peter on these
matters? He was the chosen one of the Apostles, the mouth of the disciples, the
leader of the band; on this account also Paul went up upon a time to enquire of
him rather than the others. And at the same time to show him that he must now
be of good cheer, since the denial was done away, Jesus puts into his hands the
chief authority among the brethren; and He brings not forward the denial, nor
reproaches him with what had taken place, but says, "If you love Me, preside
over your brethren, and the warm love which you ever manifested, and in which
you rejoiced, show thou now; and the life which you said you would lay down for
Me, now give for My sheep."
When then having been asked once and again, he called Him to witness
who knows the secrets of the heart, and then was asked even a third time, he was
troubled, fearing a repetition of what had happened before, (for then, having
been strong in assertion, he was afterwards convicted,) and therefore he again
betakes himself to Him. For the saying,