than another. The faculty of seeing God, however, does not belong
to the created intellect naturally, but is given to it by the light of
glory, which establishes the intellect in a kind of "deiformity," as
appears from what is said above, in the preceding article.
Hence the intellect which has more of the light of glory will see God
the more perfectly; and he will have a fuller participation of the light
of glory who has more charity; because where there is the greater
charity, there is the more desire; and desire in a certain degree
makes the one desiring apt and prepared to receive the object
desired. Hence he who possesses the more charity, will see God the
more perfectly, and will be the more beatified.
Reply to Objection 1: In the words,"We shall see Him as He is," the
conjunction "as" determines the mode of vision on the part of the
object seen, so that the meaning is, we shall see Him to be as He is,
because we shall see His existence, which is His essence. But it
does not determine the mode of vision on the part of the one seeing;
as if the meaning was that the mode of seeing God will be as perfect
as is the perfect mode of God's existence.
Thus appears the answer to the Second Objection. For when it is
said that one intellect does not understand one and the same thing
better than another, this would be true if referred to the mode of the
thing understood, for whoever understands it otherwise than it really
is, does not truly understand it, but not if referred to the mode of
understanding, for the understanding of one is more perfect than the
understanding of another.
Reply to Objection 3: The diversity of seeing will not arise on the part
of the object seen, for the same object will be presented to all---viz.
the essence of God; nor will it arise from the diverse participation of
the object seen by different similitudes; but it will arise on the part of
the diverse faculty of the intellect, not, indeed, the natural faculty,
but the glorified faculty.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether those who see the essence of God

comprehend Him?
Objection 1: It seems that those who see the divine essence,
comprehend God. For the Apostle says (Phil. 3:12): "But I follow
after, if I may by any means comprehend." But the Apostle did not
follow in vain; for he said (1 Cor. 9:26): "I . . . so run, not as at an
uncertainty." Therefore he comprehended; and in the same way,
others also, whom he invites to do the same, saying: "So run that
you may comprehend."
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Vid. Deum, Ep. cxlvii):
"That is comprehended which is so seen as a whole, that nothing of
it is hidden from the seer." But if God is seen in His essence, He is
seen whole, and nothing of Him is hidden from the seer, since God is
simple. Therefore whoever sees His essence, comprehends Him.
Objection 3: Further, if we say that He is seen as a "whole," but not
"wholly," it may be contrarily urged that "wholly" refers either to the
mode of the seer, or to the mode of the thing seen. But he who sees
the essence of God, sees Him wholly, if the mode of the thing seen is
considered; forasmuch as he sees Him as He is; also, likewise, he
sees Him wholly if the mode of the seer is meant, forasmuch as the
intellect will with its full power see the Divine essence. Therefore all
who see the essence of God see Him wholly; therefore they
comprehend Him.
On the contrary, It is written: "O most mighty, great, and powerful,
the Lord of hosts is Thy Name. Great in counsel, and
incomprehensible in thought" (Jer. 32:18,19). Therefore He cannot be
comprehended.
I answer that, It is impossible for any created intellect to comprehend
God; yet "for the mind to attain to God in some degree is great
beatitude," as Augustine says (De Verb. Dim., Serm. xxxvii).
In proof of this we must consider that what is comprehended is
perfectly known; and that is perfectly known which is known so far
as it can be known. Thus, if anything which is capable of scientific
demonstration is held only by an opinion resting on a probably
proof, it is not comprehended; as, for instance, if anyone knows by