together, and with a single stroke. How? "Have the same mind in you," he says,
"which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, counted it not a prize
to be on an equality with God." And Paul of Samosata has fallen, and Marcellus,
and Sabellius. For he says, "Being in the form of God." If "in the form" how do
you say, O wicked one, that He took His origin from Mary, and was not before?
And how do you say that He was an energy? For it is written, "The form of God
took the form of a servant." "The form of a servant," is it the energy of a servant,
or the nature of a servant? By all means, I fancy, the nature of a servant. Thus
too the form of God, is the nature of God, and therefore not an energy. Behold
also Marcellus of Galatia, Sophronius and Photinus have fallen.
Behold Sabellius too. It is written, "He counted it not a prize to be on an
equality with God." Now equality is not predicated, where there is but one
person, for that which is equal has somewhat to which it is equal. Do you see not
the substance of two Persons, and not empty names without things? Do you not
hear the eternal pre-existence of the Only-begotten?
Lastly, What shall we say against Arius, who asserts the Son is of a
different substance? Tell me now, what means, "He took the form of a servant"?
It means, He became man. Wherefore "being in the form of God," He was God.
For one "form" and another "form" is named; if the one be true, the other is also.
"The form of a servant" means, Man by nature, wherefore "the form of God"
means, God by nature. And he not only bears record of this, but of His equality
too, as John also does, that he is no way inferior to the Father, for he says, "He
thought it not a thing to seize, to be equal with God." Now what is their wise
reasoning? Nay, say they, he proves the very contrary; for he says, that, "being in
the form of God, He seized not equality with God." How if He were God, how
was He able "to seize upon it"? And is not this without meaning? Who would
say that one, being a man, seized not on being a man? For how would any one
seize on that which he is? No, say they, but he means that being a little God, He
seized not upon being equal to the great God, Who was greater than He. Is there
a great and a little God? And do ye bring in the doctrines of the Greeks upon

those of the Church? With them there is a great and a little God. If it be so with
you, I know not. For you will find it nowhere in the Scriptures: there you will
find a great God throughout, a little one nowhere. If He were little, how would
he also be God? If man is not little and great, but one nature, and if that which is
not of this one nature is not man, how can there be a little God and a great one?
He who is not of that nature is not God. For He is everywhere called great
in Scripture; "Great is the Lord, and highly to be praised." [Psalm 48:1] This is
said of the Son also, for it always calls Him Lord. "You are great, and doest
wondrous things. You are God alone." [Psalm 86:10] And again, "Great is our
Lord, and great is His power, and of His greatness there is no end." [Psalm
145:3]
But the Son, he says, is little. But it is thou that sayest this, for the Scripture
says the contrary: as of the Father, so it speaks of the Son; for listen to Paul,
saying, "Looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of our great
God." [Titus 2:13] But can he have said "appearing" of the Father? Nay, that he
may the more convince you, he has added with reference to the appearing "of the
great God." Is it then not said of the Father? By no means. For the sequel suffers
it not which says, "The appearing of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ."
See, the Son is great also. How then do you speak of small and great?
Listen to the Prophet too, calling him "The Messenger of great counsel."
[Isaiah 9:6] "The Messenger of great counsel," is He not great Himself? "The
mighty God," is He small and not great? What mean then these shameless and
reckless men when they say, that being little He is a God? I repeat ofttimes what
they say, that you may the more avoid them. He being a lesser God seized not for
Himself to be like the greater God! Tell me now (but think not that these words
are mine), if he were little, as they say, and far inferior to the Father in power,
how could He possibly have seized to Himself equality with God? For an
inferior nature could not seize for himself admission into that which is great; for
example, a man could not seize on becoming equal to an angel in nature; a horse
could not, though he wished it, seize on being equal to a man in nature. But