was an enemy, he that was hated, he is in a moment lifted up on high. And not
this only—but, yet more, that it should be done at this particular time, this again
was the work of wisdom; and that it should be done by means of the Cross. It
were matter of long discourse here to point out, how all this was the work of
wisdom, and how He had made us wise. And therefore he repeats again the
words,
"According to His good pleasure which He purposed in Him."
That is to say, this He desired, this He travailed for, as one might say, that
He might be able to reveal to us the mystery. What mystery? That He would
have man seated up on high. And this has come to pass.
Ver. 10. "Unto a dispensation of the fullness of the times to sum up all
things in Christ, the things in the heavens and the things upon the earth, even in
Him."
Heavenly things, he means to say, had been severed from earthly. They had
no longer one Head. So far indeed as the system of the creation went, there was
over all One God, but so far as management of one household went, this, amid
the wide spread of Gentile error, was not the case, but they had been severed
from His obedience.
"Unto a dispensation," says he, "of the fullness of the times."
The fullness of the times, he calls it. Observe with what nicety he speaks.
And whereas he points out the origination, the purpose, the will, the first
intention, as proceeding from the Father, and the fulfillment and execution as
effected by the agency of the Son, yet no where does he apply to him the term
minister.
"He chose us," says he, "in Him, having foreordained us unto adoption as
sons through Jesus Christ to Himself;" and, "to the praise of the glory of His
grace, in whom we have redemption through His blood,— which He purposed in
Him, unto a dispensation of the fullness of the times, to sum up all things in
Christ;" and no where has he called Him minister. If however the word "in" and
the word "by" implies a mere minister, look what the matter comes to. Just in the

very beginning of the Epistle, he used the expression "through the will of the
Father." The Father, he means, willed, the Son wrought. But neither does it
follow, that because the Father willed, the Son is excluded from the willing; nor
because the Son wrought, that the Father is deprived of the working. But to the
Father and the Son, all things are common. "For all Mine are Yours," says He,
"and Yours are Mine." [John 17:10]
The fullness of the times, however, was His coming. After, then, He had
done everything, by the ministry both of Angels, and of Prophets, and of the
Law, and nothing came of it, and it was well near come to this, that man had
been made in vain, brought into the world in vain, nay, rather to his ruin; when
all were absolutely perishing, more fearfully than in the deluge, He devised this
dispensation, that is by grace; that it might not be in vain, might not be to no
purpose that man was created. This he calls "the fullness of the times," and
"wisdom." And why so? Because at that time when they were on the very point
of perishing, then they were rescued.
That "He might sum up" he says.
What is the meaning of this word, "sum up?" It is "to knit together." Let us,
however, endeavor to get near the exact import. With ourselves then, in common
conversation, the word means the summing into a brief compass things spoken at
length, the concise account of matters described in detail. And it has this
meaning. For Christ has gathered up in Himself the dispensations carried on
through a lengthened period, that is to say, He has cut them short. For "by
finishing His word and cutting it short in righteousness," [Romans 9:28] He both
comprehended former dispensations, and added others beside. This is the
meaning of "summing up."
It has also another signification; and of what nature is this? He has set over
all one and the same Head, i.e., Christ according to the flesh, alike over Angels
and men. That is to say, He has given to Angels and men one and the same
government; to the one the Incarnate, to the other God the Word. Just as one
might say of a house which has some part decayed and the other sound, He has