For His word cannot deceive, but our senses are easily beguiled. That has
never failed, but this in most things goes wrong. Since then the word says, "This
is my body," let us both be persuaded and believe, and look at it with the eyes of
the mind.
For Christ has given nothing sensible, but though in things sensible yet all
to be perceived by the mind. So also in baptism, the gift is bestowed by a
sensible thing, that is, by water; but that which is done is perceived by the mind,
the birth, I mean, and the renewal. For if you had been incorporeal, He would
have delivered you the incorporeal gifts bare; but because the soul has been
locked up in a body, He delivers you the things that the mind perceives, in things
sensible.
How many now say, I would wish to see His form, the mark, His clothes,
His shoes. Lo! You see Him, Thou touchest Him, you eat Him. And thou indeed
desirest to see His clothes, but He gives Himself to you not to see only, but also
to touch and eat and receive within you.
Let then no one approach it with indifference, no one faint-hearted, but all
with burning hearts, all fervent, all aroused. For if Jews standing, and having on
their shoes and their staves in their hands, ate with haste, much more ought thou
to be watchful. For they indeed were to go forth to Palestine, wherefore also they
had the garb of pilgrims, but you are about to remove unto Heaven.
5. Wherefore it is needful in all respects to be vigilant, for indeed no small
punishment is appointed to them that partake unworthily.
Consider how indignant you are against the traitor, against them that
crucified Him. Look therefore, lest you also yourself become guilty of the body
and blood of Christ. They slaughtered the all-holy body, but you receive it in a
filthy soul after such great benefits. For neither was it enough for Him to be
made man, to be smitten and slaughtered, but He also commingles Himself with
us, and not by faith only, but also in very deed makes us His body. What then
ought not he to exceed in purity that has the benefit of this sacrifice, than what
sunbeam should not that hand be more pure which is to sever this flesh, the

mouth that is filled with spiritual fire, the tongue that is reddened by that most
awful blood? Consider with what sort of honor you were honored, of what sort
of table you are partaking. That which when angels behold, they tremble, and
dare not so much as look up at it without awe on account of the brightness that
comes thence, with this we are fed, with this we are commingled, and we are
made one body and one flesh with Christ. "Who shall declare the mighty works
of the Lord, and cause all His praises to be heard?" What shepherd feeds his
sheep with his own limbs? And why do I say, shepherd? There are often mothers
that after the travail of birth send out their children to other women as nurses;
but He endures not to do this, but Himself feeds us with His own blood, and by
all means entwines us with Himself.
Mark it, He was born of our substance. But, you say, this is nothing to all
men; though it does concern all. For if He came unto our nature, it is quite plain
that it was to all; but if to all, then to each one. And how was it, you say, that all
did not reap the profit therefrom. This was not of His doing, whose choice it was
to do this in behalf of all, but the fault of them that were not willing. With each
one of the faithful does He mingle Himself in the mysteries, and whom He
begot, He nourishes by Himself, and puts not out to another; by this also
persuading you again, that He had taken your flesh. Let us not then be remiss,
having been counted worthy of so much both of love and honor. See ye not the
infants with how much eagerness they lay hold of the breast? With what earnest
desire they fix their lips upon the nipple? With the like let us also approach this
table, and the nipple of the spiritual cup. Or rather, with much more eagerness let
us, as infants at the breast, draw out the grace of the spirit, let it be our one
sorrow, not to partake of this food. The works set before us are not of man's
power. He that then did these things at that supper, this same now also works
them. We occupy the place of servants. He who sanctifies and changes them is
the same. Let then no Judas be present, no covetous man. If any one be not a
disciple, let him withdraw, the table receives not such. For "I keep the passover,"
He says, "with my disciples." [Matthew 26:18]