was his grace, this was the glory of Moses. God made him thus gracious ([ἐ]
[πίχαριν]) of visage, now that he was about to say somewhat, thus at once by his
very look to awe them. For there are, yes, there are faces full-fraught with
spiritual grace, lovely to them that love, awful to haters and enemies. It mentions
also the reason, why they suffered his oration.— "Then," it proceeds, "said the
high-priest, Are these things so?" [Acts 7:1] Observe, the question is put with
mildness, that he may effect some great mischief. For this reason Stephen too
begins his speech in a tone of gentleness, and says, "Men, brethren, and fathers,
hearken; The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran." [Acts 7:2] Immediately at the outset
he overthrows their conceit, and makes it appear by what he says, that the temple
is nothing, that the customs are nothing either, without their suspecting his drift:
also that they shall not overcome the preaching; and that from powerless ([ἀ]
[μηχάνων]) things God evermore contrives Him powerful ([εὐμήχανα])
instruments. Mark then how these threads make the texture of the whole speech:
and moreover that having evermore enjoyed exceeding goodness, they still
requited their Benefactor with the opposite conduct, and that they are now
attempting impossibilities. "The God of glory appeared unto our father
Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he came into Charran." Both the
temple was not, and sacrifice was not, and yet a vision of God was vouchsafed to
Abraham, and yet had he Persians for his ancestors, and was in a strange land.
And he does well at the beginning of his speech to call Him, "the God of glory:"
seeing that He has made them that are without honor to be glorious. "Because"
(says he) "it was He that made them glorious, He will make us also." Observe
how he leads them away from things of the body, from the place, in the first
instance, as the place was in question. "The God of glory," says he: implying
again, that He needs not the glory which comes from us, which comes by the
Temple: for Himself is the Fountain thereof. Think not, he would say, in this way
to glorify Him. "And from your kindred." How then says the Scripture, that
Abraham's father was willing to go out? Hence we learn, that it was in

consequence of Abraham's vision, that his father was moved to join in the
migration. [Genesis 11:31] "And said unto him, Get you out of your country, and
from your kindred, and come into a land which I shall show you." [Acts 7:3] It
shows how far these men are from being children of Abraham, how obedient he
was. "And from your kindred." Uncomfortable ([φορτικὰ]) reflections, both, that
he endured the labors, while you reap the fruits, and that all your ancestors were
in evil case. "Then came he out of the land of the Chaldæans, and dwelt in
Charran: and from thence, when his father was dead, He removed him into this
land, wherein ye now dwell. And He gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so
much as to set his foot on." (v. 4, 5.) See how he raises their thoughts away from
(their possession of) the land. For if He said (that, He will give: clearly [all came
from him], and nothing from themselves. For he came, having left both kindred
and country. Wherefore then did He not give it to him? Truly it was a figure of
another land. "And He promised to give it to him." Do you perceive, that he does
not merely resume the thread of his discourse? "He gave him not," says he; "and
He promised; and to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child." Again,
what God can do: that out of impossibilities, He does all. For here is a man in
Persia, so far away, and this man God says He will make lord of Palestine. But
let us look back to what was said before.
Whence, I pray you, did that grace bloom upon the countenance of
Stephen? (Recapitulation.) The writer gives him this report above, that he was
"full of faith." [Acts 6:8]. For it is possible to have a grace that does not consist
in works of healing: For to one is given the grace of the Spirit [1 Corinthians
12:8-9] in such and such wise ([τοιὣσδε]). But here, it seems to me, it says that
he was also gracious to look at: "They saw his face as it had been the face of an
angel." "Full of faith and of power": [Acts 6:15] which is also the character
given of Barnabas "he was a good man, full of faith and of the Holy Ghost."
[Acts 11:24] Whence we learn that the sincere and innocent are, above all others,
the men to be saved, and that these same are also more gracious. "Then they
suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words." [Acts