THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.20, C.3.

servant is attributed to a person or hypostasis according to a nature.
Hence when it is said that Christ is the master or servant of Himself,
or that the Word of God is the Master of the Man Christ, this may be
understood in two ways. First, so that this is understood to be said
by reason of another hypostasis or person, as if there was the
person of the Word of God ruling and the person of the man serving;
and this is the heresy of Nestorius. Hence in the condemnation of
Nestorius it is said in the Council of Ephesus (Part III, ch. i, anath. 6):
"If anyone say that the Word begotten of God the Father is the God
or Lord of Christ, and does not rather confess the same to be at once
God and man as the Word made flesh, according to the Scriptures,
let him be anathema." And in this sense it is denied by Cyril and
Damascene (Objection 1); and in the same sense must it be denied
that Christ is less than Himself or subject to Himself. Secondly, it
may be understood of the diversity of natures in the one person or
hypostasis. And thus we may say that in one of them, in which He
agrees with the Father, He presides and rules together with the
Father; and in the other nature, in which He agrees with us, He is
subject and serves, and in this sense Augustine says that "the Son
is less than Himself."
Yet it must be borne in mind that since this name "Christ" is the
name of a Person, even as the name "Son," those things can be
predicated essentially and absolutely of Christ which belong to Him
by reason of the Person, Which is eternal; and especially those
relations which seem more properly to pertain to the Person or the
hypostasis. But whatever pertains to Him in His human nature is
rather to be attributed to Him with a qualification; so that we say that
Christ is simply greatest, Lord, Ruler, whereas to be subject or
servant or less is to be attributed to Him with the qualification, in His
human nature.
Reply to Objection 1: Cyril and Damascene deny that Christ is the
head of Himself inasmuch as this implies a plurality of supposita,
which is required in order that anyone may be the master of another.
Reply to Objection 2: Simply speaking it is necessary that the master
and the servant should be distinct; yet a certain notion of mastership
and subservience may be preserved inasmuch as the same one is
master of Himself in different respects.
Reply to Objection 3: On account of the divers parts of man, one of
which is superior and the other inferior, the Philosopher says (Ethic.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.20, C.3.

v, 11) that there is justice between a man and himself inasmuch as
the irascible and concupiscible powers obey reason. Hence this way
a man may be said to be subject and subservient to Himself as
regards His different parts.
To the other arguments, the reply is clear from what has been said.
For Augustine asserts that the Son is less than, or subject to,
Himself in His human nature, and not by a diversity of supposita.