sort of pleasure is this, to live in wickedness? But for the present I so speak in
respect to his way of thinking;) let him consider, besides, that it is possible for
him in a short time to wash away all. The young man again, let him also consider
the uncertainty of death, and that oftentimes, when many older persons
continued here, the young were carried off before them. For, for this reason, that
we may not make traffic of our death, it is left in uncertainty. Wherefore also a
certain wise man advises, saying, "Make no tarrying to turn unto the Lord, and
put not off from day to day: for you know not what tomorrow shall bring forth."
[Sirach 5:7; Proverbs 27:1] For by putting off there is danger and fear; but by not
putting off manifest and secure salvation. Hold fast then by virtue. For so, even
if you have departed young, you have departed in safety; and if you should come
to old age, you shall arrive [at death] with great provision made, and shall have a
double feast all your life long; both in that you abstain from vice, and layest hold
on virtue. Say not, 'there will come a time when it may be well to turn,' for this
language provokes God exceedingly. And why so? Because He has promised
you countless ages, but you are not even willing to labor during this present life,
this short life that endures but a season; but art so indolent and unmanly as to
seek a shorter even than this. Are there not the same revellings daily? Are there
not the same tables, the same harlots, the same theatres, the same wealth? How
long will you love those things as though they were anything? How long will
your appetite for evil remain insatiate? Consider that as often as you have
fornicated, so often have you condemned yourself. For such is the nature of sin:
once committed, the Judge has also passed his sentence. Have you been drunken,
been gluttonous, or robbed? Hold now, turn right back, acknowledge it to God as
a mercy that He snatched you not away in the midst of your sins; seek not yet
another set time wherein to work evil. Many have been snatched away in the
midst of their covetousness, and have departed to manifest punishment. Fear lest
you also should suffer this, and without excuse. 'But God gave to many a set
time for confession in extreme old age.' What then? Will He give it to you also?
'Perhaps He will,' says one. Why do you say 'perhaps,' and 'sometimes,' and

'often?' Consider that you are deliberating about your soul, and put also the
contrary case, and calculate, and say, 'But what if He should not give it?' 'But
what if He should give it?' says he. God has indeed given it; but still this
supposition is safer and more profitable than that. For if you begin now, you
have gained all, whether you have a set time granted you or not; but if you are
always putting off, for this very cause perhaps you shall not have one given you.
When you go out to battle, thou dost not say, 'there is no need to make my will,
perhaps I shall come back safe;' nor do you when deliberating about marriage,
say 'suppose I take a poor wife, many have even in this way got rich contrary to
expectation;' nor when building a house, 'suppose I lay a rotten foundation, many
houses have stood even so;' yet in deliberating about the soul, you lean on things
more rotten still; urging your 'perhaps,' and 'often,' and 'sometimes,' and trustest
yourself to these uncertainties. 'Nay,' says one, 'not to an uncertainty, but to the
mercy of God, for God is merciful.' I know it too; but still this merciful God
snatched those away of whom I spoke. And what if after you have had time
given you, you shall still continue as thou were? For this sort of man will be
listless even in old age. 'Nay,' he said, 'not so.' For this mode of reasoning even
after the eighty years desires ninety, and after the ninety an hundred, and after
the hundred will be yet more indisposed to act. And so the whole of life will
have been consumed in vain, and what was spoken of the Jews will happen also
to you; "Their days were consumed in vanity." [Psalm 78:33] And would that in
vanity only, and not unto evil also. For when we have departed there bearing the
heavy burden of our sins, this will be unto evil also. For we shall carry away fuel
for the fire and a plentiful feast for the worm. Wherefore I pray and conjure you
to halt at length in noble wise, and to desist from wickedness, that we may also
obtain the promised good things: whereunto may we all attain, through the grace
and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father,
together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.