justice something can be remitted from the punishment which a
sinner deserves, in so far as the effect of Christ's Passion reaches
him through the sacraments of the Church.
Reply to Objection 3: Some satisfactory punishment must remain for
each sin, so as to provide a remedy against it. Wherefore though, by
virtue of the absolution some measure of the punishment due to a
grave sin is remitted, it does not follow that the same measure of
punishment is remitted for each sin, because in that case some sin
would remain without any punishment at all: but, by virtue of the
keys, the punishments due to various sins are remitted in due
proportion.
Reply to Objection 4: Some say that at the first absolution, as much
as possible is remitted by virtue of the keys, and that, nevertheless,
the second confession is valid, on account of the instruction
received, on account of the additional surety, on account of the
prayers of the priest or confessor, and lastly on account of the merit
of the shame.
But this does not seem to be true, for though there might be a reason
for repeating the confession, there would be no reason for repeating
the absolution, especially if the penitent has no cause to doubt about
his previous absolution; for he might just as well doubt after the
second as after the first absolution: even as we see that the
sacrament of Extreme Unction is not repeated during the same
sickness, for the reason that all that could be done through the
sacrament, has been done once. Moreover, in the second
confession, there would be no need for the confessor to have the
keys, if the power of the keys had no effect therein.
For these reasons others say that even in the second absolution
something of the punishment is remitted by virtue of the keys,
because when absolution is given a second time, grace is increased,
and the greater the grace received, the less there remains of the
blemish of the previous sin, and the less punishment is required to
remove that blemish. Wherefore even when a man is first absolved,
his punishment is more or less remitted by virtue of the keys,
according as he disposes himself more or less to receive grace; and
this disposition may be so great, that even by virtue of his contrition
the whole punishment is remitted, as we have already stated
(Question 5, Article 2). Consequently it is not unreasonable, if by
frequent confession even the whole punishment be remitted, that a

sin remain altogether unpunished, since Christ made satisfaction for
its punishment.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the priest can bind through the power of

the keys?
Objection 1: It would seem that the priest cannot bind by virtue of
the power of the keys. For the sacramental power is ordained as a
remedy against sin. Now binding is not a remedy for sin, but
seemingly is rather conducive to an aggravation of the disease.
Therefore, by the power of the keys, which is a sacramental power,
the priest cannot bind.
Objection 2: Further, just as to loose or to open is to remove an
obstacle, so to bind is to place an obstacle. Now an obstacle to
heaven is sin, which cannot be placed on us by an extrinsic cause,
since no sin is committed except by the will. Therefore the priest
cannot bind.
Objection 3: Further, the keys derive their efficacy from Christ's
Passion. But binding is not an effect of the Passion. Therefore the
priest cannot bind by the power of the keys.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 16:19): "Whatsoever thou shalt bind
on earth, shall be bound also in heaven."
Further, rational powers are directed to opposites. But the power of
the keys is a rational power, since it has discretion connected with it.
Therefore it is directed to opposites. Therefore if it can loose, it can
bind.
I answer that, The operation of the priest in using the keys, is
conformed to God's operation, Whose minister he is. Now God's
operation extends both to guilt and to punishment; to the guilt
indeed, so as to loose it directly. but to bind it indirectly, in so far as
He is said to harden, when He withholds His grace; whereas His
operation extends to punishment directly, in both respects, because
He both spares and inflicts it. In like manner, therefore, although the
priest, in absolving, exercises an operation ordained to the
remission of guilt, in the way mentioned above (Article 1),
nevertheless, in binding, he exercises no operation on the guilt;
(unless he be said to bind by not absolving the penitent and by
declaring him to be bound), but he has the power both of binding
and of loosing with regard to the punishment. For he looses from the