John 2:5
"Whatsoever He says unto you, do it."
For she knew that His refusal proceeded not from want of power, but from
humility, and that He might not seem without cause to hurry to the miracle; and
therefore she brought the servants.

John 2:6-7
"And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece. Jesus said unto
them, Fill the waterpots with water; and they filled them up to the brim."
It is not without a reason that the Evangelist says, "After the manner of the
purifying of the Jews," but in order that none of the unbelievers might suspect
that lees having been left in the vessels, and water having been poured upon and
mixed with them, a very weak wine had been made. Therefore he says, "after the
manner of the purifying of the Jews," to show that those vessels were never
receptacles for wine. For because Palestine is a country with but little water, and
brooks and fountains were not everywhere to be found, they always used to fill
waterpots with water, so that they might not have to hasten to the rivers if at any
time they were defiled, but might have the means of purification at hand.
"And why was it, that He did not the miracle before they filled them, which
would have been more marvelous by far? For it is one thing to change given
matter to a different quality, and another to create matter out of nothing." The
latter would indeed have been more wonderful, but would not have seemed so
credible to the many. And therefore He often purposely lessens the greatness of
His miracles, that it may be the more readily received.
"But why," says one, "did not He Himself produce the water which He
afterwards showed to be wine, instead of bidding the servants bring it?" For the
very same reason; and also, that He might have those who drew it out to witness
that what had been effected was no delusion since if any had been inclined to be
shameless, those who ministered might have said to them, "We drew the water,
we filled the vessels." And besides what we have mentioned, He thus overthrows
those doctrines which spring up against the Church. For since there are some
who say that the Creator of the world is another, and that the things which are
seen are not His works, but those of a certain other opposing god, to curb these

men's madness He does most of His miracles on matter found at hand. Because,
had the creator of these been opposed to Him, He would not have used what was
another's to set forth His own power. But now to show that it is He who
transmutes water in the vine plants, and who converts the rain by its passage
through the root into wine, He effected that in a moment at the wedding which in
the plant is long in doing. When they had filled the waterpots, He said,

John 2:8-10
"Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast; and they bare it. When
the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and knew not
whence it was, (but the servants which drew the water knew,) the governor of the
feast called the bridegroom, and says unto him, Every man at the beginning does
set forth good wine, and when men have well drunk, then that which is worst;
but you have kept the good wine until now."
Here again some mock, saying, "this was an assembly of drunken men, the
sense of the judges was spoilt, and not able to taste what was made, or to decide
on what was done, so that they did not know whether what was made was water
or wine: for that they were drunk," it is alleged, "the ruler himself has shown by
what he said." Now this is most ridiculous, yet even this suspicion the Evangelist
has removed. For he does not say that the guests gave their opinion on the
matter, but "the ruler of the feast," who was sober, and had not as yet tasted
anything. For of course you are aware, that those who are entrusted with the
management of such banquets are the most sober, as having this one business, to
dispose all things in order and regularity; and therefore the Lord called such a
man's sober senses to testify to what was done. For He did not say, "Pour forth
to them that sit at meat," but, "Bear unto the governor of the feast."
"And when the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine,
and knew not whence it was, (but the servants knew,) the governor of the feast
called the bridegroom." "And why did he not call the servants? For so the
miracle would have been revealed." Because Jesus had not Himself revealed
what had been done, but desired that the power of His miracles should be known
gently, little by little. And suppose that it had then been mentioned, the servants
who related it would never have been believed, but would have been thought
mad to bear such testimony to one who at that time seemed to the many a mere
man; and although they knew the certainty of the thing by experience, (for they
were not likely to disbelieve their own hands,) yet they were not sufficient to