have to suffer much more grievously, being both evil spoken of, and despised by
all. For this is the meaning of "trodden under foot."
11. After this He leads on to another, a higher image.
"You are the light of the world." [Matthew 5:14]
"Of the world" again; not of one nation, nor of twenty states, but of the
whole inhabited earth. And "a light" to the mind, far better than this sunbeam:
like as they were also a spiritual salt. And before they are salt, and now light; to
teach you how great is the gain of these strict precepts, and the profit of that
grave discipline: how it binds, and permits not to become dissolute; and causes
clear sight, leading men on to virtue.
"A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid, neither do men light a candle, and
put it under the bushel."
Again, by these words He trains them to strictness of life, teaching them to
be earnest in their endeavors, as set before the eyes of all men, and contending in
the midst of the amphitheatre of the world. For, "look not to this," He says, "that
we are now sitting here, that we are in a small portion of one corner. For you
shall be as conspicuous to all as a city set on the ridge of a hill, as a candle in a
house on the candlestick, giving light."
Where now are they who persevere in disbelieving the power of Christ? Let
them hear these things, and let them adore His might, amazed at the power of the
prophecy. For consider how great things he promised to them, who were not
known even in their own country: that earth and sea should know them, and that
they should by their fame reach to the limits of the inhabited world; or rather, not
by their fame, but by the working of the good they wrought. For it was not fame
that bearing them everywhere made them conspicuous, but also the actual
demonstration by their works. Since, as though they had wings, more
vehemently than the sunbeam did they overrun the whole earth, sowing the light
of godliness.
But here He seems to me to be also training them to boldness of speech. For
to say, "A city set on a hill cannot be hid," is to speak as declaring His own

powers. For as that city can by no means be hidden, so it was impossible that
what they preached should sink into silence and obscurity. Thus, since He had
spoken of persecutions and calumnies, of plots and wars, for fear they might
think that these would have power to stop their mouths; to encourage them, He
says, that so far from being hid, it should over-shine the whole world; and that
on this very account they should be illustrious and renowned.
By this then He declares His own power. In what follows, He requires that
boldness of speech which was due on their part; thus saying,
"Neither do men light a candle and put it under the bushel, but on the
candlestick, and it gives light unto all that are in the house. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father
which is in Heaven."
"For I," says He, it is true, have kindled the light, but its continuing to burn,
let that come of your diligence: not for your own sakes alone, but also for their
sake, who are to profit by these rays, and to be guided unto the truth. Since the
calumnies surely shall not be able to obscure your brightness, if you be still
living a strict life, and as becomes those who are to convert the whole world.
Show forth therefore a life worthy of His grace; that even as it is everywhere
preached, so this light may everywhere accompany the same.
Next He sets before them another sort of gain, besides the salvation of
mankind, enough to make them strive earnestly, and to lead them unto all
diligence. As thus, "You shall not only," says He, "amend the world, if you live
aright, but you will also give occasion that God shall be glorified; even as if you
do the contrary, you will both destroy men, and make God's name to be
blasphemed."
And how, it may be asked, shall God be glorified through us, if at least men
are to speak evil of us? Nay, not all men, and even they themselves who in envy
do this, will in their conscience admire and approve you; even as the outward
flatterers of such as live in wickedness do in mind accuse them.
What then? Do you command us to live for display and vain glory? Far