are past?" Or if he ask other questions besides, more than these? For I must not
propose many questions, and be silent as to the answers to them, lest, in so
doing, I harm the simpler among you. What has been already said is sufficient to
shake off your slumbers. Well then, if they ask these questions, and you
absolutely cannot even listen to the words, shall we, tell me, suffer trifling
punishment only, when we have been the cause of such error to those who sit in
darkness? I wished, if you had sufficient leisure, to bring before you all the book
of a certain impure heathen philosopher written against us, and that of another of
earlier date, that so at least I might have roused you, and led you away from your
exceeding slothfulness. For if they were wakeful that they might say these things
against us, what pardon can we deserve, if we do not even know how to repel the
attacks made upon us? For what purpose have we been brought forward? Do you
not hear the Apostle say, "Be ready to give an answer to every man that asks you
a reason of the hope that is in you"? [1 Peter 3:15] And Paul exhorts in like
manner, saying, "Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly." [Colossians 3:16]
What do they who are more slothful than drones reply to this? "Blessed is every
simple soul," and, "he that walks simply walks surely." [Proverbs 10:8] For this is
the cause of all sorts of evil, that the many do not know how to apply rightly
even the testimony of the Scriptures. Thus in this place, the writer does not mean
(by "simple") the man who is foolish, or who knows nothing, but him who is free
from wickedness, who is no evil-doer, who is wise. If it were not so, it would
have been useless to say, "Be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves."
[Matthew 10:16] But why should I name these things, when the discourse comes
in quite out of place? For besides the things already mentioned, other matters are
not right with us, those, I mean, which concern our life and conversation. We are
in every way wretched and ridiculous, ever ready to find fault with each other,
but slow to correct in ourselves things for which we blame and accuse our
neighbor. Wherefore I exhort you, that now at least we attend to ourselves, and
stop not at the finding fault, (this is not enough to appease God;) but that we
show forth a change in every way most excellent, in order that having lived here

to the glory of God, we may enjoy the glory to come; which may it come to pass
that we will all attain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 18 on the Gospel of John
John 1:35-37
"Again the next day after John stood, and two of his disciples; and looking upon
Jesus as He walked, he says, Behold the Lamb of God. And the two disciples
heard him speak, and they followed Jesus."
1. The nature of man is somehow a thing slothful, and easily declining to
perdition, not by reason of the constitution of the nature itself, but by reason of
that sloth which is of deliberate choice. Wherefore it needs much reminding.
And for this cause Paul, writing to the Philippians, said, "To write the same
things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe." [Philippians
3:1]
The earth when it has once received the seed, straightway gives forth its
fruits, and needs not a second sowing; but with our souls it is not so, and one
must be content, after having sown many times, and manifested much
carefulness, to be able once to receive fruit. For in the first place, what is said
settles in the mind with difficulty, because the ground is very hard, and entangled
with thorns innumerable, and there are many which lay plots, and carry away the
seed; afterwards, when it has been fixed and has taken root, it still needs the
same attention, that it may come to maturity, and having done so may remain
uninjured, and take no harm from any. For in the case of seeds, when the ear is
fully formed and has gained its proper strength, it easily despises rust, and
drought, and every other thing; but it is not so with doctrines; in their case after
all the work has been fully done, one storm and flood often comes on, and either
by the attack of unpleasant circumstances, or by the plots of men skilled to
deceive, or by various other temptations brought against them, brings them to
ruin.
I have not said this without cause, but that when you hear John repeating