FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.3.

And therefore, human virtue, of which we are speaking now, cannot
belong to the body, but belongs only to that which is proper to the
soul. Wherefore human virtue does not imply reference to being, but
rather to act. Consequently it is essential to human virtue to be an
operative habit.
Reply to Objection 1: Mode of action follows on the disposition of the
agent: for such as a thing is, such is its act. And therefore, since
virtue is the principle of some kind of operation, there must needs
pre-exist in the operator in respect of virtue some corresponding
disposition. Now virtue causes an ordered operation. Therefore
virtue itself is an ordered disposition of the soul, in so far as, to wit,
the powers of the soul are in some way ordered to one another, and
to that which is outside. Hence virtue, inasmuch as it is a suitable
disposition of the soul, is like health and beauty, which are suitable
dispositions of the body. But this does not hinder virtue from being a
principle of operation.
Reply to Objection 2: Virtue which is referred to being is not proper
to man; but only that virtue which is referred to works of reason,
which are proper to man.
Reply to Objection 3: As God's substance is His act, the highest
likeness of man to God is in respect of some operation. Wherefore,
as we have said above (Question 3, Article 2), happiness or bliss by
which man is made most perfectly conformed to God, and which is
the end of human life, consists in an operation.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether human virtue is a good habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not essential to virtue that it
should be a good habit. For sin is always taken in a bad sense. But
there is a virtue even of sin; according to 1 Cor. 15:56: "The virtue of
sin is the Law." Therefore virtue is not always a good habit.
Objection 2: Further, Virtue corresponds to power. But power is not
only referred to good, but also to evil: according to Is. 5: "Woe to you
that are mighty to drink wine, and stout men at drunkenness."
Therefore virtue also is referred to good and evil.
Objection 3: Further, according to the Apostle (2 Cor. 12:9): "Virtue is
made perfect in infirmity." But infirmity is an evil. Therefore virtue is
referred not only to good, but also to evil.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. vi): "No one can
doubt that virtue makes the soul exceeding good": and the
Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6): "Virtue is that which makes its
possessor good, and his work good likewise."
I answer that, As we have said above (Article 1), virtue implies a
perfection of power: wherefore the virtue of a thing is fixed by the
limit of its power (De Coelo i). Now the limit of any power must needs
be good: for all evil implies defect; wherefore Dionysius says (Div.
Hom. ii) that every evil is a weakness. And for this reason the virtue
of a thing must be regarded in reference to good. Therefore human
virtue which is an operative habit, is a good habit, productive of
good works.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as bad things are said metaphorically to
be perfect, so are they said to be good: for we speak of a perfect
thief or robber; and of a good thief or robber, as the Philosopher
explains (Metaph. v, text. 21). In this way therefore virtue is applied
to evil things: so that the "virtue" of sin is said to be law, in so far as
occasionally sin is aggravated through the law, so as to attain to the
limit of its possibility.
Reply to Objection 2: The evil of drunkenness and excessive drink,
consists in a falling away from the order of reason. Now it happens
that, together with this falling away from reason, some lower power