great affliction; and herein also is his modesty again apparent, that he says not
for their own merits was this mercy showed, but for the sake of those that need
their assistance; "for," says he, "to this end has He comforted us that we might
comfort one another." And hereby also he manifests the excellency of the
Apostles, showing that having been comforted and breathed awhile, he lies not
softly down as we, but goes on his way to anoint , to nerve, to rouse others.
Some, however, consider this as the Apostle's meaning. "Our consolation is that
of others also:" but my opinion is that in this introduction, he is also censuring
the false Apostles, those vain boasters who sat at home and lived in luxury; but
this covertly and, as it were, incidentally, the leading object being to apologise
for his delay. "For," [he would say,] "if for this end we were comforted that we
might comfort others also, do not blame us that we came not; for in this was our
whole time spent, in providing against the conspiracies, the violence, the terrors
which assailed us."
4. "For as the sufferings of Christ abound unto us, even so our comfort also
abounds through Christ." Not to depress the disciples by an aggravated account
of his sufferings; he declares on the other hand that great and superabundant was
the consolation also, and lifts up their heart not hereby alone, but also by putting
them in mind of Christ and calling the sufferings "His," and prior to the
consolation derives a comfort from the very sufferings themselves. For what joy
can I have so great as to be partaker with Christ, and for His sake to suffer these
things? What consolation can equal this? But not from this source only does he
raise the spirits of the afflicted, but from another also. Ask you what other? In
that he says, "abound:" for he does not say, "As the sufferings of Christ" are "in
us," but as they "abound," thereby declaring that they endure not His sufferings
only, but even more than these. For, says he, not whatsoever He suffered, that
have we suffered; "but even more ," for, consider, "Christ was cast out,
persecuted, scourged, died," but we, says he, "more than all this," which even of
itself were consolation enough. Now let no one condemn this speech of
boldness; for he elsewhere says, "Now I rejoice in my sufferings, and fill up on

my part that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh." [Colossians
1:24] Yet neither here nor there is it from boldness or any presumptousness. For
as they wrought greater miracles than He according to that saying of His, "he
that believes in Me shall do greater works than these," [John 14:12] but all is of
Him that works in them; so did they suffer also more than He, but all again is of
Him that comforts them, and fits them to bear the evils that betide them.
With which respect Paul aware how great a thing he had said, does again
remarkably restrain it by adding, "So our comfort also abounds through Christ;"
thus at once ascribing all to Him, and proclaiming herein also His lovingkindness; for, he says not, "As our affliction, such our consolation;" but "far
more;" for, he says not, "our comfort is equal to our sufferings," but, "our
comfort abounds," so that the season of struggles was the season also of fresh
crowns. For, say, what is equal to being scourged for Christ's sake and holding
converse with God; and being more than match for all things, and gaining the
better of those who cast us out, and being unconquered by the whole world, and
expecting hence such good things "as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man!" [1 Corinthians 2:9] And what is equal to
suffering affliction for godliness' sake, and receiving from God consolations
infinite, and being rescued from sins so great, and counted worthy of the Spirit,
and of being sanctified and justified, and regarding no man with fear and
trembling, and in peril itself outshining all.
5. Let us then not sink down when tempted. For no self-indulger has
fellowship with Christ, nor sleeper, nor supine [person], nor any of these lax and
dissolute livers. But Whoso is in affliction and temptation, this man stands near
to Him, whoso is journeying on the narrow way. For He Himself trode this;
whence too He says, "the Son of Man has not where to lay His head." So then
grieve not when you are in affliction; considering with Whom you have
fellowship, and how you are purified by trials; and how great gain is yours. For
there is nothing miserable save the offending against God; but this apart, neither
afflictions nor conspiracies, nor any other thing has power to grieve the right-