man that works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile." [Romans 2:10]
14. But these things he spoke in reference to the early times, before the
coming of Christ; and the Gentile he names here is not an idolater, but one who
worshipped God only; unfettered by the necessity of Judaical observances, (I
mean Sabbaths, and circumcision, and various purifications,) yet exhibiting all
manner of wisdom and piety. And again, discoursing of such a worshipper, he
observes, "Wrath and indignation, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of
man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile." [Romans 2:9] Again
he here calls by the name of Greek one who was free from the observance of
Judaic customs. If, then, he had not heard the law, nor conversed with the Jews,
how could there be wrath, indignation and tribulation against him for working
evil? The reason is, that he possessed a conscience inwardly admonishing him,
and teaching him, and instructing him in all things. Whence is this manifest?
From the way in which he punished others when they did amiss; from the way in
which he laid down laws; from the way in which he set up the tribunals of
justice. With the view of making this more plain, Paul spoke of those who were
living in wickedness. "Who, knowing the ordinance of God, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but also consent
with them that practise them." [Romans 1:32] "But from whence," says some
one, "did they know, that it is the will of God, that those who live in iniquity
should be punished with death?" From whence? Why, from the way in which
they judged others who sinned. For if you deem not murder to be a wicked thing,
when you have gotten a murderer at your bar, you should not punish him. So if
you deem it not an evil thing to commit adultery, when the adulterer has fallen
into your hands, release him from punishment! But if you record laws, and
prescribest punishments, and art a severe judge of the sins of others; what
defence can you make, in matters wherein you yourself doest amiss, by saying
that you are ignorant what things ought to be done? For suppose that thou and
another person have alike been guilty of adultery. On what account do you
punish him, and deem yourself worthy of forgiveness? Since if you did not know

adultery to be wickedness, it were not right to punish it in another. But if you
punish, and thinkest to escape the punishment yourself, how is it agreeable to
reason that the same offenses should not pay the same penalty?
15. This indeed is the very thing which Paul rebukes, when he says, "And
do you think this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the
same, that you shall escape the judgment of God?" [Romans 2:3] It is not, it
cannot be possible; for from the very sentence, he means, which you pronounce
upon another, from this sentence God will then judge you. For surely you are not
just, and God unjust! But if you overlook not another suffering wrong, how shall
God overlook? And if you correct the sins of others, how will not God correct
you? And though He may not bring the punishment upon you instantly, be not
confident on that account, but fear the more. So also Paul bade you, saying,
"Despisest thou the riches of His goodness, and forbearance, and longsuffering,
not knowing that the goodness of God leads you to repentance?" [Romans 2:4]
For therefore, says he, does he bear with you, not that you may become worse,
but that you may repent. But if you will not, this longsuffering becomes a cause
of your greater punishment; continuing, as you do, impenitent. This, however, is
the very thing he means, when he says, "But after your hardness and impenitent
heart treasurest up to yourself wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God. Who will render to every man according to his
deeds." [Romans 2:5-6] Since, therefore, He renders to every man according to
his works; for this reason He both implanted within us a natural law, and
afterwards gave us a written one, in order that He might demand an account of
sins, and that He might crown those who act rightly. Let us then order our
conduct with the utmost care, and as those who have soon to encounter a fearful
tribunal; knowing that we shall enjoy no pardon, if after a natural as well as
written law, and so much teaching and continual admonition, we neglect our own
salvation.
16. I desire then to address you again on the subject of oaths; but I feel
ashamed. For to me, indeed, it is not wearisome both by day and by night to