enough. Or, had we been counted worthy even of this honor, it were enough,
without the slaying of the Son. But where there are the two, what power of
language must it not transcend and surpass? The very resurrection is not great,
when I reflect on these things. It is of Him that he says, "The God of our Lord
Jesus Christ," not of God the Word.
Let us feel awed at the closeness of our relation, let us dread lest any one
should be cut off from this body, lest any one should fall from it, lest any one
should appear unworthy of it. If any one were to place a diadem about our head,
a crown of gold, should we not do every thing that we might seem worthy of the
lifeless jewels? But now it is not a diadem that is about our head, but, what is far
greater, Christ is made our very Head, and yet we pay no regard to it. Yet Angels
reverence that Head, and Archangels, and all those powers above. And shall we,
which are His body, be awed neither on the one account nor the other? And what
then shall be our hope of salvation? Conceive to yourself the royal throne,
conceive the excess of the honor. This, at least if we chose, might more avail to
startle us, yea, even than hell itself. For, even though hell were not, that we
having been honored with such an honor, should be found base and unworthy of
it, what punishment, what vengeance must not this carry with it? Think near
whom your Head is seated, (this single consideration is amply sufficient for any
purpose whatever,) on whose right hand He is placed, far above all principality,
and power, and might. Yet is the body of this Head trampled on by the very
devils. Nay, God forbid it should be thus; for were it thus, such a body could be
His body no longer. Your own head the more respectable of your servants
reverence, and do you subject your body to be the sport of them that insult it?
How sore punishment then shall you not deserve? If a man should bind the feet
of the emperor with bonds and fetters, will he not be liable to the extremity of
punishment? Do you expose the whole body to fierce monsters, and not
shudder?
However, since our discourse is concerning the Lord's body, come, and let
us turn our thoughts to it, even that which was crucified, which was nailed,

which is sacrificed. If you are the body of Christ, bear the Cross, for He bore it:
bear spitting, bear buffetings, bear nails. Such was that Body; that Body "did no
sin, neither was guile found in His mouth." [1 Peter 2:22] His hands did every
thing for the benefit of them that needed, His mouth uttered not a word of those
things which are not convenient. He heard them say, "You have a devil," and He
answered nothing.
Further, our discourse is concerning this Body, and as many of us as partake
of that Body and taste of that Blood, are partaking of that which is in no wise
different from that Body, nor separate. Consider that we taste of that Body that
sits above, that is adored by Angels, that is next to the Power that is
incorruptible. Alas! How many ways to salvation are open to us! He has made us
His own body, He has imparted to us His own body, and yet not one of these
things turns us away from what is evil. Oh the darkness, the depth of the abyss,
the apathy! "Set your mind," says he, "on the things that are above, where Christ
is, seated on the right hand of God." [Colossians 3:1] And after all this, some set
their affections upon money, or licentiousness, others are carried captive by their
passions!
Do you not see, that even in our own body, when any part is superfluous
and useless, it is cut off, is cut away? It is of no use that it has belonged to the
body, when it is mutilated, when it is mortified, when it is decayed, when it is
detrimental to the rest. Let us not then be too confident, because we have been
once made members of this body. If this body of ours, though but a natural body,
nevertheless suffers amputation, what dreadful evil shall it not undergo, if the
moral principle should fail? When the body partakes not of this natural food,
when the pores are stopped up, then it mortifies; when the ducts are closed, then
it is palsied. So is it with us also, when we stop our ears, our soul becomes
palsied; when we partake not of the spiritual food, when, instead of corrupt
bodily humors, evil dispositions impair us, all these things engender disease,
dangerous disease, disease that wastes. And then there will be need of that fire,
there will be need of that cutting asunder. For Christ cannot endure that we