concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were
baptized, both men and women. Then Simon himself believed also: and when he
was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles
and signs which were done. Now when the Apostles which were at Jerusalem
heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and
John: who, when they had come down, prayed for them, that they might receive
the Holy Ghost." [Acts 8:10-15] And (yet) great signs had been done: how then
had they not received the Spirit? They had received the Spirit, namely, of
remission of sins: but the Spirit of miracles they had not received. "For as yet He
was fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost." (v.
16, 17.) For, to show that this was the case, and that it was the Spirit of miracles
they had not received, observe how, having seen the result, Simon came and
asked for this. "And when Simon saw that through laying on of the Apostles'
hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, Give me also
this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost." (v.
18, 19.)
"The persecution," say you, "gained strength." True, but at that very time to
men possessed before (by a hostile power) it brought deliverance. For it planted
the miracles like a stronghold, in the heart of the enemy's country.— Not even
the death of Stephen quenched their rage, nay, increased it rather: it scattered
wide the teachers, so that the greater became the discipleship.— "And there was
joy." And yet there had been "great lamentation:" true; but mark again the good
— "Of a long time" was the malady, but this man brought them deliverance.—
And how came he to baptize Simon also? Just as Christ chose Judas.— And
"beholding the signs" which he did, forasmuch as the others did not receive the
(power of working) signs, he dared not ask for it.— How was it then that they
did not strike him dead, as they did Ananias and Sapphira? Because even in the
old times, he that gathered sticks (on the sabbath-day) was put to death as a
warning to others [Numbers 15:32] and in no other instance did any suffer the

same fate. So too on the present occasion, "Peter said to him, Your money perish,
because you have imagined that the gift of God is to be purchased with
money."— [Acts 8:20] Why had not these received the Holy Ghost, when
baptized? Either because Philip kept this honor for the Apostles; or, because he
had not this gift (to impart); or, he was one of the Seven: which is rather to be
said. Whence, I take it, this Philip was one of the Apostles. But observe; those
went not forth: it was Providentially ordered that these should go forth and those
be lacking, because of the Holy Ghost: for they had received power to work
miracles, but not also to impart the Spirit to others: this was the prerogative of
the Apostles. And observe (how they sent) the chief ones: not any others, but
Peter [and John ]. "And when Simon," it says, "saw that through laying on of the
Apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given." He would not have said, "And
having seen," unless there had been some sensible manifestation. "Then laid they
their hands on them," etc. Just as Paul also did, when they spoke with tongues.
[Acts 19:6] Observe the execrable conduct of Simon. "He offered money," with
what object? And yet he did not see Peter doing this for money. And it was not
of ignorance that he acted thus; it was because he would tempt them, because he
wished to get matter of accusation against them. And therefore also Peter says,
You have no part nor lot in this matter, for your heart is not right before God
"because you have thought," etc. [Acts 8:21] Once more he brings to light what
was in the thoughts, because Simon thought to escape detection. "Repent
therefore of this your wickedness and pray God, if perhaps the thought of your
heart may be forgiven you. For I perceive the bond of inquity. Then answered
Simon, and said, Pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things which you
have spoken come upon me." [Acts 8:22-24] Even this he did only formally, as
words of course, when he ought to have wept and mourned as a penitent. "If
perchance it may be forgiven you." Not as though it would not have been
pardoned, had he wept, but this is the manner of the Prophet also, to denounce
absolutely, ([ἀ] [παγορεύειν]) and not to say, "Howbeit, if you do this, your sin
shall be forgiven," but that in any wise the punishment shall take effect.