behold you. This is to act as one insulting virtue itself, if you are to pursue it not
for its own sake, but with an eye to the ropemaker, and the brazier, and the
common people of the baser sort, that the bad and they that are far removed from
virtue may admire you. And you are calling the enemies of virtue to the display
and the sight thereof, as if one were to choose to live continently, not for the
excellency of continence, but that he might make a show before prostitutes.
Thou also, it would seem, wouldest not choose virtue, but for the sake of virtue's
enemies; whereas you ought indeed to admire her on this very ground, that she
has even her enemies to praise her—yet to admire her (as is meet), not for
others, but for her own sake. Since we too, when we are loved not for our own,
but for others' sake, account the thing an insult. Just so I bid you reckon in the
case of virtue as well, and neither to follow after her for the sake of others, nor
for men's sake to obey God; but men for God's sake. Since if you do the
contrary, though thou seem to follow virtue, you have provoked equally with
him who follows her not. For just as he disobeyed by not doing, so thou by doing
unlawfully.
2. "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth."
Thus, after He has cast out the disease of vainglory, and not before, He
seasonably introduces His discourse of voluntary poverty. For nothing so trains
men to be fond of riches, as the fondness for glory. This, for instance, is why
men devise those herds of slaves, and that swarm of eunuchs, and their horses
with trappings of gold, and their silver tables, and all the rest of it, yet more
ridiculous; not to satisfy any wants, nor to enjoy any pleasure, but that they may
make a show before the multitude.
Now above He had only said, that we must show mercy; but here He points
out also how great mercy we must show, when He says, "Lay not up treasure."
For it not being possible at the beginning to introduce all at once His discourse
on contempt of riches, by reason of the tyranny of the passion, He breaks it up
into small portions, and having set free the hearer's mind, instills it therein, so as
that it shall become acceptable. Wherefore, you see, He said first, "Blessed are

the merciful;" and after this, "Agree with your adversary;" and after that again,
"If any one will sue you at the law and take your coat, give him your cloak also;"
but here, that which is much greater than all these. For there His meaning was,
"if you see a law-suit impending, do this; since to want and be freed from strife,
is better than to possess and strive;" but here, supposing neither adversary nor
any one at law with you, and without all mention of any other such party, He
teaches the contempt of riches itself by itself, implying that not so much for their
sake who receive mercy, as for the giver's sake, He makes these laws: so that
though there be no one injuring us, or dragging us into a court of justice, even so
we may despise our possessions, bestowing them on those that are in need.
And neither here has He put the whole, but even in this place it is gently
spoken; although He had in the wilderness shown forth to a surpassing extent
His conflicts in that behalf. [Matthew 4:9-10] However He does not express this,
nor bring it forward; for it was not yet time to reveal it; but for a while He
searches out for reasons, maintaining the place of an adviser rather than a
lawgiver, in His sayings on this subject.
For after He had said, "Lay not up treasures upon the earth," He added,
"where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal."
For the present He signifies the hurtfulness of the treasure here, and the
profit of what is there, both from the place, and from the things which mar it.
And neither at this point does He stop, but adds also another argument.
And first, what things they most fear, from these He urges them. For "of
what are you afraid?" says He: "lest your goods should be spent, if you give
alms? Nay, then give alms, and so they will not be spent; and, what is more, so
far from being spent, they will actually receive a greater increase; yea, for the
things in heaven are added unto them."
However, for a time He says it not, but puts it afterwards. But for the
present, what had most power to persuade them, that He brings forward, namely,
that the treasure would thus remain for them unspent.
And on either hand He attracts them. For He said not only, "If you give