Rome, September 27, 1995
Peter-Hans Kolvenbach, S.J.
Superior General of the Society of Jesus
On the 455th anniversary of the papal approval of the Society of Jesus

## PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION OF THE CONSTITUTIONS TO THE BRETHREN OF THE SOCIETY OF JESUS

Dearly beloved in Christ, 
Here at last, beloved brothers in Christ Jesus, is what we have all been so eagerly longing and praying for our Society's Constitutions promulgated in their final form. Their appearance has been delayed longer than we had wished, but the reasons for this were both compelling and weighty; namely, that they might be drawn up with maturer deliberation and with greater devotion and care and, by being subjected to more prolonged trials, receive a form that would be more solid and enduring. In the Apostolic See's letters establishing and confirming the Society, authorization had been granted to enact Constitutions on the understanding that once enacted and approved by the Society they would automatically be considered as approved and confirmed by the authority of the Apostolic See. The Society was at that time scattered over the world and occupied with activities of great importance for faith and religion. Hence, it quite rightly entrusted its originator and founder, our Father Ignatius of holy memory, residing in Rome, with the task of writing and enacting the Constitutions.

Carefully, wisely, and religiously did he undertake and carry out this task that had been laid upon him, to the extent that he made it his chief concern for a number of years. With many tears, ardent prayers, and repeated Sacrifices of the Mass, he implored from the Lord. But our Father was a man of remarkable prudence and modesty. He realized that customs differed throughout the world, and that not all things were right for all places. He knew that, if the Society was to have everywhere a single hue and form, its Constitutions would have to be in the greatest possible agreement with all the practices of the provinces everywhere so as to enjoy permanent acceptance. Moreover, his estimation of himself was not so high that he was willing to rely in a matter of this magnitude exclusively upon his own way of proceeding or his own opinion and judgment.

Accordingly, during the Jubilee Year of 1550, he showed the Constitutions he had written to nearly all the surviving professed Fathers (who had come to Rome), and solicited their criticisms. Taking all these comments into account, along with various other points which had been turned up by day-to-day experience, he finally sent the Constitutions to Spain in 1553 for promulgation there. He also sent them to a limited number of other places. In addition, His Lordship Paul IV, by divine providence pope, submitted our Constitutions for examination to two most reverend cardinals, who returned them to us untouched, with not a word changed. Later, His Holiness gave his apostolic blessing not just to the congregation there present but to the entire body of the Society throughout the world, reconfirming and establishing by his apostolic authority all the favors, privileges, and indults granted us by his predecessors.