our affairs are full of confusion and disorder. What kind of confusion, O man,
and disorder? A certain one, says he, is rich, and overbearing, He is rapacious
and covetous, he drains the substance of the poor day by day, and suffers no
terrible affliction. Another lives in forbearance, self-restraint, and uprightness,
and is adorned with all other good qualities, and is chastened with poverty and
disease, and extremely terrible afflictions. Are these then the matters which
offend you? Yes, these, says he. If then you see both of the rapacious, many
chastened, and of those living virtuously, yea some even enjoying countless
goods, why do you not abandon your opinion, and be content with the
Almighty? Because it is this very thing which offends me more. For why when
there are two evil men, is one chastened, and another gets off, and escapes; and
when there are two good men, one is honoured, and the other continues under
punishment? And this very thing is a very great work of God's providence. For if
he were to chasten all the evil men, here; and were to honour here all the good
men, a day of judgment were superfluous. Again if he were to chasten no wicked
man, nor were to honour any of the good, then the base would become baser and
worse, as being more careless than the excellent, and they who were minded to
blaspheme would accuse God all the more, and say that our affairs were
altogether deprived of his providence. For if when certain evil men are
chastened, and certain good men punished, they likewise say that human affairs
are subject to no providence; if even this did not happen what would they not
say? And what words would they not send forth? On this account some of the
wicked he chastens, and some he does not chasten and some of the good he
honours and some he does not honour. He does not chasten all, in order that he
may persuade you, that there is a Resurrection. But he chastens some in order
that he may make the more careless, through fear by means of the punishment of
the others, more in earnest. Again he honours certain of the good, in order that
he may lead on others by his honours to emulate their virtue. But he does not
honour all, in order that you may learn that there is another season for rendering
to all their recompense. For if indeed all were to receive their deserts here, they

would disbelieve the account of the Resurrection. But if no one were to receive
his desert here, the majority would become more careless. On this account some
he chastens, and others he does not chasten, profiting both those who are
chastened, and those who are not chastened. For he separates their wickedness
from those, and he makes the others by their punishment, more self-restrained.
And this is manifest from what Christ himself said. For when they announced to
him that a tower had been brought to the ground, and had buried certain men, he
saith to them "What do you think? That these men were sinners only? I say to
you nay, but if ye do not repent ye also shall suffer the same thing."
Do you see how those perished on account of their sin, and the rest did not
escape on account of their righteousness, but in order that they might become
better by the punishment of the others? Were not then the chastened unjustly
dealt with says one? For they could without being chastened themselves become
better by the punishment of others. But if He had known that they would become
better from penitence God would not have chastened them. For if when he
foresaw that many would profit nothing from his longsuffering, he nevertheless
bears with them, with much tolerance, fulfilling his own part, and affording them
an opportunity of coming out of their own senselessness to their sober senses
one day; how could he deprive those who were about to become better from the
punishment of others, of the benefit of repentance? So that they are in no way
unjustly treated, both their evil being cut off by their punishment, and their
chastening is to be lighter there, because they suffered here beforehand. Again,
they who were not chastened are in no way unjustly treated; for it was possible
for them, had they wished, to have used the longsuffering of God, to accomplish
a most excellent change, and wondering at his tolerance, to have become
ashamed at his exceeding forbearance, and one day to have gone over to virtue,
and to have gained their own salvation by the punishment of others. But if they
remain in wickedness, God is not to blame, who on this account was
longsuffering, that he might recover them, but they are unworthy of pardon, who
did not rightly use the longsuffering of God: and it is not only possible to use