SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.2.

the "perpetual will" denotes the purpose of observing justice always,
"constant" signifies a firm perseverance in this purpose.
Reply to Objection 5: A judge renders to each one what belongs to
him, by way of command and direction, because a judge is the
"personification of justice," and "the sovereign is its
guardian" (Ethic. v, 4). On the other hand, the subjects render to
each one what belongs to him, by way of execution.
Reply to Objection 6: Just as love of God includes love of our
neighbor, as stated above (Question 25, Article 1), so too the service
of God includes rendering to each one his due.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether justice is always towards one another?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not always towards
another. For the Apostle says (Rm. 3:22) that "the justice of God is
by faith of Jesus Christ." Now faith does not concern the dealings of
one man with another. Neither therefore does justice.
Objection 2: Further, according to Augustine (De Moribus Eccl. xv),
"it belongs to justice that man should direct to the service of God his
authority over the things that are subject to him." Now the sensitive
appetite is subject to man, according to Gn. 4:7, where it is written:
"The lust thereof," viz. of sin, "shall be under thee, and thou shalt
have dominion over it." Therefore it belongs to justice to have
dominion over one's own appetite: so that justice is towards oneself.
Objection 3: Further, the justice of God is eternal. But nothing else is
co-eternal with God. Therefore justice is not essentially towards
another.
Objection 4: Further, man's dealings with himself need to be rectified
no less than his dealings with another. Now man's dealings are
rectified by justice, according to Prov. 11:5, "The justice of the
upright shall make his way prosperous." Therefore justice is about
our dealings not only with others, but also with ourselves.
On the contrary, Tully says (De Officiis i, 7) that "the object of justice
is to keep men together in society and mutual intercourse." Now this
implies relationship of one man to another. Therefore justice is
concerned only about our dealings with others.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 57, Article 1) since justice
by its name implies equality, it denotes essentially relation to
another, for a thing is equal, not to itself, but to another. And
forasmuch as it belongs to justice to rectify human acts, as stated
above (Question 57, Article 1; FS, Question 113, Article 1) this
otherness which justice demands must needs be between beings
capable of action. Now actions belong to supposits [FP, Question 29,
Article 2] and wholes and, properly speaking, not to parts and forms
or powers, for we do not say properly that the hand strikes, but a
man with his hand, nor that heat makes a thing hot, but fire by heat,
although such expressions may be employed metaphorically. Hence,