love alone, nor yet of our virtue, but of both. "He chose us," says the Apostle;
and He that chooses, knows what it is that He chooses. "In love," he adds,
"having foreordained us;" for virtue would never have saved any one, had there
not been love. For tell me, what would Paul have profited, how would he have
exhibited what he has exhibited, if God had not both called him from the
beginning, and, in that He loved him, drawn him to Himself? But besides, His
vouchsafing us so great privileges, was the effect of His love, not of our virtue.
Because our being rendered virtuous, and believing, and coming near unto Him,
even this again was the work of Him that called us Himself, and yet,
notwithstanding, it is ours also. But that on our coming near unto Him, He
should vouchsafe us so high privileges, as to bring us at once from a state of
enmity, to the adoption of children, this is indeed the work of a really
transcendent love.
Ver. 4, 5. "In love," says he, "having foreordained us unto adoption as sons
through Jesus Christ unto Himself."
Do you observe how that nothing is done without Christ? Nothing without
the Father? The one has predestinated, the other has brought us near. And these
words he adds by way of heightening the things which have been done, in the
same way as he says also elsewhere, "And not only so, but we also rejoice in
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ." [Romans 5:11] For great indeed are the
blessings bestowed, yet are they made far greater in being bestowed through
Christ; because He sent not any servant, though it was to servants He sent, but
the Only-begotten Son Himself.
Ver. 5. "According to the good pleasure," he continues, "of His will."
That is to say, because He earnestly willed it. This is, as one might say, His
earnest desire. For the word "good pleasure" every where means the precedent
will, for there is also another will. As for example, the first will is that sinners
should not perish; the second will is, that, if men become wicked, they shall
perish. For surely it is not by necessity that He punishes them, but because He
wills it. You may see something of the sort even in the words of Paul, where he

says, "I would that all men were even as I myself." [1 Corinthians 7:7] And
again, "I desire that the younger widows marry, bear children." [1 Timothy 5:14]
By "good pleasure" then he means the first will, the earnest will, the will
accompanied with earnest desire, as in case of us, for I shall not refuse to employ
even a somewhat familiar expression, in order to speak with clearness to the
simpler sort; for thus we ourselves, to express the intentness of the will, speak of
acting according to our resolve. What he means to say then is this, God earnestly
aims at, earnestly desires, our salvation. Wherefore then is it that He so loves us,
whence has He such affection? It is of His goodness alone. For grace itself is the
fruit of goodness. And for this cause, he says, has He predestinated us to the
adoption of children; this being His will, and the object of His earnest wish, that
the glory of His grace may be displayed. "According to the good pleasure of His
will," he proceeds,
Ver. 6. "To the praise of the glory of His grace, which He freely bestowed on
us in the Beloved."
That the glory of His grace may be displayed, he says, which He freely
bestowed on us in the Beloved. Now then if for this He has shown grace to us, to
the praise of the glory of His grace, and that He may display His grace, let us
abide therein. "To the praise of His glory." What is this? That who should praise
Him? That who should glorify Him? That we, that Angels, that Archangels, yea,
or the whole creation? And what were that? Nothing. The Divine nature knows
no want. And wherefore then would He have us praise and glorify Him? It is that
our love towards Him may be kindled more fervently within us. He desires
nothing we can render; not our service, not our praise, nor any thing else,
nothing but our salvation; this is His object in every thing He does. And he who
praises and marvels at the grace displayed towards himself will thus be more
devoted and more earnest.
"Which He freely bestowed on us," he says. He does not say, "Which He has
graciously given us," ([ἐ] [χαρίσατο]) but, "wherein He has shown grace to us."
([ἐ] [χαρίτωσεν]) That is to say, He has not only released us from our sins, but