THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.7.

nature . . . so that, though afterwards no such thing occur, they may
shape their faith according to that which has occurred once for all."
And therefore the Holy Ghost descended visibly, under a bodily
shape, on Christ at His baptism, in order that we may believe Him to
descend invisibly on all those who are baptized.
Reply to Objection 4: The Holy Ghost appeared over Christ at His
baptism, under the form of a dove, for four reasons. First, on
account of the disposition required in the one baptized---namely, that
he approach in good faith: since! as it is written (Wis. 1:5): "The holy
spirit of discipline will flee from the deceitful." For the dove is an
animal of a simple character, void of cunning and deceit: whence it
is said (Mt. 10:16): "Be ye simple as doves."
Secondly, in order to designate the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost,
which are signified by the properties of the dove. For the dove dwells
beside the running stream, in order that, on perceiving the hawk, it
may plunge in and escape. This refers to the gift of wisdom, whereby
the saints dwell beside the running waters of Holy Scripture, in order
to escape the assaults of the devil. Again, the dove prefers the more
choice seeds. This refers to the gift of knowledge, whereby the
saints make choice of sound doctrines, with which they nourish
themselves. Further, the dove feeds the brood of other birds. This
refers to the gift of counsel, with which the saints, by teaching and
example, feed men who have been the brood, i.e. imitators, of the
devil. Again, the dove tears not with its beak. This refers to the gift of
understanding, wherewith the saints do not rend sound doctrines, as
heretics do. Again, the dove has no gall. This refers to the gift of
piety, by reason of which the saints are free from unreasonable
anger. Again, the dove builds its nest in the cleft of a rock. This
refers to the gift of fortitude, wherewith the saints build their nest, i.
e. take refuge and hope, in the death wounds of Christ, who is the
Rock of strength. Lastly, the dove has a plaintive song. This refers to
the gift of fear, wherewith the saints delight in bewailing sins.
Thirdly, the Holy Ghost appeared under the form of a dove on
account of the proper effect of baptism, which is the remission of
sins and reconciliation with God: for the dove is a gentle creature.
Wherefore, as Chrysostom says, (Hom. xii in Matth.), "at the Deluge
this creature appeared bearing an olive branch, and publishing the
tidings of the universal peace of the whole world: and now again the
dove appears at the baptism, pointing to our Deliverer."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.39, C.7.

Fourthly, the Holy Ghost appeared over our Lord at His baptism in
the form of a dove, in order to designate the common effect of
baptism---namely, the building up of the unity of the Church. Hence it
is written (Eph. 5:25-27): "Christ delivered Himself up . . . that He
might present . . . to Himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing . . . cleansing it by the laver of water in the
word of life." Therefore it was fitting that the Holy Ghost should
appear at the baptism under the form of a dove, which is a creature
both loving and gregarious. Wherefore also it is said of the Church
(Cant 6:8): "One is my dove."
But on the apostles the Holy Ghost descended under the form of fire,
for two reasons. First, to show with what fervor their hearts were to
be moved, so as to preach Christ everywhere, though surrounded by
opposition. And therefore He appeared as a fiery tongue. Hence
Augustine says (Super Joan., Tract. vi): Our Lord "manifests" the
Holy Ghost "visibly in two ways"---namely, "by the dove corning
upon the Lord when He was baptized; by fire, coming upon the
disciples when they were met together . . . In the former case
simplicity is shown, in the latter fervor . . . We learn, then, from the
dove, that those who are sanctified by the Spirit should be without
guile: and from the fire, that their simplicity should not be left to wax
cold. Nor let it disturb anyone that the tongues were cloven . . . in the
dove recognize unity."
Secondly, because, as Chrysostom says (Gregory, Hom. xxx in Ev.):
"Since sins had to be forgiven," which is effected in baptism,
"meekness was required"; this is shown by the dove: "but when we
have obtained grace we must look forward to be judged"; and this is
signified by the fire.