are becoming thankless and inconsiderate, and that I repay him greater goodwill." And see how he extols his benefits. For since that barbarous and
abandoned woman could entertain no lofty sentiment, he shames her from
human considerations, saying, "He knows nothing through me," i.e., "he is a
great benefactor to me, and I cannot strike my patron in a vital part. He has
made me a second lord of his house, and no one has been kept back from me, but
you." Here he endeavors to raise her mind, that so at any rate he might persuade
her to be ashamed, and might signify the greatness of her honor. Nor did he stop
even here, but likewise added a name sufficient to restrain her, saying, "Because
you are his wife; and how shall I do this wickedness? But what do you say? That
your husband is not present, nor knows that he is wronged? But God will behold
it." She however profited nothing by his advice, but still sought to attract him.
For desiring to satiate her own frenzy, not through love of Joseph, she did these
things; and this is evident from what she did afterwards. As that she institutes a
trial, and brings in accusation, and bears false witness, and exposes to a wild
beast him that had done no wrong, and casts him into a prison; or rather for her
part, she even slew him, in such a manner did she arm the judge against him.
What then? Was then Joseph too such as she was? Nay, altogether the contrary,
for he neither contradicted nor accused the woman. "Yes," it may be said: "for he
would have been disbelieved." And yet he was greatly beloved; and this is
evident not only from the beginning but also from the end. For had not his
barbarian master loved him greatly, he would even have slain him in his silence,
making no defence: being as he was an Egyptian and a ruler, and wronged in his
marriage-bed as he supposed, and by a servant, and a servant to whom he had
been so great a benefactor. But all these things gave way to his regard for him,
and the grace which God poured down upon him. And together with this grace
and love, he had also other no small proofs, had he been minded to justify
himself; the garments themselves. For if it were she to whom violence was done,
her own vest should have been torn, her face lacerated, instead of her retaining
his garments. But "he heard," says she, "that I lifted up my voice, and left his

garments, and went out." And wherefore then did you take them from him?
Since unto one suffering violence, the one thing desirable is to be rid of the
intruder.
But not from hence alone, but also from the subsequent events, shall I be
able to point out his good-will and his love. Yea even when he fell into a
necessity of mentioning the cause of his imprisonment, and his remaining there,
he did not even then declare the whole course of the story. But what says he? "I
too have done nothing: but indeed I was stolen out of the land of the Hebrews;"
and he no where mentioned the adulteress nor does he plume himself on the
matter, which would have been any one's feeling, if not for vain-glory, yet so as
not to appear to have been cast into that cell for an evil cause. For if men in the
act of doing wrong by no means abstain even so from blaming the same things,
although to do so brings reproach; of what admiration is not he worthy, because,
pure as he was he did not mention the woman's passion nor make a show of her
sin; nor when he ascended the throne and became ruler of all Egypt, remember
the wrong done by the woman nor exact any punishment?
Do you see how he cared for her? But her's was not love, but madness. For
it was not Joseph that she loved, but she sought to fulfil her own lust. And the
very words too, if one would examine them accurately, were accompanied with
wrath and great blood-thirstiness. For what says she? "You have brought in a
Hebrew servant to mock us:" upbraiding her husband for the kindness; and she
exhibited the garments, having become herself more savage than any wild beast:
but not so he. And why speak I of his good-will to her, when he was such, we
know, towards his brethren who would slay him; and never said one harsh thing
of them, either within doors or without?
14. Therefore Paul says, that the love which we are speaking of is the
mother of all good things, and prefers it to miracles and all other gifts. For as
where there are vests and sandals of gold, we require also some other garments
whereby to distinguish the king: but if we see the purple and the diadem, we
require not to see any other sign of his royalty: just so here likewise, when the