pray? Both to teach us lowliness of mind, and also to deliver us from the charge
of vainglory. On this account it is said also in this passage that when He had
spoken these words "He went away and prayed:" and after He had prayed He
speaks thus to His disciples "Could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and
pray that you enter not into temptation." [Matthew 26:39-41] Do you see He not
only prays but also admonishes? "For the Spirit indeed is willing," He said, "but
the flesh is weak." [Matthew 26:41] Now this He said by way of emptying their
soul of vanity, and delivering them from pride, teaching them self-restraint,
training them to practice moderation. Therefore the prayer which He wished to
teach them, He Himself also offered, speaking after the manner of men, not
according to His Godhead (for the divine nature is impassable) but according to
His manhood. And He prayed as instructing us to pray, and even to seek
deliverance from distress; but, if this be not permitted, then to acquiesce in what
seems good to God. Therefore He said "Nevertheless not as I will but as You
will:" not because He had one will and the Father another; but in order that He
might instruct men even if they were in distress and trembling, even if danger
came upon them, and they were unwilling to be torn from present life,
nevertheless to postpone their own will to the will of God: even as Paul also
when he had been instructed practically exhibited both these principles; for he
besought that temptations might be removed from him, thus saying "For this
thing I besought the Lord thrice:" [2 Corinthians 12:8] and yet since it did not
please God to remove it, he says "Wherefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in
insults, in persecutions." [2 Corinthians 12:10] But perhaps what I have said is
not quite clear: therefore I will make it clearer. Paul incurred many dangers and
prayed that he might not be exposed to them. Then he heard Christ saying "my
grace is sufficient for you, for my strength is made perfect in weakness."
[2 Corinthians 12:9] As soon then as he saw what the will of God was, he in
future submitted his will to God's will. By means of this prayer then Christ
taught both these truths, that we should not plunge into dangers, but rather pray
that we may not fall into them; but if they come upon us we should bear them

bravely, and postpone our own will to the will of God. Knowing these things
then let us pray that we may never enter into temptation: but if we do enter it let
us beseech God to give us patience and courage, and let us honour His will in
preference to every will of our own. For then we shall pass through this present
life with safety, and shall obtain the blessings to come: which may we all receive
by the favour and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom be to the
Father, together with the Holy Ghost, glory, might, honour, now and for ever
world without end. Amen.