## Homily 7 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 2:6-7
Howbeit we speak wisdom among the perfect, yet a wisdom not of this
world, nor of the rulers of this world, which are coming to naught; but we speak
God's wisdom in a mystery, even the wisdom that has been hidden, which God
fore-ordained before the worlds unto our glory.
Darkness seems to be more suitable than light to those that are diseased in
their eyesight: wherefore they betake themselves by preference to some room
that is thoroughly shaded over. This also is the case with the wisdom which is
spiritual. As the wisdom which is of God seemed to be foolishness unto those
without: so their own wisdom, being foolishness indeed, was accounted by them
wisdom. The result has been just as if a man having skill in navigation were to
promise that without a ship or sails he would pass over a boundless tract of sea,
and then endeavor by reasonings to prove that the thing is possible; but some
other person, ignorant of it all, committing himself to a ship and a steersman and
sailors, were thus to sail in safety. For the seeming ignorance of this man is wiser
than the wisdom of the other. For excellent is the art of managing a ship; but
when it makes too great professions it is a kind of folly. And so is every art
which is not contented with its own proper limits. Just so the wisdom which is
without [were wisdom indeed ] if it had had the benefit of the spirit. But since it
trusted all to itself and supposed that it wanted none of that help, it became
foolishness, although it seemed to be wisdom. Wherefore having first exposed it
by the facts, then and not till then he calls it foolishness; and having first called
the wisdom of God folly, according to their reckoning, then and not till then he
shows it to be wisdom. (For after our proofs, not before, we are best able to
abash the gainsayers.)

His words then are, "Howbeit we speak wisdom among the perfect:" for
when I, accounted foolish and a preacher of follies, get the better of the wise, I
overcome wisdom, not by foolishness but by a more perfect wisdom; a wisdom,
too, so ample and so much greater, that the other appears foolishness. Wherefore
having before called it by a name such as they named it at that time, and having
both proved his victory from the facts, and shown the extreme foolishness of the
other side: he thenceforth bestows upon it its right name, saying, "Howbeit we
speak wisdom among the perfect." "Wisdom" is the name he gives to the Gospel,
to the method of salvation, the being saved by the Cross. "The perfect," are those
who believe. For indeed they are "perfect," who know all human things to be
utterly helpless, and who overlook them from the conviction that by such they
are profited nothing: such were the true believers.
"But not a wisdom of this world." For where is the use of the wisdom which
is without, terminating here and proceeding no further, and not even here able to
profit its possessors?
Now by the "rulers of the world," here, he means not certain demons, as
some suspect , but those in authority, those in power, those who esteem the thing
worth contending about, philosophers, rhetoricians and writers of speeches
([λογογράφους]). For these were the dominant sort and often became leaders of
the people.
"Rulers of the world" he calls them, because beyond the present world their
dominion extends not. Wherefore, he adds further, "which are coming to
nought;" disparaging it both on its own account, and from those who wield it.
For having shown that it is false, that it is foolish, that it can discover nothing,
that it is weak, he shows moreover that it is but of short duration.
2. "But we speak God's wisdom in a mystery." What mystery? For surely
Christ says, [Matthew 10:27. ηκούσατε] rec. text [ἀκούετε] "What you have
heard in the ear, proclaim upon the housetops." How then does he call it "a
mystery?" Because that neither angel nor archangel, nor any other created power
knew of it before it actually took place. Wherefore he says, [Ephesians 3:10]