But if Eutyches was unable from this most pure fountain of Christian faith (the Creed) to draw forth its genuine meaning, seeing that he had wilfully blinded himself to the brightness of transparent truth, he ought to have submitted himself to the teaching of the Gospel. He should have listened to Matthew when he says, "The Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Abraham;" he should have sought instruction also from the preaching of the Apostles; he should have read in the Epistle to the Romans, "Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God, which He had promised before by His Prophets, in the Holy Scriptures, concerning His Son, who was made unto Him of the seed of David according to the flesh;" he should have attended also with pious solicitude to the Prophets, and finding the promise of God to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all nations be blessed:" lest he should have any doubt as to the proper meaning of this "seed," he should have followed the Apostle, when he says, "To Abraham and to his seed were the promises made. He saith not 'to seeds,' as of many, but as of one, 'to thy seed,' which is Christ" (Gal 3:16). He should have apprehended too, with his inward ear, Isaiah's words, "Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel, which is being interpreted 'God with us'" (Isa 7:14). He should have read also with an honest mind the words of the same Prophet, "Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, whose authority is upon His shoulder, and His name shall be called Angel of great Counsel, Wonderful, Counsellor, Mighty God, Prince of Peace, Father of the future age" (Isa 9:6). Nor would Scripture have been so inconsistent as to say that the Word was made flesh in such wise, that Christ, born of the Virgin's womb, had the form of man, and yet had not the true nature of His Mother's body. Or did Eutyches therefore possibly suppose that our Lord Jesus Christ was not of our nature, because when the angel was sent to blessed Mary, ever Virgin, he said, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also that holy Thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God" (Lk 1:35), so that because He who was conceived by the Virgin was conceived by divine operation, therefore His flesh was not of the nature of her who conceived Him? But we are not so to understand that generation singularly marvellous and marvellously singular, as that by the novelty of the mode of production the distinctive generic character was precluded. For the Holy Spirit gave fecundity to the Virgin, but the verity of the body was received from the body; and when Wisdom built herself a house (Prov 9:1), "The Word was made flesh and dwelt in us" (Jn 1:14), i.e. in that flesh which He took from man, and which He animated with the Spirit of rational life.