FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.2.

for instance, something adorns or covers, and something else is
adorned or covered: wherefore the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text.
25) that "a habit is said to be, as it were, an action or a passion of the
haver and that which is had"; as is the case in those things which we
have about ourselves. And therefore these constitute a special
genus of things, which are comprised under the predicament of
"habit": of which the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text. 25) that
"there is a habit between clothing and the man who is clothed."
But if "to have" be taken according as a thing has a relation in regard
to itself or to something else; in that case habit is a quality; since
this mode of having is in respect of some quality: and of this the
Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text. 25) that "habit is a disposition
whereby that which is disposed is disposed well or ill, and this,
either in regard to itself or in regard to another: thus health is a
habit." And in this sense we speak of habit now. Wherefore we must
say that habit is a quality.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument takes "to have" in the general
sense: for thus it is common to many predicaments, as we have said.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument takes habit in the sense in
which we understand it to be a medium between the haver, and that
which is had: and in this sense it is a predicament, as we have said.
Reply to Objection 3: Disposition does always, indeed, imply an
order of that which has parts: but this happens in three ways, as the
Philosopher goes on at once to says (Metaph. v, text. 25): namely,
"either as to place, or as to power, or as to species." "In saying this,"
as Simplicius observes in his Commentary on the Predicaments, "he
includes all dispositions: bodily dispositions, when he says 'as to
place,'" and this belongs to the predicament "Position," which is the
order of parts in a place: "when he says 'as to power,' he includes all
those dispositions which are in course of formation and not yet
arrived at perfect usefulness," such as inchoate science and virtue:
"and when he says, 'as to species,' he includes perfect dispositions,
which are called habits," such as perfected science and virtue.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether habit is a distinct species of quality?

Objection 1: It would seem that habit is not a distinct species of
quality. Because, as we have said (Article 1), habit, in so far as it is a
quality, is "a disposition whereby that which is disposed is disposed
well or ill." But this happens in regard to any quality: for a thing
happens to be well or ill disposed in regard also to shape, and in like
manner, in regard to heat and cold, and in regard to all such things.
Therefore habit is not a distinct species of quality.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says in the Book of the
Predicaments (Categor. vi), that heat and cold are dispositions or
habits, just as sickness and health. Therefore habit or disposition is
not distinct from the other species of quality.
Objection 3: Further, "difficult to change" is not a difference
belonging to the predicament of quality, but rather to movement or
passion. Now, no genus should be contracted to a species by a
difference of another genus; but "differences should be proper to a
genus," as the Philosopher says in Metaph. vii, text. 42. Therefore,
since habit is "a quality difficult to change," it seems not to be a
distinct species of quality.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says in the Book of the
Predicaments (Categor. vi) that "one species of quality is habit and
disposition."
I answer that, The Philosopher in the Book of Predicaments
(Categor. vi) reckons disposition and habit as the first species of
quality. Now Simplicius, in his Commentary on the Predicaments,
explains the difference of these species as follows. He says "that
some qualities are natural, and are in their subject in virtue of its
nature, and are always there: but some are adventitious, being
caused from without, and these can be lost. Now the latter," i.e.
those which are adventitious, "are habits and dispositions, differing
in the point of being easily or difficultly lost. As to natural qualities,
some regard a thing in the point of its being in a state of potentiality;
and thus we have the second species of quality: while others regard
a thing which is in act; and this either deeply rooted therein or only
on its surface. If deeply rooted, we have the third species of quality:
if on the surface, we have the fourth species of quality, as shape,