4. It may be said: Whenever there is acceptance of a truth, by whatever mode of assent, there
must be something which moves the mind to assent: just as the naturally possessed light of the
intellect causes assent to first principles, and the truth of those first principles causes assent to
conclusions made from them; while in other ways we assent to things of which we have an
opinion, though, if motives were a little stronger, they would incline us to belief, in so far as faith
is said to be opinion. But that which inclines the mind to assent to the first principles of
understanding or to conclusions known from these principles is a sufficient induction which
forces assent, and is sufficient to judge of those things to which the mind gives its assent. On the
other hand, whatever inclines one to form an opinion, even though with a good amount of
conviction, is not that sufficient form of induction whereby assent is forced, nor by reason of it
can there be perfect judgment of the things to which assent is given. Therefore also in faith by
which we believe in God, not only is there acceptance of the truths to which we give assent, but
also something which inclines us to that assent; and this is the special light which is the habit of
faith, divinely infused into the human mind. This, moreover, is more sufficient for inducing
belief than any demonstration, for, though from the latter no false conclusions are reached, still
man frequently errs in this: that he thinks something is a demonstration which is not. The light of
faith is also more sufficient than the natural light of reason by which we assent to first principles,
since this natural light is often impeded by bodily infirmity, as is evident in the case of the.
insane. But the light of faith, which is, as it were, a kind of impression of the First Truth in our
minds, cannot fail, any more than God can deceive us or lie; therefore this light suffices for
making judgment.

This habit of faith, nevertheless, does not move us by way of intellectual understanding, but
more by way of the will; therefore it does not make us comprehend those truths which we
believe, nor does it force assent, but it causes us to assent to them voluntarily. And thus it is
evident that faith comes in two ways: namely, from God by reason of the interior light which
induces assent, and also by reason of those truths which are proposed exteriorly and take their
source from divine revelation. These latter are related to the knowledge which is oi faith as things
known by the senses are to knowledge of first principles, because in both cases there is a certain

determination given to cognition. Therefore, as cognition of first principles is received by way of
sense experience, and yet the light by which those principles are known is innate, so faith comes
by way of hearing, and yet the habit of faith is infused.