SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.4.

men, as in the case of those who are possessed: this is divination by
"pythons," of whom Isidore says that "pythons are so called from
Pythius Apollo, who was said to be the inventor of divination."
Sometimes they foretell the future by means of shapes or signs
which appear in inanimate beings. If these signs appear in some
earthly body such as wood, iron or polished stone, it is called
"geomancy," if in water "hydromancy," if in the air "aeromancy," if in
fire "pyromancy," if in the entrails of animals sacrificed on the altars
of demons, "aruspicy."
The divination which is practiced without express invocation of the
demons is of two kinds. The first is when, with a view to obtain
knowledge of the future, we take observations in the disposition of
certain things. If one endeavor to know the future by observing the
position and movements of the stars, this belongs to "astrologers,"
who are also called "genethliacs," because they take note of the
days on which people are born. If one observe the movements and
cries of birds or of any animals, or the sneezing of men, or the
sudden movements of limbs, this belongs in general to "augury,"
which is so called from the chattering of birds [avium garritu], just as
"auspice" is derived from watching birds [avium inspectione]. These
are chiefly wont to be observed in birds, the former by the ear, the
latter by the eye. If, however, these observations have for their object
men's words uttered unintentionally, which someone twist so as to
apply to the future that he wishes to foreknow, then it is called an
"omen": and as Valerius Maximus [De Dict. Fact. Memor. i, 5]
remarks, "the observing of omens has a touch of religion mingled
with it, for it is believed to be founded not on a chance movement,
but on divine providence. It was thus that when the Romans were
deliberating whether they would change their position, a centurion
happened to exclaim at the time: 'Standard-bearer, fix the banner, we
had best stand here': and on hearing these words they took them as
an omen, and abandoned their intention of advancing further." If,
however, the observation regards the dispositions, that occur to the
eye, of figures in certain bodies, there will be another species of
divination: for the divination that is taken from observing the lines of
the hand is called "chiromancy," i.e. divination of the hand (because
cheir is the Greek for hand): while the divination which is taken from
signs appearing in the shoulder-blades of an animal is called
"spatulamancy."
To this second species of divination, which is without express
invocation of the demons, belongs that which is practiced by

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.94, C.4.

observing certain things done seriously by men in the research of
the occult, whether by drawing lots, which is called "geomancy"; or
by observing the shapes resulting from molten lead poured into
water; or by observing which of several sheets of paper, with or
without writing upon them, a person may happen to draw; or by
holding out several unequal sticks and noting who takes the greater
or the lesser. or by throwing dice, and observing who throws the
highest score; or by observing what catches the eye when one
opens a book, all of which are named "sortilege."
Accordingly it is clear that there are three kinds of divination. The
first is when the demons are invoked openly, this comes under the
head of "necromancy"; the second is merely an observation of the
disposition or movement of some other being, and this belongs to
"augury"; while the third consists in doing something in order to
discover the occult; and this belongs to "sortilege." Under each of
these many others are contained, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 1: In all the aforesaid there is the same general,
but not the same special, character of sin: for it is much more
grievous to invoke the demons than to do things that deserve the
demons' interference.
Reply to Objection 2: Knowledge of the future or of the occult is the
ultimate end whence divination takes its general formality. But the
various species are distinguished by their proper objects or matters,
according as the knowledge of the occult is sought in various things.
Reply to Objection 3: The things observed by diviners are
considered by them, not as signs expressing what they already
know, as happens in detraction, but as principles of knowledge. Now
it is evident that diversity of principles diversifies the species, even
in demonstrative sciences.