1 Corinthians 13:6-7
"Rejoices not in unrighteousness:" i.e., does not feel pleasure over those
that suffer ill: and not this only, but also, what is much greater, "rejoices with the
truth." "She feels pleasure," says he, "with them that are well spoken of," as Paul
says, "Rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep." [Romans
12:15]
Hence, she "envies not," hence she "is not puffed up:" since in fact she
accounts the good things of others her own.
Do you see how by degrees love makes her nursling an angel? For when he
is void of anger, and pure from envy, and free from every tyrannical passion,
consider that even from the nature of man he is delivered from henceforth, and
has arrived at the very serenity of angels.
Nevertheless, he is not content with these, but has something even more
than these to say: according to his plan of stating the stronger points later.
Wherefore he says, "bears all things." From her long-suffering, from her
goodness; whether they be burdensome, or grievous, or insults, or stripes, or
death, or whatsoever else. And this again one may perceive from the case of
blessed David. For what could be more intolerable than to see a son rising up
against him, and aiming at the usurpation, and thirsting for a father's blood? Yet
this did that blessed one endure, nor even so could he bear to throw out one
bitter expression against the parricide; but even when he left all the rest to his
captains, gave a strong injunction respecting his safety. For strong was the
foundation of his love. Wherefore also it "bears all things."
Now its power the Apostle here intimates, but its goodness, by what
follows. For, "it hopes all things," says he, "believes all things, endures all
things." What is, "hopes all things?" It does not despair, says he, "of the beloved,
but even though he be worthless, it continues to correct, to provide, to care for

him."
"Believes all things." "For it does not merely hope," says he, "but also
believes from its great affection." And even if these good things should not turn
out according to its hope, but the other person should prove yet more intolerable,
it bears even these. For, says he, it "endures all things."

1 Corinthians 13:8
5. "Love never fails."
Do you see when he put the crown on the arch, and what of all things is
peculiar to this gift? For what is, "fails not?" it is not severed, is not dissolved by
endurance. For it puts up with everything: since happen what will, he that loves
never can hate. This then is the greatest of its excellencies.
Such a person was Paul. Wherefore also he said, "If by any means I may
provoke to emulation them which are my flesh;" [Romans 11:14] and he
continued hoping. And to Timothy he gave a charge, saying, "And the Lord's
servant must not strive, but be gentle towards all....in meekness correcting those
that oppose themselves, if God perhaps may give them the knowledge of the
truth. " [2 Timothy 2:24-25]
"What then," says one, "if they be enemies and heathens, must one hate
them?" One must hate, not them but their doctrine: not the man, but the wicked
conduct, the corrupt mind. For the man is God's work, but the deceit is the
devil's work. Do thou not therefore confound the things of God and the things of
the devil. Since the Jews were both blasphemers, and persecutors, and injurious,
and spoke ten thousand evil things of Christ. Did Paul then hate them, he who of
all men most loved Christ? In no wise, but he both loved them, and did
everything for their sakes: and at one time he says, "My heart's desire and my
supplication to God is for them that they may be saved:" [Romans 10:1; 9:3] and
at another, "I could wish that myself were anathema from Christ for their sakes."
Thus also Ezekiel seeing them slain says, "Alas, O Lord, dost Thou blot out the
remnant of Israel?" [Ezekiel 9:8] And Moses, "If You will forgive their sin,
forgive." [Exodus 32:32]
Why then says David, "Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate You, and
against Your enemies did I not pine away? I hate them with perfect hatred."