FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.73, C.2.

from reason, are of various kinds, having no mutual connection; in
fact they are sometimes contrary to one another. Since, therefore,
vices and sins take their species from that to which they turn, it is
evident that, in respect of that which completes a sin's species, sins
are not connected with one another. For sin does not consist in
passing from the many to the one, as is the case with virtues, which
are connected, but rather in forsaking the one for the many.
Reply to Objection 1: James is speaking of sin, not as regards the
thing to which it turns and which causes the distinction of sins, as
stated above (Question 72, Article 1), but as regards that from which
sin turns away, in as much as man, by sinning, departs from a
commandment of the law. Now all the commandments of the law are
from one and the same, as he also says in the same passage, so that
the same God is despised in every sin; and in this sense he says that
whoever "offends in one point, is become guilty of all," for as much
as, by committing one sin, he incurs the debt of punishment through
his contempt of God, which is the origin of all sins.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 71, Article 4), the
opposite virtue is not banished by every act of sin; because venial
sin does not destroy virtue; while mortal sin destroys infused virtue,
by turning man away from God. Yet one act, even of mortal sin, does
not destroy the habit of acquired virtue; though if such acts be
repeated so as to engender a contrary habit, the habit of acquired
virtue is destroyed, the destruction of which entails the loss of
prudence, since when man acts against any virtue whatever, he acts
against prudence, without which no moral virtue is possible, as
stated above (Question 58, Article 4; Question 65, Article 1).
Consequently all the moral virtues are destroyed as to the perfect
and formal being of virtue, which they have in so far as they partake
of prudence, yet there remain the inclinations to virtuous acts, which
inclinations, however, are not virtues. Nevertheless it does not follow
that for this reason man contracts all vices of sins---first, because
several vices are opposed to one virtue, so that a virtue can be
destroyed by one of them, without the others being present;
secondly, because sin is directly opposed to virtue, as regards the
virtue's inclination to act, as stated above (Question 71, Article 1).
Wherefore, as long as any virtuous inclinations remain, it cannot be
said that man has the opposite vices or sins.
Reply to Objection 3: The love of God is unitive, in as much as it
draws man's affections from the many to the one; so that the virtues,

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.73, C.2.

which flow from the love of God, are connected together. But selflove disunites man's affections among different things, in so far as
man loves himself, by desiring for himself temporal goods, which are
various and of many kinds: hence vices and sins, which arise from
self-love, are not connected together.