the lust of vainglory blinded them, together with the pursuit of things temporal.
3. For nothing so urges men headlong and drives them down precipices,
nothing so makes them fail of the things to come, as their being riveted to these
decaying things. Nothing so surely makes them enjoy both the one and the other,
as their esteeming the things to come above all. For, "Seek ye," says Christ, "the
kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you." And indeed, even
if this were not joined, not even in that case ought we to aim at them. But now in
obtaining the others, we may obtain these two; and not even so are some
persuaded, but are like senseless stones, and pursue shadows of pleasure. For
what is pleasant of the things in this present life? What is delightful? For with
greater freedom do I desire to discourse with you today; but suffer it, that you
may learn that this life which seems to you to be a galling and wearisome life, I
mean that of the monks and of them that are crucified, is far sweeter, and more to
be desired than that which seems to be easy, and more delicate.
And of this you are witnesses, who often have asked for death, in the
reverses and despondencies that have overtaken you, and have accounted happy
them that are in mountains, them that are in caves, them that have not married,
them that live the unworldly life; ye that are engaged in crafts, you that are in
military services, you that live without object or rules, and pass your days at the
theatres and orchestras. For of these, although numberless fountains of pleasures
and mirth seem to spring up, yet are countless darts still more bitter brought
forth.
For if any one be seized with a passion for one of the damsels that dance
there, beyond ten thousand marches, beyond ten thousand journeys from home,
will he undergo a torture more grievous, being in a more miserable state than any
besieged city.
However, not to inquire into those things for the present, having left them to
the conscience of those that have been taken captive, come let us discourse of
the life of the common sort of men, and we shall find the difference between
either of these kinds of life as great as between a harbor, and a sea continually

beaten about with winds.
And observe from their retreats at once the first signs of their tranquillity.
For they have fled from market places, and cities, and the tumults amidst men,
and have chosen the life in mountains, that which has nothing in common with
the things present, that which undergoes none of the ills of man, no worldly
sorrows, no grief, no care so great, no dangers, no plots, no envy, no jealousy, no
lawless lusts, nor any other thing of this kind.
Here already they meditate upon the things of the kingdom, holding
converse with groves, and mountains, and springs, and with great quietness, and
solitude, and before all these, with God. And from all turmoil is their cell pure,
and from every passion and disease is their soul free, refined and light, and far
purer than the finest air.
And their work is what was Adam's also at the beginning and before his sin,
when he was clothed with the glory, and conversed freely with God, and dwelt in
that place that was full of great blessedness. For in what respect are they in a
worse state than he, when before his disobedience he was set to till the garden?
Had he no worldly care? But neither have these. Did he talk to God with a pure
conscience? This also do these; or rather they have a greater confidence than he,
inasmuch as they enjoy even greater grace by the supply of the Spirit.
Now ye ought indeed by the sight to take in these things; but forasmuch as
you are not willing, but pass your time in turmoils and in markets, by word at
least let us teach you, taking one part of their way of living (for it is not possible
to go over their whole life). These that are the lights of the world, as soon as the
sun is up, or rather even long before its rise, rise up from their bed, healthy, and
wakeful, and sober (for neither does any sorrow and care, nor headache, and toil,
and multitude of business, nor any other such thing trouble them, but as angels
live they in Heaven); having risen then straightway from their bed cheerful and
glad, and having made one choir, with their conscience bright, with one voice
all, like as out of one mouth, they sing hymns unto the God of all, honoring Him
and thanking Him for all His benefits, both particular, and common.