Reply to Objection 3: Christ in His own person purposed preaching
to only one nation, namely the Jews. Consequently, although without
any doubt He possessed most perfectly the knowledge of all
languages, there was no need for Him to speak in every tongue. And
therefore, as Augustine says (Tract. xxxii in Joan.), "whereas even
now the Holy Ghost is received, yet no one speaks in the tongues of
all nations, because the Church herself already speaks the
languages of all nations: since whoever is not in the Church,
receives not the Holy Ghost."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.175, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the gift of tongues is more excellent than

the grace of prophecy?
Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of tongues is more excellent
than the grace of prophecy. For, seemingly, better things are proper
to better persons, according to the Philosopher (Topic. iii, 1). Now
the gift of tongues is proper to the New Testament, hence we sing in
the sequence of Pentecost: "On this day Thou gavest Christ's
apostles an unwonted gift, a marvel to all time": whereas prophecy is
more pertinent to the Old Testament, according to Heb. 1:1, "God
Who at sundry times and in divers manners spoke in times past to
the fathers by the prophets." Therefore it would seem that the gift of
tongues is more excellent than the gift of prophecy.
Objection 2: Further, that whereby we are directed to God is
seemingly more excellent than that whereby we are directed to men.
Now, by the gift of tongues, man is directed to God, whereas by
prophecy he is directed to man; for it is written (1 Cor. 14:2,3): "He
that speaketh in a tongue, speaketh not unto men, but unto God . . .
but he that prophesieth, speaketh unto men unto edification."
Therefore it would seem that the gift of tongues is more excellent
than the gift of prophecy.
Objection 3: Further, the gift of tongues abides like a habit in the
person who has it, and "he can use it when he will"; wherefore it is
written (1 Cor. 14:18): "I thank my God I speak with all your tongues."
But it is not so with the gift of prophecy, as stated above (Question
171, Article 2). Therefore the gift of tongues would seem to be more
excellent than the gift of prophecy.
Objection 4: Further, the "interpretation of speeches" would seem to
be contained under prophecy, because the Scriptures are
expounded by the same Spirit from Whom they originated. Now the
interpretation of speeches is placed after "divers kinds of
tongues" (1 Cor. 12:10). Therefore it seems that the gift of tongues is
more excellent than the gift of prophecy, particularly as regards a
part of the latter.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 14:5): "Greater is he that
prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.175, C.3.

I answer that, The gift of prophecy surpasses the gift of tongues, in
three ways. First, because the gift of tongues regards the utterance
of certain words, which signify an intelligible truth, and this again is
signified by the phantasms which appear in an imaginary vision;
wherefore Augustine compares (Gen. ad lit. xii, 8) the gift of tongues
to an imaginary vision. On the other hand, it has been stated above
(Question 173, Article 2) that the gift of prophecy consists in the
mind itself being enlightened so as to know an intelligible truth.
Wherefore, as the prophetic enlightenment is more excellent than the
imaginary vision, as stated above (Question 174, Article 2), so also is
prophecy more excellent than the gift of tongues considered in itself.
Secondly, because the gift of prophecy regards the knowledge of
things, which is more excellent than the knowledge of words, to
which the gift of tongues pertains.
Thirdly, because the gift of prophecy is more profitable. The Apostle
proves this in three ways (1 Cor. 14); first, because prophecy is more
profitable to the edification of the Church, for which purpose he that
speaketh in tongues profiteth nothing, unless interpretation follow (1
Cor. 14:4,5). Secondly, as regards the speaker himself, for if he be
enabled to speak in divers tongues without understanding them,
which pertains to the gift of prophecy, his own mind would not be
edified (1 Cor. 14:7-14). Thirdly, as to unbelievers for whose especial
benefit the gift of tongues seems to have been given; since
perchance they might think those who speak in tongues to be mad (1
Cor. 14:23), for instance the Jews deemed the apostles drunk when
the latter spoke in various tongues (Acts 2:13): whereas by
prophecies the unbeliever is convinced, because the secrets of his
heart are made manifest (Acts 2:25).
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 174, Article 3, ad 1),
it belongs to the excellence of prophecy that a man is not only
enlightened by an intelligible light, but also that he should perceive
an imaginary vision: and so again it belongs to the perfection of the
Holy Ghost's operation, not only to fill the mind with the prophetic
light, and the imagination with the imaginary vision, as happened in
the Old Testament, but also to endow the tongue with external
erudition, in the utterance of various signs of speech. All this is done
in the New Testament, according to 1 Cor. 14:26, "Every one of you
hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation," i.e. a
prophetic revelation.
Reply to Objection 2: By the gift of prophecy man is directed to God