acted. Do not thou then be curious either: since for Christ thou dost receive him.
And if you are always so scrupulous, many a time will you pass by a man of
esteem, and lose your reward from him. And yet he that receives one that is not
of esteem, has no fault found with him, but is even rewarded. For "he that
receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophet's reward."
[Matthew 10:41] But he who out of this ill-timed scrupulousness passes one that
should be admired, shall even suffer punishment. Do not then busy yourself with
men's lives and doings. For this is the very extreme of niggardliness, for one loaf
to be exact about a man's entire life. For if this person be a murderer, if a robber,
or what not, does he therefore seem to you not to deserve a loaf and a few
pence? And yet your Master causes even the sun to rise upon him! And do you
judge him unworthy of food even for a day? I will put another case to you
besides. Now even if you were positively certain that he were laden with
countless iniquities, not even then would you have an excuse for depriving him
of this day's sustenance. For you are the servant of Him Who said, "You know
not what spirit you are of." [Luke 9:55] You are servant to Him Who healed
those that stoned Him, or rather Who was crucified for them. And do not tell me
that he killed another, for even if he were going to kill you yourself, even then
you should not neglect him when starving. For you are a disciple of Him Who
desired the salvation even of them that crucified Him Who said upon the Cross
itself, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." [Luke 23:34] You
are the servant of Him Who healed him that smote Him, Who upon the Cross
itself crowned the man who had scorned Him. And what can equal this? For both
the robbers at first scorned Him. Still to one of these He opened Paradise. And
He bewails those who were upon the point of killing Him, and is troubled and
confounded at seeing the traitor, not because He was going to be crucified, but
because he was lost. He was troubled then as having foreknowledge of the
hanging, and the punishment after the hanging. And though He knelt his
wickedness, He bore with him to the last hour, and thrust not away the traitor,
but even kissed him. Your Master kisses, and with His lips receives him who was

on the very point of shedding His precious Blood. And do you count the poor not
worthy even of a loaf, and reverencest not the Law which Christ laid down?
Now by this He shows that we ought not to turn aside, not only from the poor,
but not even from those that would lead us away to death. Do not tell me then,
that so and so has done me grievous mischief, but just consider what Christ did
near the Cross itself, wishing to amend by His kiss the traitor by whom He was
on the point of being betrayed. And see with how much power to shame him.
For He says, "Judas, do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?" [Luke 23:48]
Who is there He would not have softened? Who is there that this address would
not have made yielding? What beast? What adamant? Yet not that wretched man.
Do not then say, that such an one murdered such an one, and that is why I turn
aside from him. For even if he were upon the point of thrusting a sword down
into you, and to plunge his hand into your neck itself, kiss this very right hand!
since even Christ kissed that mouth which wrought His death! And therefore do
not thou either hate, but bewail and pity him that plots against you. For such an
one deserves pity at our hands, and tears. For we are the servants of Him Who
kissed even the traitor (I will not leave off dwelling over that continually), and
spoke words unto him more gentle than the kiss. For He did not even say, O thou
foul and villanous traitor, is this the sort of recompense you return us for so great
a benefit? But in what words? "Judas;" using his own name, which is more like
a person bemoaning, and recalling him, than one angry at him. And he does not
say, your Teacher, your Master, and Benefactor, but, "the Son of Man." For
though He were neither Teacher nor Master, yet is it with One Who is so gently,
so unfeignedly affected towards you, as even to kiss you at the time of betrayal,
and that when a kiss too was the signal for the betrayal; is it with Him that you
play the traitor's part? Blessed are You, O Lord! What lowliness of mind, what
forbearance have You given us ensamples of! And to him He so behaved. But to
those who came with staves and swords to Him, was it not so too? What can be
more gentle than the words spoken to them? For when He had power to
demolish them all in an instant, He did nothing of the kind, but as expostulating