SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.2.

On the contrary, The aforesaid division is given in the Decretals 36,
qu. i [Append. Grat. ad can. Lex illa].
I answer that As stated above (Question 153, Article 3), the sin of lust
consists in seeking venereal pleasure not in accordance with right
reason. This may happen in two ways. First, in respect of the matter
wherein this pleasure is sought; secondly, when, whereas there is
due matter, other due circumstances are not observed. And since a
circumstance, as such, does not specify a moral act, whose species
is derived from its object which is also its matter, it follows that the
species of lust must be assigned with respect to its matter or object.
Now this same matter may be discordant with right reason in two
ways. First, because it is inconsistent with the end of the venereal
act. In this way, as hindering the begetting of children, there is the
"vice against nature," which attaches to every venereal act from
which generation cannot follow; and, as hindering the due
upbringing and advancement of the child when born, there is "simple
fornication," which is the union of an unmarried man with an
unmarried woman. Secondly, the matter wherein the venereal act is
consummated may be discordant with right reason in relation to
other persons; and this in two ways. First, with regard to the woman,
with whom a man has connection, by reason of due honor not being
paid to her; and thus there is "incest," which consists in the misuse
of a woman who is related by consanguinity or affinity. Secondly,
with regard to the person under whose authority the woman is
placed: and if she be under the authority of a husband, it is
"adultery," if under the authority of her father, it is "seduction," in
the absence of violence, and "rape" if violence be employed.
These species are differentiated on the part of the woman rather than
of the man, because in the venereal act the woman is passive and is
by way of matter, whereas the man is by way of agent; and it has
been stated above (Objection 1) that the aforesaid species are
assigned with regard to a difference of matter.
Reply to Objection 1: The aforesaid diversity of matter is connected
with a formal difference of object, which difference results from
different modes of opposition to right reason, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (FS, Question 18, Article 7),
nothing hinders the deformities of different vices concurring in the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.2.

one act, and in this way adultery is comprised under lust and
injustice. Nor is this deformity of injustice altogether accidental to
lust: since the lust that obeys concupiscence so far as to lead to
injustice, is thereby shown to be more grievous.
Reply to Objection 3: Since a woman, by vowing continence,
contracts a spiritual marriage with God, the sacrilege that is
committed in the violation of such a woman is a spiritual adultery. In
like manner, the other kinds of sacrilege pertaining to lustful matter
are reduced to other species of lust.
Reply to Objection 4: The sin of a husband with his wife is not
connected with undue matter, but with other circumstances, which
do not constitute the species of a moral act, as stated above (FS,
Question 18, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 5: As a gloss says on this passage,
"uncleanness" stands for lust against nature, while "lasciviousness"
is a man's abuse of boys, wherefore it would appear to pertain to
seduction. We may also reply that "lasciviousness" relates to certain
acts circumstantial to the venereal act, for instance kisses, touches,
and so forth.
Reply to Objection 6: According to a gloss on this passage "lust"
there signifies any kind of excess.