THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the defects occurring during the

celebration of this sacrament can be sufficiently met by
observing the Church's statutes?
Objection 1: It seems that the defects occurring during the
celebration of this sacrament cannot be sufficiently met by
observing the statutes of the Church. For it sometimes happens that
before or after the consecration the priest dies or goes mad, or is
hindered by some other infirmity from receiving the sacrament and
completing the mass. Consequently it seems impossible to observe
the Church's statute, whereby the priest consecrating must
communicate of his own sacrifice.
Objection 2: Further, it sometimes happens that, before the
consecration, the priest remembers that he has eaten or drunk
something, or that he is in mortal sin, or under excommunication,
which he did not remember previously. Therefore, in such a dilemma
a man must necessarily commit mortal sin by acting against the
Church's statute, whether he receives or not.
Objection 3: Further, it sometimes happens that a fly or a spider, or
some other poisonous creature falls into the chalice after the
consecration. Or even that the priest comes to know that poison has
been put in by some evilly disposed person in order to kill him. Now
in this instance, if he takes it, he appears to sin by killing himself, or
by tempting God: also in like manner if he does not take it, he sins
by acting against the Church's statute. Consequently, he seems to
be perplexed, and under necessity of sinning, which is not
becoming.
Objection 4: Further, it sometimes happens from the server's want of
heed that water is not added to the chalice, or even the wine
overlooked, and that the priest discovers this. Therefore he seems to
be perplexed likewise in this case, whether he receives the body
without the blood, thus making the sacrifice to be incomplete, or
whether he receives neither the body nor the blood.
Objection 5: Further, it sometimes happens that the priest cannot
remember having said the words of consecration, or other words
which are uttered in the celebration of this sacrament. In this case he
seems to sin, whether he repeats the words over the same matter,

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.7.

which words possibly he has said before, or whether he uses bread
and wine which are not consecrated, as if they were consecrated.
Objection 6: Further, it sometimes comes to pass owing to the cold
that the host will slip from the priest's hands into the chalice, either
before or after the breaking. In this case then the priest will not be
able to comply with the Church's rite, either as to the breaking, or
else as to this, that only a third part is put into the chalice.
Objection 7: Further, sometimes, too, it happens, owing to the
priest's want of care, that Christ's blood is spilled, or that he vomits
the sacrament received, or that the consecrated hosts are kept so
long that they become corrupt, or that they are nibbled by mice, or
lost in any manner whatsoever; in which cases it does not seem
possible for due reverence to be shown towards this sacrament, as
the Church's ordinances require. It does not seem then that such
defects or dangers can be met by keeping to the Church's statutes.
On the contrary, Just as God does not command an impossibility, so
neither does the Church.
I answer that, Dangers or defects happening to this sacrament can
be met in two ways: first, by preventing any such mishaps from
occurring: secondly, by dealing with them in such a way, that what
may have happened amiss is put right, either by employing a
remedy, or at least by repentance on his part who has acted
negligently regarding this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: If the priest be stricken by death or grave
sickness before the consecration of our Lord's body and blood,
there is no need for it to be completed by another. But if this
happens after the consecration is begun, for instance, when the
body has been consecrated and before the consecration of the
blood, or even after both have been consecrated, then the
celebration of the mass ought to be finished by someone else.
Hence, as is laid down (Decretal vii, q. 1), we read the following
decree of the (Seventh) Council of Toledo: "We consider it to be
fitting that when the sacred mysteries are consecrated by priests
during the time of mass, if any sickness supervenes, in consequence
of which they cannot finish the mystery begun, let it be free for the
bishop or another priest to finish the consecration of the office thus
begun. For nothing else is suitable for completing the mysteries