THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.7.

and Dioscorus, who held that from the two natures one nature
resulted, so that they confessed Christ to be "from" two natures
(which were distinct before the union), but not "in" two natures (the
distinction of nature coming to an end after the union). The second
was the heresy of Nestorius and Theodore of Mopsuestia, who
separated the persons. For they held the Person of the Son of God to
be distinct from the Person of the Son of man, and said these were
mutually united: first, "by indwelling," inasmuch as the Word of God
dwelt in the man, as in a temple; secondly, "by unity of intention,"
inasmuch as the will of the man was always in agreement with the
will of the Word of God; thirdly, "by operation," inasmuch as they
said the man was the instrument of the Word of God; fourthly, "by
greatness of honor," inasmuch as all honor shown to the Son of God
was equally shown to the Son of man, on account of His union with
the Son of God; fifthly, "by equivocation," i.e. communication of
names, inasmuch as we say that this man is God and the Son of
God. Now it is plain that these modes imply an accidental union.
But some more recent masters, thinking to avoid these heresies,
through ignorance fell into them. For some conceded one person in
Christ, but maintained two hypostases, or two supposita, saying that
a man, composed of body and soul, was from the beginning of his
conception assumed by the Word of God. And this is the first
opinion set down by the Master (Sent. iii, D, 6). But others desirous
of keeping the unity of person, held that the soul of Christ was not
united to the body, but that these two were mutually separate, and
were united to the Word accidentally, so that the number of persons
might not be increased. And this is the third opinion which the
Master sets down (Sent. iii, D, 6).
But both of these opinions fall into the heresy of Nestorius; the first,
indeed, because to maintain two hypostases or supposita in Christ is
the same as to maintain two persons, as was shown above (Article
3). And if stress is laid on the word "person," we must have in mind
that even Nestorius spoke of unity of person on account of the unity
of dignity and honor. Hence the fifth Council (Constantinople II, coll.
viii, can. 5) directs an anathema against such a one as holds "one
person in dignity, honor and adoration, as Theodore and Nestorius
foolishly wrote." But the other opinion falls into the error of
Nestorius by maintaining an accidental union. For there is no
difference in saying that the Word of God is united to the Man Christ
by indwelling, as in His temple (as Nestorius said), or by putting on
man, as a garment, which is the third opinion; rather it says

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.7.

something worse than Nestorius---to wit, that the soul and body are
not united.
Now the Catholic faith, holding the mean between the aforesaid
positions, does not affirm that the union of God and man took place
in the essence or nature, nor yet in something accidental, but
midway, in a subsistence or hypostasis. Hence in the fifth Council
(Constantinople II, coll. viii, can. 5) we read: "Since the unity may be
understood in many ways, those who follow the impiety of
Apollinaris and Eutyches, professing the destruction of what came
together" (i.e. destroying both natures), "confess a union by
mingling; but the followers of Theodore and Nestorius, maintaining
division, introduce a union of purpose. But the Holy Church of God,
rejecting the impiety of both these treasons, confesses a union of
the Word of God with flesh, by composition, which is in
subsistence." Therefore it is plain that the second of the three
opinions, mentioned by the Master (Sent. iii, D, 6), which holds one
hypostasis of God and man, is not to be called an opinion, but an
article of Catholic faith. So likewise the first opinion which holds two
hypostases, and the third which holds an accidental union, are not to
be styled opinions, but heresies condemned by the Church in
Councils.
Reply to Objection 1: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 26):
"Examples need not be wholly and at all points similar, for what is
wholly similar is the same, and not an example, and especially in
Divine things, for it is impossible to find a wholly similar example in
the Theology," i.e. in the Godhead of Persons, "and in the
Dispensation," i.e. the mystery of the Incarnation. Hence the human
nature in Christ is likened to a habit, i.e. a garment, not indeed in
regard to accidental union, but inasmuch as the Word is seen by the
human nature, as a man by his garment, and also inasmuch as the
garment is changed, for it is shaped according to the figure of him
who puts it on, and yet he is not changed from his form on account
of the garment. So likewise the human nature assumed by the Word
of God is ennobled, but the Word of God is not changed, as
Augustine says (Qq. 83, qu. 73).
Reply to Objection 2: Whatever accrues after the completion of the
being comes accidentally, unless it be taken into communion with
the complete being, just as in the resurrection the body comes to the
soul which pre-exists, yet not accidentally, because it is assumed
unto the same being, so that the body has vital being through the