any of those sufferings. Here observe how Paul, leaving all mention of heaven,
earth, and sea, every where preaches the power of Christ, bearing about as he
did, and holding up His cross: for this is the sum of the Divine love toward us.
Ver. 2. "This only would I learn from you, Did you receive the Spirit by the
works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith?"
As you do not attend, says he, to long discourses, nor are willing to
contemplate the magnitude of this Economy, I am desirous, (seeing your extreme
ignorance,) to convince you by concise arguments and a summary method of
proof. Before, he had convinced them by what he said to Peter; now, he
encounters them entirely with arguments, drawn not from what had occurred
elsewhere, but from what had happened among themselves. And his persuasives
and proofs are adduced, not merely from what was given them in common with
others, but from what was especially conferred on themselves. Therefore he
says, "This only would I learn from you, Did you receive the Spirit by the works
of the Law, or by the hearing of faith." You have received, he says, the Holy
Spirit, you have done many mighty works, you have effected miracles in raising
the dead, in cleansing lepers, in prophesying, in speaking with tongues,— did the
Law confer this great power upon you? Was it not rather Faith, seeing that,
before, you could do no such things? Is it not then the height of madness for
these who have received such benefits from Faith, to abandon it, and desert back
to the Law which can offer you nothing of the same kind?
Ver. 3. "Are you so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit, are you now
perfected in the flesh?"
Here again he seasonably interposes a rebuke; time, he says, should have
brought improvement; but, so far from advancing, you have even retrograded.
Those who start from small beginnings make progress to higher things; you, who
began with the high, have relapsed to the low. Even had your outset been carnal,
your advance should have been spiritual, but now, after starting from things
spiritual, you have ended your journey in that which is carnal; for to work
miracles is spiritual, but to be circumcised is carnal. And after miracles you have

passed to circumcision, after having apprehended the truth you have fallen back
to types, after gazing on the sun you seek a candle, after having strong meat you
run for milk. He says, "made perfect," which means not "initiated" merely, but
"sacrificed," signifying that their teachers took and slew them like animals,
while they resigned themselves to suffer what those teachers pleased. As if some
captain, or distinguished man, after a thousand victories and trophies, were to
subject himself to infamy as a deserter, and offer his body to be branded at the
will of others.
Ver. 4. "Did you suffer so many things in vain? if it be indeed in vain."
This remark is far more piercing than the former, for the remembrance of
their miracles would not be so powerful as the exhibition of their contests and
endurance of sufferings for Christ's sake. All that you have endured, says he,
these men would strip you of, and would rob you of your crown. Then, lest he
should dismay and unnerve, he proceeds not to a formal judgment, but subjoins,
"if it be indeed in vain;" if you have but a mind to shake off drowsiness and
recover yourselves, he says, it is not in vain. Where then be those who would cut
off repentance ? Here were men who had received the Spirit, worked miracles,
become confessors, encountered a thousand perils and persecutions for Christ's
sake, and after so many achievements had fallen from grace; nevertheless he
says, if you have the purpose, you may recover yourselves.
Ver. 5. "He therefore that supplies to you the Spirit, and works miracles
among you, does he it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?"
Have you been vouchsafed, he says, so great a gift, and achieved such
wonders, because you observed the Law, or because you adhered to Faith?
Plainly on account of Faith. Seeing that they played this argument to and fro,
that apart from the Law, Faith had no force, he proves the contrary, viz., that if
the Commandments be added, Faith no longer avails; for Faith then has efficacy
when things from the Law are not added to it. "You who would be justified by the
Law, you are fallen away from grace:" [Galatians 5:4] This he says later, when
his language has grown bolder, employing the vantage-ground by that time