alone. Hence it follows that his external occupations in no respect
impede his contemplation; because given two actions, one of which
is the rule and the reason of the other, one does not hinder but helps
the other. Wherefore Gregory says (Moral. ii) that "the angels do not
go abroad in such a manner as to lose the delights of inward
contemplation."
Reply to Objection 4: In their external actions the angels chiefly
minister to God, and secondarily to us; not because we are superior
to them, absolutely speaking, but because, since every man or angel
by cleaving to God is made one spirit with God, he is thereby
superior to every creature. Hence the Apostle says (Phil. 2:3):
"Esteeming others better than themselves."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether all the angels are sent in ministry?

Objection 1: It would seem that all the angels are sent in ministry.
For the Apostle says (Heb. 1:14): "All are ministering spirits, sent to
minister".
Objection 2: Further, among the orders, the highest is that of the
Seraphim, as stated above (Question 108, Article 6). But a Seraph
was sent to purify the lips of the prophet (Is. 6:6,7). Therefore much
more are the inferior orders sent.
Objection 3: Further, the Divine Persons infinitely excel all the
angelic orders. But the Divine Persons are sent. Therefore much
more are even the highest angels sent.
Objection 4: Further, if the superior angels are not sent to the
external ministries, this can only be because the superior angels
execute the Divine ministries by means of the inferior angels. But as
all the angels are unequal, as stated above (Question 50, Article 4),
each angel has an angel inferior to himself except the last one.
Therefore only the last angel would be sent in ministry; which
contradicts the words, "Thousands of thousands ministered to
Him" (Dan. 7:10).
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. xxxiv in Evang.), quoting the
statement of Dionysius (Coel. Hier. xiii), that "the higher ranks fulfil
no exterior service."
I answer that, As appears from what has been said above (Question
106, Article 3; Question 110, Article 1), the order of Divine
Providence has so disposed not only among the angels, but also in
the whole universe, that inferior things are administered by the
superior. But the Divine dispensation, however, this order is
sometimes departed from as regards corporeal things, for the sake
of a higher order, that is, according as it is suitable for the
manifestation of grace. That the man born blind was enlightened,
that Lazarus was raised from the dead, was accomplished
immediately by God without the action of the heavenly bodies.
Moreover both good and bad angels can work some effect in these
bodies independently of the heavenly bodies, by the condensation of
the clouds to rain, and by producing some such effects. Nor can