58. A financial reform open to such ethical considerations would require a vigorous change of
approach on the part of political leaders. I urge them to face this challenge with determination and
an eye to the future, while not ignoring, of course, the specifics of each case. Money must serve,
not rule! The Pope loves everyone, rich and poor alike, but he is obliged in the name of Christ to
remind all that the rich must help, respect and promote the poor. I exhort you to generous
solidarity and to the return of economics and finance to an ethical approach which favours human
beings.

No to the inequality which spawns violence

59. Today in many places we hear a call for greater security. But until exclusion and inequality in
society and between peoples are reversed, it will be impossible to eliminate violence. The poor
and the poorer peoples are accused of violence, yet without equal opportunities the different forms
of aggression and conflict will find a fertile terrain for growth and eventually explode. When a
society – whether local, national or global – is willing to leave a part of itself on the fringes, no
political programmes or resources spent on law enforcement or surveillance systems can
indefinitely guarantee tranquility. This is not the case simply because inequality provokes a violent

reaction from those excluded from the system, but because the socioeconomic system is unjust at
its root. Just as goodness tends to spread, the toleration of evil, which is injustice, tends to expand
its baneful influence and quietly to undermine any political and social system, no matter how solid
it may appear. If every action has its consequences, an evil embedded in the structures of a
society has a constant potential for disintegration and death. It is evil crystallized in unjust social
structures, which cannot be the basis of hope for a better future. We are far from the so-called
“end of history”, since the conditions for a sustainable and peaceful development have not yet
been adequately articulated and realized.

60. Today’s economic mechanisms promote inordinate consumption, yet it is evident that
unbridled consumerism combined with inequality proves doubly damaging to the social fabric.
Inequality eventually engenders a violence which recourse to arms cannot and never will be able
to resolve. It serves only to offer false hopes to those clamouring for heightened security, even
though nowadays we know that weapons and violence, rather than providing solutions, create new
and more serious conflicts. Some simply content themselves with blaming the poor and the poorer
countries themselves for their troubles; indulging in unwarranted generalizations, they claim that
the solution is an “education” that would tranquilize them, making them tame and harmless. All this
becomes even more exasperating for the marginalized in the light of the widespread and deeply
rooted corruption found in many countries – in their governments, businesses and institutions –
whatever the political ideology of their leaders.