THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.2.

the washing. Hence the Master (iv, 3) says that "Baptism is the
outward washing of the body done together with the prescribed form
of words."
The Baptismal character is both reality and sacrament: because it is
something real signified by the outward washing; and a sacramental
sign of the inward justification: and this last is the reality only, in this
sacrament---namely, the reality signified and not signifying.
Reply to Objection 1: That which is both sacrament and reality---i.e.
the character---and that which is reality only---i.e. the inward
justification---remain: the character remains and is indelible, as
stated above (Question 63, Article 5); the justification remains, but
can be lost. Consequently Damascene defined Baptism, not as to
that which is done outwardly, and is the sacrament only; but as to
that which is inward. Hence he sets down two things as pertaining to
the character---namely, "seal" and "safeguarding"; inasmuch as the
character which is called a seal, so far as itself is concerned,
safeguards the soul in good. He also sets down two things as
pertaining to the ultimate reality of the sacrament---namely,
"regeneration" which refers to the fact that man by being baptized
begins the new life of righteousness; and "enlightenment," which
refers especially to faith, by which man receives spiritual life,
according to Habac 2 (Heb. 10:38; cf. Habac 2:4): "But (My) just man
liveth by faith"; and Baptism is a sort of protestation of faith; whence
it is called the "Sacrament of Faith." Likewise Dionysius defined
Baptism by its relation to the other sacraments, saying (Eccl. Hier. ii)
that it is "the principle that forms the habits of the soul for the
reception of those most holy words and sacraments"; and again by
its relation to heavenly glory, which is the universal end of all the
sacraments, when he adds, "preparing the way for us, whereby we
mount to the repose of the heavenly kingdom"; and again as to the
beginning of spiritual life, when he adds, "the conferring of our most
sacred and Godlike regeneration."
Reply to Objection 2: As already stated, the opinion of Hugh of St.
Victor on this question is not to be followed. Nevertheless the saying
that "Baptism is water" may be verified in so far as water is the
material principle of Baptism: and thus there would be "causal
predication."
Reply to Objection 3: When the words are added, the element
becomes a sacrament, not in the element itself, but in man, to whom

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.2.

the element is applied, by being used in washing him. Indeed, this is
signified by those very words which are added to the element, when
we say: "I baptize thee," etc.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Baptism was instituted after Christ's