there cannot be any infinite magnitude, since no species of
magnitude is infinite.
Reply to Objection 3: The infinite in quantity, as was shown above,
belongs to matter. Now by division of the whole we approach to
matter, forasmuch as parts have the aspect of matter; but by
addition we approach to the whole which has the aspect of a form.
Therefore the infinite is not in the addition of magnitude, but only in
division.
Reply to Objection 4: Movement and time are whole, not actually but
successively; hence they have potentiality mixed with actuality. But
magnitude is an actual whole; therefore the infinite in quantity refers
to matter, and does not agree with the totality of magnitude; yet it
agrees with the totality of time and movement: for it is proper to
matter to be in potentiality.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether an infinite multitude can exist?

Objection 1: It seems that an actually infinite multitude is possible.
For it is not impossible for a potentiality to be made actual. But
number can be multiplied to infinity. Therefore it is possible for an
infinite multitude actually to exist.
Objection 2: Further, it is possible for any individual of any species
to be made actual. But the species of figures are infinite. Therefore
an infinite number of actual figures is possible.
Objection 3: Further, things not opposed to each other do not
obstruct each other. But supposing a multitude of things to exist,
there can still be many others not opposed to them. Therefore it is
not impossible for others also to coexist with them, and so on to
infinitude; therefore an actual infinite number of things is possible.
On the contrary, It is written, "Thou hast ordered all things in
measure, and number, and weight" (Wis. 11:21).
I answer that, A twofold opinion exists on this subject. Some, as
Avicenna and Algazel, said that it was impossible for an actually
infinite multitude to exist absolutely; but that an accidentally infinite
multitude was not impossible. A multitude is said to be infinite
absolutely, when an infinite multitude is necessary that something
may exist. Now this is impossible; because it would entail something
dependent on an infinity for its existence; and hence its generation
could never come to be, because it is impossible to pass through an
infinite medium.
A multitude is said to be accidentally infinite when its existence as
such is not necessary, but accidental. This can be shown, for
example, in the work of a carpenter requiring a certain absolute
multitude; namely, art in the soul, the movement of the hand, and a
hammer; and supposing that such things were infinitely multiplied,
the carpentering work would never be finished, forasmuch as it
would depend on an infinite number of causes. But the multitude of
hammers, inasmuch as one may be broken and another used, is an
accidental multitude; for it happens by accident that many hammers
are used, and it matters little whether one or two, or many are used,
or an infinite number, if the work is carried on for an infinite time. In