energy of the other members is gone, their light being quenched; so also when
the mind is depraved, your life will be filled with countless evils: — as therefore
in the body this is our aim, namely, to keep the eye sound, so also the mind in
the soul. But if we mutilate this, which ought to give light to the rest, by what
means are we to see clearly any more? For as he that destroys the fountain, dries
up also the river, so he who has quenched the understanding has confounded all
his doings in this life. Wherefore He says, "If the light that is in you be darkness,
how great is the darkness?"
For when the pilot is drowned, and the candle is put out, and the general is
taken prisoner; what sort of hope will there be, after that, for those that are under
command?
Thus then, omitting now to speak of the plots to which wealth gives
occasion, the strifes, the suits (these indeed He had signified above, when He
said, "The adversary shall deliver you to the judge, and the judge to the officer");
and setting down what is more grievous than all these, as sure to occur, He so
withdraws us from the wicked desire. For to inhabit the prison is not nearly so
grievous, as for the mind to be enslaved by this disease; and the former is not
sure to happen, but the other is connected as an immediate consequent with the
desire of riches. And this is why He puts it after the first, as being a more
grievous thing, and sure to happen.
For God, He says, gave us understanding, that we might chase away all
ignorance, and have the right judgment of things, and that using this as a kind of
weapon and light against all that is grievous or hurtful, we might remain in
safety. But we betray the gift for the sake of things superfluous and useless.
For what is the use of soldiers arrayed in gold, when the general is dragged
along a captive? What the profit of a ship beautifully equipped, when the pilot is
sunk beneath the waves? What the advantage of a well-proportioned body, when
the sight of the eyes is stricken out? As therefore, should any one cast into
sickness the physician (who should be in good health, that he may end our
diseases), and then bid him lie on a silver couch, and in a chamber of gold, this

will nothing avail the sick persons; even so, if you corrupt the mind (which has
power to put down our passions), although thou set it by a treasure, so far from
doing it any good, you have inflicted the very greatest loss, and hast harmed
your whole soul.
4. Do you see how by those very things, through which most especially
men everywhere affect wickedness, even by these most of all He deters them
from it, and brings them back to virtue? "For with what intent do you desire
riches?" says He; "is it not that you may enjoy pleasure and luxury? Why now,
this above all things you will fail to obtain thereby, it will rather be just
contrary." For if, when our eyes are stricken out, we perceive not any pleasant
thing, because of such our calamity; much more will this be our case in the
perversion and maiming of the mind.
Again, with what intent do you bury it in the earth? That it may be kept in
safety? But here too again it is the contrary, says He.
And thus, as in dealing with him that for vainglory fasts and gives alms and
prays, by those very things which he most desires He had allured him not to be
vainglorious:— "for with what intent," says He, "do you so pray and give alms?
For love of the glory that may be had from men? Then do not pray thus," says
He, "and so you shall obtain it in the day that is to come:"— so He has taken
captive the covetous man also, by those things for which he was most earnest.
Thus: "what would you?" says He, "to have your wealth preserved, and to enjoy
pleasure? Both these things I will afford you in great abundance, if you lay up
your gold in that place, where I bid you."
It is true that hereafter He displayed more clearly the evil effect of this on
the mind, I mean, when He made mention of the thorns; [Matthew 13:22] but for
the present, even here He has strikingly intimated the same, by representing him
as darkened who is beside himself in this way.
And as they that are in darkness see nothing distinct, but if they look at a
rope, they suppose it to be a serpent, if at mountains and ravines, they are dead
with fear; so these also: what is not alarming to them that have sight, that they