Instead of knowing the genus of these substances, we know them (+) by negations; for
example, by understanding that they are immaterial, incorporeal, without shapes, and so on. The
more negations we know of them the less vaguely we understand them, for subsequent negations
limit and determine a previous negation as differences do a remote genus. Our knowledge of the
heavenly bodies is also negative for the most part, because they belong to a different genus from
that of inferior bodies. We know, for instance, that they are not light or heavy, or hot or cold.
And instead of accidental characteristics in these substances we have their connections with
sensible ones, either with regard to (+) the relationship of cause to effect or with regard to (+)

the relationship of transcendence.

We conclude, then, that in the case of immaterial forms we know that they exist; and instead of
knowing what they are we have knowledge of them by way of negation, by way of causality,
and by way of transcendence. These are the same ways Dionysius proposes in his Divine
Names; and this is how Boethius understands that we can know the divine form by removing all
images, and not that we know that it is. The solution of the opposing arguments is clear from
what has been said: for the first arguments are based on perfect knowledge of what a thing is, the
others on imperfect knowledge of the sort described.

### ARTICLE FOUR

Can Our Intellect Behold the Divine Form by Means of Some Speculative Science?

We proceed as follows to the fourth article:

It seems that we can come to behold the divine form through the speculative sciences, for:

1. As Boethius says here, theology is a part of speculative science. But, as he says, it belongs to
theology to behold the divine form itself. Therefore we can arrive at a knowledge of that form
through the speculative sciences.

2. Again, there is a speculative science treating of immaterial substances, namely divine science.
Now any science treating of a substance beholds the form of that substance, because all
knowledge is by means of form, and according to the Philosopher all demonstration begins with
essence. Therefore we can behold separate forms through the speculative sciences.

3. Again, according to the philosophers, the ultimate happiness of man is to understand the
separate substances For, since happiness is the most perfect activity, it must have to do with the
most excellent things falling under the intellect, as we can learn from the Philosopher in the
Ethics. Now the happiness described by the philosophers is an activity springing from wisdom,
since wisdom is the most perfect virtue of the most perfect power ! the intellect; and, as the
Ethics says, this activity is happiness. Through wisdom, therefore, we understand the separate
substances. Now wisdom is a speculative science, as is clear in the Metaphysics and Ethics. So
we can understand the separate substances through the speculative sciences.