1 Corinthians 8:4
4. "Concerning therefore the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know
that no idol is anything in the world, and that there is no God but one." Look
what a strait he has fallen into! For indeed his mind is to prove both; that one
ought to abstain from this kind of banquet, and that it has no power to hurt those
who partake of it: things which were not greatly in agreement with each other.
For when they were told that they had no harm in them, they would naturally run
to them as indifferent things. But when forbidden to touch them, they would
suspect, on the contrary, that their having power to do hurt occasioned the
prohibition. Wherefore, you see, he puts down their opinion about idols, and
then states as a first reason for their abstaining the scandals which they place in
the way of their brethren; in these words: "Now concerning the eating of things
sacrificed to idols, we know that no idol is anything in the world." Again he
makes it common property and does not allow this to be theirs alone, but extends
the knowledge all over the world. For "not among you alone," says he, "but
every where on earth this doctrine prevails." What then is it? "That no idol is
anything in the world; that there is no God but one." What then? Are there no
idols? No statues? Indeed there are; but they have no power: neither are they
gods, but stones and demons. For he is now setting himself against both parties;
both the grosser sort among them, and those who were accounted lovers of
wisdom. Thus, seeing that the former know of no more than the mere stones, the
others assert that certain powers reside in them , which they also call gods; to the
former accordingly he says, that "no idol is anything in the world," to the other,
that "there is no God but one."
Do you mark how he writes these things, not simply as laying down
doctrine, but in opposition to those without? A thing indeed which we must at all
times narrowly observe, whether he says anything abstractedly, or whether he is

opposing any persons. For this contributes in no ordinary way to the accuracy of
our doctrinal views, and to the exact understanding of his expressions.

1 Corinthians 8:5-6
5. "For though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or on earth,
as there are gods many and lords many; yet to us there is one God, the Father, of
Whom are all things, and we unto Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, through
Whom are all things, and we through Him." Since he had said, that "an idol is
nothing" and that "there is no other God;" and yet there were idols and there
were those that were called gods; that he might not seem to be contradicting
plain facts, he goes on to say, "For though there be that are called gods, as
indeed there are;" not absolutely, "there are;" but, "called," not in reality having
this but in name: "be it in heaven or on earth:— in heaven," meaning the sun and
the moon and the remainder of the choir of stars; for these too the Greeks
worshipped: but upon the earth demons, and all those who had been made gods
of men:— "yet to us there is One God, the Father." In the first instance having
expressed it without the word "Father," and said, "there is no God but one," he
now adds this also, when he had utterly cast out the others.
Next, he adduces what indeed is the greatest token of divinity; "of Whom
are all things." For this implies also that those others are not gods. For it is said
[Jeremiah 10:11], "Let the gods who made not the heaven and the earth perish."
Then he subjoins what is not less than this, "and we unto Him." For when he
says, "of Whom are all things," he means the creation and the bringing of things
out of nothing into existence. But when he says, "and we unto Him," he speaks
of the word of faith and mutual appropriation ([οἰκειώσεως]), as also he said
before [1 Corinthians 1:30], "but of Him are you also in Christ Jesus." In two
ways we are of Him, by being made when we were not, and by being made
believers. For this also is a creation: a thing which he also declares elsewhere;
[Ephesians 2:15] "that He might create in Himself of the two one new man."
"And there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, through Whom are all things, and we