broken," [Ephesians 2:14] and the impediments removed, and many more things
than these done besides; in one word he has put before us the miracle, saying,
"Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord."
For, "think not," says he, "that these things are now determined upon; they were
prefigured of old." Which same thing, Paul also everywhere labors to prove.
And the angel proceeds to refer Joseph to Isaiah; in order that even if he
should, when awakened, forget his own words, as newly spoken, he might by
being reminded of those of the prophet, with which he had been nourished up
continually, retain likewise the substance of what he had said. And to the woman
he mentioned none of these things, as being a damsel and unskilled in them, but
to the husband, as being a righteous man and one who studied the prophets, from
them he reasons. And before this he says, "Mary, your wife;" but now, when he
has brought the prophet before him, he then trusts him with the name of
virginity; for Joseph would not have continued thus unshaken, when he heard
from him of a virgin, unless he had first heard it also from Isaiah. For indeed it
was nothing novel that he was to hear out of the prophets, but what was familiar
to him, and had been for a long time the subject of his meditations. For this
cause the angel, to make what he said easy to be received, brings in Isaiah. And
neither here does he stop, but connects the discourse with God. For he does not
call the saying Isaiah's, but that of the God of all things. For this cause he said
not, "that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of Isaiah," but "which was
spoken of the Lord." For the mouth indeed was Isaiah's, but the oracle was
wafted from above.
3. What then says this oracle? "Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel."
How was it then, one may say, that His name was not called Emmanuel, but
Jesus Christ? Because he said not, "you shall call," but "they shall call," that is,
the multitude, and the issue of events. For here he puts the event as a name: and
this is customary in Scripture, to substitute the events that take place for names.
Therefore, to say, "they shall call" Him "Emmanuel," means nothing else

than that they shall see God among men. For He has indeed always been among
men, but never so manifestly.
But if Jews are obstinate, we will ask the, when was the child called, "Make
speed to the spoil, hasten the prey?" Why, they could not say. How is it then that
the prophet said, "Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz?" Because, when he
was born, there was a taking and dividing of spoils, therefore the event that took
place in his time is put as his name. And the city, too, it is said, shall be called
"the city of righteousness, the faithful city Sion." [Isaiah 1:26-27] And yet we
nowhere find that the city was called "righteousness," but it continued to be
called Jerusalem. However, inasmuch as this came to pass in fact, when the city
underwent a change for the better, on that account he says it is so called. For
when any event happens which marks out him who brings it to pass, or who is
benefited by it, more clearly than his name, the Scripture speaks of the truth of
the event as being a name to him.
4. But if, when their mouths are stopped on this point, they should seek
another, namely, what is said touching Mary's virginity, and should object to us
other translators, saying, that they used not the term "virgin," but "young
woman;" in the first place we will say this, that the Seventy were justly entitled
to confidence above all the others. For these made their translation after Christ's
coming, continuing to be Jews, and may justly be suspected as having spoken
rather in enmity, and as darkening the prophecies on purpose; but the Seventy, as
having entered upon this work an hundred years or more before the coming of
Christ, stand clear from all such suspicion, and on account of the date, and of
their number, and of their agreement, would have a better right to be trusted.
But even if they bring in the testimony of those others, yet so the tokens of
victory would be with us. Because the Scripture is wont to put the word "youth,"
for "virginity;" and this with respect not to women only, but also to men. For it is
said, "young men and maidens, old men with younger ones." And again,
speaking of the damsel who is attacked, it says, "if the young woman cry out,"
meaning the virgin.