being, nor is he more perfect than the Creator; for the Creator grants, as we must perceive, what
He is unable to afford. But if, on the other hand, [it be that he does not grant this] when he has the
power of so doing, then he is proved to be not a good, but an envious and malignant Father.
2. If, again, they refer to any cause on account of which their Father does not impart life to
bodies, then that cause must necessarily appear superior to the Father, since it restrains Him from
the exercise of His benevolence; and His benevolence will thus be proved weak, on account of that
cause which they bring forward. Now every one must perceive that bodies are capable of receiving
life. For they live to the extent that God pleases that they should live; and that being so, the [heretics]
cannot maintain that [these bodies] are utterly incapable of receiving life. If, therefore, on account
of necessity and any other cause, those [bodies] which are capable of participating in life are not
vivified, their Father shall be the slave of necessity and that cause, and not therefore a free agent,
having His will under His own control.

### Chapter V.—The prolonged life of the ancients, the translation of Elijah and of Enoch in
their own bodies, as well as the preservation of Jonah, of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
in the midst of extreme peril, are clear demonstrations that God can raise up our bodies to
life eternal.

1. [In order to learn] that bodies did continue in existence for a lengthened period, as long as it
was God's good pleasure that they should flourish, let [these heretics] read the Scriptures, and they
will find that our predecessors advanced beyond seven hundred, eight hundred, and nine hundred
years of age; and that their bodies kept pace with the protracted length of their days, and participated
in life as long as God willed that they should live. But why do I refer to these men? For Enoch,
when he pleased God, was translated in the same body in which he did please Him, thus pointing
out by anticipation the translation of the just. Elijah, too, was caught up [when he was yet] in the
substance of the [natural] form; thus exhibiting in prophecy the assumption of those who are
spiritual, and that nothing stood in the way of their body being translated and caught up. For by
means of the very same hands through which they were moulded at the beginning, did they receive
this translation and assumption. For in Adam the hands of God had become accustomed to set in
order, to rule, and to sustain His own workmanship, and to bring it and place it where they pleased.
Where, then, was the first man placed? In paradise certainly, as the Scripture declares "And God
planted a garden [paradisum] eastward in Eden, and there He placed the man whom He had
formed." And then afterwards when [man] proved disobedient, he was cast out thence into this
world. Wherefore also the elders who were disciples of the apostles tell us that those who were
translated were transferred to that place (for paradise has been prepared for righteous men, such as
have the Spirit; in which place also Paul the apostle, when he was caught up, heard words which