them, as is clear from what has been said (Article 1; Question 50,
Article 1), it follows that they sometimes assume bodies.
Reply to Objection 1: Angels need an assumed body, not for
themselves, but on our account; that by conversing familiarly with
men they may give evidence of that intellectual companionship
which men expect to have with them in the life to come. Moreover
that angels assumed bodies under the Old Law was a figurative
indication that the Word of God would take a human body; because
all the apparitions in the Old Testament were ordained to that one
whereby the Son of God appeared in the flesh.
Reply to Objection 2: The body assumed is united to the angel not as
its form, nor merely as its mover, but as its mover represented by the
assumed movable body. For as in the Sacred Scripture the
properties of intelligible things are set forth by the likenesses of
things sensible, in the same way by Divine power sensible bodies
are so fashioned by angels as fittingly to represent the intelligible
properties of an angel. And this is what we mean by an angel
assuming a body.
Reply to Objection 3: Although air as long as it is in a state of
rarefaction has neither shape nor color, yet when condensed it can
both be shaped and colored as appears in the clouds. Even so the
angels assume bodies of air, condensing it by the Divine power in so
far as is needful for forming the assumed body.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the angels exercise functions of life in

the bodies assumed?
Objection 1: It would seem that the angels exercise functions of life
in assumed bodies. For pretence is unbecoming in angels of truth.
But it would be pretence if the body assumed by them, which seems
to live and to exercise vital functions, did not possess these
functions. Therefore the angels exercise functions of life in the
assumed body.
Objection 2: Further, in the works of the angels there is nothing
without a purpose. But eyes, nostrils, and the other instruments of
the senses, would be fashioned without a purpose in the body
assumed by the angel, if he perceived nothing by their means.
Consequently, the angel perceives by the assumed body; and this is
the most special function of life.
Objection 3: Further, to move hither and thither is one of the
functions of life, as the Philosopher says (De Anima ii). But the
angels are manifestly seen to move in their assumed bodies. For it
was said (Gn. 18:16) that "Abraham walked with" the angels, who
had appeared to him, "bringing them on the way"; and when Tobias
said to the angel (Tob. 5:7,8): "Knowest thou the way that leadeth to
the city of Medes?" he answered: "I know it; and I have often walked
through all the ways thereof." Therefore the angels often exercise
functions of life in assumed bodies.
Objection 4: Further, speech is the function of a living subject, for it
is produced by the voice, while the voice itself is a sound conveyed
from the mouth. But it is evident from many passages of Sacred
Scripture that angels spoke in assumed bodies. Therefore in their
assumed bodies they exercise functions of life.
Objection 5: Further, eating is a purely animal function. Hence the
Lord after His Resurrection ate with His disciples in proof of having
resumed life (Lk. 24). Now when angels appeared in their assumed
bodies they ate, and Abraham offered them food, after having
previously adored them as God (Gn. 18). Therefore the angels
exercise functions of life in assumed bodies.
Objection 6: Further, to beget offspring is a vital act. But this has