THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.81, C.4.

(Question 28, Article 2, ad 3; Question 45, Article 2), nevertheless the
above opinion regarding impassibility is inadmissible. For it is
manifest that the same body of Christ which was then seen by the
disciples in its own species, was received by them under the
sacramental species. But as seen in its own species it was not
impassible; nay more, it was ready for the Passion. Therefore,
neither was Christ's body impassible when given under the
sacramental species.
Yet there was present in the sacrament, in an impassible manner,
that which was passible of itself; just as that was there invisibly
which of itself was visible. For as sight requires that the body seen
be in contact with the adjacent medium of sight, so does passion
require contact of the suffering body with the active agents. But
Christ's body, according as it is under the sacrament, as stated
above (Article 1, ad 2; Question 76, Article 5), is not compared with
its surroundings through the intermediary of its own dimensions,
whereby bodies touch each other, but through the dimensions of the
bread and wine; consequently, it is those species which are acted
upon and are seen, but not Christ's own body.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ is said not to have given His mortal and
passible body at the supper, because He did not give it in mortal and
passible fashion. But the Cross made His flesh adapted for eating,
inasmuch as this sacrament represents Christ's Passion.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument would hold, if Christ's body, as
it was passible, were also present in a passible manner in this
sacrament.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 76, Article 4), the
accidents of Christ's body are in this sacrament by real
concomitance, but not by the power of the sacrament, whereby the
substance of Christ's body comes to be there. And therefore the
power of the sacramental words extends to this, that the body, i.e.
Christ's, is under this sacrament, whatever accidents really exist in
it.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.81, C.4.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.81, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether, if this sacrament had been reserved in a

pyx, or consecrated at the moment of Christ's death by one of
the apostles, Christ Himself would have died there?
Objection 1: It seems that if this sacrament had been reserved in a
pyx at the moment of Christ's death, or had then been consecrated
by one of the apostles, that Christ would not have died there. For
Christ's death happened through His Passion. But even then He was
in this sacrament in an impassible manner. Therefore, He could not
die in this sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, on the death of Christ, His blood was separated
from the body. But His flesh and blood are together in this
sacrament. Therefore He could not die in this sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, death ensues from the separation of the soul
from the body. But both the body and the soul of Christ are
contained in this sacrament. Therefore Christ could not die in this
sacrament.
On the contrary, The same Christ Who was upon the cross would
have been in this sacrament. But He died upon the cross. Therefore,
if this sacrament had been reserved, He would have died therein.
I answer that, Christ's body is substantially the same in this
sacrament, as in its proper species, but not after the same fashion;
because in its proper species it comes in contact with surrounding
bodies by its own dimensions: but it does not do so as it is in this
sacrament, as stated above (Article 3). And therefore, all that
belongs to Christ, as He is in Himself, can be attributed to Him both
in His proper species, and as He exists in the sacrament; such as to
live, to die, to grieve, to be animate or inanimate, and the like; while
all that belongs to Him in relation to outward bodies, can be
attributed to Him as He exists in His proper species, but not as He is
in this sacrament; such as to be mocked, to be spat upon, to be
crucified, to be scourged, and the rest. Hence some have composed
this verse:
"Our Lord can grieve beneath the sacramental veils But cannot feel
the piercing of the thorns and nails."