for what he heard. This was not at any rate ever the feeling of any of the
Pharisees, but they grew fierce when their mouths were stopped. But not so this
man; but he goes away cast down, which is no little sign that not with an evil
will he had come unto Him, but with one too feeble, and that he did indeed
desire life, but was held in subjection by another and most grievous feeling.
Therefore when Christ said, "If you will enter into life, keep the
commandments," he says, "Which?" Not tempting, far from it, but supposing
there were some others besides those of the law that should procure him life,
which was like one who was very desirous. Then since Jesus mentioned those
out of the law, he says, "All these things have I kept from my youth up." And
neither at this did he stop, but again asks, "What lack I yet?" which itself again
was a sign of his very earnest desire.
What then says Christ? Since He was going to enjoin something great, He
sets forth the recompenses, and says, "If you will be perfect, go and sell that you
have, and give to the poor, and you shall have treasure in Heaven: and come,
and follow me."
2. Do you see how many prizes, how many crowns, He appoints for this
race? If he had been tempting, He would not have told him these things. But now
He both says it, and in order to draw him on, He also shows him the reward to be
great, and leaves it all to his own will, by all means throwing into the shade that
which seemed to be grievous in His advice. Wherefore even before mentioning
the conflicts and the toil, He shows him the prize, saying "If you will be perfect,"
and then says, "Sell that you have, and give to the poor," and straightway again
the rewards, "You shall have treasure in Heaven; and come, and follow me." For
indeed to follow Him is a great recompense. "And you shall have treasure in
Heaven."
For since his discourse was of money, even of all did He advise him to strip
himself, showing that he loses not what he has, but adds to his possessions, He
gave him more than He required him to give up; and not only more, but also as
much greater as Heaven is greater than earth, and yet more so.

But He called it a treasure, showing the plenteousness of the recompense,
its permanency, its security, so far as it was possible by human similitudes to
intimate it to the hearer. It is not then enough to despise wealth, but we must also
maintain poor men, and above all things follow Christ; that is, do all the things
that are ordered by Him, be ready for slaughter and daily death. "For if any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me."
[Matthew 16:24] So that to cast away one's money is a much less thing than this
last commandment, to shed even one's very blood; yet not a little does our being
freed from wealth contribute towards this.
"But when the young man heard it, he went away sorrowful."
[Matthew 19:22] After this the evangelist, as it were to show that he has not felt
anything it was unlikely he should feel, says, "For he had great possessions."
For they that have little are not equally held in subjection, as they that are
overflowed with great affluence, for then the love of it becomes more tyrannical.
Which thing I cease not always saying, that the increase of acquisitions kindles
the flame more, and renders the getters poorer, inasmuch as it puts them in
greater desire, and makes them have more feeling of their want.
See, for example, even here what strength did this passion exhibit. Him that
had come to Him with joy and forwardness, when Christ commanded him to cast
away his riches, it so overwhelmed and weighed down, as not to suffer him so
much as to answer touching these things, but silenced and become dejected and
sullen to go away.
What then says Christ? "How hardly shall the rich enter into the kingdom of
Heaven!" blaming not riches but them that are held in subjection by them. But if
the rich man "hardly," much more the covetous man. For if not to give one's own
be an hindrance to entering the kingdom, even to take of other men's goods,
think how much fire it heaps up.
Why can it have been, however, that He said to His disciples, that "hardly
shall a rich man enter in," they being poor men, and having no possessions?
Instructing them not to be ashamed of their poverty, and, as it were, excusing