SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.154, C.3.

matter.
I answer that, Continence denotes, by its very name, a certain
curbing, in so far as a man contains himself from following his
passions. Hence continence is properly said in reference to those
passions which urge a man towards the pursuit of something,
wherein it is praiseworthy that reason should withhold man from
pursuing: whereas it is not properly about those passions, such as
fear and the like, which denote some kind of withdrawal: since in
these it is praiseworthy to remain firm in pursuing what reason
dictates, as stated above (Question 123, Articles 3,4). Now it is to be
observed that natural inclinations are the principles of all
supervening inclinations, as stated above (FP, Question 60, Article
2). Wherefore the more they follow the inclination of nature, the more
strongly do the passions urge to the pursuance of an object. Now
nature inclines chiefly to those things that are necessary to it,
whether for the maintenance of the individual, such as food, or for
the maintenance of the species, such as venereal acts, the pleasures
of which pertain to the touch. Therefore continence and incontinence
refer properly to desires for pleasures of touch.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as temperance may be used in a general
sense in connection with any matter; but is properly applied to that
matter wherein it is best for man to be curbed: so, too, continence
properly speaking regards that matter wherein it is best and most
difficult to contain oneself, namely desires for pleasures of touch,
and yet in a general sense and relatively may be applied to any other
matter: and in this sense Ambrose speaks of continence.
Reply to Objection 2: Properly speaking we do not speak of
continence in relation to fear, but rather of firmness of mind which
fortitude implies. As to anger, it is true that it begets an impulse to
the pursuit of something, but this impulse follows an apprehension
of the soul---in so far as a man apprehends that someone has injured
him---rather than an inclination of nature. Wherefore a man may be
said to be continent of anger, relatively but not simply.
Reply to Objection 3: External goods, such as honors, riches and the
like, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 4), seem to be objects of
choice in themselves indeed, but not as being necessary for the
maintenance of nature. Wherefore in reference to such things we
speak of a person as being continent or incontinent, not simply, but
relatively, by adding that they are continent or incontinent in regard

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.154, C.3.

to wealth, or honor and so forth. Hence Tully either understood
continence in a general sense, as including relative continence, or
understood cupidity in a restricted sense as denoting desire for
pleasures of touch.
Reply to Objection 4: Venereal pleasures are more vehement than
pleasures of the palate: wherefore we are wont to speak of
continence and incontinence in reference to venereal matters rather
than in reference to food; although according to the Philosopher
they are applicable to both.
Reply to Objection 5: Continence is a good of the human reason:
wherefore it regards those passions which can be connatural to
man. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 5) that "if a man were to
lay hold of a child with desire of eating him or of satisfying an
unnatural passion whether he follow up his desire or not, he is said
to be continent [Article 4], not absolutely, but relatively."