Homily 9 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts III. 12
"And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, You men of Israel,
why marvel ye at this, or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own
power or holiness we have made this man to walk?"
There is greater freedom of speech in this harangue, than in the former. Not
that he was afraid on the former occasion, but the persons whom he addressed
there, being jesters and scoffers, would not have borne it. Hence in the beginning
of that address he also bespeaks their attention by his preamble; "Be this known
unto you, and hearken to my words." [Acts 2:14] But here there is no need of this
management. ([κατασκευἥς].) For his hearers were not in a state of indifference.
The miracle had aroused them all; they were even full of fear and amazement.
Wherefore also there was no need of beginning at that point, but rather with a
different topic; by which, in fact, he powerfully conciliated them, namely, by
rejecting the glory which was to be had from them. For nothing is so
advantageous, and so likely to pacify the hearers, as to say nothing about one's
self of an honorable nature, but, on the contrary, to obviate all surmise of
wishing to do so. And, in truth, much more did they increase their glory by
despising glory, and showing that what had just taken place was no human act,
but a Divine work; and that it was their part to join with the beholders in
admiration, rather than to receive it from them. Do you see how clear of all
ambition he is, and how he repels the honor paid to him? In the same manner
also did the ancient fathers; for instance, Daniel said, "Not for any wisdom that is
in me." [Daniel 2:30] And again Joseph, "Do not interpretations belong to
God?" [Genesis 11:8] And David, "When the lion and the bear came, in the
name of the Lord I rent them with my hands." [1 Samuel 17:34] And so likewise
here the Apostles, "Why do you look so earnestly on us, as though by our own

power or holiness we had made this man to walk?" [Acts 3:13] Nay, not even
this; for not by our own merit did we draw down the Divine influence. "The God
of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers." See how
assiduously he thrusts himself ([εἰσωθει]) upon the fathers of old, lest he should
appear to be introducing a new doctrine. In the former address he appealed to the
patriarch David, here he appeals to Abraham and the rest. "Hath glorified His
Servant Jesus." Again a lowly expression, like as in the opening address.
But at this point he proceeds to enlarge upon the outrage, and exalts the
heinousness of the deed, no longer, as before, throwing a veil over it. This he
does, wishing to work upon them more powerfully. For the more he proved them
accountable, the better his purpose were effected. "Hath glorified," he says, "His
Servant Jesus, Whom ye delivered up, and denied Him in the presence of Pilate,
when he was determined to let him go." The charge is twofold: Pilate was
desirous to let Him go; you would not, when he was willing. "But ye denied the
Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you; and
killed the Prince (or Author) of Life: Whom God has raised from the dead;
whereof we are witnesses." (v. 14-15.) You desired a robber instead of Him. He
shows the great aggravation of the act. As he has them under his hand, he now
strikes hard. "The Prince of Life," he says. In these words he establishes the
doctrine of the Resurrection. "Whom God has raised from the dead." [Acts 2:26]
"Whence does this appear?" He no longer refers to the Prophets, but to himself,
inasmuch as now he has a right to be believed. Before, when he affirmed that He
was risen, he adduced the testimony of David; now, having said it, he alleges the
College of Apostles. "Whereof we are witnesses," he says.
"And His name, through faith in His name, has made this man strong,
whom you see and know: yea, the faith which is by Him has given him this
perfect soundness in the presence of you all." Seeking to declare the matter
([ζητὥν τὸ πρἅγμα εὶπεἵν]), he straightway brings forward the sign: "In the
presence," he says, "of you all." As he had borne hard upon them, and had
shown that He Whom they crucified had risen, again he relaxes, by giving them