care of them, he was not bound to make restitution, especially if they
were hired for a consideration: because they might have died or
deteriorated in the same way if they had remained in possession of
the lender, so that if the animal had been saved through being lent,
the lender would have gained something by the loan which would no
longer have been gratuitous. And especially was this to be observed
when animals were hired for a consideration: because then the
owner received a certain price for the use of the animals; wherefore
he had no right to any profit, by receiving indemnity for the animal,
unless the person who had charge of it were negligent. In the case,
however, of animals not hired for a consideration, equity demanded
that he should receive something by way of restitution at least to the
value of the hire of the animal that had perished or deteriorated.
Reply to Objection 5: The difference between a loan and a deposit is
that a loan is in respect of goods transferred for the use of the
person to whom they are transferred, whereas a deposit is for the
benefit of the depositor. Hence in certain cases there was a stricter
obligation of returning a loan than of restoring goods held in deposit.
Because the latter might be lost in two ways. First, unavoidably: i.e.
either through a natural cause, for instance if an animal held in
deposit were to die or depreciate in value; or through an extrinsic
cause, for instance, if it were taken by an enemy, or devoured by a
beast (in which case, however, a man was bound to restore to the
owner what was left of the animal thus slain): whereas in the other
cases mentioned above, he was not bound to make restitution; but
only to take an oath in order to clear himself of suspicion. Secondly,
the goods deposited might be lost through an avoidable cause, for
instance by theft: and then the depositary was bound to restitution
on account of his neglect. But, as stated above (ad 4), he who held
an animal on loan, was bound to restitution, even if he were absent
when it depreciated or died: because he was held responsible for
less negligence than a depositary, who was only held responsible in
case of theft.
Reply to Objection 6: Workmen who offer their labor for hire, are
poor men who toil for their daily bread: and therefore the Law
commanded wisely that they should be paid at once, lest they should
lack food. But they who offer other commodities for hire, are wont to
be rich: nor are they in such need of their price in order to gain a
livelihood: and consequently the comparison does not hold.
Reply to Objection 7: The purpose for which judges are appointed

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

among men, is that they may decide doubtful points in matters of
justice. Now a matter may be doubtful in two ways. First, among
simple-minded people: and in order to remove doubts of this kind, it
was prescribed (Dt. 16:18) that "judges and magistrates" should be
appointed in each tribe, "to judge the people with just judgment."
Secondly, a matter may be doubtful even among experts: and
therefore, in order to remove doubts of this kind, the Law prescribed
that all should foregather in some chief place chosen by God, where
there would be both the high-priest, who would decide doubtful
matters relating to the ceremonies of divine worship; and the chief
judge of the people, who would decide matters relating to the
judgments of men: just as even now cases are taken from a lower to
a higher court either by appeal or by consultation. Hence it is written
(Dt. 17:8,9): "If thou perceive that there be among you a hard and
doubtful matter in judgment . . . and thou see that the words of the
judges within thy gates do vary; arise and go up to the place, which
the Lord thy God shall choose; and thou shalt come to the priests of
the Levitical race, and to the judge that shall be at that time." But
such like doubtful matters did not often occur for judgment:
wherefore the people were not burdened on this account.
Reply to Objection 8: In the business affairs of men, there is no such
thing as demonstrative and infallible proof, and we must be content
with a certain conjectural probability, such as that which an orator
employs to persuade. Consequently, although it is quite possible for
two or three witnesses to agree to a falsehood, yet it is neither easy
nor probable that they succeed in so doing: wherefore their
testimony is taken as being true, especially if they do not waver in
giving it, or are not otherwise suspect. Moreover, in order that
witnesses might not easily depart from the truth, the Law
commanded that they should be most carefully examined, and that
those who were found untruthful should be severely punished, as
stated in Dt. 19:16, seqq.
There was, however, a reason for fixing on this particular number, in
token of the unerring truth of the Divine Persons, Who are
sometimes mentioned as two, because the Holy Ghost is the bond of
the other two Persons; and sometimes as three: as Augustine
observes on Jn. 8:17: "In your law it is written that the testimony of
two men is true."
Reply to Objection 9: A severe punishment is inflicted not only on
account of the gravity of a fault, but also for other reasons. First, on