punished yourself. For "he that loves iniquity," it is said, "hates his own soul."
[Psalm 11:5, Septuagint] Do you see that thou dost not injure, but art injured?
Therefore also Paul says, "Why do ye not rather take wrong?" [1 Corinthians
6:7] Do you see that this is not to be wronged?
When you insult, then are you insulted. And most persons partly know this:
as when they say one to another, "Let us go away, do not disgrace yourself."
Why? Because the difference is great between you and him: for however much
you insult him, he accounts it a credit. Let us consider this in all cases, and be
above insults. I will tell you how.
Should we have a contest with him who wears the purple, let us consider
that in insulting him, we insult ourselves, for we become worthy to be disgraced.
Tell me, what do you mean? When you are a citizen of Heaven, and hast the
Philosophy that is above, do you disgrace yourself with him "that minds earthly
things"? [Philippians 3:19] For though he be in possession of countless riches,
though he be in power, he does not as yet know the good that is therein. Do not
in insulting him, insult yourself. Spare yourself, not him. Honor yourself, not
him. Is there not some Proverb such as this, He that honors; honors himself?
With good reason: for he honors not the other, but himself. Hear what a certain
wise man says, "Do honor to your soul according to the dignity thereof." [Sirach
10:28] "According to the dignity thereof," what is this? If he have defrauded (it
means), do not thou defraud; if he has insulted, do not thou insult.
6. Tell me, I pray you, if some poor man has taken away clay thrown out of
your yard, would you for this have summoned a court of justice? Surely not.
Why? Lest you should disgrace yourself; lest all men should condemn you. The
same also happens in this case. For the rich man is poor, and the more rich he is,
the poorer is he in that which is indeed poverty. Gold is clay, cast out in the yard,
not lying in your house, for your house is Heaven. For this, then, will you
summon a Court of Justice, and will not the citizens on high condemn you? Will
they not cast you out from their country, who art so mean, who art so shabby, as
to choose to fight for a little clay? For if the world were yours, and then some

one had taken it, ought thou to pay any attention to it?
Do you not know, that if you were to take the world ten times or an hundred
times, or ten thousand times, and twice that, it is not to be compared with the
least of the good things in Heaven? He then who admires the things here slights
those yonder, since he judges these worthy of exertion, though so far inferior to
the other. Nay, rather indeed he will not be able to admire those other. For how
[can he], while he is passionately excited towards these earthly things? Let us cut
through the cords and entanglements: for this is what earthly things are.
How long shall we be stooping down? How long shall we plot one against
another, like wild beasts; like fishes? Nay rather, the wild beasts do not plot
against each other, but [against] animals of a different tribe. A bear for instance
does not readily kill a bear, nor a serpent kill a serpent, having respect for the
sameness of race. But you, with one of the same race, and having innumerable
claims, as common origin, rational faculties, the knowledge of God, ten
thousand other things, the force of nature, him who is your kinsman, and
partaker of the same nature— him you kill, and involvest in evils innumerable.
For what, if you dost not thrust your sword, nor plunge your right hand into his
neck, other things more grievous than this you do, when you involve him in
innumerable evils. For if you had done the other, you would have freed him from
anxiety, but now you encompass him with hunger, with slavery, with feelings of
discouragement, with many sins. These things I say, and shall not cease to say,
not [as] preparing you to commit murder: nor as urging you to some crime short
of that; but that you may not be confident, as if you were not to give account.
"For" (it says) "he that takes away a livelihood" [Sirach 34:22] and asks bread, it
says.
7. Let us at length keep our hands to ourselves, or rather, let us not keep
them, but stretch them out honorably, not for grasping, but for almsgiving. Let us
not have our hand unfruitful nor withered; for the hand which does not alms is
withered; and that which is also grasping, is polluted and unclean.
Let no one eat with such hands; for this is an insult to those invited. For, tell