But since the brethren chose to be informed on this subject, by those at
Jerusalem, he went up on their own account, not on his own. And his expression,
"I went not up," signifies that he neither went at the outset of his teaching, nor
for the purpose of being instructed. Both are implied by the phrase, "Immediately
I conferred not with flesh and blood." He says not, "I conferred," merely, but,
"immediately;" and his subsequent journey was not to gain any additional
instruction.
Ver. 17. "But I went away into Arabia."
Behold a fervent soul! He longed to occupy regions not yet tilled, but lying
in a wild state. Had he remained with the Apostles, as he had nothing to learn,
his preaching would have been straitened, for it behooved them to spread the
word every where. Thus this blessed man, fervent in spirit, straightway
undertook to teach wild barbarians, choosing a life full of battle and labor.
Having said, "I went into Arabia," he adds, "and again I returned unto
Damascus." Here observe his humility; he speaks not of his successes, nor of
whom or of how many he instructed. Yet such was his zeal immediately on his
baptism, that he confounded the Jews, and so exasperated them, that they and the
Greeks lay in wait for him with a view to kill him. This would not have been the
case, had he not greatly added to the numbers of the faithful; since they were
vanquished in doctrine, they had recourse to murder, which was a manifest sign
of Paul's superiority. But Christ suffered him not to be put to death, preserving
him for his mission. Of these successes, however, he says nothing, and so in all
his discourses, his motive is not ambition, nor to be honored more highly than
the Apostles, nor because he is mortified at being lightly esteemed, but it is a
fear lest any detriment should accrue to his mission. For he calls himself, "one
born out of due time," and, "the first of sinners," and "the last of the Apostles,"
and, "not meet to be called an Apostle." And this he said, who had labored more
than all of them; which is real humility; for he who, conscious of no excellence,
speaks humbly of himself, is candid but not humble; but to say so after such
trophies, is to be practised in self-control.

Ver. 17. "And again I returned unto Damascus."
But what great things did he not probably achieve in this city? For he tells
us that the governor under Aretas the king set guards about the whole of it,
hoping to entrap this blessed man. Which is a proof of the strongest kind that he
was violently persecuted by the Jews. Here, however, he says nothing of this, but
mentioning his arrival and departure is silent concerning the events which there
occurred, nor would he have mentioned them in the place I have referred to, [2
Corinthians 11:32] had not circumstances required their narration.
Ver. 18. "Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas."
What can be more lowly than such a soul? After such successes, wanting
nothing of Peter, not even his assent, but being of equal dignity with him, (for at
present I will say no more,) he comes to him as his elder and superior. And the
only object of this journey was to visit Peter; thus he pays due respect to the
Apostles, and esteems himself not only not their better but not their equal.
Which is plain from this journey, for Paul was induced to visit Peter by the same
feeling from which many of our brethren sojourn with holy men: or rather by a
humbler feeling for they do so for their own benefit, but this blessed man, not for
his own instruction or correction, but merely for the sake of beholding and
honoring Peter by his presence. He says, "to visit Peter;" he does not say to see,
([ἰ] [δεῖν],) but to visit and survey, ([ἰ] [στορῆσαι],) a word which those, who
seek to become acquainted with great and splendid cities, apply to themselves.
Worthy of such trouble did he consider the very sight of Peter; and this appears
from the Acts of the Apostles also. [Acts 21:17-18 etc.] For on his arrival at
Jerusalem, on another occasion, after having converted many Gentiles, and, with
labors far surpassing the rest, reformed and brought to Christ Pamphylia,
Lycaonia, Cilicia, and all nations in that quarter of the world, he first addresses
himself with great humility to James, as to his elder and superior. Next he
submits to his counsel, and that counsel contrary to this Epistle. "You see,
brother, how many thousands there are among the Jews of them which have
believed; therefore shave your head, and purify yourself." [Acts 21:20 ff.]