Reply to Objection 7: The intellect can perceive spiritual things,
whereas the eyes of the body cannot: wherefore the intellect will be
able to know the Divine essence united to it, but the eyes of the body
will not.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the saints, seeing God, see all that God

sees?
Objection 1: It would seem that the saints, seeing God in His
essence, see all that God sees in Himself. For as Isidore says (De
Sum. Bon. 1.): "The angels know all things in the World of God,
before they happen." Now the saints will be equal to the angels of
God (Mt. 22:30). Therefore the saints also in seeing God see all
things.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Dial. iv.): "Since all see God
there with equal clearness, what do they not know, who know Him
Who knows all things?" and he refers to the blessed who see God in
His essence. Therefore those who see God in His essence know all
things.
Objection 3: Further, it is stated in De Anima (iii, text. 7), that "when
an intellect understands the greatest things, it is all the more able to
understand the least things." Now God is the greatest of intelligible
things. Therefore the power of the intellect is greatly increased by
understanding Him. Therefore the intellect seeing Him understands
all things.
Objection 4: Further, the intellect is not hindered from understanding
a thing except by this surpassing it. Now no creature surpasses the
intellect that understands God, since, as Gregory says (Dial. ii.), "to
the soul which sees its Creator all creatures are small." Therefore
those who see God in His essence know all things.
Objection 5: Further, every passive power that is not reduced to act
is imperfect. Now the passive intellect of the human soul is a power
that is passive as it were to the knowledge of all things, since "the
passive intellect is in which all are in potentiality" (De Anima iii, text.
18). If then in that beatitude it were not to understand all things, it
would remain imperfect, which is absurd.
Objection 6: Further, whoever sees a mirror sees the things reflected
in the mirror. Now all things are reflected in the Word of God as in a
mirror, because He is the type and image of all. Therefore the saints
who see the Word in its essence see all created things.

Objection 7: Further, according to Prov. 10:24, "to the just their
desire shall be given." Now the just desire to know all things, since
"all men desire naturally to know," and nature is not done away by
glory. Therefore God will grant them to know all things.
Objection 8: Further, ignorance is one of the penalties of the present
life [FS, Question 85, Article 3]. Now all penalty will be removed from
the saints by glory. Therefore all ignorance will be removed: and
consequently they will know all.
Objection 9: Further, the beatitude of the saints is in their soul before
being in their body. Now the bodies of the saints will be reformed in
glory to the likeness of Christ's body (Phil. 3:21). Therefore their
souls will be perfected in likeness to the soul of Christ. Now Christ's
soul sees all things in the Word. Therefore all the souls of the saints
will also see all things in the Word.
Objection 1:: Further, the intellect, like the senses, knows all the
things with the image of which it is informed. Now the Divine
essence shows a thing forth more clearly than any other image
thereof. Therefore since in that blessed vision the Divine essence
becomes the form as it were of our intellect, it would seem that the
saints seeing God see all.
Objection 1:: Further, the Commentator says (De Anima iii), that "if
the active intellect were the form of the passive intellect, we should
understand all things." Now the Divine essence represents all things
more clearly than the active intellect. Therefore the intellect that sees
God in His essence knows all things.
Objection 1:: Further, the lower angels are enlightened by the higher
about the things they are ignorant of, for the reason that they know
not all things. Now after the day of judgment, one angel will not
enlighten another; for then all superiority will cease, as a gloss
observes on 1 Cor. 15:24, "When He shall have brought to nought,"
etc. Therefore the lower angels will then know all things, and for the
same reason all the other saints who will see God in His essence.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Hier. Eccles. vi): "The higher angels
cleanse the lower angels from ignorance." Now the lower angels see
the Divine essence. Therefore an angel while seeing the Divine
essence may be ignorant of certain things. But the soul will not see