reconciled to God by the death of His Son, much more, being reconciled, we
shall be saved by His life."
And what he has said looks indeed like tautology, but it is not to any one
who accurately attends to it. Consider then. He wishes to give them reasons for
confidence respecting things to come. And first he gives them a sense of shame
from the righteous man's decision, when he says, that he also "was fully
persuaded that what God had promised He was able also to perform;" and next
from the grace that was given; then from the tribulation, as sufficing to lead us
into hopes; and again from the Spirit, whom we have received. Next from death,
and from our former viciousness, he makes this good. And it seems indeed, as I
said, that what he had mentioned was one thing, but it is discovered to be two,
three, and even many more. First, that "He died:" second, that it was "for the
ungodly;" third, that He "reconciled, saved, justified" us, made us immortal,
made us sons and heirs. It is not from His Death then only, he says, that we draw
strong assertions, but from the gift which was given unto us through His Death.
And indeed if He had died only for such creatures as we be, a proof of the
greatest love would what He had done be! But when He is seen at once dying,
and yielding us a gift, and that such a gift, and to such creatures, what was done
casts into shade our highest conceptions, and leads the very dullest on to faith.
For there is no one else that will save us, except He Who so loved us when we
were sinners, as even to give Himself up for us. Do you see what a ground this
topic affords for hope? For before this there were two difficulties in the way of
our being saved; our being sinners, and our salvation requiring the Lord's Death,
a thing which was quite incredible before it took place, and required exceeding
love for it to take place. But now since this has come about, the other requisites
are easier. For we have become friends, and there is no further need of Death.
Shall then He who has so spared his enemies as not to spare His Son, fail to
defend them now they have become friends, when He has no longer any need to
give up his Son? For it is either because a person does not wish it, or because
though he may wish it perhaps, yet he is unable to do it, that he does not save.

Now none of these things can be said of God. For that He is willing is plain from
His having given up His Son. But that He is able also is the very thing He proved
likewise, from the very fact of His having justified men who were sinners. What
is there then to prevent us any more from obtaining the things to come? Nothing!
Then again, lest upon hearing of sinners, and enemies, and strengthless ones, and
ungodly, you should be inclined to feel abashed and blush; hear what he says.
Ver. 11. "And not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by Whom we have now received the atonement."
What means the "not only so?" Not only were we saved, he means, but we
even glory for this very reason, for which some suppose we ought to hide our
faces. For, for us who lived in so great wickedness to be saved, was a very great
mark of our being exceedingly beloved by Him that saved us. For it was not by
angels or archangels, but by His Only-begotten Son Himself, that He saved us.
And so the fact of His saving us, and saving us too when we were in such plight,
and doing it by means of His Only-begotten, and not merely by His Onlybegotten, but by His Blood, weaves for us endless crowns to glory in. For there
is not anything that counts so much in the way of glory and confidence, as the
being treated as friends ([φιλεἵσθαι]) by God, and finding a Friend ([φιλεἵν]) in
Him that loves ([ἀ] [γαπὥντα]) us. This it is that makes the angels glorious, and
the principalities and powers. This is greater than the Kingdom, and so Paul
placed it above the Kingdom. For this also I count the incorporeal powers
blessed, because they love Him, and in all things obey Him. And on this score
the Prophet also expressed his admiration at them. "You that excel in strength,
that fulfil His Word." [Psalm 103:20] And hence too Isaiah extols the Seraphim,
setting forth their great excellency from their standing near that glory, which is a
sign of the greatest love.
Let us then emulate the powers above, and be desirous not only of standing
near the throne, but of having Him dwelling in us who sits upon the Throne. He
loved us when we hated Him, and also continues to love us. "For He makes His
sun to rise on the evil and on the good and sends rain on the just and on the