What has been said therefore to the others; do ye account to have been said
to you also, that we may not repeat again the same things.
For it is full time now to close our discourse with prayer. All of you then
pray with us, that the young men of the church above all things may be enabled
to live orderly, and to attain an old age becoming them. Since for those surely
who do not so live, it were well not to come to old age at all. But for them that
have grown old even in youth, I pray that they may attain also to the very deep
of gray hairs, and become fathers of approved children, and may be a joy to
them that gave them birth, and above all surely to the God that made them, and
may exterminate every distempered fancy, not that about their shoes, nor about
their clothes only, but every other kind also.
For as untilled land, such is also youth neglected, bringing forth many
thorns from many quarters. Let us then send forth on them the fire of the Spirit,
and burn up these wicked desires, and let us break up our fields, and make them
ready for the reception of the seed, and the young men among us let us exhibit
with soberer minds than the old elsewhere. For this in fact is the marvellous
thing, when temperance shines forth in youth; since he surely that is temperate in
old age cannot have a great reward, having in perfection the security from his
age. But what is wonderful, is to enjoy a calm amidst waves, and in a furnace not
to be burnt, and in youth not to run wanton.
With these things then in our minds, let us emulate that blessed Joseph, who
shone through all these trials, that we may attain unto the same crowns with him;
unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with whom be glory unto the Father, together with the Holy Ghost,
now and always, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 50 on Matthew

Matthew 14:23-24.
" And when He had sent the multitudes away, He went up into the mountain
apart to pray: and when the evening had come, He was there alone. But the ship
was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary."
For what purpose does He go up into the mountain? To teach us, that
loneliness and retirement is good, when we are to pray to God. With this view,
you see, He is continually withdrawing into the wilderness, and there often
spends the whole night in prayer, teaching us earnestly to seek such quietness in
our prayers, as the time and place may confer. For the wilderness is the mother
of quiet; it is a calm and a harbor, delivering us from all turmoils.
He Himself then went up there with this object, but the disciples are tossed
with the waves again, and undergo a storm, equal even to the former. But
whereas before they had Him in the ship when this befell them, now they were
alone by themselves. Thus gently and by degrees He excites and urges them on
for the better, even to the bearing all nobly. Accordingly we see, that when they
were first near that danger, He was present, though asleep, so as readily to give
them relief; but now leading them to a greater degree of endurance, He does not
even this, but departs, and in mid sea permits the storm to arise, so that they
might not so much as look for a hope of preservation from any quarter; and He
lets them be tempest-tost all the night, thoroughly to awaken, as I suppose, their
hardened heart.
For such is the nature of the fear, which the time concurs with the rough
weather in producing. And together with the compunction, He cast them also
into a greater longing for Himself, and a continual remembrance of Him.
Accordingly, neither did He present Himself to them at once. For, "in the
fourth watch," so it is said, "of the night, He went unto them, walking upon the