moved below, and were wrapt in many veils, needed that meaner (voice). In the
same way John, because he had snipped himself in every way of the things of
sense, needed no other instructors, but was taught from heaven. "He that sent
me," says he, "to baptize with water, the Same said unto me, Upon whom you
shall see the Spirit" of God "descending, the same is He." [John 1:33] But the
Jews who still were children, and could not as yet reach to that height, had a man
for their teacher, a man who did not speak to them words of his own, but brought
them a message from above.
What then says he? He "bears witness concerning Him, and cries, saying"
What means that word "cries"? Boldly, he means, and freely, without any
reserve, he proclaims. What does he proclaim? To what does he "bear witness,"
and "cry"? "This is He of whom I said, He that comes after me is preferred
before me; for He was before me." The testimony is dark, and contains besides
much that is lowly. For he does not say, "This is the Son of God, the Onlybegotten, the true Son "; but what? "He that comes after me, is preferred before
me; for He was before me." As the mother birds do not teach their young all at
once how to fly, nor finish their teaching in a single day, but at first lead them
forth so as to be just outside the nest, then after first allowing them to rest, set
them again to flying, and on the next day continue a flight much farther, and so
gently, little by little, bring them to the proper height; just so the blessed John did
not immediately bring the Jews to high things, but taught them for a while to fly
up a little above the earth saying, that Christ was greater than he. And yet this,
even this was for the time no small thing, to have been able to persuade the
hearers that one who had not yet appeared nor worked any wonders was greater
than a man, (John, I mean,) so marvelous, so famous, to whom all ran, and
whom they thought to be an angel. For a while therefore he labored to establish
this in the minds of his hearers, that He to whom testimony was borne was
greater than he who bore it; He that came after, than he that came before, He
who had not yet appeared, than he that was manifest and famous. And observe
how prudently he introduces his testimony; for he does not only point Him out

when He has appeared, but even before He appears, proclaims Him. For the
expression, "This is He of whom I spoke," is the expression of one declaring this.
As also Matthew says, that when all came to him, he said, "I indeed baptize you
with water, but He that comes after me is mightier than I, the latchet of whose
shoes I am not worthy to unloose." Wherefore then even before His appearance
did he this? In order that when He appeared, the testimony might readily be
received, the minds of the hearers being already prepossessed by what was said
concerning Him, and the mean external appearance not vitiating it. For if without
having heard anything at all concerning Him they had seen the Lord, and as they
beheld Him had at the same time received the testimony of John's words, so
wonderful and great, the meanness of His appearance would have straightway
been an objection to the grandeur of the expressions. For Christ took on Him an
appearance so mean and ordinary, that even Samaritan women, and harlots, and
publicans, had confidence boldly to approach and converse with Him. As
therefore, I said, if they had at once heard these words and seen Himself, they
might perhaps have mocked at the testimony of John; but now because even
before Christ appeared, they had often heard and had been accustomed to what
was said concerning Him, they were affected in the opposite way, not rejecting
the instruction of the words by reason of the appearance of Him who was
witnessed of, but from their belief of what had been already told them,
esteeming Him even more glorious.
The phrase, "that comes after," means, "that" preaches "after me," not
"that" was born "after me." And this Matthew glances at when he says, "after me
comes a man," not speaking of His birth from Mary, but of His coming to preach
(the Gospel), for had he been speaking of the birth, he would not have said,
"comes," but "has come"; since He was born when John spoke this. What then
means "is before me"? Is more glorious, more honorable. "Do not," he says,
"because I came preaching first from this, suppose that I am greater than He; I
am much inferior, so much inferior that I am not worthy to be counted in the
rank of a servant." This is the sense of "is before me," which Matthew showing