hereafter to fill us with the joy of His countenance.
18. Neither is the Spirit of either thence excluded, that is, the Spirit of the
Father and of the Son; which Holy Spirit is specially called "the Spirit of
truth, whom the world cannot receive." For to have the fruition of God
the Trinity, after whose image we are made, is indeed the fullness of our
joy, than which there is no greater. On this account the Holy Spirit is
sometimes spoken of as if He alone sufficed to our blessedness: and He
does alone so suffice, because He cannot be divided from the Father and
the Son; as the Father alone is sufficient, because He cannot be divided
from the Son and the Holy Spirit; and the Son alone is sufficient because
He cannot be divided from the Father and the Holy Spirit. For what does
He mean by saying, "If ye love me, keep my commandments; and I will
pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that He may
abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive," that is, the lovers of the world? For "the natural man receiveth
not the things of the Spirit of God." But it may perhaps seem, further, as
if the words, "And I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another
Comforter," were so said as if the Son alone were not sufficient. And that
place so speaks of the Spirit, as if He alone were altogether sufficient:
"When He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide you into all truth."
Pray, therefore, is the Son here excluded, as if He did not teach all truth,
or as if the Holy Spirit were to fill up that which the Son could not fully
teach? Let them say then, if it pleases them, that the Holy Spirit is greater
than the Son, whom they are wont to call less. Or is it, forsooth, because it
is not said, He alone,—or, No one else except Himself—will guide you into
all truth, that they allow that the Son also may be believed to teach
together with Him? In that case the apostle has excluded the Son from
knowing those things which are of God, where he says, "Even so the
things of God knoweth no one, but the Spirit of God:" so that these
perverse men might, upon this ground, go on to say that none but the
Holy Spirit teaches even the Son the things of God, as the greater teaches
the less; to whom the Son Himself ascribes so much as to say, "But
because I have said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart.
Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away: for
if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you."

### CHAP. 9.—ALL ARE SOMETIMES UNDERSTOOD IN ONE PERSON.

But this is said, not on account of any inequality of the Word of God and
of the Holy Spirit, but as though the presence of the Son of man with
them would be a hindrance to the coming of Him, who was not less,
because He did not "empty Himself, taking upon Him the form of a
servant," as the Son did. It was necessary, then, that the form of a servant
should be taken away from their eyes, because, through gazing upon it,
they thought that alone which they saw to be Christ. Hence also is that
which is said, "If ye loved me, ye would rejoice because I said, "I go unto
the Father; for my Father is greater than I:" that is, on that account it is
necessary for me to go to the Father, because, whilst you see me thus, you
hold me to be less than the Father through that which you see; and so,
being taken up with the creature and the "fashion" which I have taken
upon me, you do not perceive the equality which I have with the Father.
Hence, too, is this: "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my
Father." For touch, as it were, puts a limit to their conception, and He
therefore would not have the thought of the heart, directed towards
Himself, to be so limited as that He should be held to be only that which
He seemed to be. But the "ascension to the Father" meant, so to appear as
He is equal to the Father, that the limit of the sight which sufficeth us
might be attained there. Sometimes also it is said of the Son alone, that
He himself sufficeth, and the whole reward of our love and longing is held
forth as in the sight of Him. For so it is said, "He that hath my
commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that
loveth me shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and will
manifest myself to him." Pray, because He has not here said, And I will
show the Father also to him, has He therefore excluded the Father? On
the contrary, because it is true, "I and my Father are one," when the
Father is manifested, the Son also, who is in Him, is manifested; and
when the Son is manifested, the Father also, who is in Him, is
manifested. As, therefore, when it is said, "And I will manifest myself to
him," it is understood that He manifests also the Father; so likewise in
that which is said, "When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
even the Father," it is understood that He does not take it away from
Himself; since, when He shall bring believers to the contemplation of
God, even the Father, doubtless He will bring them to the contemplation