calamity your own. Take share then in his tears, that you may lighten his low
spirits. Take share in his joy, that you may make the joy strike deep root, and fix
the love firmly, and be of service to yourself rather than to him in so doing, by
your weeping rendering yourself merciful, and by your feeling his pleasure,
purging yourself of envy and grudging. And let me draw your attention to Paul's
considerateness. For he does not say, Put an end to the calamity, lest you should
say in many cases (or perchance [πολλάκις]) that it is impossible: but he has
enjoined the easier task, and that which you have in your power. For even if you
are not able to remove the evil, yet contribute tears, and you will take the worst
half away. And if you be not able to increase a man's prosperity, contribute joy,
and you will have made a great addition to it. Therefore it is not abstaining from
envy only, but what is a much greater thing that he exhorts us to, namely, joining
in the pleasure. For this is a much greater thing than not envying.
Ver. 16. "Be of the same mind one towards another. Mind not high things,
but condescend to men of low estate."
Here again he insists much upon lowliness of mind, the subject he had
started this exhortation with. For there was a probability of their being full of
high-mindedness, both on account of their city (see p. 343), and from sundry
other causes; he therefore keeps drawing off ([ὑ] [ποσύρει], 2 manuscripts [ὐ]
[πορύττει]) the morbid matter, and lowers the inflammation. For there is nothing
that makes such schisms in the Churches as vanity does. And what does he mean
by, "Be of the same mind one towards another?" Has a poor man come into your
house? Be like him in your bearing, do not put on any unusual pompous air on
account of your riches. There is no rich and poor in Christ. Be not then ashamed
of him because of his external dress, but receive him because of his inward faith.
And if you see him in sorrow, do not disdain to comfort him, nor if you see him
in prosperity, feel abashed at sharing his pleasure, and being gladdened with him,
but be of the same mind in his case, that you would be of in your own. For it
says, "Be of the same mind one towards another." For instance, if you think
yourself a great man, therefore think him so likewise. Do you suspect that he is

mean and little? Well then, pass this same sentence upon yourself, and cast aside
all unevenness. And how is this to be? By your casting aside that reckless
temper. Wherefore he proceeds: "Mind not high things, but condescend to men of
low estate." That is, bring yourself down to their humble condition, associate
with them, walk with them, do not be humbled in mind only, but help them also,
and reach forth your hand to them, not by means of others, but in your own
person, as a father taking care of a child, as the head taking care of the body. As
he says in another place, "being bound with them that are in bonds." [Hebrews
13:3] But here he means by those of low estate not merely the lowly-minded, but
those of a low rank, and which one is apt to think scorn of.
"Be not wise in your own conceits." This is, do not think that you can do for
yourselves. Because the Scripture says in another place besides, "Woe to them
that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight." [Isaiah 5:22]
And by this again, he secretly draws off recklessness, and reduces conceit and
turgidity. For there is nothing that so elates men and makes them feel different
from other people, as the notion that they can do by themselves. Whence also
God has placed us in need one of another, and though thou be wise you will be
in need of another: but if you think that you are not in need of him, you will be
the most foolish and feeble of men. For a man of this sort bares himself of all
succor, and in whatever error he may run into, will not have the advantage either
of correction or of pardon, and will provoke God by his recklessness, and will
run into many errors. For it is the case, aye, and often too, that a wise man does
not perceive what is needful, and a man of less shrewdness hits upon somewhat
that is applicable. And this happened with Moses and his father-in-law, and with
Saul and his servant, and with Isaac and Rebecca. Do not then suppose that you
are lowered by needing another man. For this exalts you the more, this makes
you the stronger, and the brighter too, and the more secure.
Ver. 17. "Recompense to no man evil for evil."
For if you find fault with another who plots against you, why do you make
yourself liable to this accusation? If he did amiss how do you come not to shun