of his natural nativity, is the father's equal, because he has a like
nature."
Reply to Objection 1: These words are to be understood of Christ's
human nature, wherein He is less than the Father, and subject to
Him; but in His divine nature He is equal to the Father. This is
expressed by Athanasius, "Equal to the Father in His Godhead; less
than the Father in humanity": and by Hilary (De Trin. ix): "By the fact
of giving, the Father is greater; but He is not less to Whom the same
being is given"; and (De Synod.): "The Son subjects Himself by His
inborn piety"---that is, by His recognition of paternal authority;
whereas "creatures are subject by their created weakness."
Reply to Objection 2: Equality is measured by greatness. In God
greatness signifies the perfection of nature, as above explained
(Article 1, ad 1), and belongs to the essence. Thus equality and
likeness in God have reference to the essence; nor can there be
inequality or dissimilitude arising from the distinction of the
relations. Wherefore Augustine says (Contra Maxim. iii, 13), "The
question of origin is, Who is from whom? but the question of
equality is, Of what kind, or how great, is he?" Therefore, paternity is
the Father's dignity, as also the Father's essence: since dignity is
something absolute, and pertains to the essence. As, therefore, the
same essence, which in the Father is paternity, in the Son is filiation,
so the same dignity which, in the Father is paternity, in the Son is
filiation. It is thus true to say that the Son possesses whatever
dignity the Father has; but we cannot argue---"the Father has
paternity, therefore the Son has paternity," for there is a transition
from substance to relation. For the Father and the Son have the
same essence and dignity, which exist in the Father by the relation
of giver, and in the Son by relation of receiver.
Reply to Objection 3: In God relation is not a universal whole,
although it is predicated of each of the relations; because all the
relations are one in essence and being, which is irreconcilable with
the idea of universal, the parts of which are distinguished in being.
Persons likewise is not a universal term in God as we have seen
above (Question 30, Article 4). Wherefore all the relations together
are not greater than only one; nor are all the persons something
greater than only one; because the whole perfection of the divine
nature exists in each person.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the Son is in the Father, and conversely?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Son and the Father are not in
each other. For the Philosopher (Phys. iv, text. 23) gives eight modes
of one thing existing in another, according to none of which is the
Son in the Father, or conversely; as is patent to anyone who
examines each mode. Therefore the Son and the Father are not in
each other.
Objection 2: Further, nothing that has come out from another is
within. But the Son from eternity came out from the Father,
according to Micheas 5:2: "His going forth is from the beginning,
from the days of eternity." Therefore the Son is not in the Father.
Objection 3: Further, one of two opposites cannot be in the other.
But the Son and the Father are relatively opposed. Therefore one
cannot be in the other.
On the contrary, It is said (Jn. 14:10): "I am in the Father, and the
Father is in Me."
I answer that, There are three points of consideration as regards the
Father and the Son; the essence, the relation and the origin; and
according to each the Son and the Father are in each other. The
Father is in the Son by His essence, forasmuch as the Father is His
own essence and communicates His essence to the Son not by any
change on His part. Hence it follows that as the Father's essence is
in the Son, the Father Himself is in the Son; likewise, since the Son
is His own essence, it follows that He Himself is in the Father in
Whom is His essence. This is expressed by Hilary (De Trin. v), "The
unchangeable God, so to speak, follows His own nature in begetting
an unchangeable subsisting God. So we understand the nature of
God to subsist in Him, for He is God in God." It is also manifest that
as regards the relations, each of two relative opposites is in the
concept of the other. Regarding origin also, it is clear that the
procession of the intelligible word is not outside the intellect,
inasmuch as it remains in the utterer of the word. What also is
uttered by the word is therein contained. And the same applies to the
Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 1: What is contained in creatures does not