did every day, in what parts they were, into what house they entered, and where
they lodged — to relate everything with minute exactness, so replete with
advantage is all that was done by them. But the greater part, not knowing the
benefit that would result thence, proceed to censure it.
For if only seeing those places where they sat or where they were
imprisoned, mere lifeless spots, we often transport our minds there, and imagine
their virtue, and are excited by it, and become more zealous, much more would
this be the case, if we heard their words and their other actions. But concerning a
friend a man enquires, where he lives, what he is doing, whither he is going: and
say, should we not make these enquiries about these the general instructors of the
world? For when a man leads a spiritual life, the habit, the walk, the words and
the actions of such an one, in short, all that relates to him, profits the hearers, and
nothing is a hindrance or impediment.
But it is useful for you to learn that this Epistle was sent upon necessary
matters. Observe therefore how many things are rectified thereby. We have this
one thing first, that in all things it becomes one to be earnest. For if Paul bestows
so much concern upon a runaway, a thief, and a robber, and does not refuse nor
is ashamed to send him back with such commendations; much more does it
become us not to be negligent in such matters. Secondly, that we ought not to
abandon the race of slaves, even if they have proceeded to extreme wickedness.
For if a thief and a runaway become so virtuous that Paul was willing to make
him a companion, and says in this Epistle, "that in your stead he might have
ministered unto me" [Philemon 13], much more ought we not to abandon the
free. Thirdly, that we ought not to withdraw slaves from the service of their
masters. For if Paul, who had such confidence in Philemon, was unwilling to
detain Onesimus, so useful and serviceable to minister to himself, without the
consent of his master, much less ought we so to act. For if the servant is so
excellent, he ought by all means to continue in that service, and to acknowledge
the authority of his master, that he may be the occasion of benefit to all in that
house. Why do you take the candle from the candlestick to place it in the bushel?

I wish it were possible to bring into the cities those (servants) who are
without. "What," say you, "if he also should become corrupt." And why should
he, I beseech you? Because he has come into the city? But consider, that being
without he will be much more corrupt. For he who is corrupt being within, will
be much more so being without. For here he will be delivered from necessary
care, his master taking that care upon himself; but there the concern about those
things will draw him off perhaps even from things more necessary, and more
spiritual. On this account the blessed Paul, when giving them the best counsel,
said, "Are you called, being a servant? Care not for it: but if even you may be
made free, use it rather" [1 Corinthians 7:21]; that is, abide in slavery. But what
is more important than all, that the word of God be not blasphemed, as he
himself says in one of his Epistles. "Let as many servants as are under the yoke
count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and His
doctrine be not blasphemed." [1 Timothy 6:1] For the Gentiles also will say, that
even one who is a slave can be well pleasing to God. But now many are reduced
to the necessity of blasphemy, and of saying Christianity has been introduced
into life for the subversion of everything, masters having their servants taken
from them, and it is a matter of violence.
Let me also say one other thing. He teaches us not to be ashamed of our
domestics, if they are virtuous. For if Paul, the most admirable of men, speaks
thus much in favor of this one, much more should we speak favorably of ours.
There being then so many good effects— and yet we have not mentioned all—
does any one think it superfluous that this Epistle was inserted? And would not
this be extreme folly? Let us then, I beseech you, apply to the Epistle written by
the Apostle. For having gained already so many advantages from it, we shall
gain more from the text.