hear what preceded those words; "they all rose up," says the history, "from the
table" [1 Samuel 1:9], and she, immediately, did not betake herself to sleep, nor
to repose. Whence she appears to me even when she was sitting at the table to
have partaken lightly, and not to have been made heavy with viands. Otherwise
never could she have shed so many tears; for if we, when we are fasting and
foodless, hardly pray thus, or rather never pray thus, much more would not she
ever have prayed thus after a meal, unless even at the meal she had been as they
that eat not. Let us be ashamed, us that are men, at the example of this woman;
let us be ashamed, that are suing and gasping for a kingdom, at her, praying and
weeping for a little child. "And she stood," it says, "before the Lord" [1 Samuel
1:10]; and what are her words? "Adonai, Lord, Eloi Sabaoth!" and this is, being
interpreted, "O Lord, the God of Hosts." Her tears went before her tongue; by
these she hoped to prevail with God to bend to her request. Where tears are,
there is always affliction also: where affliction is, there is great wisdom and
heedfulness. "If you will indeed," she continues, "look on the affliction of your
handmaid, and wilt give unto your handmaid a man child, then will I give him
unto the Lord all the days of his life." [1 Samuel 1:11] She said not, "for one
year," or, "for two," as we do—nor said she, "if you will give me a child, I will
give you money"; but, "I give back to You the very gift itself entire, my first-born,
the son of my prayer." Truly here was a daughter of Abraham. He gave when it
was demanded of him. She offers even before it is demanded.
But observe even after this her deep reverence. "Only her lips moved, but
her voice," it says, "was not heard." [1 Samuel 1:13] And thus does he who
would gain his request draw near unto God; not consulting his ease, nor gaping,
nor lounging, nor scratching his head, nor with utter listlessness. What, was not
God able to grant, even without any prayer at all? What, did He not know the
woman's desire even before she asked? And yet had He granted it before she
asked, then the woman's earnestness would not have been shown, her virtue
would not have been made manifest, she would not have gained so great a
reward. So that the delay is not the result of envy or of witchcraft, but of

providential kindness. When therefore ye hear the Scripture saying, that "the
Lord had shut up her womb" (ver. 5, 6.), and that, "her rival provoked her sore";
consider that it is His intention to prove the woman's seriousness. For, mark, she
had a husband devoted to her, for he said [1 Samuel 1:8], "Am I not better to you
than ten sons?" "And her rival," it says, "provoked her sore," that is, reproached
her, insulted over her. And yet did she never once retaliate, nor utter imprecation
against her, nor say, "Avenge me, for my rival reviles me." The other had
children, but this woman had her husband's love to make amends. With this at
least he even consoled her, saying, "Am not I better to you than ten sons?"
But let us look, again, at the deep wisdom of this woman. "And Eli," it says,
"thought she had been drunken." [1 Samuel 1:13] Yet observe what she says to
him also, "Nay, count not your handmaid for a daughter of Belial, for out of the
abundance of my complaint and my provocation have I spoken hitherto." [1
Samuel 1:16] Here is truly the proof of a contrite heart, when we are not angry
with those that revile us, when we are not indignant against them, when we reply
but in self-defense. Nothing renders the heart so wise as affliction; nothing is
there so sweet as "godly mourning." [2 Corinthians 7:10] "Out of the
abundance," says she, "of my complaint and my provocation have I spoken
hitherto." Her let us imitate, one and all. Hearken, you that are barren, hearken,
you that desire children, hearken, both husbands and wives; yes, for husbands,
too, used oftentimes to contribute their part; for hear what the Scripture says,
"And Isaac intreated the Lord for Rebekah his wife, because she was barren."
[Genesis 25:21] For prayer is able to accomplish great things.
"With all prayer and supplication," says he, "for all the saints, and for me,"
placing himself last. What doest thou, O blessed Paul, in thus placing yourself
last? Yea, says he, "that utterance may be given unto me, in opening my mouth,
to make known with boldness the mystery of the gospel, for which I am an
ambassador in chains." And where are you an ambassador? "To mankind," says
he. Oh! amazing lovingkindness of God! He sent from Heaven in His own Name
ambassadors for peace, and lo, men took them, and bound them, and reverenced