rather is filled up and put in greater security: and so of all the others.
Wherefore, you see, as He had before unsuspectedly cast the seeds of this
teaching; so at the time when from His comparison of the old and new
commandments, He would be more distinctly suspected of placing them in
opposition, He used His corrective beforehand. For in a covert way He had
indeed already scattered those seeds, by what He had said. Thus, "Blessed are
the poor," is the same as that we are not to be angry; and, "Blessed are the pure
in heart," as not to "look upon a woman for lust;" and the "not laying up
treasures on earth," harmonizes with, "Blessed are the merciful;" and "to
mourn" also, "to be persecuted" and "reviled," coincide with "entering in at the
strait gate;" and, "to hunger and thirst after righteousness," is nothing else than
that which He says afterwards, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye also to them." And having declared "the peace-maker blessed," He again
almost said the same, when He gave command "to leave the gift," and hasten to
reconciliation with him that was grieved, and about "agreeing with our
adversary."
But there He set down the rewards of them that do right, here rather the
punishments of them who neglect practice. Wherefore as in that place He said,
"The meek shall inherit earth;" so here, "He who calls his brother fool, shall be
in danger of hell-fire;" and there, "The pure in heart shall see God;" here, he is a
complete adulterer who looks unchastely. And having there called "the peacemakers, sons of God;" here He alarms us from another quarter, saying, "Lest at
any time the adversary deliver you to the judge." Thus also, whereas in the
former part He blesses them that mourn, and them that are persecuted; in the
following, establishing the very same point, He threatens destruction to them
that go not that way; for, "They that walk 'in the broad way,' says He, 'make their
end there.'" And, "You cannot serve God and mammon," seems to me the same
with, "Blessed are the merciful," and, "those that hunger after righteousness."
But as I said, since He is going to say these things more clearly, and not
only more clearly, but also to add again more than had been already said (for He

no longer merely seeks a merciful man, but bids us give up even our coat; not
simply a meek person, but to turn also the other cheek to him that would smite
us): therefore He first takes away the apparent contradiction.
On this account, then, as I have already stated, He said this not once only,
but once and again; in that to the words, "Think not that I have come to destroy,"
He added, "I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill."
"For verily I say unto you, Till Heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the law, till all come to pass."
Now what He says is like this: it cannot be that it should remain
unaccomplished, but the very least thing therein must needs be fulfilled. Which
thing He Himself performed, in that He completed it with all exactness.
And here He signifies to us obscurely that the fashion of the whole world is
also being changed. Nor did He set it down without purpose, but in order to
arouse the hearer, and indicate, that He was with just cause introducing another
discipline; if at least the very works of the creation are all to be transformed, and
mankind is to be called to another country, and to a higher way of practising how
to live.
5. "Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called least in the kingdom of Heaven."
[Matthew 5:19]
Thus, having rid Himself of the evil suspicion, and having stopped the
mouths of them who would fain gainsay, then at length He proceeds to alarm,
and sets down a heavy, denunciation in support of the enactments He was
entering on.
For as to His having said this in behalf not of the ancient laws, but of those
which He was proceeding to enact, listen to what follows, "For I say unto you,"
says He, "Unless your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the kingdom of Heaven."
For if He were threatening with regard to the ancient laws, how said He,
"except it shall exceed?" since they who did just the same as those ancients,