Homily 15 on the Gospel of John
John 1:18
"No man has seen God at any time; the Only-begotten Son, which is in the
bosom of the Father, He has declared Him."
1. God will not have us listen to the words and sentences contained in the
Scriptures carelessly, but with much attention. This is why the blessed David has
prefixed in many places to his Psalms the title "for understanding," and has said,
"Open Thou my eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of Your Law."
[Psalm 32:42, etc.; Psalm 119:18] And after him his son again shows that we
ought to "seek out wisdom as silver, and to make merchandise of her rather than
of gold." [Proverbs 2:4 and 3:14 [partially quoted]; John 5:39] And the Lord
when He exhorts the Jews to "search the Scriptures," the more urges us to the
enquiry, for He would not thus have spoken if it were possible to comprehend
them immediately at the first reading. No one would ever search for what is
obvious and at hand, but for that which is wrapt in shadow, and which must be
found after much enquiry; and so to arouse us to the search He calls them
"hidden treasure." [Proverbs 2:4; Matthew 13:44] These words are said to us that
we may not apply ourselves to the words of the Scriptures carelessly or in a
chance way, but with great exactness. For if any one listen to what is said in
them without enquiring into the meaning, and receive all so as it is spoken,
according to the letter, he will suppose many unseemly things of God, will admit
of Him that He is a man, that He is made of brass, is wrathful, is furious, and
many opinions yet worse than these. But if he fully learn the sense that lies
beneath, he will be freed from all this unseemliness. [Revelation 1:15] The very
text which now lies before us says, that God has a bosom, a thing proper to
bodily substances, yet no one is so insane as to imagine, that He who is without

body is a body. In order then that we may properly interpret the entire passage
according to its spiritual meaning, let us search it through from its beginning.
"No man has seen God at any time." By what connection of thought does
the Apostle come to say this? After showing the exceeding greatness of the gifts
of Christ, and the infinite difference between them and those ministered by
Moses, he would add the reasonable cause of the difference. Moses, as being a
servant, was minister of lower things, but Christ being Lord and King, and the
King's Son, brought to us things far greater, being ever with the Father, and
beholding Him continually; wherefore He says, "No man has seen God at any
time." What then shall we answer to the most mighty of voice, Esaias, when he
says, "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up" [Isaiah 6:1]; and
to John himself testifying of Him, that "he said these things when he had seen
His glory"? [John 12:41] What also to Ezekiel? For he too beheld Him sitting
above the Cherubim. [Ezekiel 1 and 10] What to Daniel? For he too says, "The
Ancient of days did sit" [Daniel 7:9] What to Moses himself, saying, "Show me
Your Glory, that I may see You so as to know You." [Exodus 33:13, partly from
Septuagint] And Jacob took his name from this very thing, being called "Israel";
for Israel is "one that sees God." And others have seen him. How then says John,
"No man has seen God at any time"? It is to declare, that all these were instances
of (His) condescension, not the vision of the Essence itself unveiled. For had
they seen the very Nature, they would not have beheld It under different forms,
since that is simple, without form, or parts, or bounding lines. It sits not, nor
stands, nor walks: these things belong all to bodies. But how He Is, He only
knows. And this He has declared by a certain prophet, saying, "I have multiplied
visions, and used similitudes by the hands of the prophets" [Hosea 12:10], that is,
"I have condescended, I have not appeared as I really was." For since His Son
was about to appear in very flesh, He prepared them from old time to behold the
substance of God, as far as it was possible for them to see It; but what God really
is, not only have not the prophets seen, but not even angels nor archangels. If
you ask them, you shall not hear them answering anything concerning His