and confusion, because you come not with a reverent soul. What do you say? "I
know not what things are said." Well then, for this very reason ought thou to
give heed. But if not even the obscurity stir up your soul, much more if things
were clear would you hurry them by. Yea, this is the reason why neither all
things are clear, lest you should indulge indolence; nor obscure, lest you should
be in despair.
And whereas that eunuch and barbarian [Acts 8:20] said none of these
things, but surrounded as he was with a crowd of so important affairs and on his
journey, had a book in his hands and was reading: do you, both abounding in
teachers, and having others to read to you privately , allege to me your excuses
and pretexts? Do you not know what is said? Why then pray that you may learn:
but sure it is impossible to be ignorant of all things. For many things are of
themselves evident and clear. And further, even if you be ignorant of all, even so
ought thou to be quiet, not to put out them that are attentive; that God, accepting
your quietness and your reverence, may make the obscure things also plain. But
can you not be silent? Well then, go out, not to become a mischief to others also.
For in truth there ought to be but one voice in the church always, even as
there is but one body. Therefore both he that reads utters his voice alone, and the
Bishop himself is content to sit in silence; and he who chants chants alone; and
though all utter the response, the voice is wafted as from one mouth. And he that
pronounces a homily pronounces it alone. But when there are many conversing
on many and diverse subjects, why do we disturb you for no good? Since surely
unless ye thought that we are but disturbing you for no good, you would not in
the midst of our speech on such high matters, discourse on things of no
consequence.
10. Therefore not in your conduct only, but in your very estimation of
things, there is great perversion. And ye gape after superfluities, and leaving the
truth pursue all sorts of shadows and dreams. Are not all present things a shadow
and dreams, and worse than a shadow? For both before they appear, they fly
away; and before they are flown, the trouble they give is much, and more than

the pleasure. Let one acquire in this world and bury in the earth ever such
abundance of wealth, yet when the night is past, naked he shall depart hence, and
no wonder. Since they too who are rich but in a dream, on rising from their
couch have nothing of what they seemed to have while sleeping. So also are the
greedy of gain: or rather not so, but in a much worse condition. For he that
dreams of being rich, neither has the money which he fancied he had, nor is any
other mischief found to have accrued to him from this phantasy when he arises,
but this man is both deprived of his riches, and has also to depart, filled with the
sins which arise out of them; and in his wealth having but enjoyed a phantasy,
the evils resulting from his wealth he sees not in fancy any more, but in the very
truth of things; and his pleasure was in dreams, but the punishment ensuing on
his pleasure turns out no more a dream, but is matter of actual experience. Yea
rather, even before that punishment, even here he pays the heaviest penalty, in
the very collecting of his wealth wearing into himself innumerable sadnesses,
anxieties, accusations, calumnies, tumults, perturbations.
In order therefore that we may be delivered both from the dreams and from
the evils that are not in dreams, instead of covetousness let us choose
almsgiving, instead of rapine, mercy to mankind. For thus we shall obtain the
good things both present and to come, through the grace and mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom, to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power,
honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.