Arg. 7. Since all things, so far as they have being, share in the goodness of God; the
longer they exist, the more they share of that goodness: hence also the perpetual being
of the species is said to be divine. But the divine goodness is infinite. Therefore it
is proper to it to communicate itself infinitely, and not for a fixed time only.
Reply. It was proper for the creature, in such likeness as became it, to represent the
divine goodness. Such representation cannot be by way of equality: it can only be in
such way as the higher and greater is represented by the lower and less. Now the
excess of the divine goodness above the creature is best expressed by this, that
creatures have not always been in existence: for thereby it appears that all other beings
but God Himself have God for the author of their being; and that His power is not tied to
producing effects of one particular character, as physical nature produces physical
effects, but that He is a voluntary and intelligent agent.

the opponent argues that God must have created from all eternity. St Thomas in reply
allows that eternity affords us no means of fixing the date of creation: still, he contends,
we have a measure of the date in the time that has elapsed since, which, even though
we do not know it, is a knowable finite quantity.

the multiplicity of creatures is reduced to unity in the sheer, simple, and superessential
essence of God; and all things in God are one. There are therefore in God most true
and perfect exemplars of things, which remain incorrupt for ever: whereas the things
that we see in this sensible world are mere symbols and signs of reality, that pass away
with time and perish" (Blosius, i.e. Louis of Blois, O.S.B., Institutio Spiritualis, Opera
Omnia, Cologne, 1571, p. 423).

CHAPTERS XXXIII, XXXVI--Reasons alleged for the Eternity of the World on the part
Creatures, with answers to the same
ARG. 1. There are creatures in which there is no potentiality of not being (see Chap.

beyond motion (B. I, Chapp.XIII,XV). The only alternative left is that some
created substance must be eternal.
Reply. There is nothing in this argument to evince that the very supposition of time not
being supposes that time is (read, Si ponitur tempus non esse, ponatur esse). For when
we speak of something prior to the being of time, we do not thereby assert any real part
of time, but only an imaginary part. When we say, `Time has being after not being', we
mean that there was no instant of time before this present marked instant: as when we
say that there is nothing above the stellar universe, we do not mean that there is any
place beyond the stellar universe, which may be spoken of as `above' it, but that above
it there is no `place' at all.

## CHAPTER XXXIV, XXXVII--Reasons alleged for the Eternity of the World on the part of
the Creative Process itself, with Answers to the same
ARG. 1. It is the common opinion of all philosophers, and therefore it must be true, that
nothing is made of nothing (Aristotle, Physics, B. I, Chapp.VII,VIII). Whatever
is made, then, must be made of something; and that again, if it is made at all, must be
made of something else. But this process cannot go on to infinity; and therefore we
must come to something that was not made. But every being that has not always been
must have been made. Therefore that out of which all things are first made must be
something everlasting. That cannot be God, because He cannot be the material of
anything. Therefore there must be something eternal outside God, namely, primordial
matter.
Reply (Chap.XXXVII). The common position of philosophers, that nothing is made
of nothing, is true of the sort of making that they considered. For all our knowledge
begins in sense, which is of singular objects; and human investigation has advanced
from particular to general considerations. Hence, in studying the beginning of things,
men gave their attention to the making of particular things in detail. The making of one
sort of being out of another sort is the making of some particular being, inasmuch as it is
`this being,' not as it is `being' generally: for some prior being there was that now is
changed into `this being.' But entering more deeply into the origin of things,
philosophers came finally to consider the issuing of all created being from one first
cause (Chapp.XV,XVI). In this origin of all created being from God, it is
impossible to allow any making out of pre-existent material: for such making out of preexistent material would not be a making of the whole being of the creature. This first
making of the universe was not attained to in the thought of the early physicists, whose
common opinion it was that nothing was made of nothing: or if any did attain to it, they
considered that such a term as `making' did not properly apply to it, since the name
`making' implies movement or change, whereas in this origin of all being from one
first being there can be no question of the transmutation of one being into another
(Chap.XVII). Therefore it is not the concern of physical science to study this first
origin of all things: that study belongs to the metaphysician, who deals with being in
general and realities apart from motion. We may however by a figure of speech
apply the name of `making' to creation, and speak of things as `made,' whatsoever they
are, the essence or nature whereof has its origin from other being.
Arg. 2. Everything that takes a new being is now otherwise than as it was before: that
must come about by some movement or change: but all movement or change is in
some subject: therefore before anything is made there must be some subject of motion.
Reply. The notion of motion or change is foisted in here to no purpose: for what nowise
is, is not anywise, and affords no hold for the conclusion that, when it begins to be, it is
otherwise than as it was before.
These then are the reasons which some hold to as demonstrative, and necessarily
evincing that creatures have always existed, wherein they contradict the Catholic faith,