SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.4.

his service to one who commands him, even as a sword is merely
the instrument to him that wields it." Wherefore those who, at the
Lord's command, slew their neighbors and friends, would seem not
to have done this themselves, but rather He by whose authority they
acted thus: just as a soldier slays the foe by the authority of his
sovereign, and the executioner slays the robber by the authority of
the judge.
Reply to Objection 2: A beast is by nature distinct from man,
wherefore in the case of a wild beast there is no need for an
authority to kill it; whereas, in the case of domestic animals, such
authority is required, not for their sake, but on account of the
owner's loss. On the other hand a man who has sinned is not by
nature distinct from good men; hence a public authority is requisite
in order to condemn him to death for the common good.
Reply to Objection 3: It is lawful for any private individual to do
anything for the common good, provided it harm nobody: but if it be
harmful to some other, it cannot be done, except by virtue of the
judgment of the person to whom it pertains to decide what is to be
taken from the parts for the welfare of the whole.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is lawful for clerics to kill evil-doers?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful for clerics to kill evil-doers. For
clerics especially should fulfil the precept of the Apostle (1 Cor.
4:16): "Be ye followers of me as I also am of Christ," whereby we are
called upon to imitate God and His saints. Now the very God whom
we worship puts evildoers to death, according to Ps. 135:10, "Who
smote Egypt with their firstborn." Again Moses made the Levites slay
twenty-three thousand men on account of the worship of the calf (Ex.
32), the priest Phinees slew the Israelite who went in to the woman of
Madian (Num. 25), Samuel killed Agag king of Amalec (1 Kgs. 15),
Elias slew the priests of Baal (3 Kgs. 18), Mathathias killed the man
who went up to the altar to sacrifice (1 Mach. 2); and, in the New
Testament, Peter killed Ananias and Saphira (Acts 5). Therefore it
seems that even clerics may kill evil-doers.
Objection 2: Further, spiritual power is greater than the secular and
is more united to God. Now the secular power as "God's minister"
lawfully puts evil-doers to death, according to Rm. 13:4. Much more
therefore may clerics, who are God's ministers and have spiritual
power, put evil-doers to death.
Objection 3: Further, whosoever lawfully accepts an office, may
lawfully exercise the functions of that office. Now it belongs to the
princely office to slay evildoers, as stated above (Article 3).
Therefore those clerics who are earthly princes may lawfully slay
malefactors.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Tim. 3:2,3): "It behooveth ... a bishop
to be without crime ... not given to wine, no striker."
I answer that, It is unlawful for clerics to kill, for two reasons. First,
because they are chosen for the ministry of the altar, whereon is
represented the Passion of Christ slain "Who, when He was struck
did not strike" (1 Pt. 2:23). Therefore it becomes not clerics to strike
or kill: for ministers should imitate their master, according to Ecclus.
10:2, "As the judge of the people is himself, so also are his
ministers." The other reason is because clerics are entrusted with
the ministry of the New Law, wherein no punishment of death or of
bodily maiming is appointed: wherefore they should abstain from
such things in order that they may be fitting ministers of the New