bound to pay the debt to the other when the latter is troubled with
concupiscence. Therefore the payment of the debt is an obligation of
precept.
I answer that, Marriage was instituted especially as fulfilling an office
of nature. Wherefore in its act the movement of nature must be
observed according to which the nutritive power administers to the
generative power that alone which is in excess of what is required
for the preservation of the individual: for the natural order requires
that a thing should be first perfected in itself, and that afterwards it
should communicate of its perfection to others: and this is also the
order of charity which perfects nature. And therefore, since the wife
has power over her husband only in relation to the generative power
and not in relation to things directed to the preservation of the
individual, the husband is bound to pay the debt to his wife, in
matters pertaining to the begetting of children, with due regard
however to his own welfare.
Reply to Objection 1: It is possible through fulfilling a precept to
render oneself unfit for the exercise of a sacred duty: thus a judge
becomes irregular by sentencing a man to death. In like manner he
who pays the marriage debt, in fulfillment of the precept, becomes
unfit for the exercise of divine offices, not because the act in
question is sinful, but on account of its carnal nature. And so,
according to the Master (Sent. iv, D, 32), Jerome is speaking only of
the ministers of the Church, and not of others who should be left to
use their own discretion, because without sin they may either
abstain out of reverence or receive Christ's body out of devotion.
Reply to Objection 2: The wife has no power over her husband's
body, except as is consistent with the welfare of his person, as
stated above. Wherefore if she go beyond this in her demands, it is
not a request for the debt, but an unjust exaction; and for this reason
the husband is not bound to satisfy her.
Reply to Objection 3: If the husband be rendered incapable of paying
the debt through a cause consequent upon marriage, for instance
through having already paid the debt and being unable to pay it, the
wife has no right to ask again, and in doing so she behaves as a
harlot rather than as a wife. But if he be rendered incapable through
some other cause, then if this be a lawful cause, he is not bound,
and she cannot ask, but if it be an unlawful cause, then he sins, and
his wife's sin, should she fall into fornication on this account, is

somewhat imputable to him. Hence he should endeavor to do his
best that his wife may remain continent.
Reply to Objection 4: Leprosy voids a betrothal but not a marriage.
Wherefore a wife is bound to pay the debt even to a leprous
husband. But she is not bound to cohabit with him, because she is
not so liable to infection from marital intercourse as from continual
cohabitation. And though the child begotten of them be diseased, it
is better to be thus than not at all.