FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.2.

fear regard two things, namely, the evil from which it shrinks, and
that good which, by its power, can inflict that evil. In this way God is
feared by man, inasmuch as He can inflict punishment, spiritual or
corporal. In this way, too, we fear the power of man; especially when
it has been thwarted, or when it is unjust, because then it is more
likely to do us a harm.
In like manner one fears "to be over another," i.e. to lean on another,
so that it is in his power to do us a harm: thus a man fears another,
who knows him to be guilty of a crime lest he reveal it to others.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether evil of nature is an object of fear?

Objection 1: It would seem that evil of nature is not an object of fear.
For the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 5) that "fear makes us take
counsel." But we do not take counsel about things which happen
naturally, as stated in Ethic. iii, 3. Therefore evil of nature is not an
object of fear.
Objection 2: Further, natural defects such as death and the like are
always threatening man. If therefore such like evils were an object of
fear, man would needs be always in fear.
Objection 3: Further, nature does not move to contraries. But evil of
nature is an effect of nature. Therefore if a man shrinks from such
like evils through fear thereof, this is not an effect of nature.
Therefore natural fear is not of the evil of nature; and yet it seems
that it should be.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 6) that "the most
terrible of all things is death," which is an evil of nature.
I answer that, As the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 5), fear is caused by
the "imagination of a future evil which is either corruptive or
painful." Now just as a painful evil is that which is contrary to the
will, so a corruptive evil is that which is contrary to nature: and this
is the evil of nature. Consequently evil of nature can be the object of
fear.
But it must be observed that evil of nature sometimes arises from a
natural cause; and then it is called evil of nature, not merely from
being a privation of the good of nature, but also from being an effect
of nature; such are natural death and other like defects. But
sometimes evil of nature arises from a non-natural cause; such as
violent death inflicted by an assailant. In either case evil of nature is
feared to a certain extent, and to a certain extent not. For since fear
arises "from the imagination of future evil," as the Philosopher says
(Rhet. ii, 5), whatever removes the imagination of the future evil,
removes fear also. Now it may happen in two ways that an evil may
not appear as about to be. First, through being remote and far off:
for, on account of the distance, such a thing is considered as though
it were not to be. Hence we either do not fear it, or fear it but little;