Secondly, if any subtleties are proposed to uncultivated people, these folk may find in the
imperfect comprehension of them matter for error; wherefore, in 1 Cor. 3:1 it is said: "And I,
brethren, could not speak to you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal. As unto little,ones in Christ,
I gave you milk to drink, not meat." And therefore also, on Exod. 21:33, "If a man open a pit,"
the gloss of Gregory says: "He who in sacred eloquence now understands lofty things should
cover over these sublime truths by silence when in the presence of those who do not comprehend
them, lest through some scandal of mind he cause the loss of some little one among the faithful
or of an infidel who otherwise might have come to believe. Those truths, therefore, ought to be
hidden from those to whom they might do harm; but a distinction can be made as regards
speaking, since these same truths may be privately revealed to the wise, though publicly silence
is kept regarding them."

Thus, Augustine (IV De doctrina Christiana) says: "Where certain truths are, by reason of their
own character, not comprehensible, or scarcely so, even when explained with every effort on the
part of the speaker to make them clear, these one rarely dwells upon with a general audience, or
never mentions, at all: but in writing, the same distinction cannot be adhered to, because a book,
once published, can fall into the hands of any one at all, and therefore some truths should be
shielded by obscuring words so that they may profit those who will understand them and be
hidden from the simple who will not comprehend them."

And by this procedure no harm is done to anyone, because those who understand are held by
that which they read, but those who do not understand are not compelled to continue reading.
And therefore Augustine says in the same place: "In books which are, so written that they
somehow keep a hold on the attention of the reader who understands them, but cause no harm to
the one who does not understand them and so is unwilling to read further, there is no failure in
duty on the part of the author as long as we bring these truths, even though they are so difficult
of comprehension, to the understanding of some."

#### Answers to objections

1. It is answered: The authority quoted is not relevant to the proposition. For it is not to be
understood that the teaching of prudent men be "easy" in the active sense; that is, that they easily
teach everything; but in the passive sense: that such men are easily taught, as is evident from the
gloss.

2. It may be answered: These authorities speak of hiding truths which ought to be made manifest;
wherefore it is previously said in Sirach 4:28, "Refrain not to speak in the time of salvation." By
this, however, there is no denial of the fact that gore are mysteries which ought to be concealed
by obscuring words.