SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.2.

commanding; secondly, by leading up to the effect, and, in a way,
disposing to it, and in this sense the reason asks for something to
be done by things not subject to it, whether they be its equals or its
superiors. Now both of these, namely, to command and to ask or
beseech, imply a certain ordering, seeing that man proposes
something to be effected by something else, wherefore they pertain
to the reason to which it belongs to set in order. For this reason the
Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 13) that the "reason exhorts us to do what
is best."
Now in the present instance we are speaking of prayer as signifying
a beseeching or petition, in which sense Augustine [Rabanus, De
Univ. vi, 14]: says (De Verb. Dom.) that "prayer is a petition," and
Damascene states (De Fide Orth. iii, 24) that "to pray is to ask
becoming things of God." Accordingly it is evident that prayer, as we
speak of it now, is an act of reason.
Reply to Objection 1: The Lord is said to hear the desire of the poor,
either because desire is the cause of their petition, since a petition is
like the interpreter of a desire, or in order to show how speedily they
are heard, since no sooner do the poor desire something than God
hears them before they put up a prayer, according to the saying of Is.
65:24, "And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will hear."
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (FP, Question 82, Article 4; FS,
Question 9, Article 1, ad 3), the will moves the reason to its end:
wherefore nothing hinders the act of reason, under the motion of the
will, from tending to an end such as charity which is union with God.
Now prayer tends to God through being moved by the will of charity,
as it were, and this in two ways. First, on the part of the object of our
petition, because when we pray we ought principally to ask to be
united to God, according to Ps. 26:4, "One thing I have asked of the
Lord, this will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life." Secondly, on the part of the petitioner, who
ought to approach the person whom he petitions, either locally, as
when he petitions a man, or mentally, as when he petitions God.
Hence Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iii) that "when we call upon God in
our prayers, we unveil our mind in His presence": and in the same
sense Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 24) that "prayer is the
raising up of the mind to God."
Reply to Objection 3: These three acts belong to the speculative
reason, but to the practical reason it belongs in addition to cause

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.2.

something by way of command or of petition, as stated above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is becoming to pray?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is unbecoming to pray. Prayer
seems to be necessary in order that we may make our needs known
to the person to whom we pray. But according to Mt. 6:32, "Your
Father knoweth that you have need of all these things." Therefore it
is not becoming to pray to God.
Objection 2: Further, by prayer we bend the mind of the person to
whom we pray, so that he may do what is asked of him. But God's
mind is unchangeable and inflexible, according to 1 Kgs. 15:29, "But
the Triumpher in Israel will not spare, and will not be moved to
repentance." Therefore it is not fitting that we should pray to God.
Objection 3: Further, it is more liberal to give to one that asks not,
than to one who asks because, according to Seneca (De Benefic. ii,
1), "nothing is bought more dearly than what is bought with
prayers." But God is supremely liberal. Therefore it would seem
unbecoming to pray to God.
On the contrary, It is written (Lk. 18:1): "We ought always to pray,
and not to faint."
I answer that, Among the ancients there was a threefold error
concerning prayer. Some held that human affairs are not ruled by
Divine providence; whence it would follow that it is useless to pray
and to worship God at all: of these it is written (Malach. 3:14): "You
have said: He laboreth in vain that serveth God." Another opinion
held that all things, even in human affairs, happen of necessity,
whether by reason of the unchangeableness of Divine providence, or
through the compelling influence of the stars, or on account of the
connection of causes: and this opinion also excluded the utility of
prayer. There was a third opinion of those who held that human
affairs are indeed ruled by Divine providence, and that they do not
happen of necessity; yet they deemed the disposition of Divine
providence to be changeable, and that it is changed by prayers and
other things pertaining to the worship of God. All these opinions
were disproved in the FP, Question 19, Articles 7,8; FP, Question 22,
Articles 2,4; FP, Question 115, Article 6; FP, Question 116. Wherefore
it behooves us so to account for the utility of prayer as neither to
impose necessity on human affairs subject to Divine providence, nor