good reason; for he who is not made better even by punishment, is afterwards
led as insensible and a despiser to still heavier chastisement. The fault should of
itself be sufficient to check and to render more sober the man who once has
slipped, but when not even the addition of punishment effects this, he naturally
requires more bitter torments. Now if even in this world when after punishment
we fall into the same sins, we are chastised yet more severely then before, ought
we not when after sinning we have not been punished at all, to be then very
exceedingly afraid and to tremble, as being about to endure something
irreparable? "And wherefore," says some one, "are not all thus punished? For we
see many bad men well in body, vigorous, and enjoying great prosperity." But let
us not be confident, let us mourn for them in this case most of all, since their
having suffered nothing here, helps them on to a severer vengeance hereafter. As
Paul declares when he says, "But now that we are judged, we are chastened of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world" [1 Corinthians
11:32]; for the punishments here are for warning, there for vengeance.
"What then," says one, "do all diseases proceed from sin?" Not all, but most
of them; and some proceed from different kinds of loose living, since gluttony,
intemperance, and sloth, produce such like sufferings. But the one rule we have
to observe, is to bear every stroke thankfully; for they are sent because of our
sins, as in the Kings we see one attacked by gout [1 Kings 15:23]; they are sent
also to make us approved, as the Lord says to Job, "Do you think that I have
spoken to you, save that you might appear righteous?" [Job 60:8, Septuagint]
But why is it that in the case of these paralytics Christ brings forward their
sins? For He says also to him in Matthew who lay on a bed, "Son, be of good
cheer, your sins are forgiven you" [Matthew 9:2]: and to this man, "Behold, you
are made whole; sin no more." I know that some slander this paralytic, asserting
that he was an accuser of Christ, and that therefore this speech was addressed to
him; what then shall we say of the other in Matthew, who heard nearly the same
words? For Christ says to him also, "Your sins be forgiven you." Whence it is
clear, that neither was this man thus addressed on the account which they allege.

And this we may see more clearly from what follows; for, says the Evangelist,
"Afterward Jesus finds him in the Temple," which is an indication of his great
piety; for he departed not into the market places and walks, nor gave himself up
to luxury and ease, but remained in the Temple, although about to sustain so
violent an attack and to be harassed by all there. Yet none of these things
persuaded him to depart from the Temple. Moreover Christ having found him,
even after he had conversed with the Jews, implied nothing of the kind. For had
He desired to charge him with this, He would have said to him, "Are you again
attempting the same sins as before, are you not made better by your cure?" Yet
He said nothing of the kind, but merely secures him for the future.
2. Why then, when He had cured the halt and maimed, did He not in any
instance make mention of the like? Methinks that the diseases of these (the
paralytic) arose from acts of sin, those of the others from natural infirmity. Or if
this be not so, then by means of these men, and by the words spoken to them, He
has spoken to the rest also. For since this disease is more grievous than any
other, by the greater He corrects also the less. And as when He had healed a
certain other He charged him to give glory to God, addressing this exhortation
not to him only but through him to all, so He addresses to these, and by these to
all the rest of mankind, that exhortation and advice which was given to them by
word of mouth. Besides this we may also say, that Jesus perceived great
endurance in his soul, and addressed the exhortation to him as to one who was
able to receive His command, keeping him to health both by the benefit, and by
the fear of future ills.
And observe the absence of boasting. He said not, "Behold, I have made
you whole," but, "You are made whole; sin no more." And again, not, "lest I
punish you," but, "lest a worse thing come unto you"; putting both expressions
not personally, and showing that the cure was rather of grace than of merit. For
He declared not to him that he was delivered after suffering the deserved amount
of punishment, but that through lovingkindness he was made whole. Had this not
been the case, He would have said, "Behold, you have suffered a sufficient