are not (true), they are not. For in the first place he did not say "let him be
proclaimed," but "he is proclaimed," and the difference between this and that is
wide. For the saying "let him be proclaimed" belongs to a lawgiver; but the
saying "he is proclaimed" to one announcing the event. For that Paul does not
ordain a law that there should be heresies, but draws away all who attended to
him, hear what he says, "If any one preaches to you a gospel besides what you
have received, let him be anathema, were it even I, were it even an angel from
the heavens." [Galatians 1:8-9] Now he would not have anathematized both
himself and an angel, if he had known the act to be without danger. And again—
"I am jealous of you with a jealousy of God," he says; "for I have betrothed you
to one husband a chaste virgin: and fear lest at some time, as the serpent
beguiled Eve by his wiliness, so your thoughts should be corrupted from the
singleness that is towards Christ." See, he both set down singleness, and granted
no allowance. For if there were allowance, there was no danger: and if there was
no danger Paul would not have feared: and Christ would not also have
commanded that the tares should be burned up, if it were a thing indifferent to
attend to this one or that or another: or to all indiscriminately.
4. What ever then is what is meant? I wish to narrate to you the whole
history from a point a little earlier; for it is needful to know in what
circumstances Paul was when he was writing these things by letter. In what
circumstances therefore was he? In prison and chains and intolerable perils.
Whence is this manifest? From the epistle itself. For earlier than this he says,
"Now I wish you to know, brethren, that the circumstances in which I am have
come rather to the furtherance of the Gospel; so that my bonds have become
manifest in Christ in the whole Court, and to all the others; and a good many of
the brethren, trusting to my bonds, the more exceedingly dare fearlessly to speak
the word." [Philippians 1:12-14] Now Nero had then cast him into prison. For
just as some robber having set foot in the house, while all are sleeping, when
stealing every thing, if he see any one having lit a lamp, both extinguishes the
light and slays him who holds the lamp, in order that he may be allowed in

security to steal and rob the property of others; so truly also the Cæsar Nero
then, just as any robber and burglar while all were sleeping a deep and
unconscious slumber; robbing the property of all, breaking into marriage
chambers, subverting houses, displaying every form of wickedness; when he saw
Paul having lighted a lamp throughout the world; (the word of his teaching;) and
reproving his wickedness, exerted himself both to extinguish what was preached,
and to put the teachers out of the way; in order that he might be allowed with
authority to do anything he pleased; and after binding that holy man, cast him
into prison. It was at that time then that the blessed Paul wrote these things. Who
would not have been astounded? Who would not have marvelled? Or rather who
could adequately have been astounded at and admired that noble and heavenreaching soul; in that, while bound in Rome and imprisoned, at so great a
distance as that, he wrote a letter to the Philippians? For you know how great is
the distance between Macedonia and Rome. But neither did the length of the
way, nor the amount of time (required), nor the press of business, nor the peril
and the dangers coming one upon another, nor anything else, drive out his love
for and remembrance of the disciples; but he retained them all in his mind; and
not so strongly were his hands bound with the chains as his soul was bound
together and rivetted by his longing for the disciples: which very thing itself
indeed also declaring, in the preface of the Epistle he said, "On account of my
having you in my heart, both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation
of the Gospel." [Philippians 1:7] And just as a King, having ascended upon his
throne at morning-tide and taken his seat in the royal courts, immediately
receives from all quarters innumerable letters; so truly he also, just as in royal
courts, seated in the dungeon, both received and sent his letters in far greater
number; the nations from all quarters referring to his wisdom everything about
what had taken place among themselves; and he administered more business
than the reigning monarch in proportion to his having had a larger dominion
entrusted to him. For in truth God had brought and put into his hands not those
who inhabited the country of the Romans only, but also all the barbarians, both