Objection 6: Further, whatever exists in a thing by reason of its
nature exists in it always. But to be united to matter belongs to the
form by reason of its nature; because form is the act of matter, not
by an accidental quality, but by its own essence; otherwise matter
and form would not make a thing substantially one, but only
accidentally one. Therefore a form cannot be without its own proper
matter. But the intellectual principle, since it is incorruptible, as was
shown above (Question 75, Article 6), remains separate from the
body, after the dissolution of the body. Therefore the intellectual
principle is not united to the body as its form.
On the contrary, According to the Philosopher, Metaph. viii (Did. vii
2), difference is derived from the form. But the difference which
constitutes man is "rational," which is applied to man on account of
his intellectual principle. Therefore the intellectual principle is the
form of man.
I answer that, We must assert that the intellect which is the principle
of intellectual operation is the form of the human body. For that
whereby primarily anything acts is a form of the thing to which the
act is to be attributed: for instance, that whereby a body is primarily
healed is health, and that whereby the soul knows primarily is
knowledge; hence health is a form of the body, and knowledge is a
form of the soul. The reason is because nothing acts except so far as
it is in act; wherefore a thing acts by that whereby it is in act. Now it
is clear that the first thing by which the body lives is the soul. And as
life appears through various operations in different degrees of living
things, that whereby we primarily perform each of all these vital
actions is the soul. For the soul is the primary principle of our
nourishment, sensation, and local movement; and likewise of our
understanding. Therefore this principle by which we primarily
understand, whether it be called the intellect or the intellectual soul,
is the form of the body. This is the demonstration used by Aristotle
(De Anima ii, 2).
But if anyone says that the intellectual soul is not the form of the
body he must first explain how it is that this action of understanding
is the action of this particular man; for each one is conscious that it
is himself who understands. Now an action may be attributed to
anyone in three ways, as is clear from the Philosopher (Phys. v, 1);
for a thing is said to move or act, either by virtue of its whole self, for
instance, as a physician heals; or by virtue of a part, as a man sees

by his eye; or through an accidental quality, as when we say that
something that is white builds, because it is accidental to the builder
to be white. So when we say that Socrates or Plato understands, it is
clear that this is not attributed to him accidentally; since it is
ascribed to him as man, which is predicated of him essentially. We
must therefore say either that Socrates understands by virtue of his
whole self, as Plato maintained, holding that man is an intellectual
soul; or that intelligence is a part of Socrates. The first cannot stand,
as was shown above (Question 75, Article 4), for this reason, that it
is one and the same man who is conscious both that he
understands, and that he senses. But one cannot sense without a
body: therefore the body must be some part of man. It follows
therefore that the intellect by which Socrates understands is a part
of Socrates, so that in some way it is united to the body of Socrates.
The Commentator held that this union is through the intelligible
species, as having a double subject, in the possible intellect, and in
the phantasms which are in the corporeal organs. Thus through the
intelligible species the possible intellect is linked to the body of this
or that particular man. But this link or union does not sufficiently
explain the fact, that the act of the intellect is the act of Socrates.
This can be clearly seen from comparison with the sensitive faculty,
from which Aristotle proceeds to consider things relating to the
intellect. For the relation of phantasms to the intellect is like the
relation of colors to the sense of sight, as he says De Anima iii, 5,7.
Therefore, as the species of colors are in the sight, so are the
species of phantasms in the possible intellect. Now it is clear that
because the colors, the images of which are in the sight, are on a
wall, the action of seeing is not attributed to the wall: for we do not
say that the wall sees, but rather that it is seen. Therefore, from the
fact that the species of phantasms are in the possible intellect, it
does not follow that Socrates, in whom are the phantasms,
understands, but that he or his phantasms are understood.
Some, however, tried to maintain that the intellect is united to the
body as its motor; and hence that the intellect and body form one
thing so that the act of the intellect could be attributed to the whole.
This is, however, absurd for many reasons. First, because the
intellect does not move the body except through the appetite, the
movement of which presupposes the operation of the intellect. The
reason therefore why Socrates understands is not because he is
moved by his intellect, but rather, contrariwise, he is moved by his
intellect because he understands. Secondly, because since Socrates