corporeal thing, so that one combined view might be formed from both.
And so, if we shut one eye, we shall not see two flames, but one as it really
is. But why, if we shut the left eye, that appearance ceases to be seen,
which was on the right; and if, in turn, we shut the right eye, that drops
out of existence which was on the left, is a matter both tedious in itself,
and not necessary at all to our present subject to inquire and discuss. For
it is enough for the business in hand to consider, that unless some image,
precisely like the thing we perceive, were produced in our sense, the
appearance of the flame would not be doubled according to the number
of the eyes; since a certain way of perceiving has been employed, which
could separate the union of rays. Certainly nothing that is really single
can be seen as if it were double by one eye, draw it down, or press, or
distort it as you please, if the other is shut.
5. The case then being so, let us remember how these three things,
although diverse in nature, are tempered together into a kind of unity;
that is, the form of the body which is seen, and the image of it impressed
on the sense, which is vision or sense informed, and the will of the mind
which applies the sense to the sensible thing, and retains the vision itself
in it. The first of these, that is, the visible thing itself, does not belong to
the nature of the living being, except when we discern our own body. But
the second belongs to that nature to this extent, that it is wrought in the
body, and through the body in the soul; for it is wrought in the sense,
which is neither without the body nor without the soul. But the third is of
the soul alone, because it is the will. Although then the substances of
these three are so different, yet they coalesce into such a unity that the
two former can scarcely be distinguished, even with the intervention of
the reason as judge, namely the form of the body which is seen, and the
image of it which is wrought in the sense, that is, vision. And the will so
powerfully combines these two, as both to apply the sense, in order to be
informed, to that thing which is perceived, and to retain it when informed
in that thing. And if it is so vehement that it can be called love, or desire,
or lust, it vehemently affects also the rest of the body of the living being;
and where a duller and harder matter does not resist, changes it into like
shape and color. One may see the little body of a chameleon vary with
ready change, according to the colors which it sees. And in the case of
other animals, since their grossness of flesh does not easily admit change,

the offspring, for the most part, betray the particular fancies of the
mothers, whatever it is that they have beheld with special delight. For the
more tender, and so to say, the more formable, are the primary seeds, the
more effectually and capably they follow the bent of the soul of the
mother, and the phantasy that is wrought in it through that body, which it
has greedily beheld. Abundant instances might be adduced, but one is
sufficient, taken from the most trustworthy books; viz. what Jacob did,
that the sheep and goats might give birth to offspring of various colors, by
placing variegated rods before them in the troughs of water for them to
look at as they drank, at the time they had conceived.