will fall, perhaps not; but if you had rather it should not, then work and inhabit
the more secure apartment: which would you have rather chosen, that idle
condition accompanied with fear, or this labor with confidence? Why then, act
now in the same way. For the uncertain future is like a decayed house, ever
threatening to fall; but this work, laborious though it be, ensures safety.
Now God forbid that it should happen to us to fall into so great straits as to
sin after baptism. However, even if anything such should happen, God is
merciful, and has given us many ways of obtaining remission even after this. But
just as those who sin after baptism are punished for this reason more severely
than the Catechumens, so again, those who know that there are medicines in
repentance, and yet will not make use of them, will undergo a more grievous
chastisement. For by how much the mercy of God is enlarged, by so much does
the punishment increase, if we do not duly profit by that mercy. What do you
say, O man? When you were full of such grievous evils, and given over,
suddenly you became a friend, and wast exalted to the highest honor, not by
labors of your own, but by the gift of God: you again returned to your former
misconduct; and though you deserved to be sorely punished, nevertheless, God
did not turn away, but gave unnumbered opportunities of salvation, whereby you
may yet become a friend: yet for all this, you have not the will to labor. What
forgiveness can you deserve henceforth? Will not the Gentiles with good reason
deride you as a worthless drone? For if there be power in that doctrine of yours,
say they, what means this multitude of uninitiated persons? If the mysteries be
excellent and desirable, let none receive baptism at his last gasp. For that is not
the time for giving of mysteries but for making of wills; the time for mysteries is
in health of mind and soundness of soul. For, if a man would not prefer to make
his will in such a condition; and if he does so make it, he gives a handle for
subsequent litigation (and this is the reason why testators premise these words:
"Alive, in my senses, and in health, I make this disposal of my property:"), how
should it be possible for a person who is no longer master of his senses to go
through the right course of preparation for the sacred mysteries? For if in the

affairs of this life, the laws of the world would not permit a man who was not
perfectly sound in mind to make a will, although it be in his own affairs that he
would lay down the law; how, when you are receiving instruction concerning the
kingdom of heaven, and the unspeakable riches of that world, shall it be possible
for you to learn all clearly, when very likely too you are beside yourself through
the violence of your malady? And when will you say those words to Christ, in
the act of being buried with Him when at the point to depart hence? For indeed
both by works and by words must we show our good will towards Him.
[Romans 6:4] Now what you are doing is all one, as if a man should want to be
enlisted as a soldier, when the war is just about to break up; or to strip for the
contest in the arena, just when the spectators have risen from their seats. For you
have your arms given you, not that you should straightway depart hence, but that
being equipped therewith, you may raise a trophy over the enemy. Let no one
think that it is out of season to discourse on this subject, because it is not Lent
now. Nay, this it is that vexes me, that you look to a set time in such matters.
Whereas that Eunuch, barbarian as he was and on a journey, yea on the very
highway, he did not seek for a set time [Acts 8:27]; no, nor the jailer, though he
was in the midst of a set of prisoners, and the teacher he saw before him was a
man scourged and in chains, and whom he was still to have in his custody. [Acts
16:29] But here, not being inmates of a jail, nor out on a journey, many are
putting off their baptism even to their last breath.
Now if you still questionest that Christ is God, stand away from the Church:
be not here, even as a hearer of the Divine Word, and as one of the catechumens:
but if you are sure of this, and know clearly this truth, why delay? Why shrink
back and hesitate? For fear, say you, lest I should sin. But do you not fear what is
worse, to depart for the next world with such a heavy burden? For it is not
equally excusable, not to have gotten a grace set before you, and to have failed
in attempting to live uprightly. If you be called to account, Why did you not
come for it? What will you answer? In the other case you may allege the burden
of your passions, and the difficulty of a virtuous life: but nothing of the kind