Angels, or with Paul in his bonds, the prison I would choose. Were any about to
change me into one of those powers, that are in Heaven, that are round about the
throne, or into such a prisoner as this, such a prisoner I would choose to be.
Nothing is more blessed than that chain. Would that I could be at this moment in
that very spot, (for the bonds are said to be still in existence,) to behold and
admire those men, for their love of Christ. Would that I could behold the chains,
at which the devils fear and tremble, but which Angels reverence. Nothing is
more noble than to suffer any evil for Christ's sake. I count not Paul so happy,
because he was "caught up into Paradise," [2 Corinthians 12:4] as because he
was cast into the dungeon; I count him not so happy, because he heard
"unspeakable words," as because he endured those bonds. I count him not so
happy, because he was "caught up into the third Heaven," [2 Corinthians 12:2]
as I count him happy for those bonds' sake. For that these are greater than those,
hear how even he himself knew this; for he says not, I who "heard unspeakable
words," beseech you: but what? "I, the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you." Nor
yet are we to wonder, though he inscribes not this in all his Epistles, for he was
not always in prison, but only at certain times.
I deem it more desirable to suffer evil for Christ's sake, than to receive
honor at Christ's hands. This is transcendent honor, this is glory that surpasses all
things. If He Himself who became a servant for my sake, and "emptied"
[Philippians 2:7] His glory, yet thought not Himself so truly in glory, as when He
was crucified for my sake, what ought not I to endure? For hear His own words:
"Father, glorify Thou Me." [John 17:1] What is this you are saying? You are
being led to the cross with thieves and plunderers of graves, you endure the
death of the accursed; You are about to be spit upon and buffeted; and callest
Thou this glory? Yes, He says, for I suffer these things for My beloved ones, and
I count them altogether glory. If He who loved the miserable and wretched calls
this glory, not to be on His Father's throne, nor in His Father's glory, but in
dishonor—if this was His glory, and if this He set before the other: much more
ought I to regard these things as glory. Oh! Those blessed bonds! Oh! Those

blessed hands which that chain adorned! Not so worthy were Paul's hands when
they lifted up and raised the lame man at Lystra, as when they were bound
around with those chains. Had I been living in those times, how eagerly would I
have embraced them, and put them to the very apple of my eyes. Never would I
have ceased kissing those hands which were counted worthy to be bound for my
Lord. Marvellest thou at Paul, when the viper fastened on his hand, and did him
no hurt? Marvel not. It reverenced his chain. Yea, and the whole sea reverenced
it; for then too was he bound, when he was saved from shipwreck. Were any one
to grant me power to raise the dead at this moment, I would not choose that
power, but this chain. Were I free from the cares of the Church, had I my body
strong and vigorous, I would not shrink from undertaking so long a journey, only
for the sake of beholding those chains, for the sake of seeing the prison where he
was bound. The traces indeed of his miracles are numerous in all parts of the
world, yet are they not so dear as those of his scars. [Galatians 6:17] Nor in the
Scriptures does he so delight me when he is working miracles, as when he is
suffering evil, being scourged, and dragged about. Insomuch that from his body
were carried away handkerchiefs or aprons. Marvellous, truly marvellous, are
these things, and yet not so marvellous as those. "When they had laid many
stripes upon him, they cast him into prison." [Acts 16:23] And again; being in
bonds, "they were singing hymns unto God." [Acts 16:25] And again; "They
stoned him, and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead." [Acts
14:19] Would ye know how mighty a thing is an iron chain for Christ's sake,
bound about His servant's body? Hearken to what Christ Himself says, "Blessed
are you." [Matthew 5:11] Why? When you shall raise the dead? No. But why?
When you shall heal the blind? Not at all. But why then? "When men shall
reproach you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely
for My sake." [Matthew 5:11] Now, if to be evil spoken of renders men thus
blessed, to be evil entreated, what may not that achieve? Hearken to what this
blessed one himself says elsewhere; "Henceforth there is laid up for me the
crown of righteousness:" [2 Timothy 4:8] and yet, more glorious than this crown