invisible evident by that which is in sight. But nevertheless they still creep upon
the earth.
"For when the multitudes saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God, which"
(it is said) "had given such power unto men:" for the flesh was an offense unto
them. But He did not rebuke them, but proceeds by His works to arouse them,
and exalt their thoughts. Since for the time it was no small thing for Him to be
thought greater than all men, as having come from God. For had they well
established these things in their own minds, going on orderly they would have
known, that He was even the Son of God. But they did not retain these things
clearly, wherefore neither were they able to approach Him. For they said again,
"This man is not of God;" [John 9:16] "how is this man of God?" And they were
continually harping on these things, putting them forward as cloaks for their own
passions.
3. Which thing many now also do; and thinking to avenge God, fulfill their
own passions, when they ought to go about all with moderation. For even the
God of all, having power to launch His thunderbolt against them that blaspheme
Him, makes the sun to rise, and sends forth the showers, and affords them all
other things in abundance; whom we ought to imitate, and so to entreat, advise,
admonish, with meekness, not angry, not making ourselves wild beasts.
For no harm at all ensues unto God by their blasphemy, that you should be
angered, but he who blasphemed has himself also received the wound.
Wherefore groan, bewail, for the calamity indeed deserves tears. And the
wounded man, again—noth ing can so heal him as gentleness: gentleness, I say,
which is mightier than any force.
See, for example, how He Himself, the insulted one, discourses with us,
both in the Old Testament, and in the New; in the one saying, "O my people,
what have I done unto you?" [Micah 6:3] in the other, "Saul, Saul, why do you
persecute me." [Acts 9:4] And Paul too bids, "In meekness instruct those that
oppose themselves." [2 Timothy 2:25] And Christ again, when His disciples had
come to Him, requiring fire to come down from heaven, strongly rebuked them,

saying, "You know not what manner of spirit you are of."
And here again He said not, "O accursed, and sorcerers as you are; O you
envious, and enemies of men's salvation;" but, "Wherefore think ye evil in your
hearts?"
We must, you see, use gentleness to eradicate the disease. Since he who has
become better through the fear of man, will quickly return to wickedness again.
For this cause He commanded also the tares to be left, giving an appointed day
of repentance. Yea, and many of them in fact repented, and became good, who
before were bad; as for instance, Paul, the Publican, the Thief; for these being
really tares turned into kindly wheat. Because, although in the seeds this cannot
be, yet in the human will it is both manageable and easy; for our will is bound by
no limits of nature, but has freedom of choice for its privilege.
Accordingly, when you see an enemy of the truth, wait on him, take care of
him, lead him back into virtue, by showing forth an excellent life, by applying
"speech that cannot be condemned," [Titus 2:8] by bestowing attention and
tender care, by trying every means of amendment, in imitation of the best
physicians. For neither do they cure in one manner only, but when they see the
wound not yield to the first remedy, they add another, and after that again
another; and now they use the knife, and now bind up. And do thou accordingly,
having become a physician of souls, put in practice every mode of cure
according to Christ's laws; that you may receive the reward both of saving
yourself and of profiting others, doing all to the glory of God, and so being
glorified also yourself. "For them that glorify me," says He, "I will glorify; and
they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed."
Let us, I say, do all things unto His glory; that we may attain unto that
blessed portion, unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and
ever. Amen.