and puts the same meaning when He says, "The Son can do nothing of Himself."
Then again He raises His discourse to high matters, saying, "What things soever
the Father does, these also does the Son likewise." Then He returns to what is
lower, "For the Father loves the Son, and shows Him all things that Himself
does; and He will show Him greater things than these." Then He rises higher,
"For as the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, even so the Son
quickens whom He will." After this again He joins the high and the low together,
"For neither does the Father judge any one, but has given all judgment to the
Son"; then rises again, "That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father." Do you see how He varies the discourse, weaving it both of high
and low words and expressions, in order that it might be acceptable to the men of
that time, and that those who should come after might receive no injury, gaining
from the higher part a right opinion of the rest? For if this be not the case, if
these sayings were not uttered through condescension, wherefore were the high
expressions added? Because one who is entitled to utter great words concerning
himself, has, when he says anything mean and low, this reasonable excuse, that
he does it for some prudential purpose; but if one who ought to speak meanly of
himself says anything great, on what account does he utter words which surpass
his nature? This is not for any purpose at all, but an act of extreme impiety.
2. We are therefore able to assign a reason for the lowly expressions, a
reason sufficient, and becoming to God, namely, His condescension, His
teaching us to be moderate, and the salvation which is thus wrought for us. To
declare which He said Himself in another place, "These things I say that you
might be saved." For when He left His own witness, and betook Himself to that
of John, (a thing unworthy of His greatness,) He puts the reason of such
lowliness of language, and says, "These things I say that you might be saved."
And ye who assert that He has not the same authority and power with Him who
begot Him, what can you say when you hear Him utter words by which He
declares His Authority and Power and Glory equal in respect of the Father?
Wherefore, if He be as you assert very inferior, does He claim the same honor?

Nor does He stop even here, but goes on to say,
"He that honors not the Son honors not the Father which has sent Him." Do
you see how the honor of the Son is connected with that of the Father? "What of
that?" says one. "We see the same in the case of the Apostles; 'He,' says Christ,
'who receives you receives Me.'" [Matthew 10:40] But in that place He speaks
so, because He makes the concerns of His servants His own; here, because the
Essence and the Glory is One (with that of the Father). Therefore it is not said of
the Apostles "that they may honor," but rightly He says, "He that honors not the
Son honors not the Father." For where there are two kings, if one is insulted the
other is insulted also, and especially when he that is insulted is a son. He is
insulted even when one of his soldiers is maltreated; not in the same way as in
this case, but as it were in the person of another, while here it is as it were in his
own. Wherefore He beforehand said, "That they should honor the Son even as
they honor the Father," in order that when He should say, "He that honors not
the Son honors not the Father," you might understand that the honor is the same.
For He says not merely, "he that honors not the Son," but "he that honors Him
not so as I have said" "honors not the Father."
"And how," says one, "can he that sends and he that is sent be of the same
essence?" Again, you bring down the argument to carnal things, and perceivest
not that all this has been said for no other purpose, but that we might know Him
to be The Cause, and not fall into the error of Sabellius, and that in this manner
the infirmity of the Jews might be healed, so that He might not be deemed an
enemy of God; for they said, "This man is not of God" [John 9:16], "This man
has not come from God." Now to remove this suspicion, high sayings did not
contribute so much as the lowly, and therefore continually and everywhere He
said that He had been "sent"; not that you might suppose that expression to be
any lessening of His greatness, but in order to stop their mouths. And for this
cause also He constantly betakes Himself to the Father, interposing moreover
mention of His own high Parentage. For had He said all in proportion to His
dignity, the Jews would not have received His words, since because of a few