here, diminish their reward there. Further, when you lend, you wish to receive
your principal after a longer interval, and perhaps even not to receive it at all, in
order that by the delay you may make the interest greater; but, in this case, do
you ask back immediately; and that too when you are about to be not here, but
there forever; when you are about not to be here to be judged, but to render your
account? And if indeed one were building you mansions where thou were not
going to remain, you would deem it to be a loss; but now, do you desire here to
be rich, whence possibly you are to depart even before the evening? Do you not
know that we live in a foreign land, as though strangers and sojourners? Do you
not know that it is the lot of sojourners to be ejected when they think not, expect
not? Which is also our lot. For this reason then, whatsoever things we have
prepared, we leave here. For the Lord does not allow us to receive them and
depart, if we have built houses, if we have bought fields, if slaves, if gear, if any
other such thing. But not only does He not allow us to take them and depart
hence, but does not even account to you the price of them. For He forwarned you
that you should not build, nor spend what is other men's but your own. Why
therefore, leaving what is your own, do you work and be at cost in what is
another's, so as to lose both your toil and your wages and to suffer the extremest
punishment? Do not so, I beseech you; but seeing we are by nature sojourners,
let us also be so by choice; that we be not there sojourners and dishonored and
cast out. For if we are set upon being citizens here, we shall be so neither here
nor there; but if we continue to be sojourners, and live in such wise as sojourners
ought to live in, we shall enjoy the freedom of citizens both here and there. For
the just, although having nothing, will both dwell here amidst all men's
possessions as though they were his own; and also, when he has departed to
heaven, shall see those his eternal habitations. And he shall both here suffer no
discomfort, (for none will ever be able to make him a stranger that has every
land for his city;) and when he has been restored to his own country, shall
receive the true riches. In order that we may gain both the things of this life and
of that, let us use aright the things we have. For so shall we be citizens of the

heavens, and shall enjoy much boldness; whereunto may we all attain, through
the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the
Father with the Holy Ghost, be glory and power for ever. Amen.

## Homily 17 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 8:7
Therefore that ye abound in every thing; in faith and utterance, and
knowledge, and in all earnestness.
See again his exhortation accompanied with commendations, greater
commendations. And he said not, 'that you give,' but "that you abound; in faith,"
namely, of the gifts, and "in utterance," the word of wisdom, and "knowledge,"
namely, of the doctrines, and "in all earnestness," to the attaining of all other
virtue.
"And in your love," that, namely of which I have before spoken, of which I
have also made proof.
"That ye may abound in this grace also." Do you see that for this reason it
was that he began by those praises, that advancing forward he might draw them
on to the same diligence in these things also.