desire fades. How then, in order that this may not be? While this desire is warm
in you, go your way unto those angels, kindle it more. For the account that we
give will not be able to set you on fire, like as the sight of the things. Say not, I
will speak with my wife, and I will settle my affairs first. This delay is the
beginning of remissness. Hear, how one desired to bid farewell to them at his
house, [1 Kings 19:20] and the prophet suffered him not. And why do I say, to
bid farewell? The disciple desired to bury his father, [Matthew 8:21-22] and
Christ allowed not so much as this. And yet what thing seems to you to be so
necessary as the funeral of a father? But not even this did He permit.
Why could this have been? Because the devil is at hand fierce, desiring to
find some secret approach; and though it be but a little hindrance or delay he
takes hold of, he works a great remissness. Therefore one advises, "Put not off
from day to day." [Sirach 5:7] For thus shall you be able to succeed in most
things, thus also shall the things in your house be well ordered for you. "For seek
ye," it is said, "the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto
you." [Matthew 6:33] For if we establish in great security them that overlook
their own interests, and prefer the care of ours, much more does God, who even
without these things has a care for us, and provides for us.
Be not thoughtful then about your interests, but leave them to God. For if
you are thoughtful about them, you are thoughtful as a man; but if God provide,
He provides as God. Be not so thoughtful about them as to let go the greater
things, since then He will not much provide for them. In order therefore that He
may fully provide for them, leave them to Him alone. For if you also yourself
takest them in hand, having let go the things spiritual, He will not make much
provision for them.
In order then that both these things may be well disposed for you, and that
you may be freed from all anxiety, cleave to the things spiritual, overlook the
things of the world; for in this way you shall have earth also with heaven, and
shall attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might world without end. Amen.

## Homily 69 on Matthew

Matt. XXII. 1-14.
" And Jesus answered and spoke again in parables. The kingdom of Heaven
is like a certain king, which made a marriage for his son; and sent forth his
servants to call them which were bidden to the wedding; and they would not
come. Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, I
have prepared my dinner; my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are
ready; come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went their ways,
one to his farm, another to his merchandise: and the remnant took his servants,
and entreated them spitefully, and slew them."
Do you see both in the former parable and in this the difference between the
Son and the servants? Do you see at once the great affinity between both
parables, and the great difference also? For this also indicates God's longsuffering, and His great providential care, and the Jews' ingratitude.
But this parable has something also more than the other. For it proclaims
beforehand both the casting out of the Jews, and the calling of the Gentiles; and
it indicates together with this also the strictness of the life required, and how
great the punishment appointed for the careless.
And well is this placed after the other. For since He had said, "It shall be
given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof," He declares next to what kind
of nation; and not this only, but He also again sets forth His providential care
towards the Jews as past utterance. For there He appears before His crucifixion
bidding them; but here even after He is slain, He still urges them, striving to win
them over. And when they deserved to have suffered the most grievous
punishment, then He both presses them to the marriage, and honors them with
the highest honor. And see how both there He calls not the Gentiles first, but the
Jews, and here again. But as there, when they would not receive Him, but even