impassibility of His birth; let the name Son insinuate His
consubstantiality." Yet, above them all the procession of the word
from the intellect represents it more exactly; the intellectual word not
being posterior to its source except in an intellect passing from
potentiality to act; and this cannot be said of God.
Reply to Objection 2: Eternity excludes the principle of duration, but
not the principle of origin.
Reply to Objection 3: Every corruption is a change; and so all that
corrupts begins not to exist and ceases to be. The divine generation,
however, is not changed, as stated above (Question 27, Article 2).
Hence the Son is ever being begotten, and the Father is always
begetting.
Reply to Objection 4: In time there is something indivisible---namely,
the instant; and there is something else which endures---namely,
time. But in eternity the indivisible "now" stands ever still, as we
have said above (Question 10, Article 2 ad 1, Article 4 ad 2). But the
generation of the Son is not in the "now" of time, or in time, but in
eternity. And so to express the presentiality and permanence of
eternity, we can say that "He is ever being born," as Origen said
(Hom. in Joan. i). But as Gregory [Moral. xxix, 21] and Augustine
[Super Ps. 2:7] said, it is better to say "ever born," so that "ever"
may denote the permanence of eternity, and "born" the perfection of
the only Begotten. Thus, therefore, neither is the Son imperfect, nor
"was there a time when He was not," as Arius said.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether in the divine persons there exists an

order of nature?
Objection 1: It would seem that among the divine persons there does
not exist an order of nature. For whatever exists in God is the
essence, or a person, or a notion. But the order of nature does not
signify the essence, nor any of the persons, or notions. Therefore
there is no order of nature in God.
Objection 2: Further, wherever order of nature exists, there one
comes before another, at least, according to nature and intellect. But
in the divine persons there exists neither priority nor posteriority, as
declared by Athanasius. Therefore, in the divine persons there is no
order of nature.
Objection 3: Further, wherever order exists, distinction also exists.
But there is no distinction in the divine nature. Therefore it is not
subject to order; and order of nature does not exist in it.
Objection 4: Further, the divine nature is the divine essence. But
there is no order of essence in God. Therefore neither is there of
nature.
On the contrary, Where plurality exists without order, confusion
exists. But in the divine persons there is no confusion, as
Athanasius says. Therefore in God order exists.
I answer that, Order always has reference to some principle.
Wherefore since there are many kinds of principle---namely,
according to site, as a point; according to intellect, as the principle
of demonstration; and according to each individual cause---so are
there many kinds of order. Now principle, according to origin,
without priority, exists in God as we have stated (Question 33, Article
1): so there must likewise be order according to origin, without
priority; and this is called 'the order of nature': in the words of
Augustine (Contra Maxim. iv): "Not whereby one is prior to another,
but whereby one is from another."
Reply to Objection 1: The order of nature signifies the notion of
origin in general, not a special kind of origin.