worthy of punishment, since they were not brought to their senses even by the
preparation.
"And he became" (he says) "heir of the righteousness which is by Faith":
that is, by his believing God he was shown to be righteous. For this is the [part]
of a soul sincerely disposed towards Him and judging nothing more reliable than
His words, just as Unbelief is the very contrary. Faith, it is manifest, works
righteousness. For as we have been warned of God respecting Hell, so was he
also: and yet at that time he was laughed at; he was reviled and ridiculed; but he
regarded none of these things.

Hebrews 11:8-9
2. "By faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which he
should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out not knowing
whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange
country, dwelling in tabernacles, with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the
same promise." ["By faith"]: for (tell me) whom did he see to emulate? He had
for father a Gentile, and an idolater; he had heard no prophets; he knew not
whither he was going. For as they of the Hebrews who believed, looked to these
[patriarchs] as having enjoyed blessings innumerable, he shows that none of
them obtained anything as yet; all are unrewarded; no one as yet received his
reward. "He" escaped from his country and his home, and "went out not knowing
whither he went."
And what marvel, if he himself [were so], when his seed also dwelt in this
same way? For seeing the promise disproved (since He had said, "To you will I
give this land, and to your seed" [Genesis 12:7; 13:15]), he saw his son dwelling
there; and again his grandson saw himself dwelling in a land not his own; yet
was he nowise troubled. For the affairs of Abraham happened as we might have
expected, since the promise was to be accomplished afterwards in his family
(although it is said even to himself, "To you, and to your seed," not, "to you
through your seed," but "to you and to your seed"): still neither he, nor Isaac, nor
Jacob, enjoyed the promise. For one of them served for hire, and the other was
driven out: and he himself even was failing through fear: and while he took some
things indeed in war, others, unless he had had the aid of God, would have been
destroyed. On this account [the Apostle] says, "with the heirs of the same
promise"; not himself alone, he means; but the heirs also.

Hebrews 11:13
3. "These all died in faith," he says, "not having obtained the promises." At
this place it is worth while to make two enquiries; how, after saying that [God]
"translated Enoch, and he was not found, so that he did not see death," does he
say, "These all died in Faith." And again, after saying, "they not having obtained
the promises," he declares that Noah had received a reward, "to the saving of his
house," and that Enoch had been "translated," and that Abel "yet speaks," and
that Abraham had gained a hold on the land, and yet he says, "These all died in
Faith, not having obtained the promises." What then is [meant]?
It is necessary to solve the first [difficulty], and then the second. "These all"
(he says) " died in faith." The word "all" is used here not because all had died,
but because with that one exception "all these had died," whom we know to be
dead.
And the [statement] "not having obtained the promises," is true: for surely
the promise to Noah was not to be this [which is here spoken of]. But further, of
what kind of "promises" is he speaking? For Isaac and Jacob received the
promises of the land; but as to Noah and Abel and Enoch, what kind of promises
did they receive? Either then he is speaking concerning these three; or if
concerning those others also, the promise was not this, that Abel should be
admired, nor that Enoch should be translated, nor that Noah should be preserved;
but these things came to them for their virtue's sake, and were a sort of foretaste
of things to come. For God from the beginning, knowing that the human race
needs much condescension, bestows on us not only the things in the world to
come, but also those here; as for instance, Christ said even to the disciples,
"Whosoever has left houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, shall
receive an hundredfold and shall inherit everlasting life." [Matthew 19:29] And
again, "Seek the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you."