body in respect of their being, nevertheless the corporeal world is
governed by God by means of the spiritual world, as asserted by
Augustine (De Trin. iii, 4) and Gregory (Dial. iv, 6). Hence it is that
there is a certain fittingness by way of congruity of spiritual
substances to corporeal substances, in that the more noble bodies
are adapted to the more noble substances: wherefore also the
philosophers held that the order of separate substances is according
to the order of movables. And though after death souls have no
bodies assigned to them whereof they be the forms or determinate
motors, nevertheless certain corporeal places are appointed to them
by way of congruity in reference to their degree of nobility (wherein
they are as though in a place, after the manner in which incorporeal
things can be in a place), according as they more or less approach to
the first substance (to which the highest place it fittingly assigned),
namely God, whose throne the Scriptures proclaim heaven to be (Ps.
102:19, Is. 66:1). Wherefore we hold that those souls that have a
perfect share of the Godhead are in heaven, and that those souls
that are deprived of that share are assigned to a contrary place.
Reply to Objection 1: Incorporeal things are not in place after a
manner known and familiar to us, in which way we say that bodies
are properly in place; but they are in place after a manner befitting
spiritual substances, a manner that cannot be fully manifest to us.
Reply to Objection 2: Things have something in common with or a
likeness to one another in two ways. First, by sharing a same quality:
thus hot things have something in common, and incorporeal things
can have nothing in common with corporeal things in this way.
Secondly, by a kind of proportionateness, by reason of which the
Scriptures apply the corporeal world to the spiritual metaphorically.
Thus the Scriptures speak of God as the sun, because He is the
principle of spiritual life, as the sun is of corporeal life. In this way
certain souls have more in common with certain places: for instance,
souls that are spiritually enlightened, with luminous bodies, and
souls that are plunged in darkness by sin, with dark places.
Reply to Objection 3: The separated soul receives nothing directly
from corporeal places in the same way as bodies which are
maintained by their respective places: yet these same souls, through
knowing themselves to be appointed to such places, gather joy or
sorrow therefrom; and thus their place conduces to their punishment
or reward.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether souls are conveyed to heaven or hell

immediately after death?
Objection 1: It would seem that no souls are conveyed to heaven or
hell immediately after death. For a gloss on Ps. 36:10, "Yet a little
while and the wicked shall not be," says that "the saints are
delivered at the end of life; yet after this life they will not yet be
where the saints will be when it is said to them: Come ye blessed of
My Father." Now those saints will be in heaven. Therefore after this
life the saints do not go immediately up to heaven.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Enchiridion cix) that "the time
which lies between man's death and the final resurrection holds the
souls in secret receptacles according as each one is worthy of rest
or of suffering." Now these secret abodes cannot denote heaven and
hell, since also after the final resurrection the souls will be there
together with their bodies: so that he would have no reason to
distinguish between the time before and the time after the
resurrection. Therefore they will be neither in hell nor in heaven until
the day of judgment.
Objection 3: Further, the glory of the soul is greater than that of
bodies. Now the glory of the body is awarded to all at the same time,
so that each one may have the greater joy in the common rejoicing
of all, as appears from a gloss on Heb. 11:40, "God providing some
better thing for us---that the common joy may make each one rejoice
the more." Much more, therefore, ought the glory of souls to be
deferred until the end, so as to be awarded to all at the same time.
Objection 4: Further, punishment and reward, being pronounced by
the sentence of the judge, should not precede the judgment. Now
hell fire and the joys of heaven will be awarded to all by the sentence
of Christ judging them, namely at the last judgment, according to Mt.
25. Therefore no one will go up to heaven or down to hell before the
day of judgment.
On the contrary, It is written (2 Cor. 5:1): "If our earthly house of this
habitation be dissolved, that we have . . . a house not made with
hands, but reserved in heaven." Therefore, after the body's
dissolution, the soul has an abode, which had been reserved for it in
heaven.