riches, and the use and the ownership entire, let him disencumber himself from
them all; since, truly, he who does not this must at all events be separated from
them at death; and frequently before his death will lose them, in the midst of
dangers and innumerable ills.
19. And this is not the only disaster, that the change comes suddenly; but
that the rich man comes unpractised to the endurance of poverty. But not so the
poor man; for he confides not in gold and silver, which are lifeless matter, but in
"God, who gives us all things richly to enjoy." So that the rich man stands in
more uncertainty than the poor man, experiencing, as he does, frequent and
diversified changes. What is the sense of this? "Who gives to us all things richly
to enjoy." [1 Timothy 6:17] God gives all those things with liberality, which are
more necessary than riches; such, for example, as the air, the water, the fire, the
sun; all things of this kind. The rich man is not able to say that he enjoys more of
the sunbeams than the poor man; he is not able to say that he breathes more
plenteous air: but all these are offered alike to all. And wherefore, one may say,
is it the greater and more necessary blessings, and those which maintain our life,
that God has made common; but the smaller and less valuable (I speak of
money) are not thus common. Why is this? In order that our life might be
disciplined, and that we might have training ground for virtue. For if these
necessaries were not common, perhaps they who are rich, practising their usual
covetousness, would strangle those who were poor. For if they do this for the
sake of money, much rather would they do so for the things referred to. Again, if
money was also an universal possession, and were offered in the same manner to
all, the occasion for almsgiving, and the opportunity for benevolence, would be
taken away.
20. That we may live then securely, the sources of our existence have been
made common. On the other hand, to the end that we may have an opportunity
of gaining crowns and good report, property has not been made common; in
order that hating covetousness, and following after righteousness, and freely
bestowing our goods upon the poor, we may by this method obtain a certain kind

of relief for our sins. God has made you rich, why makest you yourself poor? He
has made you rich that you may assist the needy; that you may have release of
your own sins, by liberality to others. He has given you money, not that you may
shut it up for your destruction, but that you may pour it forth for your salvation.
For this reason also He has made the possession of riches uncertain and unstable,
that by this means he might slack the intensity of your madness concerning it.
For if its possessors, even now while they can have no confidence in regard to it,
but behold a multitude of snares produced from this quarter, are so inflamed with
the desire of these things; if the elements of security and stability were added to
wealth, whom would they have spared? From whom would they have refrained?
From what widows? From what orphans? From what poor?
21. Wherefore let us not consider riches to be a great good; for the great
good is, not to possess money, but to possess the fear of God and all manner of
piety. Behold, now if there were any righteous man here, having great boldness
toward God, notwithstanding he might be the poorest of mortals, he would be
sufficient to liberate us from present evils! For he only needed to spread forth his
hands towards heaven, and to call upon God, and this cloud would pass away!
But now gold is treasured up in abundance; and yet it is more useless than mere
clay for the purpose of deliverance from the impending calamities! Nor is it only
in a peril of this kind; but should disease or death, or any such evil befall us, the
impotency of wealth is fully proved, since it is at a loss, and has no consolation
of its own to offer us amidst these events.
22. There is one thing in which wealth seems to have an advantage over
poverty, viz. that it lives in a state of daily luxury, and is supplied with an
abundance of pleasure in its banquets. This however may also be seen
exemplified at the table of the poor; and these enjoy there a pleasure superior to
that of the rich. And marvel not at this, nor think what I say a paradox; for I will
make the matter clear to you from the evidence of facts. You know of course,
and you all confess that in feasts it is not the nature of the viands, but the
disposition of those who feast upon them, which usually causes the pleasure; for