brethren, and fathers, hearken," he says; "The God of glory appeared unto
our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia." But lest any one,
should think that the God of glory appeared then to the eyes of any
mortal in that which He is in Himself, he goes on to say that an angel
appeared to Moses. "Then fled Moses," he says, "at that saying, and was a
stranger in the land of Midian, where he begat two sons. And when forty
years were expired, there appeared to him in the wilderness of mount
Sinai an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush. When Moses saw it,
he wondered at the sight: and as he drew near to behold it, the voice of
the Lord came unto him, saying, I am the God of thy fathers, the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Then Moses
trembled, and durst not behold. Then said the Lord to him, Put off thy
shoes from thy feet," etc. Here, certainly, he speaks both of angel and of
Lord; and of the same as the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and
the God of Jacob; as is written in Genesis.
25. Can there be any one who will say that the Lord appeared to Moses by
an angel, but to Abraham by Himself? Let us not answer this question
from Stephen, but from the book itself, whence Stephen took his
narrative. For, pray, because it is written, "And the Lord God said unto
Abraham;" and a little after, "And the Lord God appeared unto
Abraham;" were these things, for this reason, not done by angels?
Whereas it is said in like manner in another place, "And the Lord
appeared to him in the plains of Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the
heat of the day;" and yet it is added immediately, "And he lift up his eyes
and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him:" of whom we have already
spoken. For how will these people, who either will not rise from the words
to the meaning, or easily throw themselves down from the meaning to the
words,—how, I say, will they be able to explain that God was seen in three
men, except they confess that they were angels, as that which follows also
shows? Because it is not said an angel spoke or appeared to him, will they
therefore venture to say that the vision and voice granted to Moses was
wrought by an angel because it is so written, but that God appeared and
spake in His own substance to Abraham because there is no mention
made of an angel? What of the fact, that even in respect to Abraham an
angel is not left unmentioned? For when his son was ordered to be
offered up as a sacrifice, we read thus: "And it came to pass after these

things that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he
said, Behold, here I am. And He said, Take now thy son, thine only son
Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer
him there for a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains that I will tell
thee of." Certainly God is here mentioned, not an angel. But a little
afterwards Scripture hath it thus: "And Abraham stretched forth his
hand, and took the knife to slay his son. And the angel of the Lord called
unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here
am I. And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou
anything unto him." What can be answered to this? Will they say that
God commanded that Isaac should be slain, and that an angel forbade it?
and further, that the father himself, in opposition to the decree of God,
who had commanded that he should be slain, obeyed the angel, who had
bidden him spare him? Such an interpretation is to be rejected as absurd.
Yet not even for it, gross and abject as it is, does Scripture leave any
room, for it immediately adds: "For now I know that thou fearest God,
seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son, on account of
me." What is "on account of me," except on account of Him who had
commanded him to be slain? Was then the God of Abraham the same as
the angel, or was it not rather God by an angel? Consider what follows.
Here, certainly, already an angel has been most clearly spoken of; yet
notice the context: "And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and
behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham
went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt-offering in the
stead of his son. And Abraham called the name of that place, The Lord
saw: as it is said to this day, In the mount the Lord was seen." Just as
that which a little before God said by an angel, "For now I know that thou
fearest God;" not because it was to be understood that God then came to
know, but that He brought it to pass that through God Abraham himself
came to know what strength of heart he had to obey God, even to the
sacrificing of his only son: after that mode of speech in which the effect is
signified by the efficient,—as cold is said to be sluggish, because it makes
men sluggish; so that He was therefore said to know, because He had
made Abraham himself to know, who might well have not discerned the
firmness of his own faith, had it not been proved by such a trial. So here,
too, Abraham called the name of the place "The Lord saw," that is, caused
Himself to be seen. For he goes on immediately to say, "As it is said to