an enemy to us, and overlooks His own;" that they might not say, "If miracles
had been wrought, we also should have believed." Therefore He both wrought
them, and stayed: the one, that He might fulfill His own part; the other, that He
might not condemn them the more.
And consider thou the power of His words, herein at least, that possessed as
they were by envy, they did yet admire. And as with regard to His works, they
do not find fault with what is done, but feign causes which have no existence,
slaying, "In Beelzebub He casts out the devils;" even so here too, they find no
fault with the teaching, but take refuge in the meanness of His race.
But mark thou, I pray you, the Master's gentleness, how He reviles them
not, but with great mildness says, "A prophet is not without honor, save in his
own country." And neither here did He stop, but added, "And in his own house."
To me it appears, that with covert reference to His very own brethren, He made
this addition.
But in Luke He puts examples also of this, saying, that neither did Elias
come unto His own, but to the stranger widow; neither by Eliseus was any other
leper healed, but the stranger Naaman; [Luke 4:25-27] and Israelites neither
received benefit, nor conferred benefit, but the foreigners. And these things He
says, signifying in every instance their evil disposition, and that in His case
nothing new is taking place.
2. "At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus." For Herod
the king, this man's father, he that slew the children, was dead.
But not without a purpose does the evangelist signify the time, but to make
you observe also the haughtiness of the tyrant, and his thoughtlessness, in that
not at the beginning did he inform himself about Christ, but after a very long
time. For such are they that are in places of power, and are encompassed with
much pomp, they learn these things late, because they do not make much
account of them.
But mark thou, I pray you, how great a thing virtue is, that he was afraid of
him even when dead, and out of his fear he speaks wisely even concerning a

resurrection.
"For he said," it is mentioned, "unto his servants, This is John, whom I
slew, he is risen from the dead, and therefore the mighty powers do work in him."
[Matthew 13:2] Do you see the intensity of his fear? For neither then did he dare
to publish it abroad, but he still speaks but to his own servants.
But yet even this opinion savored of the soldier, and was absurd. For many
besides had risen from the dead, and no one had wrought anything of the kind.
And his words seem to me to be the language both of vanity, and of fear. For
such is the nature of unreasonable souls, they admit often a mixture of opposite
passions.
But Luke affirms that the multitudes said, "This is Elias, or Jeremias, or
one of the old prophets," but he, as uttering forsooth something wiser than the
rest, made this assertion.
But it is probable that before this, in answer to them that said He was John
(for many had said this too), he had denied it, and said, "I slew him," priding
himself and glorying in it. For this both Mark and Luke report that he said, "John
I beheaded." But when the rumor prevailed, then he too says the same as the
people.
Then the evangelist relates to us also the history. And what might his reason
be for not introducing it as a subject by itself? Because all their labor entirely
was to tell what related to Christ, and they made themselves no secondary work
besides this, except it were again to contribute to the same end. Therefore neither
now would they have mentioned the history were it not on Christ's account, and
because Herod said, "John is risen again."
But Mark says, that Herod exceedingly honored the man, and this, when
reproved. [Mark 6:20] So great a thing is virtue.
Then his narrative proceeds thus: "For Herod had laid hold on John, and
bound him, and put him in prison, for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife.
For John said unto him, It is not lawful for you to have her. And when he would
have put him to death, he feared the people, because they counted him as a