from another star in glory;" [1 Corinthians 15:41] although the substance be
one), how may the substance of those differ, whereof the glory is one? For He
said not at all, "In glory such as the Father's," whereby you might suppose again
some variation; but implying entire perfection, "In that same glory," says He,
"will He come;" for it to be deemed one and the same.
"Now, why fear, O Peter" (so He speaks), "on being told of death? Why,
then shall you see me in the glory of the Father. And if I am in glory, so are you;
your interests are no wise limited to the present life, but another sort of portion
will take you up, a better one." Nevertheless, when He had spoken of the good
things, He stayed not at this, but mingled the fearful things also, bringing
forward that judgment-seat, and the inexorable account, and the inflexible
sentence, and the judgment that cannot be deceived.
He suffered not however His discourse to appear only dismal, but tempered
it also with good hopes. For neither did He say, "then shall He punish them that
sinned," but, "He shall reward every man according to his doings." And this He
said, reminding not only the sinners of punishment, but also them that have done
well of prizes and crowns.
6. And He indeed spoke it, in part to refresh the good, but I ever shudder at
hearing it, for I am not of them that are crowned, and I suppose that others also
share with us in our fear and anxiety. For whom is this saying not enough to
startle, when he has entered into his own conscience; and to make him shudder,
and convince him that we have need of sackcloth, and of prolonged fasting,
more than the people of the Ninevites? For not for an overthrow of a city, and the
common end, are we concerned, but for eternal punishment, and the fire that is
never quenched.
Wherefore also I praise and admire the monks that have occupied the desert
places, as for the rest, so for this saying. For they after having made their
dinners, or rather after supper (for dinner they know not at any time, because
they know that the present time is one of mourning and fasting); after supper
then, in saying certain hymns of thanksgiving unto God, they make mention of

this expression also. And if you would hear the very hymns themselves, that you
too may say them continually, I will rehearse to you the whole of that sacred
song. The words of it then stand as follows: "Blessed God, who feedest me from
my youth up, who givest food to all flesh; fill our hearts with joy and gladness,
that always having all sufficiency we may abound unto every good work in
Christ Jesus our Lord; with whom be unto You glory, honor and might, with the
Holy Spirit, forever. Amen. Glory to You, O Lord, glory to You, O Holy One,
glory to You, O King, that You have given us meat to make us glad. Fill us with
the Holy Ghost, that we may be found well-pleasing before You, not being
ashamed, when You render to every man according to his works."
Now this hymn is in all parts worthy of admiration, but especially the above
ending of it. That is, because meals and food are wont to dissipate and weigh
down, they put this saying as a kind of bridle upon the soul, at the time of
indulgence reminding it of the time of judgment. For they have learned what
befell Israel through a costly table. "For my beloved," says He, "ate, and waxed
fat, and kicked." Wherefore also Moses said, "When you shall have eaten and
drunk and art full, remember the Lord your God." [Deuteronomy 6:11-12]
For after that feast, then they ventured on those acts of lawless daring.
Do thou therefore also look to it, lest something like it befall you. For
though thou sacrifice not to stone nor to gold, either sheep or bullocks, see lest to
wrath thou sacrifice your own soul, lest to whoredom or other like passions, thou
sacrifice your own salvation. Yea— on this account, you see, they being afraid of
these downfalls, when they have enjoyed their meal, or rather fasting (for their
meal is in fact fasting), remind themselves of the terrible judgment-seat, and of
that day. And if they who correct themselves both with fasting, and with nights
spent on the ground, with watchings, and with sackcloth, and with ten thousand
means, do yet require also this reminding, when will it be possible for us to live
virtuously; who set forth tables loaded with innumerable wrecks, and do not so
much as pray at all, neither in the beginning nor the end?
7. Wherefore to put an end to these shipwrecks, let us bring before us that