SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.8.

being committed, the infliction of punishment will no longer be a part
of justice. It is in this sense that Augustine is speaking, when, to wit,
the excommunication of a few threatens to bring about the danger of
a schism, for in that case it would be contrary to the truth of justice
to pronounce excommunication.
Reply to Objection 2: With regard to a man's doctrine two points
must be considered, namely, the truth which is taught, and the act of
teaching. The first of these is necessary for salvation, to wit, that he
whose duty it is to teach should no' teach what is contrary to the
truth, and that he should teach the truth according to the
requirements of times and persons: wherefore on no account ought
he to suppress the truth and teach error in order to avoid any
scandal that might ensue. But the act itself of teaching is one of the
spiritual almsdeeds, as stated above (Question 32, Article 2), and so
the same is to be said of it as of the other works of mercy, of which
we shall speak further on (ad 4).
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 33, Article 1),
fraternal correction aims at the correction of a brother, wherefore it
is to be reckoned among spiritual goods in so far as this end can be
obtained, which is not the case if the brother be scandalized through
being corrected. And so, if the correction be omitted in order to
avoid scandal, no spiritual good is foregone.
Reply to Objection 4: The truth of life, of doctrine, and of justice
comprises not only whatever is necessary for salvation, but also
whatever is a means of obtaining salvation more perfectly, according
to 1 Cor. 12:31: "Be zealous for the better gifts." Wherefore neither
the counsels nor even the works of mercy are to be altogether
omitted in order to avoid scandal; but sometimes they should be
concealed or deferred, on account of the scandal of the little ones,
as stated above. Sometimes, however, the observance of the
counsels and the fulfilment of the works of mercy are necessary for
salvation. This may be seen in the case of those who have vowed to
keep the counsels, and of those whose duty it is to relieve the wants
of others, either in temporal matters (as by feeding the hungry), or in
spiritual matters (as by instructing the ignorant), whether such
duties arise from their being enjoined as in the case of prelates, or
from the need on the part of the person in want; and then the same
applies to these things as to others that are necessary for salvation.
Reply to Objection 5: Some have said that one ought to commit a

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.8.

venial sin in order to avoid scandal. But this implies a contradiction,
since if it ought to be done, it is no longer evil or sinful, for a sin
cannot be a matter of choice. It may happen however that, on
account of some circumstance, something is not a venial sin, though
it would be were it not for that circumstance: thus an idle word is a
venial sin, when it is uttered uselessly; yet if it be uttered for a
reasonable cause, it is neither idle nor sinful. And though venial sin
does not deprive a man of grace which is his means of salvation, yet,
in so far as it disposes him to mortal sin, it tends to the loss of
salvation.