ridiculously, and they spring at those who restrain them, and differ nothing from
madmen in their insensibility to all these things; nay, differ not from wild asses,
kicking and biting. Truly a passionate man is not a graceful one.
And then, when after this exceedingly ridiculous conduct, they return home
and come to themselves, they have the greater pain, and much fear, thinking who
were present when they were angry. For like raving men, they did not then know
the standers by, but when they have returned to their right mind, then they
consider, were they friends? Were they foes and enemies that looked on? And
they fear alike about both; the first because they will condemn them and give
them more shame; the others because they will rejoice at it. And if they have
even exchanged blows, then their fear is the more pressing; for instance, lest
anything very grievous happen to the sufferer; a fever follow and bring on death,
or a troublesome swelling rise and place him in danger of the worst. And, "what
need" (say they) "had I of fighting, and violence, and quarreling? Perish such
things." And then they curse the ill-fated business which caused them to begin,
and the more foolish lay on "wicked spirits," and "an evil hour," the blame of
what has been done; but these things are not from an evil hour, (for there is no
such thing as an evil hour,) nor from a wicked spirit, but from the wickedness of
those captured by the passion; they draw the spirits to them, and bring upon
themselves all things terrible. "But the heart swells," says one, "and is stung by
insults." I know it; and that is the reason why I admire those who master this
dreadful wild beast; yet it is possible if we will, to beat off the passion. For why
when our rulers insult us do we not feel it? It is because fear counterbalances the
passion, and frightens us from it, and does not allow it to spring up at all. And
why too do our servants, though insulted by us in ten thousand ways, bear all in
silence? Because they too have the same restraint laid upon them. And think
thou not merely of the fear of God, but that it is even God Himself who then
insults you, who bids you be silent, and then you will bear all things meekly, and
say to the aggressor, How can I be angry with you? There is another that
restrains both my hand and my tongue; and the saying will be a suggestion of

sound wisdom, both to yourself and to him. Even now we bear unbearable things
on account of men, and often say to those who have insulted us, "Such an one
insulted me, not you." Shall we not use the same caution in the case of God?
How else can we hope for pardon? Let us say to our soul, "It is God who holds
our hands, who now insults us; let us not be restive, let not God be less honored
by us than men." Did you shudder at the word? I wish you would shudder not at
the word only, but at the deed. For God has commanded us when buffeted not
only to endure it, but even to offer ourselves to suffer something worse; and we
withstand Him with such vehemence, that we not only refuse to offer ourselves
to suffer evil, but even avenge ourselves, nay often are the first to act on the
offensive, and think we are disgraced if we do not the same in return. Yes, and
the mischief is, that when utterly worsted we think ourselves conquerors, and
when lying undermost and receiving ten thousand blows from the devil, then we
imagine that we are mastering him. Let us then, I exhort you, understand what is
the nature of this victory, and this kind of nature let us follow after. To suffer evil
is to get the crown. If then we wish to be proclaimed victors by God, let us not in
these contests observe the laws of heathen games, but those of God, and learn to
bear all things with longsuffering; for so we may get the better of our
antagonists, and obtain both present and promised goods, through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom and with whom to the
Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.