FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.2.

about passions and operations, that are clearly related to one
another. For all the passions have their rise in certain initial
passions, viz. love and hatred, and terminate in certain others, viz.
pleasure and sorrow. In like manner all the operations that are the
matter of moral virtue are related to one another, and to the
passions. Hence the whole matter of moral virtues falls under the
one rule of prudence.
Nevertheless, all intelligible things are related to first principles. And
in this way, all the intellectual virtues depend on the understanding
of principles; even as prudence depends on the moral virtues, as
stated. On the other hand, the universal principles which are the
object of the virtue of understanding of principles, do not depend on
the conclusions, which are the objects of the other intellectual
virtues, as do the moral virtues depend on prudence, because the
appetite, in a fashion, moves the reason, and the reason the appetite,
as stated above (Question 9, Article 1; Question 58, Article 5, ad 1).
Reply to Objection 4: Those things to which the moral virtues incline,
are as the principles of prudence: whereas the products of art are
not the principles, but the matter of art. Now it is evident that, though
reason may be right in one part of the matter, and not in another, yet
in no way can it be called right reason, if it be deficient in any
principle whatever. Thus, if a man be wrong about the principle, "A
whole is greater than its part," he cannot acquire the science of
geometry, because he must necessarily wander from the truth in his
conclusion. Moreover, things "done" are related to one another, but
not things "made," as stated above (ad 3). Consequently the lack of
prudence in one department of things to be done, would result in a
deficiency affecting other things to be done: whereas this does not
occur in things to be made.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.65, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether moral virtues can be without charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that moral virtues can be without charity.
For it is stated in the Liber Sentent. Prosperi vii, that "every virtue
save charity may be common to the good and bad." But "charity can
be in none except the good," as stated in the same book. Therefore
the other virtues can be had without charity.
Objection 2: Further, moral virtues can be acquired by means of
human acts, as stated in Ethic. ii, 1,2, whereas charity cannot be had
otherwise than by infusion, according to Rm. 5:5: "The charity of
God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost Who is given to
us." Therefore it is possible to have the other virtues without charity.
Objection 3: Further, the moral virtues are connected together,
through depending on prudence. But charity does not depend on
prudence; indeed, it surpasses prudence, according to Eph. 3:19:
"The charity of Christ, which surpasseth all knowledge." Therefore
the moral virtues are not connected with charity, and can be without
it.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Jn. 3:14): "He that loveth not, abideth
in death." Now the spiritual life is perfected by the virtues, since it is
"by them" that "we lead a good life," as Augustine states (De Lib.
Arb. ii, 17,19). Therefore they cannot be without the love of charity.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 63, Article 2), it is possible
by means of human works to acquire moral virtues, in so far as they
produce good works that are directed to an end not surpassing the
natural power of man: and when they are acquired thus, they can be
without charity, even as they were in many of the Gentiles. But in so
far as they produce good works in proportion to a supernatural last
end, thus they have the character of virtue, truly and perfectly; and
cannot be acquired by human acts, but are infused by God. Such like
moral virtues cannot be without charity. For it has been stated above
(Article 1; Question 58, Articles 4,5) that the other moral virtues
cannot be without prudence; and that prudence cannot be without
the moral virtues, because these latter make man well disposed to
certain ends, which are the starting-point of the procedure of
prudence. Now for prudence to proceed aright, it is much more
necessary that man be well disposed towards his ultimate end,