one and the same essence; and for that reason, if they were confounded
together as it were by a commingling, they could not be in any way three,
neither could they be mutually referred to each other. Just as if you were
to make from one and the same gold three similar rings, although
connected with each other, they are mutually referred to each other,
because they are similar. For everything similar is similar to something,
and there is a trinity of rings, and one gold. But if they are blended with
each other, and each mingled with the other through the whole of their
own bulk, then that trinity will fall through, and it will not exist at all; and
not only will it be called one gold, as it was called in the case of those
three rings, but now it will not be called three things of gold at all.

### CHAP. 5.—THAT THESE THREE ARE SEVERAL IN THEMSELVES, AND MUTUALLY ALL IN ALL.

8. But in these three, when the mind knows itself and loves itself, there
remains a trinity: mind, love, knowledge; and this trinity is not
confounded together by any commingling: although they are each
severally in themselves and mutually all in all, or each severally in each
two, or each two in each. Therefore all are in all. For certainly the mind is
in itself, since it is called mind in respect to itself: although it is said to be
knowing, or known, or knowable, relatively to its own knowledge; and
although also as loving, and loved, or lovable, it is referred to love, by
which it loves itself. And knowledge, although it is referred to the mind
that knows or is known, nevertheless is also predicated both as known
and knowing in respect to itself: for the knowledge by which the mind
knows itself is not unknown to itself. And although love is referred to the
mind that loves, whose love it is; nevertheless it is also love in respect to
itself, so as to exist also in itself: since love too is loved, yet cannot be
loved with anything except with love, that is with itself. So these things
are severally in themselves. But so are they in each other; because both
the mind that loves is in love, and love is in the knowledge of him that
loves, and knowledge is in the mind that knows. And each severally is in
like manner in each two, because the mind which knows and loves itself,
is in its own love and knowledge: and the love of the mind that loves and
knows itself, is in the mind and in its knowledge: and the knowledge of
the mind that knows and loves itself is in the mind and in its love,

because it loves itself that knows, and knows itself that loves. And hence
also each two is in each severally, since the mind which knows and loves
itself, is together with its own knowledge in love, and together with its
own love in knowledge; and love too itself and knowledge are together in
the mind, which loves and knows itself. But in what way all are in all, we
have already shown above; since the mind loves itself as a whole, and
knows itself as a whole, and knows its own love wholly, and loves its own
knowledge wholly, when these three things are perfect in respect to
themselves. Therefore these three things are marvellously inseparable
from each other, and yet each of them is severally a substance, and all
together are one substance or essence, whilst they are mutually
predicated relatively.