movement of the body, it is perceived by the subject wherein it
resides, by the interior act of the heart. For no one knows that he has
faith unless he knows that he believes.
Reply to Objection 2: Habits are present in our intellect, not as its
object since, in the present state of life, our intellect's object is the
nature of a material thing as stated above (Question 84, Article 7),
but as that by which it understands.
Reply to Objection 3: The axiom, "whatever is the cause of a thing
being such, is still more so," is true of things that are of the same
order, for instance, of the same kind of cause; for example, we may
say that health is desirable on account of life, and therefore life is
more desirable still. But if we take things of different orders the
axiom is not true: for we may say that health is caused by medicine,
but it does not follow that medicine is more desirable than health, for
health belongs to the order of final causes, whereas medicine
belongs to the order of efficient causes. So of two things belonging
essentially to the order of the objects of knowledge, the one which is
the cause of the other being known, is the more known, as principles
are more known than conclusions. But habit as such does not
belong to the order of objects of knowledge; nor are things known
on account of the habit, as on account of an object known, but as on
account of a disposition or form whereby the subject knows: and
therefore the argument does not prove.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether our intellect knows its own act?

Objection 1: It would seem that our intellect does not know its own
act. For what is known is the object of the knowing faculty. But the
act differs from the object. Therefore the intellect does not know its
own act.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is known is known by some act. If,
then, the intellect knows its own act, it knows it by some act, and
again it knows that act by some other act; this is to proceed
indefinitely, which seems impossible.
Objection 3: Further, the intellect has the same relation to its act as
sense has to its act. But the proper sense does not feel its own act,
for this belongs to the common sense, as stated De Anima iii, 2.
Therefore neither does the intellect understand its own act.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. x, 11), "I understand that I
understand."
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 1,2) a thing is intelligible
according as it is in act. Now the ultimate perfection of the intellect
consists in its own operation: for this is not an act tending to
something else in which lies the perfection of the work
accomplished, as building is the perfection of the thing built; but it
remains in the agent as its perfection and act, as is said Metaph. ix,
Did. viii, 8. Therefore the first thing understood of the intellect is its
own act of understanding. This occurs in different ways with
different intellects. For there is an intellect, namely, the Divine, which
is Its own act of intelligence, so that in God the understanding of His
intelligence, and the understanding of His Essence, are one and the
same act, because His Essence is His act of understanding. But
there is another intellect, the angelic, which is not its own act of
understanding, as we have said above (Question 79, Article 1), and
yet the first object of that act is the angelic essence. Wherefore
although there is a logical distinction between the act whereby he
understands that he understands, and that whereby he understands
his essence, yet he understands both by one and the same act;
because to understand his own essence is the proper perfection of
his essence, and by one and the same act is a thing, together with its
perfection, understood. And there is yet another, namely, the human