faith. Elsewhere we find him saying, "We were made righteousness in Him;" in
these words, "Him who knew no sin He made to be sin for us that we might be
made the righteousness of God in Him;" [2 Corinthians 5:21] but now he says,
"He has been made righteousness unto us; so that whosoever will may partake
plentifully." For it is not this man or that who has made us wise, but Christ. "He
that glories," therefore, "let him glory in Him," not in such or such an one. From
Christ have proceeded all things. Wherefore, having said, "Who was made unto
us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption," he added,
"that, according as it is written, he that glories, let him glory in the Lord."
For this cause also he had vehemently inveighed against the wisdom of the
Greeks, to teach men this lesson, ([τοῦτο αὐτὸ] Savile; [τούτῳ αὐτῶ] Bened.)
and no other: that (as indeed is no more than just) they should boast themselves
in the Lord. For when of ourselves we seek the things which are above us,
nothing is more foolish, nothing weaker than we are. In such case, a tongue well
whetted we may have; but stability of doctrine we cannot have. Rather,
reasonings, being alone, are like the webs of spider. For unto such a point of
madness have some advanced as to say that there is nothing real in the whole of
being: yea, they maintain positively that all things are contrary to what appears.
Say not therefore that anything is from yourself, but in all things glory in
God. Impute unto no man anything at any time. For if unto Paul nothing ought to
be imputed much less unto any others. For, says he, [1 Corinthians 3:6] "I
planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase." He that has learned to
make his boast in the Lord, will never be elated, but will be moderate at all
times, and thankful under all circumstances. But not such is the mind of the
Greeks; they refer all to themselves; wherefore even of men they make gods. In
so great shame has desperate arrogance plunged them. ([ἐξετραχήλισεν])
5. It is time then, in what remains, to go forth to battle against these.
Recollect where we left our discourse on the former day. We were saying that it
was not possible according to human cause and effect that fishermen should get
the better of philosophers. But nevertheless it became possible: from whence it is

clear that by grace it became so. We were saying that it was not possible for
them even to conceive such great exploits: and we showed that they not only
conceived, but brought them to a conclusion with great ease. Let us handle,
today, the same head of our argument: viz. From whence did it enter their
thoughts to expect to overcome the world, unless they had seen Christ after He
was risen? What? Were they beside themselves, to reckon upon any such thing
inconsiderately and at random? For it goes even beyond all madness, to look,
without Divine grace, for success in so great an undertaking. How did they
succeed in it, if they were insane and frenzied? But if they were in their sober
senses, as indeed the events showed, how, but on receiving credible pledges
from the heavens and enjoying the influence which is from above, did they
undertake to go forth to so great wars, and to make their venture against earth
and sea, and to strip and stand their ground so nobly, for a change in the customs
of the whole world which had been so long time fixed, they being but twelve
men?
And, what is more, what made them expect to convince their hearers, by
inviting them to heaven and the mansions above? Even had they been brought up
in honor, and wealth, and power, and erudition, not even so would it have been at
all likely that they should be roused to so burthensome an undertaking. However,
there would have been somewhat more of reason in their expectation. But as the
case now stands, some of them had been occupied about lakes, some about hides
, some about the customs: than which pursuits nothing is more unprofitable
towards philosophy, and the persuading men to have high imaginations: and
especially when one has no example to show. Nay, they had not only no
examples to make their success likely, but they had examples against all
likelihood of success, and those within their own doors. ([ἔναυλα]) For many for
attempting innovations had been utterly extinguished, I say not among the
Greeks, for all that was nothing, but among the Jews themselves at that very
time; who not with twelve men, but with great numbers had applied themselves
to the work. Thus both Theudas and Judas, having great bodies of men, perished