John 3:15
"That whosoever believes in Him should not perish, but have eternal life."
Do you see the cause of the Crucifixion, and the salvation which is by it?
Do you see the relationship of the type to the reality? There the Jews escaped
death, but the temporal, here believers the eternal; there the hanging serpent
healed the bites of serpents, here the Crucified Jesus cured the wounds inflicted
by the spiritual dragon; there he who looked with his bodily eyes was healed,
here he who beholds with the eyes of his understanding put off all his sins; there
that which hung was brass fashioned into the likeness of a serpent, here it was
the Lord's Body, built by the Spirit; there a serpent bit and a serpent healed, here
death destroyed and a Death saved. But the snake which destroyed had venom,
that which saved was free from venom; and so again was it here, for the death
which slew us had sin with it, as the serpent had venom; but the Lord's Death
was free from all sin, as the brazen serpent from venom. For, says Peter, "He did
no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth." [1 Peter 2:22] And this is what
Paul also declares, "And having spoiled principalities and powers, He made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them in it." [Colossians 2:16] For as some
noble champion by lifting on high and dashing down his antagonist, renders his
victory more glorious, so Christ, in the sight of all the world, cast down the
adverse powers, and having healed those who were smitten in the wilderness,
delivered them from all venomous beasts that vexed them, by being hung upon
the Cross. Yet He did not say, "must hang," but, "must be lifted up" [Acts 28:4];
for He used this which seemed the milder term, on account of His hearer, and
because it was proper to the type.

John 3:16
"God so loved the world that He gave His Only-begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life."
What He says, is of this kind: Marvel not that I am to be lifted up that you
may be saved, for this seems good to the Father, and He has so loved you as to
give His Son for slaves, and ungrateful slaves. Yet a man would not do this even
for a friend, nor readily even for a righteous man; as Paul has declared when he
said, "Scarcely for a righteous man will one die." [Romans 5:7] Now he spoke at
greater length, as speaking to believers, but here Christ speaks concisely,
because His discourse was directed to Nicodemus, but still in a more significant
manner, for each word had much significance. For by the expression, "so loved,"
and that other, "God the world," He shows the great strength of His love. Large
and infinite was the interval between the two. He, the immortal, who is without
beginning, the Infinite Majesty, they but dust and ashes, full of ten thousand sins,
who, ungrateful, have at all times offended Him; and these He "loved." Again,
the words which He added after these are alike significant, when He says, that
"He gave His Only-begotten Son," not a servant, not an Angel, not an Archangel.
And yet no one would show such anxiety for his own child, as God did for His
ungrateful servants.
His Passion then He sets before him not very openly, but rather darkly; but
the advantage of the Passion He adds in a clearer manner, saying, "That every
one that believes in Him. should not perish, but have everlasting life." For when
He had said, "must be lifted up," and alluded to death, lest the hearer should be
made downcast by these words, forming some mere human opinions concerning
Him, and supposing that His death was a ceasing to be, observe how He sets this
right, by saying, that He that was given was "The Son of God," and the cause of
life, of everlasting life. He who procured life for others by death, would not
Himself be continually in death; for if they who believed on the Crucified perish