dragged to it should they once for all decline, nor, when not dragged cast
themselves upon it, but should even flee, foreseeing the greatness of the dignity;
and when they have been seized, they ought again to show their godly fear. Let
there be nothing out of measure. If you have perceived it beforehand, retire;
convince yourself that you are unworthy of the office. Again, if you have been
seized, in like manner be thou reverential, always showing rightmindedness.

Hebrews 13:18
4. "Pray for us" (he says); "for we trust we have a good conscience among
all, willing to live honestly."
You see that he used these apologies, as writing to persons grieved with
him, as to those who turned away, who were disposed as towards a transgressor,
not enduring even to hear his name? Inasmuch then as he asked from those who
hated him what all others ask from those who love them [their prayers for him],
therefore he here introduces this; saying, "We trust that we have a good
conscience." For do not tell me of accusations; our conscience, he says, in
nothing hurts us; nor are we conscious to ourselves that we have plotted against
you. "For we trust," he says, "that we have a good conscience among all," not
among the Gentiles only, but also among you. We have done nothing with
deceitfulness, nothing with hypocrisy: for it was probable that these [calumnies]
were reported respecting him. "For they have been informed concerning you" (it
is said) "that you teach apostasy." [Acts 21:21] Not as an enemy, he means, nor
as an adversary I write these things, but as a friend. And this he shows also by
what follows.

Hebrews 13:19
"But I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the
sooner." His thus praying was [the act] of one who loved them greatly, and that
not simply, but with all earnestness, that so, he says, I may come to you speedily.
The earnest desire to come to them is [the mark] of one conscious to himself of
nothing [wrong], also the entreating them to pray for him.
Therefore having first asked their prayers, he then himself also prays for all
good things on them.

Hebrews 13:20-21
"Now the God of peace," he says (be ye not therefore at variance one with
another), "that brought again from the earth the Shepherd of the sheep"
[Hebrews 13:20] (this is said concerning the resurrection) "the Great
[Shepherd]" (another addition: here again he confirms to them even to the end,
his discourse concerning the Resurrection) "through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, our Lord Jesus Christ," [Hebrews 13:21] "make you perfect in every
good work, to do His will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in His
sight."
Again he bears high testimony to them. For that is made "perfect" which
having a beginning is afterwards completed. And he prays for them which is the
act of one who yearns for them. And while in the other Epistles, he prays in the
prefaces, here he does it at the end. "Working in you," he says, "that which is
well-pleasing in His sight through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen."