speak, they should conceive of some place, void, formless, and full of darkness, in which those
things were formed which have been formed. By such a supposition, however, the light of their
Father would incur a reproach, as if He could not illuminate and fill those things which are within
Himself. Thus, then, when they maintain that these things were the fruit of defect and the work of
error, they do moreover introduce defect and error within the Pleroma, and into the bosom of the
Father.

### Chapter V.—This world was not formed by any other beings within the territory which is
contained by the Father.
1. The remarks, therefore, which I made a little while ago are suitable in answer to those
who assert that this world was formed outside of the Pleroma, or under a "good God;" and such
persons, with the Father they speak of, will be quite cut off from that which is outside the Pleroma,
in which, at the same time, it is necessary that they should finally rest. In answer to those, again,
who maintain that this world was formed by certain other beings within that territory which is
contained by the Father, all those points which have now been noticed will present themselves
[as exhibiting their] absurdities and incoherencies; and they will be compelled either to acknowledge
all those things which are within the Father, lucid, full, and energetic, or to accuse the light of the
Father as if He could not illuminate all things; or, as a portion of their Pleroma [is so described],
the whole of it must be confessed to be void, chaotic, and full of darkness. And they accuse all
other created things as if these were merely temporal, or [at the best], if eternal, yet material.
But these (the Æons) ought to be regarded as beyond the reach of such accusations, since they
are within the Pleroma, or the charges in question will equally fall against the entire Pleroma; and
!"#$%&'(# as a passive instead of a middle verb, fieri for facere.
We have rendered it as if the reading were "ab eo quod," though, if the strict grammatical construction be followed, the translation
must be, "from Him who." But then to what does "in quo," which follows, refer? It may be ascribed either to the immediate
antecedent Pleroma, or to Him who is described as being beyond it.
Æon substance were equally ephemeral and choic."

thus the Christ of whom they speak is discovered to be the author of ignorance. For, according to
their statements, when He had given a form so far as substance was concerned to the Mother they
conceive of, He cast her outside of the Pleroma; that is, He cut her off from knowledge. He, therefore,
who separated her from knowledge, did in reality produce ignorance in her. How then could the
very same person bestow the gift of knowledge on the rest of the Æons, those who were anterior
to Him [in production], and yet be the author of ignorance to His Mother? For He placed her beyond
the pale of knowledge, when He cast her outside of the Pleroma.
2. Moreover, if they explain being within and without the Pleroma as implying knowledge and
ignorance respectively, as certain of them do (since he who has knowledge is within that which
knows), then they must of necessity grant that the Saviour Himself (whom they designate All Things)
was in a state of ignorance. For they maintain that, on His coming forth outside of the Pleroma, He
imparted form to their Mother [Achamoth]. If, then, they assert that whatever is outside [the Pleroma]
is ignorant of all things, and if the Saviour went forth to impart form to their Mother, then He was
situated beyond the pale of the knowledge of all things; that is, He was in ignorance. How then
could He communicate knowledge to her, when He Himself was beyond the pale of knowledge?
For we, too, they declare to be outside the Pleroma, inasmuch as we are outside of the knowledge
which they possess. And once more: If the Saviour really went forth beyond the Pleroma to seek
after the sheep which was lost, but the Pleroma is [co-extensive with] knowledge, then He placed
Himself beyond the pale of knowledge, that is, in ignorance. For it is necessary either that they
grant that what is outside the Pleroma is so in a local sense, in which case all the remarks formerly
made will rise up against them; or if they speak of that which is within in regard to knowledge, and
of that which is without in respect to ignorance, then their Saviour, and Christ long before Him,
must have been formed in ignorance, inasmuch as they went forth beyond the Pleroma, that is,
beyond the pale of knowledge, in order to impart form to their Mother.
3. These arguments may, in like manner, be adapted to meet the case of all those who, in any
way, maintain that the world was formed either by angels or by any other one than the true God.
For the charges which they bring against the Demiurge, and those things which were made material
and temporal, will in truth fall back on the Father; if indeed the very things which were formed
in the bosom of the Pleroma began by and by in fact to be dissolved, in accordance with the
permission and good-will of the Father. The [immediate] Creator, then, is not the [real] Author of
this work, thinking, as He did, that He formed it very good, but He who allows and approves of
the productions of defect, and the works of error having a place among his own possessions, and
that temporal things should be mixed up with eternal, corruptible with incorruptible, and those
which partake of error with those which belong to truth. If, however, these things were formed
without the permission or approbation of the Father of all, then that Being must be more powerful,
stronger, and more kingly, who made these things within a territory which properly belongs to Him
(the Father), and did so without His permission. If again, as some say, their Father permitted these