SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.4.

Reply to Objection 5: The episcopal state is not directed to the
attainment of perfection, but rather to the effect that, in virtue of the
perfection which he already has, a man may govern others, by
administering not only spiritual but also temporal things. This
belongs to the active life, wherein many things occur that may be
done by means of wealth as an instrument, as stated (ad 4).
Wherefore it is not required of bishops, who make profession of
governing Christ's flock, that they have nothing of their own,
whereas it is required of religious who make profession of learning
to obtain perfection.
Reply to Objection 6: The renouncement of one's own wealth is
compared to almsgiving as the universal to the particular, and as the
holocaust to the sacrifice. Hence Gregory says (Hom. xx in Ezech.)
that those who assist "the needy with the things they possess, by
their good deeds offer sacrifice, since they offer up something to
God and keep back something for themselves; whereas those who
keep nothing for themselves offer a holocaust which is greater than
a sacrifice." Wherefore Jerome also says (Contra Vigilant.): "When
you declare that those do better who retain the use of their
possessions, and dole out the fruits of their possessions to the poor,
it is not I but the Lord Who answers you; If thou wilt be perfect," etc.,
and afterwards he goes on to say: "This man whom you praise
belongs to the second and third degree, and we too commend him:
provided we acknowledge the first as to be preferred to the second
and third." For this reason in order to exclude the error of Vigilantius
it is said (De Eccl. Dogm. xxxviii): "It is a good thing to give away
one's goods by dispensing them to the poor: it is better to give them
away once for all with the intention of following the Lord, and, free of
solicitude, to be poor with Christ."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether perpetual continence is required for

religious perfection?
Objection 1: It would seem that perpetual continence is not required
for religious perfection. For all perfection of the Christian life began
with Christ's apostles. Now the apostles do not appear to have
observed continence, as evidenced by Peter, of whose mother-in-law
we read Mt. 8:14. Therefore it would seem that perpetual continence
is not requisite for religious perfection.
Objection 2: Further, the first example of perfection is shown to us in
the person of Abraham, to whom the Lord said (Gn. 17:1): "Walk
before Me, and be perfect." Now the copy should not surpass the
example. Therefore perpetual continence is not requisite for
religious perfection.
Objection 3: Further, that which is required for religious perfection is
to be found in every religious order. Now there are some religious
who lead a married life. Therefore religious perfection does not
require perpetual continence.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (2 Cor. 7:1): "Let us cleanse
ourselves from all defilement of the flesh and of the spirit, perfecting
sanctification in the fear of God." Now cleanness of flesh and spirit
is safeguarded by continence, for it is said (1 Cor. 7:34): "The
unmarried woman and the virgin thinketh on the things of the Lord
that she may be holy both in spirit and in body ." Therefore religious
perfection requires continence.
I answer that, The religious state requires the removal of whatever
hinders man from devoting himself entirely to God's service. Now
the use of sexual union hinders the mind from giving itself wholly to
the service of God, and this for two reasons. First, on account of its
vehement delectation, which by frequent repetition increases
concupiscence, as also the Philosopher observes (Ethic. iii, 12): and
hence it is that the use of venery withdraws the mind from that
perfect intentness on tending to God. Augustine expresses this
when he says (Solil. i, 10): "I consider that nothing so casts down the
manly mind from its height as the fondling of women, and those
bodily contacts which belong to the married state." Secondly,
because it involves man in solicitude for the control of his wife, his