SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.2.

effect of fear, as the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii, 9).
Secondly, another's good may be reckoned as being one's own evil,
in so far as it conduces to the lessening of one's own good name or
excellence. It is in this way that envy grieves for another's good: and
consequently men are envious of those goods in which a good name
consists, and about which men like to be honored and esteemed, as
the Philosopher remarks (Rhet. ii, 10).
Reply to Objection 1: Nothing hinders what is good for one from
being reckoned as evil for another: and in this way it is possible for
sorrow to be about good, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 2: Since envy is about another's good name in so
far as it diminishes the good name a man desires to have, it follows
that a man is envious of those only whom he wishes to rival or
surpass in reputation. But this does not apply to people who are far
removed from one another: for no man, unless he be out of his mind,
endeavors to rival or surpass in reputation those who are far above
him. Thus a commoner does not envy the king, nor does the king
envy a commoner whom he is far above. Wherefore a man envies not
those who are far removed from him, whether in place, time, or
station, but those who are near him, and whom he strives to rival or
surpass. For it is against our will that these should be in better
repute than we are, and that gives rise to sorrow. On the other hand,
likeness causes pleasure in so far as it is in agreement with the will.
Reply to Objection 3: A man does not strive for mastery in matters
where he is very deficient; so that he does not envy one who
surpasses him in such matters, unless he surpass him by little, for
then it seems to him that this is not beyond him, and so he makes an
effort; wherefore, if his effort fails through the other's reputation
surpassing his, he grieves. Hence it is that those who love to be
honored are more envious; and in like manner the faint-hearted are
envious, because all things are great to them, and whatever good
may befall another, they reckon that they themselves have been
bested in something great. Hence it is written (Job 5:2): "Envy
slayeth the little one," and Gregory says (Moral. v, 46) that "we can
envy those only whom we think better in some respect than
ourselves."
Reply to Objection 4: Recollection of past goods in so far as we have

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.2.

had them, causes pleasure; in so far as we have lost them, causes
sorrow; and in so far as others have them, causes envy, because
that, above all, seems to belittle our reputation. Hence the
Philosopher says (Rhet. ii) that the old envy the young, and those
who have spent much in order to get something, envy those who
have got it by spending little, because they grieve that they have lost
their goods, and that others have acquired goods.