And that which the evangelist says, "For the Holy Ghost was not yet
given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified;" how is this to be
understood, unless because the special giving or sending of the Holy
Spirit after the glorification of Christ was to be such as it had never been
before? For it was not previously none at all, but it had not been such as
this. For if the Holy Spirit was not given before, wherewith were the
prophets who spoke filled? Whereas the Scripture plainly says, and shows
in many places, that they spake by the Holy Spirit. Whereas, also, it is
said of John the Baptist, "And he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even
from his mother's womb." And his father Zacharias is found to have been
filled with the Holy Ghost, so as to say such things of him. And Mary, too,
was filled with the Holy Ghost, so as to foretell such things of the Lord,
whom she was bearing in her womb.5 And Simeon and Anna were filled
with the Holy Spirit, so as to acknowledge the greatness of the little child
Christ. How, then, was "the Spirit not yet given, since Jesus was not yet
glorified," unless because that giving, or granting, or mission of the Holy
Spirit was to have a certain speciality of its own in its very advent, such as
never was before? For we read nowhere that men spoke in tongues which
they did not know, through the Holy Spirit coming upon them; as
happened then, when it was needful that His coming should be made
plain by visible signs, in order to show that the whole world, and all
nations constituted with different tongues, should believe in Christ
through the gift of the Holy Spirit, to fulfill that which is sung in the
Psalm, "There is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard;
their sound is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end
of the world."
30. Therefore man was united, and in some sense commingled, with the
Word of God, so as to be One Person, when the fullness of time was come,
and the Son of God, made of a woman, was sent into this world, that He
might be also the Son of man for the sake of the sons of men. And this
person angelic nature could prefigure beforehand, so as to pre-announce,
but could not appropriate, so as to be that person itself.

### CHAP. 21.—OF THE SENSIBLE SHOWING OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND

But with respect to the sensible showing of the Holy Spirit, whether by
the shape of a dove, or by fiery tongues,9 when the subjected and
subservient creature by temporal motions and forms manifested His
substance co-eternal with the Father and the Son, and alike with them
unchangeable, while it was not united so as to be one person with Him, as
the flesh was which the Word was made; I do not dare to say that nothing
of the kind was done aforetime. But I would boldly say, that the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, of one and the same substance, God the Creator, the
Omnipotent Trinity, work indivisibly; but that this cannot be indivisibly
manifested by the creature, which is far inferior, and least of all by the
bodily creature: just as the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit cannot be named
by our words, which certainly are bodily sounds, except in their own
proper intervals of time, divided by a distinct separation, which intervals
the proper syllables of each word occupy. Since in their proper substance
wherein they are, the three are one, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, the very same, by no temporal motion, above the whole creature,
without any interval of time and place, and at once one and the same
from eternity to eternity, as it were eternity itself, which is not without
truth and charity. But, in my words, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are
separated, and cannot be named at once, and occupy their own proper
places separately invisible letters. And as, when I name my memory, and
intellect, and will, each name refers to each severally, but yet each is
uttered by all three; for there is no one of these three names that is not
uttered by both my memory and my intellect and my will together ; so the Trinity together wrought both the voice of the
Father, and the flesh of the Son, and the dove of the Holy Spirit, while
each of these things is referred severally to each person. And by this
similitude it is in some degree discernible, that the Trinity, which is
inseparable in itself, is manifested separably by the appearance of the
visible creature; and that the operation of the Trinity is also inseparable
in each severally of those things which are said to pertain properly to the
manifesting of either the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit.
31. If then I am asked, in what manner either words or sensible forms and
appearances were wrought before the incarnation of the Word of God,
which should prefigure it as about to come, I reply that God wrought
those things by the angels; and this I have also shown sufficiently, as I