Now, following the line of the Second Vatican Council, I wish to emphasize the special
presence of the Mother of God in the mystery of Christ and his Church. For this is a
fundamental dimension emerging from the Mariology of the Council, the end of which is
now more than twenty years behind us. The Extraordinary Synod of Bishops held in 1985
exhorted everyone to follow faithfully the teaching and guidelines of the Council We can
say that these two events-the Council and the synod-embody what the Holy Spirit himself
wishes "to say to the Church" in the present phase of history.

In this context, the Marian Year is meant to promote a new and more careful reading of
what the Council said about the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, in the mystery of
Christ and of the Church, the topic to which the contents of this Encyclical are devoted.
Here we speak not only of the doctrine of faith but also of the life of faith, and thus of
authentic "Marian spirituality," seen in the light of Tradition, and especially the
spirituality to which the Council exhorts us. Furthermore, Marian spirituality, like its
corresponding devotion, finds a very rich source in the historical experience of
individuals and of the various Christian communities present among the different peoples
and nations of the world. In this regard, I would like to recall, among the many witnesses
and teachers of this spirituality, the figure of Saint Louis Marie Grignion de Montfort,
who proposes consecration to Christ through the hands of Mary, as an effective means for
Christians to live faithfully their baptismal commitments. I am pleased to note that in our
own time too new manifestations of this spirituality and devotion are not lacking.

There thus exist solid points of reference to look to and follow in the context of this
Marian Year.

49. This Marian Year will begin on the Solemnity of Pentecost, on June 7 next. For it is a
question not only of recalling that Mary "preceded" the entry of Christ the Lord into the
history of the human family, but also of emphasizing, in the light of Mary, that from the
moment when the mystery of the Incarnation was accomplished, human history entered
"the fullness of time," and that the Church is the sign of this fullness. As the People of
God, the Church makes her pilgrim way towards eternity through faith, in the midst of all
the peoples and nations, beginning from the day of Pentecost. Christ's Mother-who was
present at the beginning of "the time of the Church," when in expectation of the coming

of the Holy Spirit she devoted herself to prayer in the midst of the Apostles and her Son's
disciples-constantly "precedes" the Church in her journey through human history. She is
also the one who, precisely as the "handmaid of the Lord," cooperates unceasingly with
the work of salvation accomplished by Christ, her Son.