heaven, and see how much more splendid it is than the roofs of palaces. And if
the pavement of the palaces above is so much more grand than those below, that
the one may be considered as dirt in comparison with the other; if any one
should be thought worthy to see those palaces perfectly, what blessedness will
not be his!
"But she," he says, "that is a widow indeed, and desolate, has her hope set
on God." [1 Timothy 5:5] To whom is this said? To those who have no children,
because they are more highly approved, and have a greater opportunity of
pleasing God, because all their chains are loosened to them. There is no one to
hold them fast, no one to compel them to drag their chains after them. You are
separated from your husband, but art united to God. You have not a fellowservant for your associate, but you have your Lord. When you pray, tell me, do
you not converse with God? When you read, hear Him conversing with you.
And what does He say to you? Much kinder words than your husband. For
though indeed your husband should flatter you, the honor is not great, for he is
your fellow-servant. But when the Lord flatters the slave, then is the courtship
great. How then does He court us? Hear by what means he does it. "Come," He
says, "unto Me, all you that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest."
[Matthew 11:28] And again through the Prophet He calls, saying, "Will a woman
forget to have compassion on the offspring of her womb? But even if a woman
should forget, yet will I not forget you, says the Lord." [Isaiah 49:15, Septuagint]
Of how great a love are these words? And again, "Turn unto Me" [Isaiah 45:22];
and again elsewhere, "Turn unto Me, and you shall be saved." [Isaiah 43:22]
And if one was willing to select too from the Canticles, taking them in the more
mystical way, he will hear Him conversing and saying to every soul that is fitted
for Him, "My fair one, my dove." [Canticles 2:10] What is sweeter than these
words? Do you see the conversation of God with men? But what? Tell me, do
you not see how many children of those blessed women are gone, and are in
their tombs; how many have suffered more severely, and with their husbands
have lost also their children? To these things let us attend; let us be anxious

about these things, and nothing will be grievous to us, but we shall continue
passing all our time in spiritual joy; and we shall enjoy the eternal blessings, of
which may we all be partakers, by the grace and lovingkindness, etc.

## Homily 7 on First Thessalonians

[1 Thessalonians 4:13]
"But we would not have you ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are
asleep; that you sorrow not, even as the rest, which have no hope."
There are many things which from ignorance alone cause us sorrow, so that
if we come to understand them well, we banish our grief. This therefore Paul
also showing, says, "I would not have you ignorant, that you sorrow not, even as
the rest, which have no hope." Is it on this account you would not have them
ignorant? But wherefore do you not speak of the punishment that is laid up?
Ignorant, says he, of the doctrine of the Resurrection. But why? This is manifest
from the other, and is admitted. But meanwhile, together with that, there will
also be this not inconsiderable gain. For since they did not disbelieve the
Resurrection, but nevertheless bewailed, on this account he speaks. And he
discourses indeed with those who disbelieve the Resurrection in one way, but
with these in another. For it is manifest that they knew, who were enquiring
about the "times and seasons." [1 Thessalonians 5:1]
Ver. 14. "For if we believe," he says, "that Jesus died and rose again," and
lived, "even so them also that are fallen asleep in Jesus will God bring with
Him."
Where are they who deny the Flesh? For if He did not assume Flesh, neither
did He die. If He did not die, neither did He rise again. How then does he exhort
us from these things to faith? Was he not then according to them a trifler and a
deceiver? For if to die proceeds from sin, and Christ did not sin, how does he
now encourage us? And now, concerning whom does he say, O men, for whom
do ye mourn? For whom do ye sorrow? For sinners, or simply for those who die?
And why does he say, "Even as the rest, which have no hope"? For whom do the
rest mourn? So that to them all these things are vapid. "The firstborn from the