SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.4.

and again there is a certain distribution and payment of laborious
works.
If, however, we take for the matter of both kinds of justice the
principal actions themselves, whereby we make use of persons,
things, and works, there is then a difference of matter between them.
For distributive justice directs distributions, while commutative
justice directs commutations that can take place between two
persons. of these some are involuntary, some voluntary. They are
involuntary when anyone uses another man's chattel, person, or
work against his will, and this may be done secretly by fraud, or
openly by violence. In either case the offence may be committed
against the other man's chattel or person, or against a person
connected with him. If the offence is against his chattel and this be
taken secretly, it is called "theft," if openly, it is called "robbery." If it
be against another man's person, it may affect either the very
substance of his person, or his dignity. If it be against the substance
of his person, a man is injured secretly if he is treacherously slain,
struck or poisoned, and openly, if he is publicly slain, imprisoned,
struck or maimed. If it be against his personal dignity, a man is
injured secretly by false witness, detractions and so forth, whereby
he is deprived of his good name, and openly, by being accused in a
court of law, or by public insult. If it be against a personal
connection, a man is injured in the person of his wife, secretly (for
the most part) by adultery, in the person of his slave, if the latter be
induced to leave his master: which things can also be done openly.
The same applies to other personal connections, and whatever injury
may be committed against the principal, may be committed against
them also. Adultery, however, and inducing a slave to leave his
master are properly injuries against the person; yet the latter, since a
slave is his master's chattel, is referred to theft. Voluntary
commutations are when a man voluntarily transfers his chattel to
another person. And if he transfer it simply so that the recipient
incurs no debt, as in the case of gifts, it is an act, not of justice but of
liberality. A voluntary transfer belongs to justice in so far as it
includes the notion of debt, and this may occur in many ways. First
when one man simply transfers his thing to another in exchange for
another thing, as happens in selling and buying. Secondly when a
man transfers his thing to another, that the latter may have the use
of it with the obligation of returning it to its owner. If he grant the use
of a thing gratuitously, it is called "usufruct" in things that bear fruit;
and simply "borrowing" on "loan" in things that bear no fruit, such
as money, pottery, etc.; but if not even the use is granted gratis, it is