worthless, and of no great use, God has displayed so great care, how shall He
give up you, of all living creatures the most important?
Wherefore then did He make them so beautiful? That He might display His
own wisdom and the excellency of His power; that from everything we might
learn His glory. For not "the Heavens only declare the glory of God," but the
earth too; and this David declared when he said, "Praise the Lord, you fruitful
trees, and all cedars." For some by their fruits, some by their greatness, some by
their beauty, send up praise to Him who made them: this too being a sign of great
excellency of wisdom, when even upon things that are very vile (and what can
be viler than that which today is, and tomorrow is not?) He pours out such great
beauty. If then to the grass He has given that which it needs not (for what does
the beauty thereof help to the feeding of the fire?) how shall He not give unto
you that which you need? If that which is the vilest of all things, He has lavishly
adorned, and that as doing it not for need, but for munificence, how much more
will He honor you, the most honorable of all things, in matters which are of
necessity.
2. Now when, as you see, He had demonstrated the greatness of God's
providential care, and they were in what follows to be rebuked also, even in this
He was sparing, laying to their charge not want, but poverty, of faith. Thus, "if
God," says He, "so clothe the grass of the field, much more you, O you of little
faith." [Matthew 6:30]
And yet surely all these things He Himself works. For "all things were
made by Him, and without Him was not so much as one thing made." [John 1:3]
But yet He nowhere as yet makes mention of Himself: it being sufficient for the
time, to indicate His full power, that He said at each of the commandments, "You
have heard that it has been said to them of old time, but I say unto you."
Marvel not then, when in subsequent instances also He conceals Himself, or
speaks something lowly of Himself: since for the present He had but one object,
that His word might prove such as they would readily receive, and might in
every way demonstrate that He was not a sort of adversary of God, but of one

mind, and in agreement with the Father.
Which accordingly He does here also; for through so many words as He has
spent He ceases not to set Him before us, admiring His wisdom, His providence,
His tender care extending through all things, both great and small. Thus, both
when He was speaking of Jerusalem, He called it "the city of the Great King;"
[Matthew 5:35] and when He mentioned Heaven, He spoke of it again as "God's
throne;" [Matthew 5:34] and when He was discoursing of His economy in the
world, to Him again He attributes it all, saying, "He makes His sun to rise on the
evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust."
[Matthew 5:45] And in the prayer too He taught us to say, His "is the kingdom
and the power and the glory." And here in discoursing of His providence, and
signifying how even in little things He is the most excellent of artists, He says,
that "He clothes the grass of the field." And nowhere does He call Him His own
Father, but theirs; in order that by the very honor He might reprove them, and
that when He should call Him His Father, they might no more be displeased.
Now if for bare necessaries one is not to take thought, what pardon can we
deserve, who take thought for things expensive? Or rather, what pardon can they
deserve, who do even without sleep, that they may take the things of others?
3. "Therefore take no thought, saying, what shall we eat? Or, what shall we
drink? Or, wherewithal shall we be clothed? For after all these things do the
nations of the world seek."
Do you see how again He has both shamed them the more, and has also
shown by the way, that He had commanded nothing grievous nor burdensome?
As therefore when He said, "If you love them which love you," it is nothing great
which you practise, for the very Gentiles do the same; by the mention of the
Gentiles He was stirring them up to something greater: so now also He brings
them forward to reprove us, and to signify that it is a necessary debt which He is
requiring of us. For if we must show forth something more than the Scribes or
Pharisees, what can we deserve, who so far from going beyond these, do even
abide in the mean estate of the Gentiles, and emulate their littleness of soul?