we say that something white is sweet), or essentially, in the second
manner of essential predication, (if the forms are ordered one to
another, the subject belonging to the definition of the predicate; as a
surface is presupposed to color; so that if we say that a body with a
surface is colored, we have the second manner of essential
predication.) Therefore, if we have one form by which a thing is an
animal, and another form by which it is a man, it follows either that
one of these two things could not be predicated of the other, except
accidentally, supposing these two forms not to be ordered to one
another---or that one would be predicated of the other according to
the second manner of essential predication, if one soul be
presupposed to the other. But both of these consequences are
clearly false: because "animal" is predicated of man essentially and
not accidentally; and man is not part of the definition of an animal,
but the other way about. Therefore of necessity by the same form a
thing is animal and man; otherwise man would not really be the thing
which is an animal, so that animal can be essentially predicated of
man.
Thirdly, this is shown to be impossible by the fact that when one
operation of the soul is intense it impedes another, which could
never be the case unless the principle of action were essentially one.
We must therefore conclude that in man the sensitive soul, the
intellectual soul, and the nutritive soul are numerically one soul. This
can easily be explained, if we consider the differences of species
and forms. For we observe that the species and forms of things
differ from one another, as the perfect and imperfect; as in the order
of things, the animate are more perfect than the inanimate, and
animals more perfect than plants, and man than brute animals; and
in each of these genera there are various degrees. For this reason
Aristotle, Metaph. viii (Did. vii, 3), compares the species of things to
numbers, which differ in species by the addition or subtraction of
unity. And (De Anima ii, 3) he compares the various souls to the
species of figures, one of which contains another; as a pentagon
contains and exceeds a tetragon. Thus the intellectual soul contains
virtually whatever belongs to the sensitive soul of brute animals, and
to the nutritive souls of plants. Therefore, as a surface which is of a
pentagonal shape, is not tetragonal by one shape, and pentagonal by
another---since a tetragonal shape would be superfluous as
contained in the pentagonal---so neither is Socrates a man by one
soul, and animal by another; but by one and the same soul he is both
animal and man.

Reply to Objection 1: The sensitive soul is incorruptible, not by
reason of its being sensitive, but by reason of its being intellectual.
When, therefore, a soul is sensitive only, it is corruptible; but when
with sensibility it has also intellectuality, it is incorruptible. For
although sensibility does not give incorruptibility, yet it cannot
deprive intellectuality of its incorruptibility.
Reply to Objection 2: Not forms, but composites, are classified either
generically or specifically. Now man is corruptible like other animals.
And so the difference of corruptible and incorruptible which is on the
part of the forms does not involve a generic difference between man
and the other animals.
Reply to Objection 3: The embryo has first of all a soul which is
merely sensitive, and when this is removed, it is supplanted by a
more perfect soul, which is both sensitive and intellectual: as will be
shown further on (Question 118, Article 2, ad 2).
Reply to Objection 4: We must not consider the diversity of natural
things as proceeding from the various logical notions or intentions,
which flow from our manner of understanding, because reason can
apprehend one and the same thing in various ways. Therefore since,
as we have said, the intellectual soul contains virtually what belongs
to the sensitive soul, and something more, reason can consider
separately what belongs to the power of the sensitive soul, as
something imperfect and material. And because it observes that this
is something common to man and to other animals, it forms thence
the notion of the "genus"; while that wherein the intellectual soul
exceeds the sensitive soul, it takes as formal and perfecting; thence
it gathers the "difference" of man.