other from the divine nature. For in the perfection itself of the divine
existence are contained both the Word intelligibly proceeding and
the principle of the Word, with whatever belongs to His perfection
(Question 4, Article 2).

### ARTICLE 3. Whether any other procession exists in God

besides that of the Word?
Objection 1: It would seem that no other procession exists in God
besides the generation of the Word. Because, for whatever reason
we admit another procession, we should be led to admit yet another,
and so on to infinitude; which cannot be. Therefore we must stop at
the first, and hold that there exists only one procession in God.
Objection 2: Further, every nature possesses but one mode of selfcommunication; because operations derive unity and diversity from
their terms. But procession in God is only by way of communication
of the divine nature. Therefore, as there is only one divine nature
(Question 11, Article 4), it follows that only one procession exists in
God.
Objection 3: Further, if any other procession but the intelligible
procession of the Word existed in God, it could only be the
procession of love, which is by the operation of the will. But such a
procession is identified with the intelligible procession of the
intellect, inasmuch as the will in God is the same as His intellect
(Question 19, Article 1). Therefore in God there is no other
procession but the procession of the Word.
On the contrary, The Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father (Jn.
15:26); and He is distinct from the Son, according to the words, "I
will ask My Father, and He will give you another Paraclete" (Jn.
14:16). Therefore in God another procession exists besides the
procession of the Word.
I answer that, There are two processions in God; the procession of
the Word, and another.
In evidence whereof we must observe that procession exists in God,
only according to an action which does not tend to anything
external, but remains in the agent itself. Such an action in an
intellectual nature is that of the intellect, and of the will. The
procession of the Word is by way of an intelligible operation. The
operation of the will within ourselves involves also another
procession, that of love, whereby the object loved is in the lover; as,
by the conception of the word, the object spoken of or understood is

in the intelligent agent. Hence, besides the procession of the Word in
God, there exists in Him another procession called the procession of
love.
Reply to Objection 1: There is no need to go on to infinitude in the
divine processions; for the procession which is accomplished within
the agent in an intellectual nature terminates in the procession of the
will.
Reply to Objection 2: All that exists in God, is God (Question 3,
Articles 3,4); whereas the same does not apply to others. Therefore
the divine nature is communicated by every procession which is not
outward, and this does not apply to other natures.
Reply to Objection 3: Though will and intellect are not diverse in
God, nevertheless the nature of will and intellect requires the
processions belonging to each of them to exist in a certain order.
For the procession of love occurs in due order as regards the
procession of the Word; since nothing can be loved by the will
unless it is conceived in the intellect. So as there exists a certain
order of the Word to the principle whence He proceeds, although in
God the substance of the intellect and its concept are the same; so,
although in God the will and the intellect are the same, still,
inasmuch as love requires by its very nature that it proceed only
from the concept of the intellect, there is a distinction of order
between the procession of love and the procession of the Word in
God.