down by those hopes the tyranny of gluttonous desire; and all but saying, You
have eaten, hast drunk to excess: and what is the result? Nothing, save only
destruction. You have been conjoined unto Christ; and what is the result? A great
and marvellous thing: the future Resurrection, that glorious one, and
transcending all utterance!
3. Let no one therefore go on disbelieving the Resurrection: but if a man
disbelieve, let him think how many things He made from nothing, and admit it as
a proof also of the other. For the things which are already past are stranger by
far, and fraught with overpowering wonder. Just consider. He took earth and
mixed it, and made man; earth which existed not before this. How then did the
earth become man? And how was it produced from nothing? And, how, all the
things that were made from it? The endless sorts of irrational creatures; of seeds;
of plants; no pangs of travail having preceded in the one case, no rains having
come down upon the others; no tillage seen, no oxen, no plough, nor any thing
else contributing to their production? Why, for this cause the lifeless and
senseless thing was made to put forth in the beginning so many kinds of plants
and irrational creatures, in order that from the very first He might instruct you in
the doctrine of Resurrection. For this is more inexplicable than the Resurrection.
For it is not the same thing to rekindle an extinguished lamp, and to show fire
that has never yet appeared. It is not the same thing to raise up again a house
which has fallen down, and to produce one which has never at all had an
existence. For in the former case, if nothing else, yet the material was given to
work with: but in the latter, not even the substance appeared. Wherefore He
made first that which seemed to be the more difficult, to the end that hereby you
might admit that which is the more easy; more difficult, I say, not to God, but as
far as our reasonings can follow the subject. For with God nothing is difficult:
but as the painter who has made one likeness will make ten thousand with ease,
so also with God it is easy to make worlds without number and end. Rather, as it
is easy for you to conceive a city and worlds without bound, so unto God is it
easy to make them; or rather again it is easier by far. For you consume time,

brief though it be, in your conception; but God not even this, but as much as
stones are heavier than any of the lightest things, yea even than our minds; so
much is our mind surpassed by the rapidity of God's work of creation.
Do you marvel at His power on the earth? Think again how the heaven was
made, not yet being; how the innumerable stars, how the sun, how the moon; and
all these things not yet being. Again, tell me how after they were made they
stood fast, and upon what? What foundation have they? And what the earth?
What comes next to the earth? And again, what after that which came next to the
earth? Do you see into what an eddy the eye of your mind is plunged, unless you
quickly take refuge in faith and the incomprehensible power of the Maker?
But if you choose from human things also to make conjecture, you will be
able by degrees to find wings for your understanding. "What kind of human
things?" may be asked. Do you not see the potters, how they fashion the vase
which had been broken in pieces and become shapeless? Those who fuse the ore
from the mine, how the earth in their hands turns out ([τὴν γῆν χρύσιον
ἀποφαίνουσι]) gold, or silver, or copper? Others again who work in glass, how
they transform the sand into one compact and transparent substance? Shall I
speak of the dressers of leather, the dyers of purple vestments; how they make
that which had received their tint show as one thing, when it had been another?
Shall I speak of the generation of our own race? Does not a small seed, at first
without form and impress, enter into the womb which receives it? Whence then
the so intricate formation of the living creature? What is the wheat? Is it not cast
a naked seed into the earth? After it has been cast there, does it not decay?
Whence is the ear, the beard, the stalk, and all the other parts? Does not often a
little grain of a fig fall into the ground, and produce both root, and branches, and
fruit? And do you hereupon admit each of these and make no curious enquiries,
and of God alone do you demand account, in His work of changing the fashion
of our body? And how can such things be pardonable?
These things and such like we say to the Greeks. For to those who are
obedient to the Scriptures, I have no occasion to speak at all.