Reply to Objection 1: Augustine, as may be gathered from what he
says afterwards, is speaking according to the common course of
nature, And yet it does not follow, although the dead be able to
appear to the living as they will, that they appear as often as when
living in the flesh: because when they are separated from the flesh,
they are either wholly conformed to the divine will, so that they may
do nothing but what they see to be agreeable with the Divine
disposition, or else they are so overwhelmed by their punishments
that their grief for their unhappiness surpasses their desire to appear
to others.
Reply to Objection 2: The authorities quoted speak in the sense that
no one comes forth from heaven or hell simply, and do not imply that
one may not come forth for a time.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Article 1, ad 3) the soul's
place conduces to its punishment or reward in so far as the soul,
through being consigned to that place, is affected either by joy or by
grief. Now this joy or grief at being consigned to such a place
remains in the soul even when it is outside that place. Thus a bishop
who is given the honor of sitting on a throne in the church incurs no
dishonor when he leaves the throne, for though he sits not therein
actually, the place remains assigned to him.
We must also reply to the arguments in the contrary sense.
Reply to Objection 4: Jerome is speaking of the apostles and martyrs
in reference to that which they gain from their power of glory, and
not to that which befits them as due to them by nature. And when he
says that they are everywhere, he does not mean that they are in
several places or everywhere at once, but that they can be wherever
they will.
Reply to Objection 5: There is no parity between demons and angels
on the one hand and the souls of the saints and of the damned on
the other. For the good or bad angels have allotted to them the office
of presiding over men, to watch over them or to try them; but this
cannot be said of the souls of men. Nevertheless, according to the
power of glory, it is competent to the souls of the saints that they
can be where they will; and this is what Jerome means to say.
Reply to Objection 6: Although the souls of the saints or of the

damned are sometimes actually present where they appear, we are
not to believe that this is always so: for sometimes these apparitions
occur to persons whether asleep or awake by the activity of good or
wicked angels in order to instruct or deceive the living. Thus
sometimes even the living appear to others and tell them many
things in their sleep; and yet it is clear that they are not present, as
Augustine proves from many instances (De Cura pro Mort. xi, xii).

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the limbo of hell is the same as

Abraham's bosom?
Objection 1: It would seem that the limbo of hell is not the same as
Abraham's bosom. For according to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xxxiii): "I
have not yet found Scripture mentioning hell in a favorable sense."
Now Abraham's bosom is taken in a favorable sense, as Augustine
goes on to say (Gen. ad lit. xxxiii): "Surely no one would be allowed
to give an unfavorable signification to Abraham's bosom and the
place of rest whither the godly poor man was carried by the angels."
Therefore Abraham's bosom is not the same as the limbo of hell.
Objection 2: Further, those who are in hell see not God. Yet God is
seen by those who are in Abraham's bosom, as may be gathered
from Augustine (Confess. ix, 3) who, speaking of Nebridius, says:
"Whatever that be, which is signified by thut bosom, there lives my
Nebridius," and further on: "Now lays he not his ear to my mouth,
but his spiritual mouth unto Thy fountain, and drinketh as much as
he can receive wisdom in proportion to his thirst, endlessly happy."
Therefore Abraham's bosom is not the same as the limbo of hell.
Objection 3: Further, the Church prays not that a man be taken to
hell: and yet she prays that the angels may carry the departed soul
to Abraham's bosom. Therefore it would seem that Abraham's
bosom is not the same as limbo.
On the contrary, The place whither the beggar Lazarus was taken is
called Abraham's bosom. Now he was taken to hell, for as a gloss
[St. Gregory, Moral. xx] on Job 30:23, "Where a house is appointed
for every one that liveth," says: "Hell was the house of all the living
until the coming of Christ." Therefore Abraham's bosom is the same
as limbo.
Further, Jacob said to his sons (Gn. 44:38): "You will bring down my
grey hairs with sorrow to hell": wherefore Jacob knew that he would
be taken to hell after his death. Therefore Abraham likewise was
taken to hell after his death; and consequently Abraham's bosom
would seem to be a part of hell.
I answer that, After death men's souls cannot find rest save by the
merit of faith, because "he that cometh to God must believe" (Heb.