1 Corinthians 15:15
"Yea, and we are found false witnesses of God: because we witnessed of
Him that He raised up Christ; whom He raised not up, if so be that the dead are
not raised."
But if this be absurd, (for it is a charge against God and a calumny,) and He
raised Him not, as you say, not only this, but other absurdities too will follow.
And again he establishes it all, and takes it up again, saying,

1 Corinthians 15:16
"For if the dead are not raised, neither has Christ been raised."
For had He not intended to do this, He would not have come into the world.
And he names not this, but the end, to wit, His resurrection; through it drawing
all things.

1 Corinthians 15:17
"And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is vain."
With whatever is clear and confessed, he keeps on surrounding the
resurrection of Christ, by means of the stronger point making even that which
seems to be weak and doubtful, strong and clear.
"You are yet in your sins." For if He was not raised, neither did He die; and
if He died not, neither did He take away sin: His death being the taking away of
sin. "For behold," says one, "the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the
world." [John 1:29] But how "takes away?" By His death. Wherefore also he
called him a Lamb, as one slain. But if He rose not again, neither was He slain:
and if He was not slain, neither was sin taken away: and if it was not taken away,
you are in it: and if you are in it, we have preached in vain: and if we have
preached in vain, you have believed in vain that you were reconciled. And
besides, death remains immortal, if He did not arise. For if He too was holden of
death and loosed not its pains, how released He all others, being as yet Himself
holden of it? Wherefore also he adds,

1 Corinthians 15:18
"Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ have perished."
"And why speak I of you," says he, "when all those also are perished, who
have done all and are no longer subject to the uncertainty of the future?" But by
the expression, "in Christ," he means either "in the faith," or "they who died for
His sake, who endured many perils, many miseries, who walked in the narrow
way. "
Where are those foul-mouthed Manichees who say that by the resurrection
here means the liberation from sin ? For these compact and continuous
syllogisms, holding as they do also conversely, indicate nothing of what they say,
but what we affirm. It is true, "rising again" is spoken of one who has fallen: and
this is why he keeps on explaining, and says not only that He was raised, but
adds this also, "from the dead." And the Corinthians too doubted not of the
forgiveness of sins, but of the resurrection of bodies.
But what necessity is there at all, that except mankind be not without sin,
neither should Christ Himself be so? Whereas, if He were not to raise men up, it
were natural to say, "wherefore came He and took our flesh and rose again?"
But on our supposition not so. Yea, and whether men sin or do not sin, there is
ever with God an impossibility of sinning, and what happens to us reaches not to
Him, nor does one case answer to the other by way of conversion, as in the
matter of the resurrection of the body.