FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.2.

determinate to acts by means of habits, as is clear from what we
have said above (Question 49, Article 4). Therefore human virtues
are habits.
Reply to Objection 1: Sometimes we give the name of a virtue to that
to which the virtue is directed, namely, either to its object, or to its
act: for instance, we give the name Faith, to that which we believe, or
to the act of believing, as also to the habit by which we believe.
When therefore we say that "virtue is the limit of power," virtue is
taken for the object of virtue. For the furthest point to which a power
can reach, is said to be its virtue; for instance, if a man can carry a
hundredweight and not more, his virtue is put at a hundredweight,
and not at sixty. But the objection takes virtue as being essentially
the limit of power.
Reply to Objection 2: Good use of free-will is said to be a virtue, in
the same sense as above (ad 1); that is to say, because it is that to
which virtue is directed as to its proper act. For the act of virtue is
nothing else than the good use of free-will.
Reply to Objection 3: We are said to merit by something in two ways.
First, as by merit itself, just as we are said to run by running; and
thus we merit by acts. Secondly, we are said to merit by something
as by the principle whereby we merit, as we are said to run by the
motive power; and thus are we said to merit by virtues and habits.
Reply to Objection 4: When we say that virtue is the order or
ordering of love, we refer to the end to which virtue is ordered:
because in us love is set in order by virtue.
Reply to Objection 5: Natural powers are of themselves determinate
to one act: not so the rational powers. And so there is no
comparison, as we have said.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether human virtue is an operative habit?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not essential to human virtue to
be an operative habit. For Tully says (Tuscul. iv) that as health and
beauty belong to the body, so virtue belongs to the soul. But health
and beauty are not operative habits. Therefore neither is virtue.
Objection 2: Further, in natural things we find virtue not only in
reference to act, but also in reference to being: as is clear from the
Philosopher (De Coelo i), since some have a virtue to be always,
while some have a virtue to be not always, but at some definite time.
Now as natural virtue is in natural things, so is human virtue in
rational beings. Therefore also human virtue is referred not only to
act, but also to being.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Phys. vii, text. 17) that
virtue "is the disposition of a perfect thing to that which is best."
Now the best thing to which man needs to be disposed by virtue is
God Himself, as Augustine proves (De Moribus Eccl. 3,6, 14) to
Whom the soul is disposed by being made like to Him. Therefore it
seems that virtue is a quality of the soul in reference to God, likening
it, as it were, to Him; and not in reference to operation. It is not,
therefore, an operative habit.
On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 6) says that "virtue of a
thing is that which makes its work good."
I answer that, Virtue, from the very nature of the word, implies some
perfection of power, as we have said above (Article 1). Wherefore,
since power is of two kinds, namely, power in reference to being,
and power in reference to act; the perfection of each of these is
called virtue. But power in reference to being is on the part of matter,
which is potential being, whereas power in reference to act, is on the
part of the form, which is the principle of action, since everything
acts in so far as it is in act.
Now man is so constituted that the body holds the place of matter,
the soul that of form. The body, indeed, man has in common with
other animals; and the same is to be said of the forces which are
common to the soul and body: and only those forces which are
proper to the soul, namely, the rational forces, belong to man alone.