truly dreadful; and, even as fire, devours the conscience! And this is wont to
happen not on account of the nature of the things, but by reason of our own
folly; so that if we were once to consider what death is, we should at no time be
afraid of it. What then, I pray you, is death? Just what it is to put off a garment.
For the body is about the soul as a garment; and after laying this aside for a short
time by means of death, we shall resume it again with the more splendour. What
is death at most? It is a journey for a season; a sleep longer than usual! So that if
you fear death, you should also fear sleep! If for those who are dying you are
pained, grieve for those too who are eating and drinking, for as this is natural, so
is that! Let not natural things sadden you; rather let things which arise from an
evil choice make you sorrowful. Sorrow not for the dying man; but sorrow for
him who is living in sin!
12. Would you have me mention another reason on account of which we
fear death? We do not live with strictness, nor keep a clear conscience; for if this
were the case nothing would alarm us, neither death, nor famine, nor the loss of
wealth, nor anything else of this kind. For he who lives virtuously, cannot be
injured by any of these things, or be deprived of his inward pleasure. For being
supported by favourable hopes, nothing will be able to throw him into dejection.
What is there that any one can possibly effect, by which he can cause the nobleminded man to become sorrowful? Take away his riches? He has yet wealth that
is in the heavens! Cast him out of his country? He will take his journey to that
city which is above! Load him with fetters? He has still his conscience free, and
is insensible to the external chain! Put his body to death? Yet he shall rise again!
And as he who fights with a shadow, and beaten the air, will be unable to hit any
one; so he who is at war with the just man, is but striking at a shadow, and
wasting his own strength, without being able to inflict any injury upon him.
Grant me then to be sure of the kingdom of heaven; and, if you wish, slay me
this day. I shall be thankful to you for the slaughter; forasmuch as you send me
quickly to the possession of those good things! "This, however," says some one,
"is what we especially lament, that hindered as we are by the multitude of our

sins, we shall not attain to that kingdom." Such being the case then, leave off
lamenting death, and lament your sins, in order that you may be freed from
them! Grief, indeed, has had its existence, not that we should sorrow for the loss
of wealth, nor for death, nor for anything else of that kind, but that we may
employ it for the taking away of our sins. And I will make the truth of this
evident by an example. Healing medicines have been made for those diseases
only which they are able to remove; not for those which are in no respect
assisted by them. For instance (for I wish to make the matter still plainer), the
medicine which is able to benefit a malady of the eyes only, and no other
disease, one might justly say was made only for the sake of the eyes; not for the
stomach, nor for the hands, nor any other member. Let us then transfer this
argument to the subject of grief; and we shall find, that in none of those things
which happen to us, is it of any advantage, except to correct sin; whence it is
apparent that it has had its existence only for the destruction of this. Let us now
take a survey of each of those evils which befall us, and let us apply
despondency as a remedy, and see what sort of advantage results from it.
13. Some one is mulcted in property: he becomes sad, but this does not
make good his loss. Some one has lost a son: he grieves, but he cannot raise the
dead, nor benefit the departed. Some one has been scourged, beaten, and
insulted; he becomes sorrowful. This does not recall the insult. Some one falls
into sickness, and a most grievous disease; he is dejected. This does not remove
his disease, but only makes it the more grievous. Do you see that in none of
these cases does sadness answer any useful purpose? Suppose that any one has
sinned, and is sad. He blots out the sin; he gets free from the transgression. How
is this shown? By the declaration of the Lord; for, speaking of a certain one who
had sinned, He said, "Because of his iniquity I made him sad for a while; and I
saw that he was grieved, and he went on heavily; and I healed his ways."
Therefore also Paul says, "Godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation not to
be repented of." [2 Corinthians 7:10] Since then what I have said clearly shows,
that neither the loss of riches, nor insult, nor abuse, nor stripes, nor sickness, nor