blessings. Doubly, therefore, does He awaken their spirit, both by the dignity of
Him who is called on, and by the greatness of the benefits which they have
enjoyed. But when He says, "in Heaven," He speaks not this as shutting up God
there, but as withdrawing him who is praying from earth, and fixing him in the
high places, and in the dwellings above.
He teaches, moreover, to make our prayer common, in behalf of our
brethren also. For He says not, "my Father, which art in Heaven," but, "our
Father," offering up his supplications for the body in common, and nowhere
looking to his own, but everywhere to his neighbor's good. And by this He at
once takes away hatred, and quells pride, and casts out envy, and brings in the
mother of all good things, even charity, and exterminates the inequality of
human things, and shows how far the equality reaches between the king and the
poor man, if at least in those things which are greatest and most indispensable,
we are all of us fellows. For what harm comes of our kindred below, when in
that which is on high we are all of us knit together, and no one has anything
more than another; neither the rich more than the poor, nor the master than the
servant, neither the ruler than the subject, nor the king than the common soldier,
nor the philosopher than the barbarian, nor the skillful than the unlearned? For to
all has He given one nobility, having vouchsafed to be called the Father of all
alike.
7. When therefore He has reminded us of this nobility, and of the gift from
above, and of our equality with our brethren, and of charity; and when He has
removed us from earth, and fixed us in Heaven; let us see what He commands us
to ask after this. Not but, in the first place, even that saying alone is sufficient to
implant instruction in all virtue. For he who has called God Father, and a
common Father, would be justly bound to show forth such a conversation, as not
to appear unworthy of this nobility, and to exhibit a diligence proportionate to
the gift. Yet is He not satisfied with this, but adds, also another clause, thus
saying,
"Hallowed be Your name."

Worthy of him who calls God Father, is the prayer to ask nothing before the
glory of His Father, but to account all things secondary to the work of praising
Him. For "hallowed" is glorified. For His own glory He has complete, and ever
continuing the same, but He commands him who prays to seek that He may be
glorified also by our life. Which very thing He had said before likewise, "Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven." [Matthew 5:16] Yea, and the seraphim too,
giving glory, said on this wise, "Holy, holy, holy." So that "hallowed" means this,
viz. "glorified." That is, "vouchsafe," says he, "that we may live so purely, that
through us all may glorify You." Which thing again appertains unto perfect selfcontrol, to present to all a life so irreprehensible, that every one of the beholders
may offer to the Lord the praise due to Him for this.
"Your kingdom come." [Matthew 6:10]
And this again is the language of a right-minded child, not to be rivetted to
things that are seen, neither to account things present some great matter; but to
hasten unto our Father, and to long for the things to come. And this springs out
of a good conscience, and a soul set free from things that are on earth. This, for
instance, Paul himself was longing after every day: wherefore he also said, that
"even we ourselves, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, groan, waiting for an
adoption, the redemption of our body." For he who has this fondness, can neither
be puffed up by the good things of this life, nor abashed by its sorrows; but as
though dwelling in the very heavens, is freed from each sort of irregularity.
"Your will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven."
Behold a most excellent train of thought! In that He bade us indeed long for
the things to come, and hasten towards that sojourn; and, till that may be, even
while we abide here, so long to be earnest in showing forth the same
conversation as those above. For you must long, says He, for heaven, and the
things in heaven; however, even before heaven, He has bidden us make the earth
a heaven and do and say all things, even while we are continuing in it, as having
our conversation there; insomuch that these too should be objects of our prayer