Reply to Objection 2: We can name a thing according to the
knowledge we have of its nature from its properties and effects.
Hence because we can know what stone is in itself from its property,
this name "stone" signifies the nature of the stone itself; for it
signifies the definition of stone, by which we know what it is, for the
idea which the name signifies is the definition, as is said in Metaph.
iv. Now from the divine effects we cannot know the divine nature in
itself, so as to know what it is; but only by way of eminence, and by
way of causality, and of negation as stated above (Question 12,
Article 12). Thus the name "God" signifies the divine nature, for this
name was imposed to signify something existing above all things,
the principle of all things and removed from all things; for those who
name God intend to signify all this.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether this name "God" is communicable?

Objection 1: It seems that this name "God" is communicable. For
whosoever shares in the thing signified by a name shares in the
name itself. But this name "God" signifies the divine nature, which is
communicable to others, according to the words, "He hath given us
great and precious promises, that by these we may be made
partakers of the divine nature" (2 Pt. 1:4). Therefore this name "God"
can be communicated to others.
Objection 2: Further, only proper names are not communicable. Now
this name "God" is not a proper, but an appellative noun; which
appears from the fact that it has a plural, according to the text, "I
have said, You are gods" (Ps. 81:6). Therefore this name "God" is
communicable.
Objection 3: Further, this name "God" comes from operation, as
explained. But other names given to God from His operations or
effects are communicable; as "good," "wise," and the like. Therefore
this name "God" is communicable.
On the contrary, It is written: "They gave the incommunicable name
to wood and stones" (Wis. 14:21), in reference to the divine name.
Therefore this name "God" is incommunicable.
I answer that, A name is communicable in two ways: properly, and
by similitude. It is properly communicable in the sense that its whole
signification can be given to many; by similitude it is communicable
according to some part of the signification of the name. For instance
this name "lion" is properly communicable to all things of the same
nature as "lion"; by similitude it is communicable to those who
participate in the nature of a lion, as for instance by courage, or
strength, and those who thus participate are called lions
metaphorically. To know, however, what names are properly
communicable, we must consider that every form existing in the
singular subject, by which it is individualized, is common to many
either in reality, or in idea; as human nature is common to many in
reality, and in idea; whereas the nature of the sun is not common to
many in reality, but only in idea; for the nature of the sun can be
understood as existing in many subjects; and the reason is because
the mind understands the nature of every species by abstraction