## Homily 82 on Matthew

Matt. XXVI. 26-28.
" And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and gave thanks, and broke it,
and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; This is my body."
" And He took a cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of it; This is my blood of the New Testament, Which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins."
Ah! How great is the blindness of the traitor! Even partaking of the
mysteries, he remained the same; and admitted to the most holy table, he
changed not. And this Luke shows by saying, that after this Satan entered into
him, not as despising the Lord's body, but thenceforth laughing to scorn the
traitor's shamelessness. For indeed his sin became greater from both causes, as
well in that he came to the mysteries with such a disposition, as that having
approached them, he did not become better, either from fear, or from the benefit,
or from the honor. But Christ forbad him not, although He knew all things, that
you might learn that He omits none of the things that pertain to correction.
Wherefore both before this, and after this, He continually admonished him, and
checked him, both by deeds, and by words; both by fear, and by kindness; both
by threatening, and by honor. But none of these things withdrew him from that
grievous pest.
Wherefore thenceforth He leaves him, and by the mysteries again reminds
the disciples of His being slain, and in the midst of the meal His discourse is of
the cross, by the continual repeating of the prediction, making His passion easy
to receive. For if, when so many things had been done and foretold, they were
troubled; if they had heard none of these things, what would they not have felt?
"And as they were eating, He took bread, and broke it." Why can it have
been that He ordained this sacrament then, at the time of the passover? That you

might learn from everything, both that He is the lawgiver of the Old Testament,
and that the things therein are foreshadowed because of these things. Therefore, I
say, where the type is, there He puts the truth.
But the evening is a sure sign of the fullness of times, and that the things
were now come to the very end.
And He gives thanks, to teach us how we ought to celebrate this sacrament,
and to show that not unwillingly does He come to the passion, and to teach us
whatever we may suffer to bear it thankfully, thence also suggesting good hopes.
For if the type was a deliverance from such bondage, how much more will the
truth set free the world, and will He be delivered up for the benefit of our race.
Wherefore, I would add, neither did He appoint the sacrament before this, but
when henceforth the rites of the law were to cease. And thus the very chief of the
feasts He brings to an end, removing them to another most awful table, and He
says, "Take, eat, This is my body, Which is broken for many."
And how were they not confounded at hearing this? Because He had before
told unto them many and great things touching this. Wherefore that He
establishes no more, for they had heard it sufficiently, but he speaks of the cause
of His passion, namely, the taking away of sins. And He calls it blood of a New
Testament, that of the undertaking, the promise, the new law. For this He
undertook also of old, and this comprises the Testament that is in the new law.
And like as the Old Testament had sheep and bullocks, so this has the Lord's
blood. Hence also He shows that He is soon to die, wherefore also He made
mention of a Testament, and He reminds them also of the former Testament, for
that also was dedicated with blood. And again He tells the cause of His death,
"which is shed for many for the remission of sins;" and He says, "Do this in
remembrance of me." Do you see how He removes and draws them off from
Jewish customs. For like as you did that, He says, in remembrance of the
miracles in Egypt, so do this likewise in remembrance of me. That was shed for
the preservation of the firstborn, this for the remission of the sins of the whole
world. For, "This," says He, "is my blood, which is shed for the remission of