upon our oath. Why, tell me, is it that we do not trust some, no, not on their oath,
while we deem others trustworthy even independently of oaths. Do you see that
there is no need of oaths in any case? 'When such an one speaks,' we say, 'I
believe him, even without any oath, but you, no, not with your oaths.' Thus then
an oath is unnecessary; and is in fact an evidence rather of distrust than of
confidence. For where a man is over ready to take his oath, he does not leave us
to entertain any great idea of his scrupulousness. So that the man who is most
constant in his use of oaths, has on no occasion any necessity for using one, and
he who never uses one on any occasion, has in himself the full benefit of its use.
Some one says there is a necessity for an oath, to produce confidence; but we see
that they are the more readily trusted who abstain from taking oaths.
But again, if one is a man of violence, is this a matter of necessity? Yes, he
will say, because his passion carries him away, and burns within him, and does
not let the soul be at rest. Man, to act with violence is not the effect of anger, but
of littleness of mind. Were it the effect of anger, all men, whenever they were
angry, would never cease committing acts of violence. We have anger given us,
not that we may commit acts of violence on our neighbors, but that we may
correct those that are in sin, that we may bestir ourselves, that we may not be
sluggish. Anger is implanted in us as a sort of sting, to make us gnash with our
teeth against the devil, to make us vehement against him, not to set us in array
against each other. We have arms, not to make us at war among ourselves, but
that we may employ our whole armor against the enemy. Are you prone to
anger? Be so against your own sins: chastise your soul, scourge your conscience,
be a severe judge, and merciless in your sentence against your own sins. This is
the way to turn anger to account. It was for this that God implanted it within us.
But again, is plunder a matter of necessity? No, in no wise. Tell me, what
manner of necessity is there to be grasping: what manner of compulsion?
Poverty, a man will say, causes it, and the fear of being without common
necessaries. Now this is the very reason why you ought not to be grasping.
Wealth so gotten has no security in it. You are doing the very same thing as a

man would do, who, if he were asked why he laid the foundation of his house in
the sand, should say, he did it because of the frost and rain. Whereas this would
be the very reason why he should not lay it in the sand. They are the very
foundations which the rain, and blasts, and wind, most quickly overturn. So that
if you would be wealthy, never be rapacious; if you would transmit wealth to
your children, get righteous wealth, at least, if any there be that is such. Because
this abides, and remains firm, whereas that which is not such, quickly wastes and
perishes. Tell me, have you a mind to be rich, and do you take the goods of
others? Surely this is not wealth: wealth consists in possessing what is your own.
He that is in possession of the goods of others, never can be a wealthy man;
since at that rate even your very silk venders, who receive their goods as a
consignment from others, would be the wealthiest and the richest of men.
Though for the time, indeed, it is theirs, still we do not call them wealthy. And
why forsooth? Because they are in possession of what belongs to others. For
though the piece itself happens to be theirs, still the money it is worth is not
theirs. Nay, and even if the money is in their hands, still this is not wealth. Now,
if consignments thus given render not men more wealthy because we so soon
resign them, how can those which arise from rapine render them wealthy?
However, if at any rate you desire to be wealthy, (for the matter is not one of
necessity,) what greater good is it that you would fain enjoy? Is it a longer life?
Yet, surely men of this character quickly become short-lived. Oftentimes they
pay as the penalty of plunder and rapaciousness, an untimely death; and not only
suffer as a penalty the loss of the enjoyment of their gains, but go out of life
having gained but little, and hell to boot. Oftentimes too they die of diseases,
which are the fruits of self-indulgence, and of toil, and of anxiety. Fain would I
understand why it is that wealth is so eagerly pursued by mankind. Why surely
for this reason has God set a limit and a boundary to our nature, that we may
have no need to go on seeking wealth beyond it. For instance He has
commanded us, to clothe the body in one, or perhaps in two garments; and there
is no need of any more to cover us. Where is the good of ten thousand changes