the Word of God, and the Word of God truly is man. And though such union cannot be
perfectly explained by mortal man, still we will endeavour, according to our capacity and
ability, to say something towards the building up of faith and the defence of this mystery
of faith against unbelievers.
In all creation there is nothing so like this union as the union of soul and body. So the
Athanasian Creed has it: "As the rational soul and flesh is one man, so God and man is
one Christ." But whereas the rational soul is united with the body, (a) as form with
matter, (b) as chief agent with instrument (B. II, Chapp.LVI,LVII ); this
comparison cannot hold in respect of the former mode of union, for so we should be
brought round to the [Eutychian] conclusion, that of God and man there was made one
nature. We must take the point of the comparison then to be the union of soul with body
as of agent with instrument. And with this the sayings of some ancient Doctors agree,
who have laid it down that the human nature in Christ is an instrument of His divinity, as
the body is an instrument of the soul. The body and its parts, as instruments of the
soul, come in a different category from exterior instruments. This axe is not my own
proper instrument as is this hand. With this axe many men may work: but this hand is
set aside for the proper activity of this soul. Therefore the hand is a tool conjoined with
and proper to him that works with it: but the axe is an instrument extrinsic to the
workman and common to many hands. Thus then we may take it to be with the union of
God and man. All men stand to God as instruments wherewith He works: For he it is
that worketh in us to will and accomplish on behalf of the good will (Phil. ii, 13). But
other men stand to God as extrinsic and separate instruments. God moves them, not
merely to activities proper to Himself, but to activities common to all rational nature,
such as understanding truth, loving goodness, and working justice. But human nature
has been taken up in Christ to work as an instrument proper to God alone, such works
as cleansing of sins, illumination of the mind by grace, and introduction to everlasting
life. The human nature therefore of Christ stands to God as an instrument proper and
conjoined, as the hand to the soul.
The aforesaid examples however are not alleged as though a perfect likeness were to
be looked for in them. We must understand how easy it was for the Word of God to
unite Himself with human nature in a union far more sublime and intimate than that of
the soul with any `proper instrument.'

## CHAPTER XL, XLIX--Objections against the Faith of the Incarnation, with Replies
ARG. 1. If God has taken flesh, He must be either changed into a body, or be some
power resident in a body.
Reply 1. The Incarnation does not mean either the conversion of the Word into flesh, or
the union of the Word with a human body as the form of the same.
Arg. 2. If the person of the Word of God acquires a new subsistence in a human nature,
it must undergo a substantial change, as everything is changed that acquires a new
nature.
Reply 2. The change is not in the Word of God, but in the human nature assumed by
the Word.
Arg. 3. If the personality of the Word of God has become the personality of a human
nature, it follows that since the Incarnation the Word of God has not been everywhere,
as that human nature is not everywhere.
Reply 3. Personality does not extend beyond the bounds of that nature from which it
has its subsistence. But the Word of God has not its subsistence from its human nature,
but rather draws that human nature to its own subsistence or personality: for it does not
subsist through it, but in it.
Arg. 4. One and the same thing has only one quiddity, substance, or nature. It seems
impossible therefore for one person to subsist in two natures.
Reply 4. The assertion is true, if you speak of the nature whereby a thing has being,
absolutely speaking; and so, absolutely speaking, the Word of God has being by the
divine nature alone, not by the human nature. But by the human nature it has being as
Man.
Arg. 8. Soul and body in Christ are of not less potency than they are in other men. But
their union in other men constitutes a person: therefore also in Christ.
Reply 8. The human soul and body in Christ being drawn into the personality of the
Word, and not constituting another person besides the person of the Word, does not
mark a diminution of potency, but a greater excellence. Everything is better for being
united to what is more excellent than itself, better than it was, or would be, if it stood by
itself.
Arg. 10. This man, who is Christ, considered merely as made up of soul and body, is a
substance: but not a universal, therefore a particular substance: therefore a person.
Reply 10. Yes, He is a person, but no other person than the person of the Word:
because the human nature has been so assumed by the person of the Word that the