Observe the wisdom: observe the considerate forbearance: ([συγκατάβασιν].) He
did not pass on to speak at once of the things relating to Christ; that He had
promised this after His Crucifixion; truly that would have been to upset all. And
yet, you will say, here was sufficient to prove His divinity. True, it was, if
believed (and the very point was that it should be believed); but if not believed,
it would have caused them to be stoned. "And I will pour out of My Spirit upon
all flesh." He offers even to them excellent hopes, if they would have them. And
so far, he does not leave it to be regarded as the exclusive advantage of himself
and his company; which would have made them be looked upon with an evil
eye; thus cutting off all envious feeling. "And your sons shall prophesy." And
yet, he says, not yours this achievement, this distinction; the gift has passed over
to your children. Himself and his company he calls their sons, and those [whom
he is addressing] he calls his and their fathers. "And your young men shall see
visions, and your old men shall dream dreams; and on My servants and on My
handmaidens I will pour out in those days of My Spirit; and they shall
prophesy." So far he shows that he and his have found favor, in that they had
received ([καταξιωθέντας]) [the Spirit]; not so they whom he is addressing; for
that they had crucified [the Lord]. So Christ also, willing to mitigate their wrath,
said, "By whom do your sons cast out devils?" [Matthew 12:27] He did not say,
My disciples; for indeed it seemed a flattering mode of expression. And so Peter
also did not say, 'They are not drunk, but speak by the Spirit.' but he takes refuge
with the prophet, and under shelter of him, so speaks. As for the accusation [of
drunkenness], he cleared himself of that by his own assertion; but for the grace,
he fetches the prophet as witness. "I will pour out of My Spirit upon all flesh."
["And your sons," etc.] To some the grace was imparted through dreams, to
others it was openly poured forth. For indeed by dreams the prophets saw, and
received revelations.
Then he goes on with the prophecy, which has in it also something terrible.
"And I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs" ["in the earth beneath"].
[Acts 2:19] In these words he speaks both of the judgment to come, and of the

taking of Jerusalem. "Blood and fire, and vapor of smoke." Observe how he
describes the capture. "The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into
blood." [Acts 2:20] This results from the ([διαθέσεως]) internal affection of the
sufferers. It is said, indeed, that many such phenomena actually did occur in the
sky, as Josephus attests. At the same time the Apostle strikes fear into them, by
reminding them of the darkness which had lately occurred, and leading them to
expect things to come. "Before that great and notable day of the Lord come." For
be not confident, he means to say, because at present you sin with impunity. For
these things are the prelude of a certain great and dreadful day. Do you see how
he made their souls to quake and melt within them, and turned their laughter into
pleading for acquittal? For if these things are the prelude of that day, it follows
that the extreme of danger is impending. But what next? He again lets them take
breath, adding, "And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord, shall be saved." [Romans 10:13] This is said concerning
Christ, as Paul affirms, but Peter does not venture as yet to reveal this.
Well, let us look over again what has been said. It is well managed, that as
against men laughing and mocking, he starts up and begins with, "Be this known
unto you all and hearken unto my words." But he begins by saying, "You men of
Judea." By the expression [᾿] [Ιουδαἵοι], I take him to mean those that lived in
Judea.— And, if you please, let us compare those expressions in the Gospel, that
you may learn what a sudden change has taken place in Peter. "A damsel," it is
written, "came out unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth."
And, says he, "I know not the Man." And being again questioned, "he began to
curse and to swear." [Matthew 26:69-72] But see here his boldness, and his great
freedom of speech.— He did not praise those who had said, "We do hear them
speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God;" but by his severity towards
those others, he made these more earnest, and at the same time his address is
clear from all appearance of adulation. And it is well to remark, on all occasions,
however the Apostles may condescend to the level of their hearers
([συγκατάβασις]), their language is clear from all appearance both of adulation