SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.4.

finally completed, namely the contemplation of truth, and from this
act it derives its unity. Yet it has many acts whereby it arrives at this
final act. Some of these pertain to the reception of principles, from
which it proceeds to the contemplation of truth; others are
concerned with deducing from the principles, the truth, the
knowledge of which is sought; and the last and crowning act is the
contemplation itself of the truth.
Reply to Objection 1: According to Richard of St. Victor "cogitation"
would seem to regard the consideration of the many things from
which a person intends to gather one simple truth. Hence cogitation
may comprise not only the perceptions of the senses in taking
cognizance of certain effects, but also the imaginations. and again
the reason's discussion of the various signs or of anything that
conduces to the truth in view: although, according to Augustine (De
Trin. xiv, 7), cogitation may signify any actual operation of the
intellect. "Meditation" would seem to be the process of reason from
certain principles that lead to the contemplation of some truth: and
"consideration" has the same meaning, according to Bernard (De
Consid. ii, 2), although, according to the Philosopher (De Anima ii, 1),
every operation of the intellect may be called "consideration." But
"contemplation" regards the simple act of gazing on the truth;
wherefore Richard says again (De Grat. Contempl. i, 4) that
"contemplation is the soul's clear and free dwelling upon the object
of its gaze; meditation is the survey of the mind while occupied in
searching for the truth: and cogitation is the mind's glance which is
prone to wander."
Reply to Objection 2: According to a gloss [De Trin. xv, 8] of
Augustine on this passage, "beholding" [speculatio] denotes "seeing
in a mirror [speculo], not from a watch-tower [specula]." Now to see
a thing in a mirror is to see a cause in its effect wherein its likeness
is reflected. Hence "beholding" would seem to be reducible to
meditation.
Reply to Objection 3: Admiration is a kind of fear resulting from the
apprehension of a thing that surpasses our faculties: hence it results
from the contemplation of the sublime truth. For it was stated above
(Article 1) that contemplation terminates in the affections.
Reply to Objection 4: Man reaches the knowledge of truth in two
ways. First, by means of things received from another. In this way,
as regards the things he receives from God, he needs "prayer,"

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.179, C.4.

according to Wis. 7:7, "I called upon" God, "and the spirit of wisdom
came upon me": while as regards the things he receives from man,
he needs "hearing," in so far as he receives from the spoken word,
and "reading," in so far as he receives from the tradition of Holy Writ.
Secondly, he needs to apply himself by his personal study, and thus
he requires "meditation."