come not together for this purpose," says he, "that you may show that you have a
gift, but that you may edify the hearers;" which also he before said, "Let all
things be done unto edifying."

1 Corinthians 14:29
6. "Let the prophets speak by two or three, and let the others discern."
No where has he added, "at the most," as in the case of the tongues. And
how is this, one says? For he makes out that neither is prophesy sufficient in
itself, if at least he permits the judgment to others. Nay, surely it is quite
sufficient; and this is why he did not stop the mouth of the prophet, as of the
other, when there is no interpreter; nor, as in his case he said, "if there be no
interpreter let him keep silence," so also in the case of the prophet, "if there be
none to discern, let him not prophesy;" but he only secured the hearer; since for
the satisfaction of the hearers he said this, that no diviner might throw himself in
among them. For of this also at the beginning he bade them beware, when he
introduced a distinction between divination and prophecy, and now he bids them
discriminate and spy out the matter, so that no Satanic teacher might privily
enter.

1 Corinthians 14:30
"But if a revelation be made to another sitting by, let the first keep silence."

1 Corinthians 14:31
"For you all can prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted."
What may this be which is spoken? "If when you prophesy," says he, "and
art speaking, the spirit of another stir him up, be silent thenceforth." For that
which he said in the case of the tongues, this also here he requires, that it should
be done "in turn," only in a diviner way here. For he made not use of the very
expression, "in turn ?" but "if a revelation be made to another." Since what need
was there further, that when the second was moved to prophesy the first should
speak? Ought they then both? Nay, this were profane and would produce
confusion. Ought the first? This too were out of place. For to this end when the
one was speaking, the Spirit moved the other, in order that he too might say
somewhat.
So then, comforting him that had been silenced, he says, "For you all can
prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted." Do you see
how again he states the reason wherefore he does all things? For if him that
speaks with tongues he altogether forbid to speak, when he has not an
interpreter, because of the unprofitableness; reasonably also he bids restrain
prophecy, if it have not this quality, but creates confusion and disturbance and
unseasonable tumult.

1 Corinthians 14:32
"And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets."
Do you see how he put him to shame earnestly and fearfully? For that the
man might not strive nor be factious, he signifies that the gift itself was under
subjection. For by "spirit" here, he means its actual working. But if the spirit be
subject, much more thou its possessor canst not justly be contentious.
7. Then he signifies that this is pleasing also to God, subjoining and saying,