trumpets are sounding, when the Angels are rushing forward, the first, then the
second, then the third, then ten thousand ranks, are pouring forth upon the earth;
then the Cherubim, (and many are these and infinite;) the Seraphim; when He
Himself is coming, with His ineffable glory; when those meet Him, who had
gone to gather the elect into the midst; when Paul and his companions, and all
who in his time had been approved, are crowned, are proclaimed aloud, are
honored by the King, before all His heavenly host. For if hell did not exist, how
fearful a thing it is, that the one part should be honored, and the other
dishonored! Hell, I confess, is intolerable, yea, very intolerable, but more
intolerable than it is the loss of the Kingdom. Consider; if any king, or the son of
a king, having taken his departure, and been successful in innumerable wars, and
become the object of admiration, should with his army entire, return to any city,
in his chariot, with his trophies, with his innumerable ranks of golden shields,
with his spearmen, his bodyguard all about him, while the whole city was
adorned with crowns, while all the rulers of the world accompanied him, and all
the soldiery of foreign nations followed him as captives, then præfects, satraps,
and in the presence of all the rulers, and all that splendor, he should receive the
citizens who meet him, and kiss them, and stretch forth his hand, and give them
freedom of access, and converse with them, all standing around, as with friends,
and tell them that all that journey was undertaken for their sake, and should lead
them into his palace, and give them a share of it, even if the rest should not be
punished, to how great punishment would not this be equal? But if in the case of
men it were a bitter thing to fall away from this glory, much more is it so with
God, when all the heavenly Powers are present with the King, when the demons,
bound, and bowing down their heads, and the devil himself is led along in
chains, and all military force that opposes itself, when the Powers of the
heavens, when He Himself, comes upon the clouds.
Believe me, I am not even able to finish my words, from the grief which
lays hold of my soul at this relation. Consider of how great glory we shall be
deprived, when it is in our power not to be deprived of it. For this is the misery,

that we suffer these things, when it is in our power not to suffer them. When he
receives the one part and leads them to His Father in heaven, and rejects the
other, whom Angels take and drag against their will, weeping, and hanging down
their heads, to the fire of hell, when they have first been made a spectacle to the
whole world, what grief, think you, is there? Let us then make haste, while there
is time, and take great thought of our own salvation. How many things have we
to say like the rich man? If any one would now suffer us, we would take counsel
of the things that are profitable! But no one does suffer us. And that we shall so
say, is clear, not from him alone, but from many others. And that you may learn
this, how many men have been in fevers, and said, if we recover, we shall never
again fall into the same state. Many such words we shall then say, but we shall
be answered as the rich man was, that there is a gulf, that we have received our
good things here. [Luke 16:25-26] Let us groan then, I entreat you, bitterly,
rather let us not only groan, but pursue virtue too; let us lament now, for
salvation, that we may not then lament in vain. Let us weep now, and not weep
then, at our evil lot. This weeping is of virtue, that of unprofitable repentance; let
us afflict ourselves now, that we may not then; for it is not the same thing to be
afflicted here and there. Here, you are afflicted for a little time, or rather thou
dost not perceive your affliction, knowing that you are afflicted for your good.
But there, the affliction is more bitter, because it is not in hope, nor for any
escape, but without limit, and throughout.
But may we all be freed from this, and obtain remission. But let us pray and
be diligent, that we may obtain the remission. Let us be diligent, I entreat; for if
we are diligent, we prevail even through our prayer: if we pray earnestly, God
grants our request; but if we neither ask Him, nor do earnestly anything of this
sort, nor work, how is it possible that we should ever succeed? By sleeping? Not
at all. For it is much if even by running, and stretching forth, and being
conformed to His death, as Paul said, we shall be able to succeed, not to say
sleeping. "If by any means I may attain," says he. But if Paul said, "If by any
means I may attain," what shall we say? For it is not possible by sleeping to