expected that she should always be honored by Him as by a son, and not that He
should come as her Master.
3. It was then from this motive that He said in this place, "Woman, what
have I to do with you?" and also for another reason not less pressing. What was
that? It was, that His miracles might not be suspected. The request ought to have
come from those who needed, not from His mother. And why so? Because what
is done at the request of one's friends, great though it be, often causes offense to
the spectators; but when they make the request who have the need, the miracle is
free from suspicion, the praise unmixed, the benefit great. So if some excellent
physician should enter a house where there were many sick, and be spoken to by
none of the patients or their relations, but be directed only by his own mother, he
would be suspected and disliked by the sufferers, nor would any of the patients
or their attendants deem him able to exhibit anything great or remarkable. And
so this was a reason why He rebuked her on that occasion, saying, "Woman,
what have I to do with you?" instructing her for the future not to do the like;
because, though He was careful to honor His mother, yet He cared much more
for the salvation of her soul, and for the doing good to the many, for which He
took upon Him the flesh.
These then were the words, not of one speaking rudely to his mother, but
belonging to a wise dispensation, which brought her into a right frame of mind,
and provided that the miracles should be attended with that honor which was
meet. And setting other things aside, this very appearance which these words
have of having been spoken chidingly, is amply enough to show that He held her
in high honor, for by His displeasure He showed that He reverenced her greatly;
in what manner, we will say in the next discourse. Think of this then, and when
you hear a certain woman saying, "Blessed is the womb that bare You, and the
paps which You have sucked," and Him answering, "rather blessed are they that
do the will of my Father" [Luke 11:27], suppose that those other words also were
said with the same intention. For the answer was not that of one rejecting his
mother, but of One who would show that her having borne Him would have

nothing availed her, had she not been very good and faithful. Now if, setting
aside the excellence of her soul, it profited Mary nothing that the Christ was
born of her, much less will it be able to avail us to have a father or a brother, or a
child of virtuous and noble disposition, if we ourselves be far removed from his
virtue. "A brother," says David, "does not redeem, shall man redeem?" [Psalm
49:7, Septuagint] We must place our hopes of salvation in nothing else, but only
in our own righteous deeds (done) after the grace of God. For if this by itself
could have availed, it would have availed the Jews, (for Christ was their kinsman
according to the flesh,) it would have availed the town in which He was born, it
would have availed His brethren. But as long as His brethren cared not for
themselves, the honor of their kindred availed them nothing, but they were
condemned with the rest of the world, and then only were approved, when they
shone by their own virtue; and the city fell, and was burnt, having gained
nothing from this; and His kinsmen according to the flesh were slaughtered and
perished very miserably, having gained nothing towards being saved from their
relationship to Him, because they had not the defense of virtue. The Apostles, on
the contrary, appeared greater than any, because they followed the true and
excellent way of gaining relationship with Him, that by obedience. And from
this we learn that we have always need of faith, and a life shining and bright,
since this alone will have power to save us. For though His relations were for a
long time everywhere held in honor, being called the Lord's kinsmen, yet now
we do not even know their names, while the lives and names of the Apostles are
everywhere celebrated.
Let us then not be proud of nobleness of birth according to the flesh, but
though we have ten thousand famous ancestors, let us use diligence ourselves to
go beyond their excellences, knowing that we shall gain nothing from the
diligence of others to help us in the judgment that is to come; nay, this will be
the more grievous condemnation, that though born of righteous parents and
having an example at home, we do not, even thus, imitate our teachers. And this
I say now, because I see many heathens, when we lead them to the faith and