benefits He bestowed on them: from Egypt and the slavery there He set them
free, the sea He made their path, from heaven he brought down manna, from
beneath He sent forth strange and marvellous fountains of waters; He was with
them every where, doing wonders and fencing them in on every side:
nevertheless since they showed forth nothing worthy of this gift, He spared them
not, but destroyed them all.

1 Corinthians 10:5
"For they were overthrown," says he, "in the wilderness." Declaring by this
word both the sweeping destruction, and the punishments and the vengeance
inflicted by God, and that they did not so much as attain to the rewards proposed
to them. Neither were they in the land of promise when He did these things unto
them, but without and afar somewhere, and wide of that country; He thus
visiting them with a double vengeance, both by not permitting them to see the
land, and this too though promised unto them, and also by actual severe
punishment.
And what are these things to us? Say you. To you surely they belong.
Wherefore also he adds,

1 Corinthians 10:6
"Now these things were figures of us. "
For as the gifts are figures, even so are the punishments figures: and as
Baptism and the Table were sketched out prophetically, so also by what ensued,
the certainty of punishment coming on those who are unworthy of this gift was
proclaimed beforehand for our sake that we by these examples might learn
soberness. Wherefore also he adds,
"To the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted." For
as in the benefits the types went before and the substance followed, such shall be
the order also in the punishments. Do you see how he signifies not only the fact
that these shall be punished, but also the degree, more severely than those
ancients? For if the one be type, and the other substance, it must needs be that
the punishments should as far exceed as the gifts.
And see whom he handles first: those who eat in the idol-temples. For
having said, "that we should not lust after evil things," which was general, he
subjoins that which is particular, implying that each of their sins arose from evil
lusting. And first he said this,

1 Corinthians 10:7-8
"Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is written, 'the people
sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.'"
Do you hear how he even calls them "idolaters?" here indeed making the
declaration, but afterwards bringing the proof. And he assigned the cause too
wherefore they ran to those tables; and this was gluttony. Wherefore having said,
"to the intent that we should not lust after evil things," and having added, nor "be
idolaters," he names the cause of such transgression; and this was gluttony. "For
the people sat down," says he, "to eat and to drink," and he adds the end thereof,
"they rose up to play." "For even as they," says he, "from sensuality passed into
idolatry; so there is a fear lest ye also may fall from the one into the other." Do
you see how he signifies that these, perfect men forsooth, were more imperfect
than the others whom they censured? Not in this respect only, their not bearing
with their brethren throughout, but also in that the one sin from ignorance, but
the others from gluttony. And from the ruin of the former he reckons the
punishment to these, but allows not these to lay upon another the cause of their
own sin but pronounces them responsible both for their injury, and for their own.
"Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed." Wherefore
does he here make mention of fornication again, having so largely discoursed
concerning it before? It is ever Paul's custom when he brings a charge of many
sins, both to set them forth in order and separately to proceed with his proposed
topics, and again in his discourses concerning other things to make mention also
of the former: which thing God also used to do in the Old Testament, in
reference to each several transgression, reminding the Jews of the calf and
bringing that sin before them. This then Paul also does here, at the same time
both reminding them of that sin, and teaching that the parent of this evil also was
luxury and gluttony. Wherefore also he adds, "Neither let us commit fornication,