possessions only, but you will even remove this grievous thirst altogether, and
wilt endure all things easily, so far from desiring more, not seeking often even
necessary things. Thus does Paul suffer hunger, and is held in honor more than
when he ate. Forasmuch as a wrestler also, when striving, and winning crowns,
would not choose to give up and to be in repose; and a merchant who has entered
on sea voyages would not desire to be afterwards in idleness.
And we therefore, if we should taste as we ought of spiritual fruits, shall
thenceforth not even account the things present to be anything, being seized by
the desire of the things to come as with some most noble intoxication.
Let us taste of them, therefore, that we may both be delivered from the
turmoil of the things present, and may attain the good things to come, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and
the might, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 75 on Matthew

Matthew 24:1-2.
" And Jesus went out from the temple, and departed. And His disciples came
to Him to show Him the buildings of the temple. And He answered and said unto
them, See ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left
here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down."
For inasmuch as He said, "Your house is left desolate," and had previously
forewarned them of many grievous things; therefore the disciples having heard
these things, as though marvelling at it, came unto Him, showing the beauty of
the temple, and wondering, if so much beauty was to be destroyed, and materials
so costly, and variety of workmanship past utterance; He no longer thenceforth
talks to them of desolation merely, but foretells an entire destruction. "See ye not
all these things," says He, and do ye marvel, and are you amazed? "There shall
not remain one stone upon another." How then did it remain? One may say. But
what is this? For neither so has the prediction fallen to the ground. For He said
these things either indicating its entire desolation, or at that spot where He was.
For there are parts of it destroyed unto the foundations.
And together with its we would say another thing also, that from what has
been done, even the most contentious ought to believe concerning the remains,
that they are utterly to be destroyed.
"And as He sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto Him
privately, saying, Tell us when shall these things be? And what shall be the sign
of Your coming, and of the end of the world?" [Matthew 24:3]
Therefore did they come unto Him privately, as it was of such matters they
meant to inquire. For they were in travail to know the day of His coming,
because of their eager desire to behold that glory, which is the cause of countless
blessings. And these two things do they ask him, when shall these things be?