the House.
And therefore not by His actions only, but by His words, He shows his
agreement with the Father; for He says not "the Holy House," but "My Father's
House." See, He even calls Him, "Father," and they are not angry; they thought
He spoke in a general way: but when He went on and spoke more plainly, so as
to set before them the idea of His Equality, then they become angry.
And what say they? "What sign showest Thou unto us, seeing that You do
these things?" Alas for their utter madness! Was there need of a sign before they
could cease their evil doings, and free the house of God from such dishonor?
And was it not the greatest sign of His Excellence that He had gotten such zeal
for that House? In fact, the well-disposed were distinguished by this very thing,
for "They," His disciples, it says,

John 2:17
"Remembered that it is written, The zeal of your house has eaten me up."
But the Jews did not remember the Prophecy, and said, "What sign showest
Thou unto us?" [Psalm 69:9], both grieving that their shameful traffic was cut
off, and expecting by these means to stop Him, and also desiring to challenge
Him to a miracle, and to find fault with what He was doing. Wherefore He will
not give them a sign; and before, when they came and asked Him, He made them
the same answer, "A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign; and
there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas." [Matthew
16:4] Only then the answer was clear, now it is more ambiguous. This He does
on account of their extreme insensibility; for He who prevented them without
their asking, and gave them signs, would never when they asked have turned
away from them, had He not seen that their minds were wicked and false, and
their intention treacherous. Think how full of wickedness the question itself was
at the outset. When they ought to have applauded Him for His earnestness and
zeal, when they ought to have been astonished that He cared so greatly for the
House, they reproach Him, saying, that it was lawful to traffic, and unlawful for
any to stop their traffic, except he should show them a sign. What says Christ?

John 2:19
"Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up."
Many such sayings He utters which were not intelligible to His immediate
hearers, but which were to be so to those that should come after. And wherefore
does He this? In order that when the accomplishment of His prediction should
have come to pass, He might be seen to have foreknown from the beginning
what was to follow; which indeed was the case with this prophecy. For, says the
Evangelist,

John 2:22
"When He was risen from the dead, His disciples remembered that He had said
this; and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said."
But at the time when this was spoken, the Jews were perplexed as to what it
might mean, and cast about to discover, saying,