received no less a reward than the other. And therefore the Apostle here also
encourages the hearer on the same ground, showing that gifts are bestowed not
for the honor of one above another, but for the work of the church, even as he
says further on:
"For the perfecting of the saints unto the work of ministering unto the
building up of the body of Christ."
Hence it is that even he himself says, "Woe is unto me, if I preach not the
Gospel." [1 Corinthians 9:16] For example: he received the grace of Apostleship,
but for this very reason, "woe unto him," because he received it: whereas you are
free from the danger.
"According to the measure."
What is meant by, "according to the measure"? It means, "not according to
our merit," for then would no one have received what he has received: but of the
free gift we have all received. And why then one more, and another less? There
is nothing to cause this, he would say, but the matter itself is indifferent; for
every one contributes towards "the building." And by this too he shows, that it is
not of his own intrinsic merit that one has received more and another less, but
that it is for the sake of others, as God Himself has measured it; since he says
also elsewhere, "But now has God set the members each one of them in the body,
even as it pleased Him." [1 Corinthians 12:18] And he mentions not the reason,
lest he should deject or dispirit the hearers.
Ver. 8. "Wherefore he says, When He ascended on high, He led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men."
As though he had said, Why are you high-minded? The whole is of God.
The Prophet says in the Psalm, "You have received gifts among men" [Psalm
68:18.], whereas the Apostle says, "He gave gifts unto men." The one is the same
as the other.
Ver. 9, 10. "Now this, He ascended, what is it, but that He also descended
into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended, is the same also that
ascended far above all the Heavens, that He might fill all things."

When you hear these words, think not of a mere removal from one place to
another; for what Paul establishes in the Epistle to the Philippians [Philippians
2:5-8], that very argument is he also insisting upon here. In the same way as
there, when exhorting them concerning lowliness, he brings forward Christ as an
example, so does he here also, saying, "He descended into the lower parts of the
earth." For were not this so, this expression which he uses, "He became obedient
even unto death" [Philippians 2:8-9], were superfluous; whereas from His
ascending, he implies His descent, and by "the lower parts of the earth," he
means "death," according to the notions of men; as Jacob also said, "Then shall
you bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave." [Genesis 32:48] And
again as it is in the Psalm, "Lest I become like them that go down into the pit"
[Psalm 143:7], that is like the dead. Why does he descant upon this region here?
And of what captivity does he speak? Of that of the devil; for He took the tyrant
captive, the devil, I mean, and death, and the curse, and sin. Behold His spoils
and His trophies.
"Now this, He ascended, what is it but that He also descended?"
This strikes at Paul of Samosata and his school.
"He that descended, is the same also that ascended far above all the
Heavens, that He might fill all things."
He descended, says he, into the lower parts of the earth, beyond which there
are none other: and He ascended up far above all things, to that place, beyond
which there is none other. This is to show His divine energy, and supreme
dominion. For indeed even of old had all things been filled.
Ver. 11, 12. "And He gave some to be apostles; and some, prophets; and
some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the
saints, unto the work of ministering, unto the building up of the body of Christ."
What he said elsewhere, "Wherefore also God has highly exalted Him"
[Philippians 2:9], that says he also here. "He that descended, is the same also
that ascended." It did Him no injury that He came down into the lower parts of
the earth, nor was it any hindrance to His becoming far higher than the Heavens.