THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.32, C.3.

assumed, and the consubstantiality to the Person assuming.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ's body, through not being
consubstantial with the Holy Ghost, cannot properly be said to be
conceived "of" [de] the Holy Ghost, but rather "from [ex] the Holy
Ghost," as Ambrose says (De Spir. Sanct. ii.): "What is from
someone is either from his substance or from his power: from his
substance, as the Son who is from the Father; from his power, as all
things are from God, just as Mary conceived from the Holy Ghost."
Reply to Objection 2: It seems that on this point there is a difference
of opinion between Jerome and certain other Doctors, who assert
that the Holy Ghost took the place of seed in this conception. For
Chrysostom says (Hom. i in Matth. [Opus Imperf.]): "When God's
Only-Begotten was about to enter into the Virgin, the Holy Ghost
preceded Him; that by the previous entrance of the Holy Ghost,
Christ might be born unto sanctification according to His body, the
Godhead entering instead of the seed." And Damascene says (De
Fide Orth. iii): "God's wisdom and power overshadowed her, like
unto a Divine seed."
But these expressions are easily explained. Because Chrysostom
and Damascene compare the Holy Ghost, or also the Son, who is the
Power of the Most High, to seed, by reason of the active power
therein; while Jerome denies that the Holy Ghost took the place of
seed, considered as a corporeal substance which is transformed in
conception.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Enchiridion xl), Christ is
said to be conceived or born of the Holy Ghost in one sense; of the
Virgin Mary in another---of the Virgin Mary materially; of the Holy
Ghost efficiently. Therefore there was no mingling here.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.32, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the Holy Ghost should be called Christ's

father in respect of His humanity?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Holy Ghost should be called
Christ's father in respect of His humanity. Because, according to the
Philosopher (De Gener. Animal. i): "The Father is the active principle
in generation, the Mother supplies the matter." But the Blessed
Virgin is called Christ's Mother, by reason of the matter which she
supplied in His conception. Therefore it seems that the Holy Ghost
can be called His father, through being the active principle in His
conception.
Objection 2: Further, as the minds of other holy men are fashioned
by the Holy Ghost, so also was Christ's body fashioned by the Holy
Ghost. But other holy men, on account of the aforesaid fashioning,
are called the children of the whole Trinity, and consequently of the
Holy Ghost. Therefore it seems that Christ should be called the Son
of the Holy Ghost, forasmuch as His body was fashioned by the Holy
Ghost.
Objection 3: Further, God is called our Father by reason of His
having made us, according to Dt. 32:6: "Is not He thy Father, that
hath possessed thee, and made thee and created thee?" But the Holy
Ghost made Christ's body, as stated above (Articles 1,2). Therefore
the Holy Ghost should be called Christ's Father in respect of the
body fashioned by Him.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchiridion xl): "Christ was born of
the Holy Ghost not as a Son, and of the Virgin Mary as a Son."
I answer that, The words "fatherhood," "motherhood," and
"sonship," result from generation; yet not from any generation, but
from that of living things, especially animals. For we do not say that
fire generated is the son of the fire generating it, except, perhaps,
metaphorically; we speak thus only of animals in whom generation is
more perfect. Nevertheless, the word "son" is not applied to
everything generated in animals, but only to that which is generated
into likeness of the generator. Wherefore, as Augustine says
(Enchiridion xxxix), we do not say that a hair which is generated in a
man is his son; nor do we say that a man who is born is the son of
the seed; for neither is the hair like the man nor is the man born like