## Homily 8 on Philippians

[Philippians 2:12-16]
"So then, my beloved, even as you have always obeyed, not as in my
presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling; for it is God which works in you both to will and to
work for His good pleasure. Do all things without murmurings and disputings:
that you may be blameless and harmless, children of God without blemish in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you are seen as lights
in the world, holding forth the word of life; that I may have whereof to glory in
the day of Christ."
The admonitions which we give ought to be accompanied with
commendations; for thus they become even welcome, when we refer those
whom we admonish to that measure of zeal which they have themselves
exhibited; as Paul, for instance, did here; and observe with what singular
discretion; "So then, my beloved," he says; he did not say simply "be obedient,"
not until he had first commended them in these words, "even as you have always
obeyed"; i.e. "it is not other men, but your own selves, whom I bid you take
example by." "Not as in my presence only, but much more in my absence." And
why, "much more in my absence"? "You seemed perhaps at that time to be doing
everything out of respect to me, and from a principle of shame, but that is no
longer so; if then ye make it evident that you now strive more earnestly, it is also
made evident that neither then was it done out of consideration to me, but for
God's sake." Tell me, what would you? "not that you give heed to me, but that
you 'work out your own salvation with fear and trembling'"; for it is impossible
for one, who lives devoid of fear, to set forth any high or commanding example;
and he said not merely "with fear," but "and with trembling," which is an
excessive degree of fear. Such fear had Paul: and therefore he said, I fear "lest

having preached to others, I myself should be rejected." [1 Corinthians 9:27] For
if without the aid of fear temporal things can never be achieved, how much less
spiritual matters; for I desire to know, who ever learned his letters without fear?
Who has become a proficient in any art, without fear? But if, when the devil
does not lie in the way, where indolence is the only obstacle, so much of fear is
necessary merely in order that we may master that indolence which is natural to
us; where there is so fierce a war, so great hindrances, how can we by any
possibility be saved without fear?
And how may this fear be produced? If we but consider that God is
everywhere present, hears all things, sees all things, not only whatsoever is done
and said, but also all that is in the heart, and in the depth of the soul, for He is
"quick to discern the thoughts and intents of the heart" [Hebrews 4:12], if we so
dispose ourselves, we shall not do or say or imagine anything that is evil. Tell
me, if you had to stand constantly near the person of a ruler, wouldest not thou
stand there with fear? And how standing in God's presence, do you laugh and
throw yourself back, and not conceive fear and dread? Let it never be that you
despise His patient endurance, for it is to bring you to repentance that He is
longsuffering. Whenever you eat, consider that God is present, for He is present;
whenever you are preparing to sleep, or giving way to passion, if you are
robbing another, or indulging in luxury, or whatever you are about, you will
never fall into laughter, never be inflamed with rage. If this be your thought
continually, you will continually be in "fear and trembling," forasmuch as you
are standing beside the King. The architect, though he be experienced, though he
be perfectly master of his art, yet stands with "fear and trembling," lest he fall
down from the building. Thou too hast believed, you have performed many good
deeds, you have mounted high: secure yourself, be in fear as you stand, and keep
a wary eye, lest you fall thence. For manifold are the spiritual sorts of
wickedness which aim to cast you down. [Ephesians 6:12] "Serve the Lord with
fear," he says, "and rejoice unto Him with trembling." [Psalm 2:11] And how is
rejoicing compatible with "trembling"? Yet this, be assured, is the only rejoicing;