cruelty and inhumanity, to desist from the healing treatment. For if when
physicians despair of our bodies, we beseech them not to neglect us, not to cease
to our last breath applying whatever is in their power, shall we not much more
exhort ourselves? For perhaps when we have come to the very gates of Hell, the
vestibule of wickedness itself, it may be possible to recover, to renew our
strength, to lay hold on eternal life! How many, who have heard ten times and
remained insensible, have afterwards at one hearing been converted! Or rather,
not at one hearing; for though they seemed insensible at the ten discourses, yet
they gained something, and afterwards showed all at once abundant fruit. For as
a tree may receive ten strokes, and not fall; then afterwards be brought down all
at once by a single blow: yet it is not done by that one blow, but by the ten which
made that last successful. And this is known to him who sees the root, though he
who takes his view of the trunk above knows it not. So it is in this case. And thus
often, when physicians have applied many remedies, no benefit is perceived; but
afterwards some one comes in and effects an entire cure. Yet it is not the work of
him alone, but of these who have already reduced the disorder. So that, if now
we do not bring forth the fruits of hearing the word, yet hereafter we shall. For
that we shall bring them forth, I am fully persuaded. For it is not, indeed it is not
possible that such eager desire, such a love of hearing, should fail of its effect.
God forbid! But may we all, having become worthy of the admonitions of
Christ, obtain the everlasting blessings, etc.

## Homily 6 on Second Timothy

[2 Timothy 2:20, 21]
"But in a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but
also of wood and of earth; and some to honor, and some to dishonor. If a man
therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified,
and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work."
Many men are still even now perplexed to account for the fact, that the
wicked are suffered to remain, and are not yet destroyed. Now doubtless various
reasons may be assigned for this, as, that they may be converted, or that by their
punishment they may be made an example to the multitude. But Paul here
mentions a similar case. For he says,
"In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and silver, but also of
wood and earth." Showing by this, that as in a great house it is likely there
should be a great difference of vessels, so here also, in the whole world, for he
speaks not of the Church only, but of the world at large. For think not, I pray,
that he means it of the Church; for there he would not have any vessels of wood
or of earth, but all of gold or silver where is the body of Christ, where is that
"pure virgin, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing." [Ephesians 5:27] And
this is what he means to say: Let it not disturb you that there are corrupt and
wicked men. For in a great house there are such vessels. But what then? They do
not receive the same honor. But some are to honor and some to dishonor. "Nay,"
says one, "in a house they may be of some use, but not at all in the world."
Though God employs them not for such honorable service, he makes use of them
for other purposes. For instance, the vainglorious man builds much, so does the
covetous man, the merchant, the tradesman, the magistrate; there are certain
works in the world suited to these. But the golden vessel is not of such a nature.
It is employed about the royal table. He does not say however that wickedness is