seem to be at variance with this. But it was not at variance. For he did not
measure the power of God by human reasonings, but committed all to faith. And
hence he was not afraid to say, that God was "able to raise him up, even from the
dead."
"From whence also he received him in a figure," that is in idea, by the ram,
he means. How? The ram having been slain, he was saved: so that by means of
the ram he received him again, having slain it in his stead. But these things were
types: for here it is the Son of God who is slain.
And observe, I beseech you, how great is His lovingkindness. For inasmuch
as a great favor was to be given to men, He, wishing to do this, not by favor, but
as a debtor, arranges that a man should first give up his own son on account of
God's command, in order that He Himself might seem to be doing nothing great
in giving up His own Son, since a man had done this before Him; that He might
be supposed to do it not of grace, but of debt. For we wish to do this kindness
also to those whom we love, others, to appear first to have received some little
thing from them, and so give them all: and we boast more of the receiving than
of the giving; and we do not say, We gave him this, but, We received this from
him.
"From whence also" (are his words) "he received him in a figure," i.e. as in
a riddle (for the ram was as it were a figure of Isaac) or, as in a type. For since
the sacrifice had been completed, and Isaac slain in purpose, therefore He gave
him to the Patriarch.
4. You see, that what I am constantly saying, is shown in this case also?
When we have proved that our mind is made perfect, and have shown that we
disregard earthly things, then earthly things also are given to us; but not before;
lest being bound to them already, receiving them we should be bound still. Loose
yourself from your slavery first (He says), and then receive, that you may
receive no longer as a slave, but as a master. Despise riches, and you shall be
rich. Despise glory, and you shall be glorious. Despise the avenging yourself on
your enemies, and then shall you attain it. Despise repose, and then you shall

receive it that in receiving you may receive not as a prisoner, nor as a slave, but
as a freeman.
For as in the case of little children, when the child eagerly desires childish
playthings, we hide them from him with much care, as a ball, for instance, and
such like things, that he may not be hindered from necessary things; but when he
thinks little of them, and no longer longs for them, we give them fearlessly,
knowing that henceforth no harm can come to him from them, the desire no
longer having strength enough to draw him away from things necessary; so God
also, when He sees that we no longer eagerly desire the things of this world,
thenceforward permits us to use them. For we possess them as freemen and men,
not as children.
For [in proof] that if you despise the avenging yourself on your enemies,
you will then attain it, hear what he says, "If your enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst, give him drink," and he added, "for in so doing, you shall heap coals of
fire on his head." [Romans 12:20] And again, that if you despise riches, you
shall then obtain them, hear Christ saying, "There is no man which has left
father, or mother, or house, or brethren, who shall not receive an hundredfold,
and shall inherit everlasting life." [Matthew 19:29] And that if you despise
glory, you shall then attain it, again hear Christ Himself saying, "He that will be
first among you, let him be your minister." [Matthew 20:26] And again, "For
whosoever shall humble himself, he shall be exalted." [Matthew 23:12]
What do you say? If I give drink to mine enemy, do I then punish him? If I
give up my goods, do I then possess them? If I humble myself, shall I then be
exalted? Yea, He says, for such is My power, to give contraries by means of
contraries. I abound in resources and in contrivances: be not afraid. The 'Nature
of things' follows My will: not I attend upon Nature. I do all things: I am not
controlled by them: wherefore also I am able to change their form and order.
5. And why do you wonder if [it is so] in these instances? For you will find
the same also in all others. If you injure, you are injured; if you are injured, then
you are uninjured; if you punish, then you have not punished another, but hast