Again what is universally proposed to all should in a special way be called universal; but the
Christian faith is universally proposed to all, as is evident in the last chapter of Matthew (28:19),
"Teach all nations," etc.; therefore it is deservedly called Catholic or universal.

Response. I answer that it must be said that faith, just as any other cognition, has a twofold
matter: namely, that in which it exists (the believers themselves) and that about which it is
concerned (the truths believed); and as regards both types of matter, the Christian religion can be
called Catholic.

As regards the believers it is Catholic because the Apostle (Rom. 3:2) asserts that that is the true
religion which was given testimony to by the law and the prophets. Since, however, in the times
of the prophets various tribes offered worship to different gods, only one nation, the people of
Israel, gave due honor to the true God, and so there did not exist that one universal religion
which was foretold to them by the Holy Spirit, that worship of the true God which would be
paid by all. Therefore Isaias (45:24) says: "For every knee shall be bowed to Me, and every
tongue shall swear." And this prophecy has, indeed, been fulfilled by faith and the Christian
religion.

Therefore deservedly is that faith called Catholic since it has been accepted by men of every
condition. And thus, those who have fallen away from this faith and this religion which has been
so universally foretold and received, and who have become divided into various sects, are not
called Catholics, but as it were, having been cut off from the communion of the faithful, they are
called heretics.

As regards the truths proposed for belief in the Christian religion, there is also found truth that is
catholic. Now, there were various arts and ways in ancient times according as there was vision,

or belief in the vision of the human mind among men. For certain men placed the good of man in
corporeal things alone, either in riches or in honors or in pleasures. Some others placed this good
in the soul alone, as in moral or intellectual virtues. Certain others, as Augustine says in his
book, De civ. Dei, thought that gods ought to be honored because of the corporeal blessings of
this life; but others, on account of blessings to be realized after death. Porphyry also relates that it
was believed among certain peoples of the earth that the imaginative part of the soul would be
cleansed, but not the whole soul; and he said, as Augustine tells in X De civ. Dei, that there had
not yet been found a single sect that possessed a universal way for liberty of spirit. Now this
way, as Augustine says in the same place, is the Christian religion.

This religion teaches that God is to be honored not only on account of eternal, but also because
of temporal benefits; that He rules man not only in spiritual ways but also in all that concerns him
bodily, and that He promises beatitude for both soul and body. Hence His regulations are called
universal, as pertaining to the whole life of man and as extending to all that in any way affects
man. For these two reasons, therefore, thename "universal" is given to the Christian religion, as
Boethius in the text makes clear.