took thought for His works, and was known to all who were worthy. But if you
should say, that, because all did not then know Him, because He was only
known by those noble and excellent persons, therefore He was not
acknowledged; at this rate you will not allow that He is worshipped even now,
since even now all men do not know Him. But as at present no one, because of
those who do not know Him, would refuse credit to those who do, so as regards
former times, we must not doubt that He was known to many, or rather to all of
those noble and admirable persons.
2. And if any one say, "Why did not all men give heed to Him? Nor all
worship Him, but the just only?" I also will ask, why even now do not all men
know him? But why do I speak of Christ, when not all men knew His Father
then, or know Him now? For some say, that all things are borne along by chance,
while others commit the providence of the universe to devils. Others invent
another God besides Him, and some blasphemously assert, that His is an
opposing power, and think that His laws are the laws of a wicked dæmon. What
then? Shall we say that He is not God because there are some who say so? And
shall we confess Him to be evil? For there are some who even so blaspheme
Him. Away with such mental wandering, such utter insanity. If we should
delineate doctrines according to the judgment of madmen, there is nothing to
hinder us from being mad ourselves with most grievous madness. No one will
assert, looking to those who have weak vision, that the sun is injurious to the
eyes, but he will say that it is fitted to give light, drawing his judgments from
persons in health. And no one will call honey bitter, because it seems so to the
sense of the sick. And will any, from the imaginations of men diseased (in mind)
decide that God either is not, or is evil; or that He sometimes indeed exerts His
Providence, sometimes does not so at all? Who can say that such men are of
sound mind, or deny that they are beside themselves, delirious, utterly mad?
"The world," he says, "knew Him not"; but they of whom the world was not
worthy knew Him. And having spoken of those who knew Him not, he in a short
time puts the cause of their ignorance; for he does not absolutely say, that no one

knew Him, but that "the world knew him not"; that is, those persons who are as it
were nailed to the world alone, and who mind the things of the world. For so
Christ was wont to call them; as when He says, "O Holy Father, the world has
not known You." [Luke 17:25] The world then was ignorant, not only of Him, but
also of His Father, as we have said; for nothing so darkens the mind as to be
closely attached to present things.
Knowing therefore this, remove yourselves from the world, and tear
yourselves as much as possible from carnal things, for the loss which comes to
you from these lies not in common matters, but in what is the chief of goods. For
it is not possible for the man who clings strongly to the things of the present life
really to lay hold on those in heaven, but he who is earnest about the one must
needs lose the other. "You cannot," He says, "serve God and Mammon"
[Matthew 6:24], for you must hold to the one and hate the other. And this too the
very experience of the things proclaims aloud. Those, for instance, who deride
the lust of money, are especially the persons who love God as they ought, just as
those who respect that sovereignty (of Mammon), are the men who above all
others have the slackest love for Him. For the soul when made captive once for
all by covetousness, will not easily or readily refuse doing or saying any of the
things which anger God, as being the slave of another master, and one who gives
all his commands in direct opposition to God. Return then at length to your sober
senses, and rouse yourselves, and calling to mind whose servants we are, let us
love His kingdom only; let us weep, let us wail for the times past in which we
were servants of Mammon; let us cast off once for all his yoke so intolerable, so
heavy, and continue to bear the light and easy yoke of Christ. For He lays no
such commands upon us as Mammon does. Mammon bids us be enemies to all
men, but Christ, on the contrary, to embrace and to love all. The one having
nailed us to the clay and the brickmaking, (for gold is this,) allows us not even at
night to take breath a little; the other releases us from this excessive and
insensate care, and bids us gather treasures in heaven, not by injustice towards
others, but by our own righteousness. The one after our many toils and sufferings