FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.113, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: More is required for an offender to pardon an
offense, than for one who has committed no offense, not to be hated.
For it may happen amongst men that one man neither hates nor
loves another. But if the other offends him, then the forgiveness of
the offense can only spring from a special goodwill. Now God's
goodwill is said to be restored to man by the gift of grace; and hence
although a man before sinning may be without grace and without
guilt, yet that he is without guilt after sinning can only be because he
has grace.
Reply to Objection 2: As God's love consists not merely in the act of
the Divine will but also implies a certain effect of grace, as stated
above (Question 110, Article 1), so likewise, when God does not
impute sin to a man, there is implied a certain effect in him to whom
the sin is not imputed; for it proceeds from the Divine love, that sin
is not imputed to a man by God.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Nup. et Concup. i, 26), if
to leave off sinning was the same as to have no sin, it would be
enough if Scripture warned us thus: "'My son, hast thou sinned? do
so no more?' Now this is not enough, but it is added: 'But for thy
former sins also pray that they may be forgiven thee.'" For the act of
sin passes, but the guilt remains, as stated above (Question 87,
Article 6). Hence when anyone passes from the sin of one vice to the
sin of a contrary vice, he ceases to have the act of the former sin, but
he does not cease to have the guilt, hence he may have the guilt of
both sins at once. For sins are not contrary to each other on the part
of their turning from God, wherein sin has its guilt.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.113, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether for the justification of the ungodly is

required a movement of the free-will?
Objection 1: It would seem that no movement of the free-will is
required for the justification of the ungodly. For we see that by the
sacrament of Baptism, infants and sometimes adults are justified
without a movement of their free-will: hence Augustine says
(Confess. iv) that when one of his friends was taken with a fever, "he
lay for a long time senseless and in a deadly sweat, and when he
was despaired of, he was baptized without his knowing, and was
regenerated"; which is effected by sanctifying grace. Now God does
not confine His power to the sacraments. Hence He can justify a man
without the sacraments, and without any movement of the free-will.
Objection 2: Further, a man has not the use of reason when asleep,
and without it there can be no movement of the free-will. But
Solomon received from God the gift of wisdom when asleep, as
related in 3 Kgs. 3 and 2 Paral 1. Hence with equal reason the gift of
sanctifying grace is sometimes bestowed by God on man without the
movement of his free-will.
Objection 3: Further, grace is preserved by the same cause as brings
it into being, for Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. viii, 12) that "so ought
man to turn to God as he is ever made just by Him." Now grace is
preserved in man without a movement of his free-will. Hence it can
be infused in the beginning without a movement of the free-will.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 6:45): "Every one that hath heard of
the Father, and hath learned, cometh to Me." Now to learn cannot be
without a movement of the free-will, since the learner assents to the
teacher. Hence, no one comes to the Father by justifying grace
without a movement of the free-will.
I answer that, The justification of the ungodly is brought about by
God moving man to justice. For He it is "that justifieth the ungodly"
according to Rm. 4:5. Now God moves everything in its own manner,
just as we see that in natural things, what is heavy and what is light
are moved differently, on account of their diverse natures. Hence He
moves man to justice according to the condition of his human
nature. But it is man's proper nature to have free-will. Hence in him
who has the use of reason, God's motion to justice does not take