such expressions, they persecuted and oftentimes stoned Him; and if looking
wholly to them He had used none but low expressions, many in after times might
have been harmed. Wherefore He mingles and blends His teaching, both by
these lowly sayings stopping, as I said, the mouths of the Jews, and also by
expressions suited to His dignity banishing from men of sense any mean notion
of what He had said, and proving that such a notion did not in any wise apply to
Him at all.
The expression "having been sent" denotes change of place— but God is
everywhere present. Wherefore then says He that He was "sent"? He speaks in
an earthly way, declaring His unanimity with the Father. At least He shapes His
succeeding words with a desire to effect this.

John 5:24
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that hears My word, and believes in Him that
sent Me, has everlasting life."
Do you see how continually He puts the same thing to cure that feeling of
suspicion, both in this place and in what follows by fear and by promises of
blessings removing their jealousy of Him, and then again condescending greatly
in words? For He said not, "he that hears My words, and believes in Me," since
they would have certainly deemed that to be pride, and a superfluous pomp of
words; because, if after a very long time, and ten thousand miracles, they
suspected this when He spoke after this manner, much more would they have
done so then. It was on this account that at that later period they said to Him,
"Abraham is dead, and the prophets are dead, how sayest Thou, If a man keep
My saying, he shall never taste of death?" [John 8:52] In order therefore that
they may not here also become furious, see what He says, "He that hears My
word, and believes in Him that sent Me, has everlasting life." This had no small
effect in making His discourse acceptable, when they learned that those who
hear Him believe in the Father also; for after having received this with readiness,
they would more easily receive the rest. So that the very speaking in a humble
manner contributed and led the way to higher things; for after saying, "has
everlasting life," He adds,
"And comes not into judgment, but is passed from death unto life."
By these two things He makes His discourse acceptable; first, because it is
the Father who is believed on, and then, because the believer enjoys many
blessings. And the "comes not into judgment" means, "is not punished," for He
speaks not of death "here," but of death eternal, as also of the other "life" which
is deathless.

John 5:25
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour comes, and now is, when the dead shall
hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that have heard shall live."
Having said the words, He speaks also of the proof by deeds. For when He
had said, "As the Father raises up the dead and quickens them, even so the Son
quickens whom He will," that the thing may not seem to be mere boasting and
pride, He affords proof by works, saying, "The hour comes"; then, that you may
not deem that the time is long, He adds, "and now is, when the dead shall hear
the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live." Do you see
here His absolute and unutterable authority? For as it shall be in the
Resurrection, even so, He says, it shall be "now." Then too when we hear His
voice commanding us we are raised; for, says the Apostle, "at the command of
God the dead shall arise." "And whence," perhaps some one will ask, "is it clear
that the words are not mere boast?" From what He has added, "and now is";
because had His promises referred only to some future time, His discourse
would have been suspected by them, but now He supplies them with a proof:
"While I," says He, "am tarrying among you, this thing shall come to pass"; and
He would not, had He not possessed the power, have promised for that time, lest
through the promise He should incur the greater ridicule. Then too He adds an
argument demonstrative of His assertions, saying,