SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.7.

Hence matters of Christian faith are said to contain distinct articles,
in so far as they are divided into parts, and fit together. Now the
object of faith is something unseen in connection with God, as
stated above (Article 4). Consequently any matter that, for a special
reason, is unseen, is a special article; whereas when several matters
are known or not known, under the same aspect, we are not to
distinguish various articles. Thus one encounters one difficulty in
seeing that God suffered, and another in seeing that He rose again
from the dead, wherefore the article of the Resurrection is distinct
from the article of the Passion. But that He suffered, died and was
buried, present the same difficulty, so that if one be accepted, it is
not difficult to accept the others; wherefore all these belong to one
article.
Reply to Objection 1: Some things are proposed to our belief are in
themselves of faith, while others are of faith, not in themselves but
only in relation to others: even as in sciences certain propositions
are put forward on their own account, while others are put forward in
order to manifest others. Now, since the chief object of faith consists
in those things which we hope to see, according to Heb. 11:2: "Faith
is the substance of things to be hoped for," it follows that those
things are in themselves of faith, which order us directly to eternal
life. Such are the Trinity of Persons in Almighty God, the mystery of
Christ's Incarnation, and the like: and these are distinct articles of
faith. On the other hand certain things in Holy Writ are proposed to
our belief, not chiefly on their own account, but for the manifestation
of those mentioned above: for instance, that Abraham had two sons,
that a dead man rose again at the touch of Eliseus' bones, and the
like, which are related in Holy Writ for the purpose of manifesting the
Divine mystery or the Incarnation of Christ: and such things should
not form distinct articles.
Reply to Objection 2: The formal aspect of the object of faith can be
taken in two ways: first, on the part of the thing believed, and thus
there is one formal aspect of all matters of faith, viz. the First Truth:
and from this point of view there is no distinction of articles.
Secondly, the formal aspect of matters of faith, can be considered
from our point of view; and thus the formal aspect of a matter of faith
is that it is something unseen; and from this point of view there are
various distinct articles of faith, as we saw above.
Reply to Objection 3: This definition of an article is taken from an

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.7.

etymology of the word as derived from the Latin, rather than in
accordance with its real meaning, as derived from the Greek: hence
it does not carry much weight. Yet even then it could be said that
although faith is exacted of no man by a necessity of coercion, since
belief is a voluntary act, yet it is exacted of him by a necessity of
end, since "he that cometh to God must believe that He is," and
"without faith it is impossible to please God," as the Apostle
declares (Heb. 11:6).