whether, as regards the effect, predestination has any cause; or what
comes to the same thing, whether God pre-ordained that He would
give the effect of predestination to anyone on account of any merits.
Accordingly there were some who held that the effect of
predestination was pre-ordained for some on account of pre-existing
merits in a former life. This was the opinion of Origen, who thought
that the souls of men were created in the beginning, and according
to the diversity of their works different states were assigned to them
in this world when united with the body. The Apostle, however,
rebuts this opinion where he says (Rm. 9:11,12): "For when they
were not yet born, nor had done any good or evil . . . not of works,
but of Him that calleth, it was said of her: The elder shall serve the
younger."
Others said that pre-existing merits in this life are the reason and
cause of the effect of predestination. For the Pelagians taught that
the beginning of doing well came from us; and the consummation
from God: so that it came about that the effect of predestination was
granted to one, and not to another, because the one made a
beginning by preparing, whereas the other did not. But against this
we have the saying of the Apostle (2 Cor. 3:5), that "we are not
sufficient to think anything of ourselves as of ourselves." Now no
principle of action can be imagined previous to the act of thinking.
Wherefore it cannot be said that anything begun in us can be the
reason of the effect of predestination.
And so others said that merits following the effect of predestination
are the reason of predestination; giving us to understand that God
gives grace to a person, and pre-ordains that He will give it, because
He knows beforehand that He will make good use of that grace, as if
a king were to give a horse to a soldier because he knows he will
make good use of it. But these seem to have drawn a distinction
between that which flows from grace, and that which flows from free
will, as if the same thing cannot come from both. It is, however,
manifest that what is of grace is the effect of predestination; and this
cannot be considered as the reason of predestination, since it is
contained in the notion of predestination. Therefore, if anything else
in us be the reason of predestination, it will outside the effect of
predestination. Now there is no distinction between what flows from
free will, and what is of predestination; as there is not distinction
between what flows from a secondary cause and from a first cause.
For the providence of God produces effects through the operation of

secondary causes, as was above shown (Question 22, Article 3).
Wherefore, that which flows from free-will is also of predestination.
We must say, therefore, that the effect of predestination may be
considered in a twofold light---in one way, in particular; and thus
there is no reason why one effect of predestination should not be the
reason or cause of another; a subsequent effect being the reason of
a previous effect, as its final cause; and the previous effect being the
reason of the subsequent as its meritorious cause, which is reduced
to the disposition of the matter. Thus we might say that God preordained to give glory on account of merit, and that He pre-ordained
to give grace to merit glory. In another way, the effect of
predestination may be considered in general. Thus, it is impossible
that the whole of the effect of predestination in general should have
any cause as coming from us; because whatsoever is in man
disposing him towards salvation, is all included under the effect of
predestination; even the preparation for grace. For neither does this
happen otherwise than by divine help, according to the prophet
Jeremias (Lam. 5:21): "convert us, O Lord, to Thee, and we shall be
converted." Yet predestination has in this way, in regard to its effect,
the goodness of God for its reason; towards which the whole effect
of predestination is directed as to an end; and from which it
proceeds, as from its first moving principle.
Reply to Objection 1: The use of grace foreknown by God is not the
cause of conferring grace, except after the manner of a final cause;
as was explained above.
Reply to Objection 2: Predestination has its foundation in the
goodness of God as regards its effects in general. Considered in its
particular effects, however, one effect is the reason of another; as
already stated.
Reply to Objection 3: The reason for the predestination of some, and
reprobation of others, must be sought for in the goodness of God.
Thus He is said to have made all things through His goodness, so
that the divine goodness might be represented in things. Now it is
necessary that God's goodness, which in itself is one and undivided,
should be manifested in many ways in His creation; because
creatures in themselves cannot attain to the simplicity of God. Thus
it is that for the completion of the universe there are required
different grades of being; some of which hold a high and some a low
place in the universe. That this multiformity of grades may be
preserved in things, God allows some evils, lest many good things