trifles, and makest it a matter of perplexity? For tell me, if the man had not fallen
into the sea, if the fish had not eaten him, nor the fish again been devoured by
numberless men— but he had been preserved with care in a coffin, and neither
worms nor anything else had disturbed him, how shall that which is dissolved
rise again? How shall the dust and ashes be again conglutinated? Whence shall
there be any more its bloom for the body? But is not this a difficulty?
If indeed they be Greeks who raise these doubts, we shall have numberless
things to say to them. What then? For there are among them those who convey
souls into plants, and shrubs, and dogs. Tell me, which is more easy, to resume
one's own body, or that of another? Others again say that they are consumed by
fire, and that there is a resurrection of garments and of shoes, and they are not
ridiculed. Others say atoms. With them, however, we have no argument at all;
but to the faithful, (if we ought to call them faithful who raise questions,) we will
still say what the Apostle has said, that all life springs from corruption, all
plants, all seeds. Do you see not the fig tree, what a trunk it has, what stems, how
many leaves, and branches, stalks, and roots, occupying so much ground and
embosomed therein. This then, such and so great as it is, springs from the grain
which was thrown into the ground and itself first corrupted. And if it be not
rotted and dissolved, there will be none of these things. Tell me, whence does
this happen? And the vine too, which is so fair both to see and to partake of,
springs from that which is vile in appearance. And what, tell me, is not the water
that descends from above one thing? How is it changed into so many things? For
this is more wonderful than the Resurrection. For there indeed the same seed and
the same plant is the subject, and there is a great affinity. But here tell me how,
having one quality and one nature, it turns into so many things? In the vine it
becomes wine, and not only wine, but leaves and sap. For not only is the cluster
of grapes, but the rest of the vine nourished by it. Again, in the olive (it
becomes) oil, and the other so numerous things. And what is wonderful, here it
is moist, there dry, here sweet there sour, here astringent, elsewhere bitter. Tell
me how it turns into so many things? Show me the reason! But you cannot.

And in the case of yourself, tell me, for this comes nearer, this seed, that is
deposited, how is it fashioned and molded into so many things? How into eyes?
How into ears? How into hands? How into heart? Are there not in the body ten
thousand differences of figures, of sizes, of qualities, of positions, of powers, of
proportions? Nerves and veins and flesh and bones and membranes, and arteries
and joints and cartilages, and as many more things beside these, as the sons of
the physicians precisely specify, which compose our nature— and these come
from that one seed! Does not this then seem to you much more difficult than
those things? How is the moist and soft congealed into the dry and cold, that is,
bone? How into the warm and moist, which are united in the blood? How into
the cold and soft, the nerve? How into the cold and moist, the artery? Tell me,
whence are these things? Are you not quite at a loss about these things? Do you
not see every day a resurrection and a death taking place in the periods of our
life? Whither is our youth gone? Whence is our age come? How is it that he who
is grown old cannot indeed make himself young, but begets another, a very
young child, and what he cannot give to himself, that he bestows upon another?
This also we may see in trees and in animals. And yet that which gives to
another ought first to bestow upon itself. But this is what human reasoning
demands. But when God creates, let all things give way. If these things are so
difficult, nay, so excessively difficult, I am reminded of those mad persons, who
are curious about the incorporeal Generation of the Son. Things that take place
every day, that are within the grasp of our hands, and that have been enquired
into ten thousand times, no one has yet been able to discover; tell me, then, how
is it they are curious about that secret and ineffable Generation? Is not the mind
of such men wearied in treading that void? Has it not been whirled into ten
thousand giddinesses? Is it not dumfounded? And yet not even so are they
instructed. When they are able to say nothing about grapes and figs, they are
curious about God! For tell me, how is that grape-stone resolved into leaves and
stems? How before this were they not in it, nor seen in it? But it is not the grapestone, you say, but all is from the earth. Then how is it that without this the earth