repeat the same things to you. But I am afraid, lest, having followed you up so
many days, I should seem to condemn you of great listlessness, that you should
require continual admonition respecting so easy a matter. And I am not only
ashamed, but also in fear for you! For frequent instruction to those who give
heed, is salutary and profitable; but to those who are listless, it is injurious, and
exceedingly perilous; for the oftener any one hears, the greater punishment does
he draw upon himself, if he does not practise what is told him. With this
accordingly God reproached the Jews, speaking thus: "I have sent my prophets,
rising up early, and sending them; and even then ye did not hearken."
[Jeremiah 29:9] We therefore do this of our great care for you. But we fear, lest,
on that tremendous Day, this admonition and counsel should rise up against you
all. For when the point to be attained is easy, and he whose office it is
continually to admonish, desists not from his task, what defence shall we have to
offer? Or what argument will save us from punishment? Tell me, if a sum of
money chance to be due to you, do you not always, when you meet the debtor,
remind him of the loan? Do thou too act thus; and let every one suppose that his
neighbour owes him money, viz., the fulfilling of this precept; and upon meeting
him, let him put him in mind of the payment, knowing that no small danger lies
at our door, while we are unmindful of our brethren. For this cause I too cease
not to make mention of these things. For I fear, lest by any means I should hear it
said on that day, "O wicked and slothful servant, you ought to have put my
money to the exchangers." [Matthew 25:26-27] Behold, however, I have laid it
down, not once, or twice, but oftentimes. It is left then for you to discharge the
usury of it. Now the usury of hearing is the manifestation of it by deeds, for the
deposit is the Lord's. Therefore let us not negligently receive that with which we
are entrusted; but let us keep it with diligence, that we may restore it with much
interest on That Day. For unless thou bring others to the performance of the same
good works, you shall hear that voice, which he who buried the talent heard. But
God forbid it should be this! But may you hear that different voice which Christ
uttered, saying to him who had made profit, "Well done, good and faithful

servant; you have been faithful over a few things, I will make you ruler over
many things." [Matthew 25:21]
17. And this voice we shall hear, if we show the same earnestness as he did.
And we shall show this earnestness, if we do this which I say. When you depart,
while what you have heard is yet warm within you, exhort one another! And just
as you each salute at parting, so let every one go from hence with an admonition,
and say to his neighbour, "Observe and remember that thou keep the
commandment;" and thus shall we assuredly get the mastery. For when friends
also dismiss one with such counsel; and on one's return home, one's wife again
admonishes one to the same effect; and our word keeps its hold on you when
alone; we shall soon shake off this evil habit. I know, indeed, that you marvel
why I am so earnest respecting this precept. But discharge the duty enjoined, and
then I will tell you. Meanwhile, this I say; that this precept is a divine law; and it
is not safe to transgress it. But if I shall see it rightly performed, I will speak of
another reason, which is not less than this, that you may learn that it is with
justice I make so much ado about this law. But it is now time to conclude this
address in a prayer. Wherefore, let us all say in common, "O God, Who willest
not the death of a sinner, but that he should be converted and live; grant that we,
having discharged this and every other precept, may be found worthy so to stand
at the tribunal of Your Christ, that having enjoyed great boldness, we may attain
the kingdom to Your glory. For to You belongs glory, together with Your only
begotten Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and world without end." Amen.