only after the Apostles were dead. For of them (the Apostles) says, "The wrath
has come upon them unto the end." [1 Thessalonians 2:16] The more
insignificant the persons, the more illustrious the grace, working great results by
small means.— "And he exhorted them to cleave unto the Lord, for he was a
good man." (v. 23, 24.) By "good man," I take it, he means one that is kind,
([χρηστὸν]) sincere, exceedingly desirous of the salvation of his neighbors—
"for he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith. To cleave unto
the Lord with purpose of heart" (this is said): with encomium and praise. "And
much people was added unto the Lord:" for like rich land this city received the
word, and brought forth much fruit. "Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus," etc.
[Acts 11:25] But why did he take him off from Tarsus and bring him here? Not
without good reason; for here were both good hopes, and a greater city, and a
great body of people. See how grace works all, not Paul: by small means the
affair was taking its commencement. When it has become difficult the Apostles
take it up. Why did they not before this seen Barnabas? Because they had
enough to do ([ἠ] [σχόληντο]) with Jerusalem. Again they justified themselves
to the Jews, that the Gentiles were receiving ([προσελάμβανε]) the word, even
without enjoying so great attention. There is about to be a questioning: therefore
the affair of Cornelius forestalled it. Then indeed they say, "That we to the
Gentiles, and they to the Circumcision." [Galatians 2:9] Observe, henceforth the
very stress of the famine introduces the fellowship on the part of the Gentiles,
namely, from the alms. For they receive the offerings sent from them.
"Now they which were scattered abroad," etc. [Acts 11:19] and not as we
who pass our time in lamentations and tears, in our calamities; but with more
fearlessness they passed their time, as having got to a distance from those
hindering them, and as being among men not afraid of the Jews: which also
helped. And they came to Cyprus, where they had the sea between them, and
greater freedom from anxiety: so they made no account of the fear of men, but
(still) they gave the precedence to the regard of the Law: "they spoke to Jews
only. But there were in Antioch certain men of Cyprus and Cyrene:" these, of all

others, least cared for the Jews: "who spoke unto the Greeks, preaching the Lord
Jesus." [Acts 11:20] Probably it was because of their not knowing Hebrew, that
they called them Greeks. And "when" Barnabas, it says, "came and had seen the
grace of God,"— not the diligence of men— "he exhorted them to cleave unto
the Lord" [Acts 11:23]: and by this he converted more. "And much people was
added unto the Lord." Why do they not write to Paul, but send Barnabas? They
did not yet know the virtue of the man: but it is providentially ordered that
Barnabas should come. As there was a multitude, and none to hinder, well might
the faith grow, and above all because they had no trials to undergo. Paul also
preaches, and is no longer compelled to flee. And it is well ordered, that not they
speak of the famine, but the prophets. The men of Antioch also did not take it
amiss that they sent not the Apostles, but were content with their teachers: so
fervent were they all for the word. They did not wait for the famine to come, but
before this they sent: "according as each had the ability." And observe, among
the Apostles, others are put in charge with this trust, but here Paul and Barnabas.
For this was no small order ([οἰκονομία]) of Providence. Besides, it was the
beginning, and it was not fit they should be offended.
"As each had the ability, they sent." But now, none does this, although there
is a famine more grievous than that. For the cases are not alike, for (all) to bear
the calamity in common, and, while all (the rest) abound, for the poorer to be
famishing. And the expression shows that the givers also were poor, for, it says,
"as each of them had the means." A twofold famine, even as the abundance is
twofold: a severe famine, a famine not of hearing the word of the Lord, but of
being nourished by alms. Then, both the poor in Judea enjoyed the benefit, and
so did those in Antioch who gave their money; yea, these more than those: but
now, both we and the poor are famishing: they being in lack of necessary
sustenance, and we in luxurious living, lacking the mercy of God. But this is a
food, than which nothing can be more necessary. This is not a food, from which
one has to undergo the evils of repletion: not a food, of which the most part ends
in the draught. ([ἀ] [φεδρὥνα].) Nothing more beauteous, nothing more