"unbegotten" is not attributed to the Father as a privation, but it may
be so attributed in the second sense, meaning that a certain person
of the divine nature is not begotten, while some person of the same
nature is begotten. In this sense the term "unbegotten" can be
applied also to the Holy Ghost. Hence to consider it as a term proper
to the Father alone, it must be further understood that the name
"unbegotten" belongs to a divine person as the principle of another
person; so that it be understood to imply negation in the genus of
principle taken personally in God. Or that there be understood in the
term "unbegotten" that He is not in any way derived from another;
and not only that He is not from another by way only of generation.
In this sense the term "unbegotten" does not belong at all to the
Holy Ghost, Who is from another by procession, as a subsisting
person; nor does it belong to the divine essence, of which it may be
said that it is in the Son or in the Holy Ghost from another---namely,
from the Father.
Reply to Objection 3: According to Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 9),
"unbegotten" in one sense signifies the same as "uncreated"; and
thus it applies to the substance, for thereby does the created
substance differ from the uncreated. In another sense it signifies
what is not begotten, and in this sense it is a relative term; just as
negation is reduced to the genus of affirmation, as "not man" is
reduced to the genus of substance, and "not white" to the genus of
quality. Hence, since "begotten" implies relation in God,
"unbegotten" belongs also to relation. Thus it does not follow that
the Father unbegotten is substantially distinguished from the Son
begotten; but only by relation; that is, as the relation of Son is
denied of the Father.
Reply to Objection 4: In every genus there must be something first;
so in the divine nature there must be some one principle which is not
from another, and which we call "unbegotten." To admit two
innascibles is to suppose the existence of two Gods, and two divine
natures. Hence Hilary says (De Synod.): "As there is one God, so
there cannot be two innascibles." And this especially because, did
two innascibles exist, one would not be from the other, and they
would not be distinguished by relative opposition: therefore they
would be distinguished from each other by diversity of nature.
Reply to Objection 5: The property of the Father, whereby He is not
from another, is more clearly signified by the removal of the nativity
of the Son, than by the removal of the procession of the Holy Ghost;

both because the procession of the Holy Ghost has no special name,
as stated above (Question 27, Article 4, ad 3), and because also in
the order of nature it presupposes the generation of the Son. Hence,
it being denied of the Father that He is begotten, although He is the
principle of generation, it follows, as a consequence, that He does
not proceed by the procession of the Holy Ghost, because the Holy
Ghost is not the principle of generation, but proceeds from the
person begotten.