FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.6.

We must therefore say that the difference between venial and mortal
sin, or any other difference is respect of the debt of punishment,
cannot be a difference constituting specific diversity. For what is
accidental never constitutes a species; and what is outside the
agent's intention is accidental (Phys. ii, text. 50). Now it is evident
that punishment is outside the intention of the sinner, wherefore it is
accidentally referred to sin on the part of the sinner. Nevertheless it
is referred to sin by an extrinsic principle, viz. the justice of the
judge, who imposes various punishments according to the various
manners of sin. Therefore the difference derived from the debt of
punishment, may be consequent to the specific diversity of sins, but
cannot constitute it.
Now the difference between venial and mortal sin is consequent to
the diversity of that inordinateness which constitutes the notion of
sin. For inordinateness is twofold, one that destroys the principle of
order, and another which, without destroying the principle of order,
implies inordinateness in the things which follow the principle: thus,
in an animal's body, the frame may be so out of order that the vital
principle is destroyed; this is the inordinateness of death; while, on
the other hand, saving the vital principle, there may be disorder in
the bodily humors; and then there is sickness. Now the principle of
the entire moral order is the last end, which stands in the same
relation to matters of action, as the indemonstrable principle does to
matters of speculation (Ethic. vii, 8). Therefore when the soul is so
disordered by sin as to turn away from its last end, viz. God, to
Whom it is united by charity, there is mortal sin; but when it is
disordered without turning away from God, there is venial sin. For
even as in the body, the disorder of death which results from the
destruction of the principle of life, is irreparable according to nature,
while the disorder of sickness can be repaired by reason of the vital
principle being preserved, so it is in matters concerning the soul.
Because, in speculative matters, it is impossible to convince one
who errs in the principles, whereas one who errs, but retains the
principles, can be brought back to the truth by means of the
principles. Likewise in practical matters, he who, by sinning, turns
away from his last end, if we consider the nature of his sin, falls
irreparably, and therefore is said to sin mortally and to deserve
eternal punishment: whereas when a man sins without turning away
from God, by the very nature of his sin, his disorder can be repaired,
because the principle of the order is not destroyed; wherefore he is
said to sin venially, because, to wit, he does not sin so as to deserve

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.6.