active form, such as heat is, which is clearly false. It seems,
therefore, that the same individual knowledge which is in the master
is communicated to the disciple; which cannot be, unless there is
one intellect in both. Seemingly, therefore, the intellect of the
disciple and master is but one; and, consequently, the same applies
to all men.
Objection 6: Further, Augustine (De Quant. Animae xxxii) says: "If I
were to say that there are many human souls, I should laugh at
myself." But the soul seems to be one chiefly on account of the
intellect. Therefore there is one intellect of all men.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Phys. ii, 3) that the relation of
universal causes to universals is like the relation of particular
causes to individuals. But it is impossible that a soul, one in species,
should belong to animals of different species. Therefore it is
impossible that one individual intellectual soul should belong to
several individuals.
I answer that, It is absolutely impossible for one intellect to belong to
all men. This is clear if, as Plato maintained, man is the intellect
itself. For it would follow that Socrates and Plato are one man; and
that they are not distinct from each other, except by something
outside the essence of each. The distinction between Socrates and
Plato would be no other than that of one man with a tunic and
another with a cloak; which is quite absurd.
It is likewise clear that this is impossible if, according to the opinion
of Aristotle (De Anima ii, 2), it is supposed that the intellect is a part
or a power of the soul which is the form of man. For it is impossible
for many distinct individuals to have one form, as it is impossible for
them to have one existence, for the form is the principle of existence.
Again, this is clearly impossible, whatever one may hold as to the
manner of the union of the intellect to this or that man. For it is
manifest that, supposing there is one principal agent, and two
instruments, we can say that there is one agent absolutely, but
several actions; as when one man touches several things with his
two hands, there will be one who touches, but two contacts. If, on
the contrary, we suppose one instrument and several principal
agents, we might say that there are several agents, but one act; for
example, if there be many drawing a ship by means of a rope; there

will be many drawing, but one pull. If, however, there is one principal
agent, and one instrument, we say that there is one agent and one
action, as when the smith strikes with one hammer, there is one
striker and one stroke. Now it is clear that no matter how the intellect
is united or coupled to this or that man, the intellect has the
precedence of all the other things which appertain to man; for the
sensitive powers obey the intellect, and are at its service. Therefore,
if we suppose two men to have several intellects and one sense---for
instance, if two men had one eye---there would be several seers, but
one sight. But if there is one intellect, no matter how diverse may be
all those things of which the intellect makes use as instruments, in
no way is it possible to say that Socrates and Plato are otherwise
than one understanding man. And if to this we add that to
understand, which is the act of the intellect, is not affected by any
organ other than the intellect itself; it will further follow that there is
but one agent and one action: that is to say that all men are but one
"understander," and have but one act of understanding, in regard,
that is, of one intelligible object.
However, it would be possible to distinguish my intellectual action
form yours by the distinction of the phantasms---that is to say, were
there one phantasm of a stone in me, and another in you---if the
phantasm itself, as it is one thing in me and another in you, were a
form of the possible intellect; since the same agent according to
divers forms produces divers actions; as, according to divers forms
of things with regard to the same eye, there are divers visions. But
the phantasm itself is not a form of the possible intellect; it is the
intelligible species abstracted from the phantasm that is a form. Now
in one intellect, from different phantasms of the same species, only
one intelligible species is abstracted; as appears in one man, in
whom there may be different phantasms of a stone; yet from all of
them only one intelligible species of a stone is abstracted; by which
the intellect of that one man, by one operation, understands the
nature of a stone, notwithstanding the diversity of phantasms.
Therefore, if there were one intellect for all men, the diversity of
phantasms which are in this one and that one would not cause a
diversity of intellectual operation in this man and that man. It follows,
therefore, that it is altogether impossible and unreasonable to
maintain that there exists one intellect for all men.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the intellectual soul, like an angel,
has no matter from which it is produced, yet it is the form of a certain
matter; in which it is unlike an angel. Therefore, according to the