FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.97, C.2.

his condition. An example is proposed by Augustine (De Lib. Arb. i,
6): "If the people have a sense of moderation and responsibility, and
are most careful guardians of the common weal, it is right to enact a
law allowing such a people to choose their own magistrates for the
government of the commonwealth. But if, as time goes on, the same
people become so corrupt as to sell their votes, and entrust the
government to scoundrels and criminals; then the right of appointing
their public officials is rightly forfeit to such a people, and the choice
devolves to a few good men."
Reply to Objection 1: The natural law is a participation of the eternal
law, as stated above (Question 91, Article 2), and therefore endures
without change, owing to the unchangeableness and perfection of
the Divine Reason, the Author of nature. But the reason of man is
changeable and imperfect: wherefore his law is subject to change.
Moreover the natural law contains certain universal precepts, which
are everlasting: whereas human law contains certain particular
precepts, according to various emergencies.
Reply to Objection 2: A measure should be as enduring as possible.
But nothing can be absolutely unchangeable in things that are
subject to change. And therefore human law cannot be altogether
unchangeable.
Reply to Objection 3: In corporal things, right is predicated
absolutely: and therefore, as far as itself is concerned, always
remains right. But right is predicated of law with reference to the
common weal, to which one and the same thing is not always
adapted, as stated above: wherefore rectitude of this kind is subject
to change.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.97, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether human law should always be changed,

whenever something better occurs?
Objection 1: It would seem that human law should be changed,
whenever something better occurs. Because human laws are
devised by human reason, like other arts. But in the other arts, the
tenets of former times give place to others, if something better
occurs. Therefore the same should apply to human laws.
Objection 2: Further, by taking note of the past we can provide for
the future. Now unless human laws had been changed when it was
found possible to improve them, considerable inconvenience would
have ensued; because the laws of old were crude in many points.
Therefore it seems that laws should be changed, whenever anything
better occurs to be enacted.
Objection 3: Further, human laws are enacted about single acts of
man. But we cannot acquire perfect knowledge in singular matters,
except by experience, which "requires time," as stated in Ethic. ii.
Therefore it seems that as time goes on it is possible for something
better to occur for legislation.
On the contrary, It is stated in the Decretals (Dist. xii, 5): "It is
absurd, and a detestable shame, that we should suffer those
traditions to be changed which we have received from the fathers of
old."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), human law is rightly
changed, in so far as such change is conducive to the common weal.
But, to a certain extent, the mere change of law is of itself prejudicial
to the common good: because custom avails much for the
observance of laws, seeing that what is done contrary to general
custom, even in slight matters, is looked upon as grave.
Consequently, when a law is changed, the binding power of the law
is diminished, in so far as custom is abolished. Wherefore human
law should never be changed, unless, in some way or other, the
common weal be compensated according to the extent of the harm
done in this respect. Such compensation may arise either from some
very great and every evident benefit conferred by the new
enactment; or from the extreme urgency of the case, due to the fact
that either the existing law is clearly unjust, or its observance