Mnason, an ancient disciple of Cyprus." [Acts 21:16] "And when we had come
to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly." [Acts 21:17] (f) "Bringing us," it
says, "(to him) with whom we should lodge"— not to the church: for on the
former occasion [Acts 15:4], when they went up concerning the decrees, they
lodged with the Church, but now with a certain "ancient disciple." (The
expression) shows that the preaching had been going on a long time: whence it
seems to me that this writer in the Acts epitomizes the events of many years,
relating (only) the matters of chief importance. (h) So unwilling were they to
burden the Church, when there was another to lodge them; and so little did they
stand upon their dignity. "The brethren," it says, "received us gladly." Affairs
among the Jews were now full of peace: there was not much warfare (among
them). "Bringing us," it says, "to one with whom we should lodge." Paul was the
guest he entertained. Perchance some one of you says: Aye, if it were given me
to entertain Paul as a guest, I readily and with much eagerness would do this.
Lo! It is in your power to entertain Paul's Master for your guest, and you will
not: for "he that receives one of these least," he says, "receives Me." [Matthew
18:5; Luke 9:48] By how much the brother may be least, so much the more does
Christ come to you through him. For he that receives the great, often does it
from vainglory also; but he that receives the small, does it purely for Christ's
sake. It is in your power to entertain even the Father of Christ as your guest, and
thou will not: for, "I was a stranger," He says, "and you took me in" [Matthew
25:35]: and again, "Unto one of the least of these the brethren that believe in Me,
you have done it unto Me." [Matthew 25:40] Though it be not Paul, yet if it be a
believer and a brother, although the least, Christ comes to you through him.
Open your house, take Him in. "He that receives a prophet," He says, "shall
receive a prophet's reward." [Matthew 10:41] Therefore too he that receives
Christ, shall receive the reward of him who has Christ for his guest. Do not thou
disbelieve His words, but be believing. Himself has said, Through them I come
to you: and that you may not disbelieve, He lays down both punishments for
those who do not receive, and honors for those who do receive; since He would

not have done this, unless both the person honored and the person insulted were
Himself. " You received Me," He says, "into your lodging, I will receive you into
the Kingdom of My Father; you took away My hunger, I take away your sins;
you saw Me bound, I see you loosed; you saw Me a stranger, I make you a
citizen of heaven; you gave Me bread, I give you an entire Kingdom, that you
may inherit and possess it." He says not, "Receive," but, "Inherit," the word
which is spoken of those who have possession by right of ownership; as when
we say, "This have I inherited." Thou did it to Me in secret, I will proclaim it
openly: and of your acts indeed I say, that they were of free gift, but Mine are of
debt. "For since thou," He says, "began, I follow and come after: I am not
ashamed to confess the benefits conferred on Me, nor from what things you freed
Me, hunger and nakedness and wandering. Thou saw Me bound, you shall not
behold the fire of hell; you saw Me sick, you shall not behold the torments nor
the punishments." O hands, truly blessed, which minister in such services as
these, which are accounted worthy to serve Christ! Feet which go into prisons
for Christ's sake, with ease defy the fire: no trial of bonds have they, (the hands)
which saw Him bound! You clothed Him with a garment, and you put on a
garment of salvation: you were in prison with Him, and with Him you find
yourself in the Kingdom, not ashamed, knowing that you visited Him. The
Patriarch knew not that he was entertaining Angels, and he did entertain them.
[Genesis 18:3] Let us take shame to ourselves, I beseech you: he was sitting in
mid-day, being in a foreign land, where he had none inheritance, "not so much as
to set his foot on" [Acts 7:5]: he was a stranger, and the stranger entertained
strangers: for he was a citizen of heaven. Therefore, not even while he was on
earth was he a stranger (to Him). We are rather strangers than that stranger, if we
receive not strangers. He had no home, and his tent was his place of reception.
And mark his liberality— he killed a calf, and kneaded fine meal: mark his ready
mind— by himself and his wife: mark the unassuming manner— he worships
and beseeches them. For all these qualities ought to be in that man who
entertains strangers— readiness, cheerfulness, liberality. For the soul of the