SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.164, C.3.

since not even men, who are rational by nature, know what they say
when a demon speaks in them. Accordingly (Gen. ad lit. xi, 29) the
serpent spoke to man, even as the ass on which Balaam sat spoke to
him, except that the former was the work of a devil, whereas the
latter was the work of an angel. Hence (Gen. ad lit. xi, 36) the serpent
was not asked why it had done this, because it had not done this in
its own nature, but the devil in it, who was already condemned to
everlasting fire on account of his sin: and the words addressed to
the serpent were directed to him who wrought through the serpent."
Moreover, as again Augustine says (Super Gen. contra Manich. ii,
17,18), "his, that is, the devil's, punishment mentioned here is that
for which we must be on our guard against him, not that which is
reserved till the last judgment. For when it was said to him: 'Thou art
cursed among all cattle and beasts of the earth,' the cattle are set
above him, not in power, but in the preservation of their nature, since
the cattle lost no heavenly bliss, seeing that they never had it, but
they continue to live in the nature which they received." It is also
said to him: "'Upon thy breast and belly shalt thou creep,'" according
to another version [The Septuagint] "Here the breast signifies pride,
because it is there that the impulse of the soul dominates, while the
belly denotes carnal desire, because this part of the body is softest
to the touch: and on these he creeps to those whom he wishes to
deceive." The words, "'Earth shalt thou eat all the days of thy life'
may be understood in two ways. Either 'Those shall belong to thee,
whom thou shalt deceive by earthly lust,' namely sinners who are
signified under the name of earth, or a third kind of temptation,
namely curiosity, is signified by these words: for to eat earth is to
look into things deep and dark." The putting of enmities between him
and the woman "means that we cannot be tempted by the devil,
except through that part of the soul which bears or reflects the
likeness of a woman. The seed of the devil is the temptation to evil,
the seed of the woman is the fruit of good works, whereby the
temptation to evil is resisted. Wherefore the serpent lies in wait for
the woman's heel, that if at any time she fall away towards what is
unlawful, pleasure may seize hold of her: and she watches his head
that she may shut him out at the very outset of the evil temptation."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.165, C.1.

## QUESTION 166 — OF STUDIOUSNESS

Prologue
We must next consider studiousness and its opposite, curiosity.
Concerning studiousness there are two points of inquiry:
(1) What is the matter of studiousness?
(2) Whether it is a part of temperance?

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.165, C.2.