SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.3.

Reply to Objection 3: There are some counsels such that if they be
omitted, man's whole life would be taken up with secular business;
for instance if he have property of his own, or enter the married
state, or do something of the kind that regards the essential vows of
religion themselves; wherefore religious are bound to keep all such
like counsels. Other counsels there are, however, about certain
particular better actions, which can be omitted without one's life
being taken up with secular actions; wherefore there is no need for
religious to be bound to fulfil all of them.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether poverty is required for religious

perfection?
Objection 1: It would seem that poverty is not required for religious
perfection. For that which it is unlawful to do does not apparently
belong to the state of perfection. But it would seem to be unlawful for
a man to give up all he possesses; since the Apostle (2 Cor. 8:12)
lays down the way in which the faithful are to give alms saying: "If
the will be forward, it is accepted according to that which a man
hath," i.e. "you should keep back what you need," and afterwards he
adds (2 Cor. 8:13): "For I mean not that others should be eased, and
you burthened," i.e. "with poverty," according to a gloss. Moreover a
gloss on 1 Tim. 6:8, "Having food, and wherewith to be covered,"
says: "Though we brought nothing, and will carry nothing away, we
must not give up these temporal things altogether." Therefore it
seems that voluntary poverty is not requisite for religious perfection.
Objection 2: Further, whosoever exposes himself to danger sins. But
he who renounces all he has and embraces voluntary poverty
exposes himself to danger---not only spiritual, according to Prov.
30:9, "Lest perhaps . . . being compelled by poverty, I should steal
and forswear the name of my God," and Ecclus. 27:1, "Through
poverty many have sinned"---but also corporal, for it is written
(Eccles. 7:13): "As wisdom is a defense, so money is a defense," and
the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 1) that "the waste of property
appears to be a sort of ruining of one's self, since thereby man
lives." Therefore it would seem that voluntary poverty is not requisite
for the perfection of religious life.
Objection 3: Further, "Virtue observes the mean," as stated in Ethic.
ii, 6. But he who renounces all by voluntary poverty seems to go to
the extreme rather than to observe the mean. Therefore he does not
act virtuously: and so this does not pertain to the perfection of life.
Objection 4: Further, the ultimate perfection of man consists in
happiness. Now riches conduce to happiness; for it is written
(Ecclus. 31:8): "Blessed is the rich man that is found without
blemish," and the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 8) that "riches
contribute instrumentally to happiness." Therefore voluntary poverty
is not requisite for religious perfection.