19. Yes, truly "blessed is she who believed"! These words, spoken by Elizabeth after the
Annunciation, here at the foot of the Cross seem to re-echo with supreme eloquence, and
the power contained within them becomes something penetrating. From the Cross, that is
to say from the very heart of the mystery of Redemption, there radiates and spreads out
the prospect of that blessing of faith It goes right hack to "the beginning." and as a
sharing in the sacrifice of Christ-the new Adam-it becomes in a certain sense the
counterpoise to the disobedience and disbelief embodied in the sin of our first parents.
Thus teach the Fathers of the Church and especially St. Irenaeus, quoted by the
Constitution Lumen Gentium: "The knot of Eve's disobedience was untied by Mary's

obedience; what the virgin Eve bound through her unbelief, the Virgin Mary loosened by
her faith." In the light of this comparison with Eve, the Fathers of the Church-as the
Council also says-call Mary the "mother of the living" and often speak of "death through
Eve, life through Mary."

In the expression "Blessed is she who believed," we can therefore rightly find a kind of
"key" which unlocks for us the innermost reality of Mary, whom the angel hailed as "full
of grace." If as "full of grace" she has been eternally present in the mystery of Christ,
through faith she became a sharer in that mystery in every extension of her earthly
journey. She "advanced in her pilgrimage of faith" and at the same time, in a discreet yet
direct and effective way, she made present to humanity the mystery of Christ. And she
still continues to do so. Through the mystery of Christ, she too is present within mankind.
Thus through the mystery of the Son the mystery of the Mother is also made clear.

### 3. Behold your mother
20. The Gospel of Luke records the moment when "a woman in the crowd raised her
voice" and said to Jesus: "Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts that you
sucked!" (Lk. 11:27) These words were an expression of praise of Mary as Jesus' mother
according to the flesh. Probably the Mother of Jesus was not personally known to this
woman; in fact, when Jesus began his messianic activity Mary did not accompany him
but continued to remain at Nazareth. One could say that the words of that unknown
woman in a way brought Mary out of her hiddenness.

Through these words, there flashed out in the midst of the crowd, at least for an instant,
the gospel of Jesus' infancy. This is the gospel in which Mary is present as the mother
who conceives Jesus in her womb, gives him birth and nurses him: the nursing mother
referred to by the woman in the crowd. Thanks to this motherhood, Jesus, the Son of the
Most High (cf. Lk. 1:32), is a true son of man. He is "flesh," like every other man: he is
"the Word (who) became flesh" (cf. Jn. 1:14). He is of the flesh and blood of Mary!