thus says: "And then shall the wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the
spirit of His mouth, and destroy by the presence of His coming; whose coming [i.e., the wicked
one's] is after the working of Satan, in all power, and signs, and portents of lies, and with all
deceivableness of wickedness for those who perish; because they did not receive the love of the
truth, that they might be saved. And therefore God will send them the working of error, that they
may believe a lie; that they all may be judged who did not believe the truth, but gave consent to
iniquity,"
4. The Lord also spoke as follows to those who did not believe in Him: "I have come in my
Father's name, and ye have not received Me: when another shall come in his own name, him ye
will receive," calling Antichrist "the other," because he is alienated from the Lord. This is also
the unjust judge, whom the Lord mentioned as one "who feared not God, neither regarded man,"
to whom the widow fled in her forgetfulness of God,—that is, the earthly Jerusalem,—to be avenged
of her adversary. Which also he shall do in the time of his kingdom: he shall remove his kingdom
into that [city], and shall sit in the temple of God, leading astray those who worship him, as if he
were Christ. To this purpose Daniel says again: "And he shall desolate the holy place; and sin has
been given for a sacrifice, and righteousness been cast away in the earth, and he has been active
(fecit), and gone on prosperously." And the angel Gabriel, when explaining his vision, states
with regard to this person: "And towards the end of their kingdom a king of a most fierce countenance
shall arise, one understanding [dark] questions, and exceedingly powerful, full of wonders; and he
shall corrupt, direct, influence (faciet), and put strong men down, the holy people likewise; and his
yoke shall be directed as a wreath [round their neck]; deceit shall be in his hand, and he shall be
lifted up in his heart: he shall also ruin many by deceit, and lead many to perdition, bruising them
in his hand like eggs." And then he points out the time that his tyranny shall last, during which
the saints shall be put to flight, they who offer a pure sacrifice unto God: "And in the midst of the
week," he says, "the sacrifice and the libation shall be taken away, and the abomination of desolation
[shall be brought] into the temple: even unto the consummation of the time shall the desolation be
complete." Now three years and six months constitute the half-week.
5. From all these passages are revealed to us, not merely the particulars of the apostasy, and
[the doings] of him who concentrates in himself every satanic error, but also, that there is one and

Dan. viii. 23, etc.

the same God the Father, who was declared by the prophets, but made manifest by Christ. For if
what Daniel prophesied concerning the end has been confirmed by the Lord, when He said, "When
ye shall see the abomination of desolation, which has been spoken of by Daniel the prophet"
(and the angel Gabriel gave the interpretation of the visions to Daniel, and he is the archangel of
the Creator (Demiurgi), who also proclaimed to Mary the visible coming and the incarnation of
Christ), then one and the same God is most manifestly pointed out, who sent the prophets, and
made promise of the Son, and called us into His knowledge.