Ver. 24. "Which things contain an allegory."
Contrary to usage, he calls a type an allegory; his meaning is as follows;
this history not only declares that which appears on the face of it, but announces
somewhat farther, whence it is called an allegory. And what has it announced?
No less than all the things now present.
Ver. 24. "For these women," he says, "are two covenants; one from mount
Sinai, bearing children unto bondage, which is Hagar."
"These:" who? The mothers of those children, Sarah and Hagar; and what
are they? Two covenants, two laws. As the names of the women were given in
the history, he abides by this designation of the two races, showing how much
follows from the very names. How from the names?
Ver. 25. "Now this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia:"
The bond-woman was called Hagar, and "Hagar" is the word for Mount
Sinai in the language of that country. So that it is necessary that all who are born
of the Old Covenant should be bondmen, for that mountain where the Old
Covenant was delivered has a name in common with the bondwoman. And it
includes Jerusalem, for this is the meaning of,
Ver. 25. "And answers to Jerusalem that now is."
That is, it borders on, and is contiguous to it.
Ver. 25. "For she is in bondage with her children."
What follows from hence? Not only that she was in bondage and brought
forth bondmen, but that this Covenant is so too, whereof the bondwoman was a
type. For Jerusalem is adjacent to the mountain of the same name with the
bondwoman, and in this mountain the Covenant was delivered. Now where is the
type of Sarah?
Ver. 26. "But Jerusalem that is above is free."
Those therefore, who are born of her are not bondmen. Thus the type of the
Jerusalem below was Hagar, as is plain from the mountain being so called; but of
that which is above is the Church. Nevertheless he is not content with these
types, but adds the testimony of Isaiah to what he has spoken. Having said that

Jerusalem which is above "is our Mother," and having given that name to the
Church, he cites the suffrage of the Prophet in his favor,
Ver. 27. "Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not, break forth and cry, you that
travailest not, for more are the children of the desolate than of her which has the
husband." [Isaiah 54:1]
Who is this who before was "barren," and "desolate?" Clearly it is the
Church of the Gentiles, that was before deprived of the knowledge of God?
Who, "she which has the husband?" plainly the Synagogue. Yet the barren
woman surpassed her in the number of her children, for the other embraces one
nation, but the children of the Church have filled the country of the Greeks and
of the Barbarians, the earth and sea, the whole habitable world. Observe how
Sarah by acts, and the Prophet by words, have described the events about to
befal us. Observe too, that he whom Isaiah called barren, Paul has proved to
have many children, which also happened typically in the case of Sarah. For she
too, although barren, became the mother of a numerous progeny. This however
does not suffice Paul, but he carefully follows out the mode whereby the barren
woman became a mother, that in this particular likewise the type might
harmonize with the truth. Wherefore he adds
Ver. 28. "Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are children of promise."
It is not merely that the Church was barren like Sarah, or became a mother
of many children like her, but she bore them in the way Sarah did. As it was not
nature but the promise of God which rendered Sarah a mother, [for the word of
God which said, "At the time appointed I will return unto you, and Sarah shall
have a son," [Genesis 18:14] this entered into the womb and formed the babe,]
so also in our regeneration it is not nature, but the Words of God spoken by the
Priest, (the faithful know them,) which in the Bath of water as in a sort of womb,
form and regenerate him who is baptized.
Wherefore if we are sons of the barren woman, then are we free. But what
kind of freedom, it might be objected, is this, when the Jews seize and scourge
the believers, and those who have this pretence of liberty are persecuted? For