THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.8.

an end, inasmuch as it is sought for under the appearance of liberty,
according to Jer. 2:20: "Of old time thou hast broken my yoke, thou
hast burst my bands, and thou saidst, 'I will not serve.'" Hence,
inasmuch as some are brought to this end by sinning, they fall under
the rule and government of the devil, and therefore he is called their
head.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the devil does not influence the
rational mind interiorly, yet he beguiles it to evil by persuasion.
Reply to Objection 2: A governor does not always suggest to his
subjects to obey his will; but proposes to all the sign of his will, in
consequence of which some are incited by inducement, and some of
their own free-will, as is plain in the leader of an army, whose
standard all the soldiers follow, though no one persuades them.
Therefore in the same way, the first sin of the devil, who "sinneth
from the beginning" (1 Jnn 3:8), is held out to all to be followed, and
some imitate at his suggestion, and some of their own will without
any suggestion. And hence the devil is the head of all the wicked,
inasmuch as they imitate Him, according to Wis. 2:24,25: "By the
envy of the devil, death came into the world. And they follow him that
are of his side."
Reply to Objection 3: All sins agree in aversion from God, although
they differ by conversion to different changeable goods.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether Anti-christ may be called the head of all

the wicked?
Objection 1: It would seem that Antichrist is not the head of the
wicked. For there are not several heads of one body. But the devil is
the head of the multitude of the wicked. Therefore Anti-christ is not
their head.
Objection 2: Further, Anti-christ is a member of the devil. Now the
head is distinguished from the members. Therefore Anti-christ is not
the head of the wicked.
Objection 3: Further, the head has an influence over the members.
But Anti-christ has no influence over the wicked who have preceded
him. Therefore Anti-christ is not the head of the wicked.
On the contrary, A gloss [St. Gregory, Moral. xv] on Job 21:29, "Ask
any of them that go by the way," says: "Whilst he was speaking of
the body of all the wicked, suddenly he turned his speech to Antichrist the head of all evil-doers."
I answer that, As was said above (Article 1), in the head are found
three things: order, perfection, and the power of influencing. But as
regards the order of the body, Anti-christ is not said to be the head
of the wicked as if his sin had preceded, as the sin of the devil
preceded. So likewise he is not called the head of the wicked from
the power of influencing, although he will pervert some in his day by
exterior persuasion; nevertheless those who were before him were
not beguiled into wickedness by him nor have imitated his
wickedness. Hence he cannot be called the head of all the wicked in
this way, but of some. Therefore it remains to be said that he is the
head of all the wicked by reason of the perfection of his wickedness.
Hence, on 2 Thess. 2:4, "Showing himself as if he were God," a gloss
says: "As in Christ dwelt the fulness of the Godhead, so in Antichrist the fulness of all wickedness." Not indeed as if his humanity
were assumed by the devil into unity of person, as the humanity of
Christ by the Son of God; but that the devil by suggestion infuses his
wickedness more copiously into him than into all others. And in this
way all the wicked who have gone before are signs of Anti-christ,
according to 2 Thess. 2:7, "For the mystery of iniquity already
worketh."