Himself to them for suffering them to have nothing.
But having said it was hard; as He proceeds, He shows that it is even
impossible, and not merely impossible, but even in the highest degree
impossible; and this He showed by the comparison concerning the camel and the
needle.
"It is easier" says He, "for a camel to enter in by the eye of a needle, than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 19:24] Whence it
is shown, that there is no ordinary reward for them that are rich, and are able to
practise self command. Wherefore also He affirmed it to be a work of God, that
He might show that great grace is needed for him who is to achieve this. At least,
when the disciples were troubled, He said, "With men this is impossible; but with
God all things are possible." [Matthew 19:26]
And wherefore are the disciples troubled, being poor, yea, exceedingly
poor? Wherefore then are they confounded? Being in pain about the salvation of
the rest, and having a great affection for all, and having already taken upon
themselves the tender bowels of teachers. They were at least in such trembling
and fear for the whole world from this declaration, as to need much comfort.
Therefore, having first "beheld them, He said unto them, The things which
are impossible with men, are possible with God." For with a mild and meek look,
having soothed their shuddering mind, and having put an end to their distress
(for this the evangelist signified by saying, "He beheld them"), then by His
words also He relieves them, bringing before them God's power, and so making
them feel confidence.
But if you will learn the manner of it likewise, and how what is impossible
may become possible, hear. Born either for this end did He say, "The things
which are impossible with men, are possible with God," that you should give it
up, and abstain, as from things impossible; but that having considered the
greatness of the good work, you should hasten to it readily, and having besought
God to assist you in these noble contests, should attain unto life.
3. How then should this become possible? If you cast away what you have,

if you empty yourself of your wealth, if you refrain from the wicked desire. For
in proof that He does not refer it to God alone, but that to this end He said it, that
you should know the vastness of the good work, hear what follows. For when
Peter had said, "Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed You," and had asked,
"What shall we have therefore?" having appointed the reward for them; He
added, "And every one who has forsaken houses, or lands, or brothers, or sisters,
or father, or mother, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit eternal life."
Thus that which is impossible becomes possible. But how may this very thing be
done, one may say, to forsake these? How is it possible for him that is once sunk
in such lust of wealth, to recover himself? If he begin to empty himself of his
possessions, and cut off what are superfluous. For so shall he both advance
further, and shall run on his course more easily afterwards.
Do not then seek all at once, but gently, and little by little, ascend this
ladder, that leads you up to Heaven. For like as those in fevers having acrid bile
abounding within them, when they cast in thereon meats and drinks, so far from
quenching their thirst, do even kindle the flame; so also the covetous, when they
cast in their wealth upon this wicked lust more acrid than that bile, do rather
inflame it. For nothing so stays it as to refrain for a time from the lust of gain,
like as acrid bile is stayed by abstinence and evacuations.
But this itself, by what means will it be done? One may say. If you consider,
that while rich, you will never cease thirsting, and pining with the lust of more;
but being freed from your possessions, you will be able also to stay this disease.
Do not then encompass yourself with more, lest you follow after things
unattainable, and be incurable, and be more miserable than all, being thus
frantic.
For answer me, whom shall we affirm to be tormented and pained? Him
that longs after costly meats and drinks, and is not able to enjoy them as he will,
or him that has not such a desire? It is quite clear one must say, him that desires,
but cannot obtain what he desires. For this is so painful, to desire and not to
enjoy, to thirst and not to drink, that Christ desiring to describe hell to us,