them all by the handle, whom might they not put to shame of those who refuse to
undergo any labour for the sake of virtue? And what can any one say of those
men, who balancing a pole on the forehead, keep it just as steady as a tree rooted
in the ground? And this is not the only marvellous part of the affair but that they
set little children to wrestle with one another on the top of the tree; and neither
the hands, nor any other part of the body assisting, the forehead alone sustains
the pole unshaken, and with more steadiness than any kind of fastening. Again:
another walks on the slenderest rope, with the same fearlessness as men do when
they run over level plains. Nevertheless these things, which even in thought
seem impracticable, have become possible by art. What like this have we, I ask,
to allege concerning oaths? What kind of difficulty? What toil? What art? What
danger? There is only needed on our part a little earnestness, and the whole of
our task will be quickly performed.
14. And do not tell me, "I have accomplished the greater part of it;" but if
you have not accomplished the whole, consider that you have not as yet done
any thing; for this little, if neglected, is destruction to all the rest. Often indeed
when men have built a house, and put on the roof, they have destroyed the whole
fabric, by not making any concern of a single tile that has been shaken off from
it. And one may see the same thing occur with respect to garments; for there too
if a small hole is made, and not repaired, a large rent is the consequence. And
this also is frequently the case in regard to floods; for these, if they find but a
small entrance, let in the whole torrent. Thou also, then, even if you have
fortified yourself all around, and but a small part be left still unfortified, yet
block up this also against the devil, that you may be made strong on all sides!
You have seen the sickle! You have seen the head of John! You have heard the
history pertaining to Saul! You have heard the manner of the Jewish captivity!
And beside all these, you have heard the sentence of Christ declaring, that not
only to commit perjury, but to swear in any way, is a diabolical thing, and the
whole a device of the evil one. You have heard that every where perjuries follow
oaths. Putting all these things then together, write them upon your understanding.

Do you not see how women and little children suspend Gospels from their necks
as a powerful amulet, and carry them about in all places wherever they go. Thus
do thou write the commands of the Gospel and its laws upon your mind. Here
there is no need of gold or property, or of buying a book; but of the will only,
and the affections of the soul awakened, and the Gospel will be your surer
guardian, carrying it as you will then do, not outside, but treasured up within;
yea, in the soul's secret chambers. When you rise up then from your bed, and
when you go out of your house, repeat this law: "I say unto you, Swear not at
all." [Matthew 5:34] And the saying will be to you a discipline; for there is no
need of much labour, but only of a moderate degree of attention. And that this is
true, may thus be proved. Call your son, and frighten him, and threaten to lay a
few stripes upon him, if he does not duly observe this law; and you will see, how
he will immediately abstain from this custom. Is it not therefore truly absurd,
that little children, out of the fear we inspire, should perform this commandment,
and that we should not fear God as our sons fear us?
15. What then I said before this, I now again repeat. Let us lay down a law
for ourselves in this matter; not to meddle either with public or private affairs
until we have fulfilled this law; and then surely under the pressure of this
obligation we shall easily conquer, and we shall at once adorn ourselves, and
decorate our city. For consider what a thing it would be to have it said every
where throughout the world, "A practice becoming Christians is established at
Antioch, and you will hear no one giving utterance to an oath, even though the
greatest necessity is laid upon him!" This is what the neighbouring cities will
certainly hear; nay, not the neighbouring cities only, but even to the ends of the
earth will the report be conveyed. For it is indeed probable that both the
merchants who mix with you, and others who arrive from this place, will report
all these matters. When, therefore, many persons in the way of encomium
mention the harbours of other cities, or the markets, or the abundance of wares,
enable those who come from hence to say, that there is that at Antioch, which is
to be seen in no other city; for that the men who dwell there would sooner have