of our father Abraham, who was certainly awake and ministering, when,
after Scripture had premised, "The Lord appeared unto Abraham," not
one, or two, but three men appeared to him; no one of whom is said to
have stood prominently above the others, no one more than the others to
have shone with greater glory, or to have acted more authoritatively?
35. Wherefore, since in that our threefold division we determined to
inquire, first, whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit; or
whether sometimes the Father, sometimes the Son, sometimes the Holy
Spirit; or whether, without any distinction of persons, as it is said, the one
and only God, that is, the Trinity itself, appeared to the fathers through
those forms of the creature: now that we have examined, so far as
appeared to be sufficient, what places of the Holy Scriptures we could, a
modest and cautious consideration of divine mysteries leads, as far as I
can judge, to no other conclusion, unless that we may not rashly affirm
which person of the Trinity appeared to this or that of the fathers or the
prophets in some body or likeness of body, unless when the context
attaches to the narrative some probable intimations on the subject. For
the nature itself, or substance, or essence, or by whatever other name that
very thing, which is God, whatever it be, is to be called, cannot be seen
corporeally: but we must believe that by means of the creature made
subject to Him, not only the Son, or the Holy Spirit, but also the Father,
may have given intimations of Himself to mortal senses by a corporeal
form or likeness. And since the case stands thus, that this second book
may not extend to an immoderate length, let us consider what remains in
those which follow.

## BOOK III. The appearances of God to the Old Testament saints are discussed

PREFACE.—WHY AUGUSTIN WRITES OF THE TRINITY. WHAT HE
CLAIMS FROM READERS, WHAT HAS BEEN SAID IN THE PREVIOUS
BOOK.
1. I WOULD have them believe, who are willing to do so, that I had rather
bestow labor in reading, than in dictating what others may read. But let
those who will not believe this, but are both able and willing to make the
trial, grant me whatever answers may be gathered from reading, either to
my own inquiries, or to those interrogations of others, which for the
character I bear in the service of Christ, and for the zeal with which I burn
that our faith may be fortified against the error of carnal and natural
men, I must needs bear with; and then let them see how easily I would
refrain from this labor, and with how much even of joy I would give my
pen a holiday. But if what we have read upon these subjects is either not
sufficiently set forth, or is not to be found at all, or at any rate cannot
easily be found by us, in the Latin tongue, while we are not so familiar
with the Greek tongue as to be found in any way competent to read and
understand therein the books that treat of such topics, in which class of
writings, to judge by the little which has been translated for us, I do not
doubt that everything is contained that we can profitably seek;2 while yet
I cannot resist my brethren when they exact of me, by that law by which I
am made their servant, that I should minister above all to their
praiseworthy studies in Christ by my tongue and by my pen, of which two