Christ our Lord, with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory,
and might, and honor, now and henceforth, and for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 6 on Ephesians

Chapter II. Verses 17-22
"And He came and preached peace to you that were far off, and peace to
them that were near, for through Him we both have our access in one Spirit unto
the Father. So then you are no more strangers and sojourners, but you are fellow
citizens with the saints, and of the household of God, being built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus Himself being the chief
corner-stone. In whom each several building, fitly framed together, grows into a
holy temple in the Lord. In whom you also are built together for a habitation of
God in the Spirit."
He sent not, says the Apostle, by the hand of another, nor did He announce
these tidings to us by means of any other, but Himself did it in His own person.
He sent not Angel nor Archangel on the mission, because to repair so many and
vast mischiefs and to declare what had been wrought was in the power of none
other, but required His own coming. The Lord then took upon Himself the rank
of a servant, nay, almost of a minister, "and came, and preached peace to you,"
says he, "that were far off, and to them that were near." To the Jews, he means,
who as compared with ourselves were near. "For through Him we both have our
access in one Spirit unto the Father."
"Peace," says he, that "peace" which is towards God. He has reconciled us.
For the Lord Himself also says, "Peace I leave with you; my peace I give unto
you." [John 14:27] And again, "Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world."
[John 16:33] And again, "Whatsoever you shall ask in my name that will I do."
[John 14:14] And again, "For the Father loves you." [John 16:27] These are so
many evidences of peace. But how towards the Gentiles? "Because through Him
we both have our access in one Spirit unto the Father," not ye less, and they
more, but all by one and the same grace. The wrath He appeased by His death,

and has made us meet for the Father's love through the Spirit. Mark again, the
"in" means "by" or "through." By Himself and the Spirit that is, He has brought
us unto the Father. "So then you are no more strangers and sojourners, but
fellow citizens with the saints."
Perceive ye that it is not with the Jews simply, no, but with those saintly
and great men, such as Abraham, and Moses, and Elias? It is for the self-same
city with these we are enrolled, for that we declare ourselves. "For they that say
such things," says he, "make it manifest that they are seeking after a country of
their own." [Hebrews 11:14] No longer are we strangers from the saints, nor
foreigners. For they who shall not attain to heavenly blessings, are foreigners.
"For the Son," says Christ, "abides for ever." [John 8:35]
"And of the household," he continues, "of God."
The very thing which they at the first had, by means of so many toils and
troubles, has been for you accomplished by the grace of God. Behold the hope of
your calling.
"Being built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets."
Observe how he blends all together, the Gentiles, the Jews, the Apostles, the
Prophets, and Christ, and illustrates the union sometimes from the body, and
sometimes from the building: "built," says he, "upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets;" that is, the Apostles and Prophets are a foundation, and
he places the Apostles first, though they are in order of time last, doubtless to
represent and express this, that both the one and the other are alike a foundation,
and that the whole is one building, and that there is one root. Consider, that the
Gentiles have the Patriarchs as a foundation. He here speaks more strongly of
that point than he does when he speaks of a "grafting in." There he rather
attaches them on. Then he adds, that He who binds the whole together in Christ.
For the chief corner-stone binds together both the walls, and the foundations.
"In whom each several building."
Mark, how he knits it all together, and represents Him at one time, as
holding down the whole body from above, and welding it together; at another