issue, without even touching His Body, but merely the hem of His garment,
stanched a flux of blood of so long standing. (So St. Aug. Serm. LXII. iii. 4, p.
124 O.T.) This Name is fearful alike to devils, and to passions, and to diseases.
In this then let us find a pleasure, herewith let us fortify ourselves. It was thus
Paul waxed great, and yet he was of the like nature with ourselves, so the whole
choir of the Disciples. But faith had made him a perfectly different person, and
so much did it abound in them, that even their garments had great force. [Acts
19:12] What excuse then shall we deserve, if even the shadows and the garments
of those men drove off death [Acts 5:15], but our very prayers do not so much as
bring the passions down? What is the reason of it? Our temper is widely
different. For what nature gives, is as much ours as theirs. For he was born and
brought up just as we are, and dwelt upon the earth and breathed the air, as we
do. But in other points he was far greater and better than we are, in zeal, in faith,
and love. Let us then imitate him. Let us allow Christ to speak through us. He
desires it more than we do: and by reason of this, He prepared this instrument,
and would not have it remain useless and idle, but wishes to keep it ever in hand.
Why then do you not make it serviceable for the Maker's hand, but let it become
unstrung, and makest it relaxed through luxury, and unfittest the whole harp for
His use, when you ought to keep the members of it in full stretch, and well
strung, and braced with spiritual salt. For if Christ see our soul thus attuned, He
will send forth His sounds even by it. And when this takes place, then shall you
see Angels leaping for joy, ([σκιρτὥντας]) and Archangels too, and the
Cherubim.
Let us then become worthy of His spotless hands. Let us invite Him to
strike even upon our heart. For He rather needs not any inviting. Only make it
worthy of that touch, and He will be foremost in running unto you. For if in
consideration of their attainments not yet reached, He runs to them (for when
Paul was not yet so advanced He yet framed that praise for him) when He sees
one fully furnished, what is there that He will not do? But if Christ shall sound
forth and the Spirit shall indeed light upon us, and we shall be better than the

heaven, having not the sun and the moon fixed in our body, but the Lord of both
sun and moon and angels dwelling in us and walking in us. And this I say, not
that we may raise the dead, or cleanse the lepers, but that we may show forth
what is a greater miracle than all these— charity. For wheresoever this glorious
thing shall be there the Son takes up His abode along with the Father, and the
grace of the Spirit frequents. For "where two or three are gathered together in
My Name," it says, "there am I in the midst of them." [Matthew 18:20] Now this
is for great affection, and for those that are very intimate friends, to have those
whom they love on either side of them. Who then, he means, is so wretched as
not to wish to have Christ in the midst? We that are at variance with one another!
And haply some one may ridicule me and ask, What is it that you mean? Do you
not see that we are all within the same walls, and under the same enclosure of
the Church, standing under the same fold with unanimity; that no one fights, that
we be under the same shepherd, crying aloud in common, listening in common
to what is being said, sending up our prayers in common—and yet mention
fighting and variance? Fighting I do mention, and I am not mad nor out of my
sober mind. For I see what I see, and know that we are under the same fold, and
the same shepherd. Yet for this cause I make the greater lamentation, because,
though there are so many circumstances to draw us together, we are at variance.
And what sedition, it will be said, see you here? Here truly I see none. But when
we have broken up, such an one accuses such another, another is openly
insulting, another grudges, another is fraudulent, and rapacious, and violent,
another indulges in unlawful love, another frames countless schemes of deceit.
And if it were possible to open your souls, then ye would see all things
distinctly, and know that I am not mad. Do you not see in a camp, that when it is
peace, men lay down their arms and cross over unarmed and undefended into the
camp of the enemy, but when they are protected with arms, and with guards and
outposts, the nights are spent in watching, and the fires are kept continually
burning, this state of things is no longer peace but war? Now this is what may be
seen among us. For we are on our guard against one another, and fear one