When He expends, when He lavishes, then is He rich, then is He affluent. Large
is the mouth of that fountain: pure and limpid its water. If you stop not up the
fountain here, neither will you stop up that fountain.— Let no unfruitful tree
stand beside it, that it may not waste its spray. Have you wealth? Plant not
poplars there: for such is luxury: it consumes much, and shows nothing for it in
itself, but spoils the fruit. Plant not a pine-tree— such is wantonness in apparel,
beautiful only to the sight, and useful for nothing— nor yet a fir-tree, nor any
other of such trees as consume indeed, but are in no sort useful. Set it thick with
young shoots: plant all that is fruitful, in the hands of the poor, all that you will.
Nothing richer than this ground. Though small the reach of the hand, yet the tree
it plants starts up to heaven and stands firm. This it is to plant. For that which is
planted on the earth will perish, though not now, at any rate a hundred years
hence. Thou plantest many trees, of which you shall not enjoy the fruit, but ere
you can enjoy it, death comes upon you. This tree will give you its fruit then,
when you are dead.— If you plant, plant not in the maw of gluttony, that the fruit
end not in the draught-house: but plant thou in the pinched belly, that the fruit
may start up to heaven. Refresh the straightened soul of the poor, lest you pinch
your own roomy soul.— See you not, that the plants which are over-much
watered at the root decay, but grow when watered in moderation? Thus also
drench not thou your own belly, that the root of the tree decay not: water that
which is thirsty, that it may bear fruit. If you water in moderation, the sun will
not wither them, but if in excess, then it withers them: such is the nature of the
sun. In all things, excess is bad; wherefore let us cut it off, that we also may
obtain the things we ask for.— Fountains, it is said, rise on the most elevated
spots. Let us be elevated in soul, and our alms will flow with a rapid stream: the
elevated soul cannot but be merciful, and the merciful cannot but be elevated.
For he that despises wealth, is higher than the root of evils.— Fountains are
oftenest found in solitary places: let us withdraw our soul from the crowd, and
alms will gush out with us. Fountains, the more they are cleaned, the more
copiously they flow: so with us, the more we spend, the more all good grows.—

He that has a fountain, has nothing to fear: then neither let us be afraid. For
indeed this fountain is serviceable to us for drink, for irrigation, for building, for
everything. Nothing better than this draught: it is not possible for this to
inebriate. Better to possess such a fountain, than to have fountains running with
gold. Better than all gold-bearing soil is the soul which bears this gold. For it
advances us, not into these earthly palaces, but into those above. The gold
becomes an ornament to the Church of God. Of this gold is wrought "the sword
of the Spirit" [Ephesians 6:17], the sword by which the dragon is beheaded.
From this fountain come the precious stones which are on the King's head. Then
let us not neglect so great wealth, but contribute our alms with largeness, that we
may be found worthy of the mercy of God, by the grace and tender compassion
of His only begotten Son, with Whom to the Father and Holy Ghost together be
glory, dominion, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.