higher philosophy. Lest any one should suspect, from his calling the Law over
and over again a yoke of bondage, and a bringing on of the curse, that his object
in enjoining an abandonment of the Law, was that one might live lawlessly, he
corrects this notion, and states his object to be, not that our course of life might
be lawless, but that our philosophy might surpass the Law. For the bonds of the
Law are broken, and I say this not that our standard may be lowered, but that it
may be exalted. For both he who commits fornication, and he who leads a virgin
life, pass the bounds of the Law, but not in the same direction; the one is led
away to the worse, the other is elevated to the better; the one transgresses the
Law, the other transcends it. Thus Paul says that Christ has removed the yoke
from you, not that you may prance and kick, but that though without the yoke
you may proceed at a well-measured pace. And next he shows the mode
whereby this may be readily effected; and what is this mode? He says,
Ver. 13. "But through love be servants one to another."
Here again he hints that strife and party-spirit, love of rule and
presumptousness, had been the causes of their error, for the desire of rule is the
mother of heresies. By saying, "Be servants one to another," he shows that the
evil had arisen from this presumptuous and arrogant spirit, and therefore he
applies a corresponding remedy. As your divisions arose from your desire to
domineer over each other, "serve one another;" thus will you be reconciled
again. However, he does not openly express their fault, but he openly tells them
its corrective, that through this they may become aware of that; as if one were
not to tell an immodest person of his immodesty, but were continually to exhort
him to chastity. He that loves his neighbor as he ought, declines not to be servant
to him more humbly than any servant. As fire, brought into contact with wax,
easily softens it, so does the warmth of love dissolve all arrogance and
presumption more powerfully than fire. Wherefore he says not, "love one
another," merely, but, "be servants one to another," thus signifying the intensity
of the affection. When the yoke of the Law was taken off them that they might
not caper off and away another was laid on, that of love, stronger than the

former, yet far lighter and pleasanter; and, to point out the way to obey it, he
adds;
Ver. 14. "For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, even in this; You shall
love your neighbor as yourself."
Seeing that they made so much of the Law, he says, "If you wish to fulfill it,
do not be circumcised, for it is fulfilled not in circumcision but in love." Observe
how he cannot forget his grief, but constantly touches upon what troubled him,
even when launched into his moral discourse.
Ver. 15. "But if you bite and devour one another, take heed that you be not
consumed one of another."
That he may not distress them, he does not assert this, though he knew it
was the case, but mentions it ambiguously. For he does not say, "Inasmuch as
you bite one another," nor again does he assert, in the clause following, that they
shall be consumed by each other; but "take heed that you be not consumed one of
another," and this is the language of apprehension and warning, not of
condemnation. And the words which he uses are expressly significant; he says
not merely, "you bite," which one might do in a passion, but also "you devour,"
which implies a bearing of malice. To bite is to satisfy the feeling of anger, but to
devour is a proof of the most savage ferocity. The biting and devouring he
speaks of are not bodily, but of a much more cruel kind; for it is not such an
injury to taste the flesh of man, as to fix one's fangs in his soul. In proportion as
the soul is more precious than the body, is damage to it more serious. "Take heed
that you be not consumed one of another." For those who commit injury and lay
plots, do so in order to destroy others; therefore he says, Take heed that this evil
fall not on your own heads. For strife and dissensions are the ruin and
destruction as well of those who admit as of those who introduce them, and eats
out every thing worse than a moth does.
Ver. 16. "But I say, Walk by the Spirit, and you shall not fulfil the lust of the
flesh."
Here he points out another path which makes duty easy, and secures what