John 6:61-62
"When Jesus knew in Himself that His disciples murmured at it," (for this is an
attribute of His Godhead to bring secret things to light,) "He said unto them,
Does this offend you? What and if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where
He was before?"
This also He does in the case of Nathanael, saying, "Because I said unto
you, I saw you under the fig-tree, do you believe? You shall see greater things
than these." [John 1:50] And to Nicodemus, "No man has ascended up to heaven
but the Son of man which is in heaven." [John 3:13] What then, does He add
difficulties to difficulties? No, (that be far from Him,) but by the greatness of the
doctrines, and the number of them, He desires to bring them over. For if one had
said simply, "I have come down from heaven," and added nothing more, he
would have been the more likely to offend them; but He who said, "My body is
the life of the world"; He who said, "As the living Father has sent Me, so I live
by the Father"; and who said, "I have come down from heaven," solves the
difficulty. For the man who utters any one great thing concerning himself may
perhaps be suspected of feigning, but he who connects together so many one
after another removes all suspicion. All that He does and says is intended to lead
them away from the thought, that Joseph was His father. And it was not with a
wish to strengthen, but rather to do away that stumbling-block, that He said this.
For whosoever deemed that He was Joseph's son could not receive His sayings,
while one that was persuaded that He had come down from heaven, and would
ascend there, might more easily give heed to His words: at the same time He
brings forward also another explanation, saying,

John 6:63
"It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing."
His meaning is, "You must hear spiritually what relates to Me, for he who
hears carnally is not profited, nor gathers any advantage." It was carnal to
question how He came down from heaven, to deem that He was the son of
Joseph, to ask, "How can he give us His flesh to eat?" All this was carnal, when
they ought to have understood the matter in a mystical and spiritual sense. "But,"
says some one, "how could they understand what the 'eating flesh' might mean?"
Then it was their duty to wait for the proper time and enquire, and not to
abandon Him.
"The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life."
That is, they are divine and spiritual, have nothing carnal about them, are
not subject to the laws of physical consequence, but are free from any such
necessity, are even set above the laws appointed for this world, and have also
another and a different meaning. Now as in this passage He said "spirit," instead
of "spiritual," so when He speaks of "flesh," He meant not "carnal things," but
"carnally hearing," and alluding at the same time to them, because they ever
desired carnal things when they ought to have desired spiritual. For if a man
receives them carnally, he profits nothing. "What then, is not His flesh, flesh?"
Most certainly. "How then says He, that the flesh profits nothing?" He speaks not
of His own flesh, (God forbid!) but of those who received His words in a carnal
manner. But what is "understanding carnally"? It is looking merely to what is
before our eyes, without imagining anything beyond. This is understanding
carnally. But we must not judge thus by sight, but must look into all mysteries
with the eyes within. This is seeing spiritually. He that eats not His flesh, and
drinks not His blood, has no life in him. How then does "the flesh profit
nothing," if without it we cannot live? Do you see that the words, "the flesh
profits nothing," are spoken not of His own flesh, but of carnal hearing?