to the progress of the Gospel"? So God in His dispensation ordered, he means,
that my bonds were not hid, my bonds which were "in" Christ, which were "for"
Christ.
"In the whole prætorium." For up to that time they so called the palace. And
in the whole city, says he.
Ver. 14. "And that most of the brethren in the Lord, being confident through
my bonds, are more abundantly bold to speak the word without fear."
This shows that they were of good courage even before, and spoke with
boldness, but much more now. If others then, says he, are of good courage
through my bonds, much more am I; if I am the cause of confidence to others,
much more to myself. "And most of the brethren in the Lord." As it was a great
thing to say, My bonds gave confidence to them, he therefore adds beforehand,
"in the Lord." Do you see how, even when he sees himself constrained to speak
great things, he departs not from moderation? "Are more abundantly bold," he
says, "to speak the word without fear"; the words "more abundantly" show that
they had already begun.
Ver. 15. "Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some also
of good will."
And what this means is worth enquiry. Since Paul was under restraint, many
of the unbelievers, willing to stir up more vehemently the persecution from the
Emperor, themselves also preached Christ, in order that the Emperor's wrath
might be increased at the spread of the Gospel, and all his anger might fall on the
head of Paul. From my bonds then two lines of action have sprung. One party
took great courage thereat; the other, from hope to work my destruction, set
themselves to preach Christ; "some of them through envy," that is, envying my
reputation and constancy, and from desire of my destruction, and the spirit of
strife, work with me; or that they themselves may be esteemed, and from the
expectation that they will draw to themselves somewhat of my glory. "And some
also of good will," that is, without hypocrisy, with all earnestness.
Ver. 16. "The one proclaim Christ of faction not sincerely."

That is, not with pure motives, nor from regard to the matter itself; but
why? "thinking to add affliction to my bonds." As they think that I shall thus fall
into greater peril, they add affliction to affliction. O cruelty! O devilish
instigation! They saw him in bonds, and cast into prison, and still they envied
him. They would increase his calamities, and render him subject to greater
anger: well said he, "thinking," for it did not so turn out. They thought indeed to
grieve me by this; but I rejoiced that the Gospel was furthered.
Ver. 17. "But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the
Gospel."
What means, "that I am set for the defense of the Gospel"? It is, They are
preparing for the account which I must give to God, and assisting me.
What is meant by "for the defense"? I have been appointed to preach, I must
give account, and answer for the work to which I have been appointed; they
assist me, that my defense may be easy; for if there be found many who have
been instructed and have believed, my defense will be easy. So it is possible to
do a good work, from a motive which is not good. And not only is there no
reward in store for such an action, but punishment. For as they preached Christ
from a desire to involve the preacher of Christ in greater perils, not only shall
they receive no reward, but shall be subject to vengeance and punishment. "And
some of love." That is, they know that I must give account for the Gospel.
Ver. 18. "What then? Only that every way, whether in pretense, or in truth,
Christ is proclaimed."
But see the wisdom of the Man. He did not vehemently accuse them, but
mentioned the result; what difference does it make to me, says he, whether it be
done in this or that way? Only that every way, "whether in pretense or in truth,
Christ is proclaimed." He did not say, "Let him be proclaimed," as some
suppose, stating that he opens the way for the heresies, but, "He is proclaimed."
For in the first place he did not lay down the law and say, as if laying down the
law, "Let Him be proclaimed," but he reported what was taking place; secondly,
if he even spoke as laying down the law, not even thus would he be opening the