intellect not only receives, but keeps what it receives: hence it is called the "place of
ideas." Therefore, on this showing, no impressions from our phantasms are
received in the potential intellect.
G. 6 and 7. If the potential intellect receives no intellectual impressions from the
phantasms that are in us, because it has already received them from the phantasms of
those who were before us, then for the like reason we must say that it receives
impressions from the phantasms of no generation of men, whom another generation
has preceded. But every generation has been preceded by some previous generation, if
the world and human society is eternal, as Averroists suppose. Therefore the potential
intellect never receives any impressions from phantasms; and from this it seems to
follow that the potential intellect has no need of phantasms to understand. But we (nos)
understand by the potential intellect. Therefore neither shall we need sense and
phantasm for our understanding: which is manifestly false and contrary to the opinion of
Aristotle.
For the potential intellect, like every other substance, operates according to the mode of
its nature. Now according to its nature it is the form of the body. Hence it understands
immaterial things, but views them in some material medium; as is shown by the fact that
in teaching universal truths particular examples are alleged, in which what is said may
be seen. Therefore the need which the potential intellect has of the phantasm before
receiving the intellectual impression is different from that which it has after the
impression has been received. Before reception, it needs the phantasm to gather from it
the intellectual impression, so that the phantasm then stands to the potential intellect as
an object which moves it. But after receiving the impression, of which the phantasm is
the vehicle, it needs the phantasm as an instrument or basis of the impression received.
Thus by command of the intellect there is formed in the phantasy a phantasm
answering to such and such an intellectual impression; and in this phantasm the
intellectual impression shines forth as an exemplar in the thing exemplified, or as in an
image.
G. 8. If the potential intellect is one for all men and eternal, by this time there must have
been received in it the intellectual impressions of all things that have been known by
any men whatsoever. Then, as every one of us understands by the potential intellect, -nay, as the act of understanding in each is the act of that potential intellect
understanding, -- every one of us must understand all that has been understood by any
other men whatsoever.
H. To this the Commentator replies that we do not understand by the potential intellect
except in so far as it is conjoined with us through the impressions in our phantasy, and
that these phantasms are not the same nor similar amongst all men. And this answer
seems to be in accordance with the doctrine that has gone before: for, apart from any
affirmation of the unity of the potential intellect, it is true that we do not understand those
things, the impressions whereof are in the potential intellect, unless the appropriate
phantasms are at hand. But that this answer does not altogether escape the difficulty,
may be thus shown. When the potential intellect has been actualised by the reception