SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.2.

while we progress; until having grown out of infancy we leave our
mother's milk for a father's control, that is to say, we pass from
simple doctrine, by which we are taught the Word made flesh, to the
Word that was in the beginning with God." Afterwards it goes on to
say: "For those who are just baptized on Holy Saturday are borne in
the hands of the Church as it were and fed with milk until Pentecost,
during which time nothing arduous is prescribed, no fasts, no rising
at midnight. Afterwards they are confirmed by the Paraclete Spirit,
and being weaned so to speak, begin to fast and keep other difficult
observances. Many, like the heretics and schismatics, have
perverted this order by being weaned before the time. Hence they
have come to naught." Now this order is apparently perverted by
those who enter religion, or induce others to enter religion, before
they are practiced in the easier observance of the commandments.
Therefore they would seem to be heretics or schismatics.
Objection 5: Further, one should proceed from that which precedes
to that which follows after. Now the commandments precede the
counsels, because they are more universal, for "the implication of
the one by the other is not convertible" [Categor. ix], since whoever
keeps the counsels keeps the commandments, but the converse
does not hold. Seeing then that the right order requires one to pass
from that which comes first to that which comes after, it follows that
one ought not to pass to the observance of the counsels in religion,
without being first of all practiced in the observance of the
commandments.
On the contrary, Matthew the publican who was not practiced in the
observance of the commandments was called by our Lord to the
observance of the counsels. For it is stated (Lk. 5:28) that "leaving all
things he . . . followed Him." Therefore it is not necessary for a
person to be practiced in the observance of the commandments
before passing to the perfection of the counsels.
I answer that, As shown above (Question 188, Article 1), the religious
state is a spiritual schooling for the attainment of the perfection of
charity. This is accomplished through the removal of the obstacles
to perfect charity by religious observances; and these obstacles are
those things which attach man's affections to earthly things. Now the
attachment of man's affections to earthly things is not only an
obstacle to the perfection of charity, but sometimes leads to the loss
of charity, when through turning inordinately to temporal goods man
turns away from the immutable good by sinning mortally. Hence it is

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.2.

evident that the observances of the religious state, while removing
the obstacles to perfect charity, remove also the occasions of sin:
for instance, it is clear that fasting, watching, obedience, and the like
withdraw man from sins of gluttony and lust and all other manner of
sins.
Consequently it is right that not only those who are practiced in the
observance of the commandments should enter religion in order to
attain to yet greater perfection, but also those who are not practiced,
in order the more easily to avoid sin and attain to perfection.
Reply to Objection 1: Jerome (Super Matth. xix, 20) says: "The young
man lies when he says: 'All these have I kept from my youth.' For if
he had fulfilled this commandment, 'Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself,' why did he go away sad when he heard: Go, sell all thou
hast and give to the poor?" But this means that he lied as to the
perfect observance of this commandment. Hence Origen says (Tract.
viii super Matth.) that "it is written in the Gospel according to the
Hebrews that when our Lord had said to him: 'Go, sell all thou hast,'
the rich man began to scratch his head; and that our Lord said to
him: How sayest thou: I have fulfilled the law and the prophets,
seeing that it is written in the law: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself? Behold many of thy brethren, children of Abraham, are
clothed in filth, and die of hunger, whilst thy house is full of all
manner of good things, and nothing whatever hath passed thence to
them. And thus our Lord reproves him saying: If thou wilt be perfect,
go, etc. For it is impossible to fulfil the commandment which says,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, and to be rich, especially to
have such great wealth." This also refers to the perfect fulfilment of
this precept. on the other hand, it is true that he kept the
commandments imperfectly and in a general way. For perfection
consists chiefly in the observance of the precepts of charity, as
stated above (Question 184, Article 3). Wherefore in order to show
that the perfection of the counsels is useful both to the innocent and
to sinners, our Lord called not only the innocent youth but also the
sinner Matthew. Yet Matthew obeyed His call, and the youth obeyed
not, because sinners are converted to the religious life more easily
than those who presume on their innocency. It is to the former that
our Lord says (Mt. 21:31): "The publicans and the harlots shall go
into the kingdom of God before you."
Reply to Objection 2: The highest and the lowest place can be taken
in three ways. First, in reference to the same state and the same