from honest earnings likewise. For these are of the sort that is more precious
even than gold, these that are without injuriousness. For the church is not a gold
foundry nor a workshop for silver, but an assembly of angels. Wherefore it is
souls which we require, since in fact God accepts these for the souls' sake.
That table at that time was not of silver nor that cup of gold, out of which
Christ gave His disciples His own blood; but precious was everything there, and
awful, for that they were full of the Spirit. [Ephesians 5:18]
Would you do honor to Christ's body? Neglect Him not when naked; do not
while here you honor Him with silken garments, neglect Him perishing without
of cold and nakedness. For He that said, "This is my body," and by His word
confirmed the fact, This same said, "You saw me an hungered, and fed me not;"
and, "Inasmuch as you did it not to one of the least of these, you did it not to
me." [Matthew 25:42, 45] For This indeed needs not coverings, but a pure soul;
but that requires much attention.
Let us learn therefore to be strict in life, and to honor Christ as He Himself
desires. For to Him who is honored that honor is most pleasing, which it is His
own will to have, not that which we account best. Since Peter too thought to
honor Him by forbidding Him to wash his feet, but his doing so was not an
honor, but the contrary.
Even so do thou honor Him with this honor, which He ordained, spending
your wealth on poor people. Since God has no need at all of golden vessels, but
of golden souls.
And these things I say, not forbidding such offerings to be provided; but
requiring you, together with them, and before them, to give alms. For He accepts
indeed the former, but much more the latter. For in the one the offerer alone is
profited, but in the other the receiver also. Here the act seems to be a ground
even of ostentation; but there all is mercifulness, and love to man.
For what is the profit, when His table indeed is full of golden cups, but He
perishes with hunger? First fill Him, being an hungered, and then abundantly
deck out His table also. Do you make Him a cup of gold, while you give Him

not a cup of cold water? And what is the profit? Do you furnish His table with
cloths bespangled with gold, while to Himself you afford not even the necessary
covering? And what good comes of it? For tell me, should you see one at a loss
for necessary food, and omit appeasing his hunger, while you first overlaid his
table with silver; would he indeed thank you, and not rather be indignant? What,
again, if seeing one wrapped in rags, and stiff with cold, you should neglect
giving him a garment, and build golden columns, saying, "thou were doing it to
his honor," would he not say that thou were mocking, and account it an insult,
and that the most extreme?
Let this then be your thought with regard to Christ also, when He is going
about a wanderer, and a stranger, needing a roof to cover Him; and thou,
neglecting to receive Him, deckest out a pavement, and walls, and capitals of
columns, and hangest up silver chains by means of lamps, but Himself bound in
prison you will not even look upon.
5. And these things I say, not forbidding munificence in these matters, but
admonishing you to do those other works together with these, or rather even
before these. Because for not having done these no one was ever blamed, but for
those, hell is threatened, and unquenchable fire, and the punishment with evil
spirits. Do not therefore while adorning His house overlook your brother in
distress, for he is more properly a temple than the other.
And whereas these your stores will be subject to alienations both by
unbelieving kings, and tyrants, and robbers; whatever you may do for your
brother, being hungry, and a stranger, and naked, not even the devil will be able
to despoil, but it will be laid up in an inviolable treasure.
Why then does He Himself say, "The poor always you have with you, but
me you have not always?" Why, for this reason most of all should we give alms,
that we have Him not always an hungered, but in the present life only. But if you
are desirous to learn also the whole meaning of the saying, understand that this
was said not with a view to His disciples, although it seem so, but to the
woman's weakness. That is, her disposition being still rather imperfect, and they