descending line is contracted from the fact that one of the parties
whose consanguinity is in question, is descended from the other.
Wherefore according to the canonical as well as the legal reckoning,
the person who occupies the first place, whether in the ascending or
in the descending line, is distant from a certain one, say Peter, in the
first degree---for instance father and son; while the one who
occupies the second place in either direction is distant in the second
degree, for instance grandfather, grandson and so on. But the
consanguinity that exists between persons who are in collateral lines
is contracted not through one being descended from the other, but
through both being descended from one: wherefore the degrees of
consanguinity in this line must be reckoned in relation to the one
principle whence it arises. Here, however, the canonical and legal
reckonings differ: for the legal reckoning takes into account the
descent from the common stock on both sides, whereas the
canonical reckoning takes into account only one, that namely on
which the greater number of degrees are found. Hence according to
the legal reckoning brother and sister, or two brothers, are related in
the second degree, because each is separated from the common
stock by one degree; and in like manner the children of two brothers
are distant from one another in the fourth degree. But according to
the canonical reckoning, two brothers are related in the first degree,
since neither is distant more than one degree from the common
stock: but the children of one brother are distant in the second
degree from the other brother, because they are at that distance from
the common stock. Hence, according to the canonical reckoning, by
whatever degree a person is distant from some higher degree, by so
much and never by less is he distant from each person descending
from that degree, because "the cause of a thing being so is yet more
so." Wherefore although the other descendants from the common
stock be related to some person on account of his being descended
from the common stock, these descendants of the other branch
cannot be more nearly related to him than he is to the common
stock. Sometimes, however, a person is more distantly related to a
descendant from the common stock, than he himself is to the
common stock, because this other person may be more distantly
related to the common stock than he is: and consanguinity must be
reckoned according to the more distant degree.
Reply to Objection 1: This objection is based on a false premise: for
consanguinity is not the series but a mutual relationship existing
between certain persons, the series of whom forms a line of
consanguinity.

Reply to Objection 2: Descent taken in a general sense attaches to
every line of consanguinity, because carnal procreation whence the
tie of consanguinity arises is a kind of descent: but it is a particular
kind of descent, namely from the person whose consanguinity is in
question, that makes the descending line.
Reply to Objection 3: A line may be taken in two ways. Sometimes it
is taken properly for the dimension itself that is the first species of
continuous quantity: and thus a straight line contains actually but
two points which terminate it, but infinite points potentially, any one
of which being actually designated, the line is divided, and becomes
two lines. But sometimes a line designates things which are
arranged in a line, and thus we have line and figure in numbers, in so
far as unity added to unity involves number. Thus every unity added
makes a degree in a particular line: and it is the same with the line of
consanguinity: wherefore one line contains several degrees.
Reply to Objection 4: Even as there cannot be likeness without a
difference, so there is no propinquity without distance. Hence not
every distance is opposed to consanguinity, but such as excludes
the propinquity of blood-relationship.
Reply to Objection 5: Even as whiteness is said to be greater in two
ways, in one way through intensity of the quality itself, in another
way through the quantity of the surface, so consanguinity is said to
be greater or lesser in two ways. First, intensively by reason of the
very nature of consanguinity: secondly, extensively as it were, and
thus the degree of consanguinity is measured by the persons
between whom there is the propagation of a common blood, and in
this way the degrees of consanguinity are distinguished. Wherefore
it happens that of two persons related to one person in the same
degree of consanguinity, one is more akin to him than the other, if
we consider the quantity of consanguinity in the first way: thus a
man's father and brother are related to him in the first degree of
consanguinity, because in neither case does any person come in
between; and yet from the point of view of intensity a man's father is
more closely related to him than his brother, since his brother is
related to him only because he is of the same father. Hence the
nearer a person is to the common ancestor from whom the
consanguinity descends, the greater is his consanguinity although
he be not in a nearer degree. In this way a man's great-uncle is more
closely related to him than his great-nephew, although they are in