And if any one asks, "How of water? " I also will ask, How of earth? How
was the clay separated into different parts? How was the material uniform, (it
was earth only,) and the things made from it, various and of every kind? Whence
are the bones, and sinews, and arteries, and veins? Whence the membranes, and
vessels of the organs, the cartilages, the tissues, the liver, spleen, and heart?
Whence the skin, and blood, and mucus, and bile? Whence so great powers,
whence such varied colors? These belong not to earth or clay. How does the
earth, when it receives the seeds, cause them to shoot, while the flesh receiving
them wastes them? How does the earth nourish what is put into it, while the flesh
is nourished by these things, and does not nourish them? The earth, for instance,
receives water, and makes it wine; the flesh often receives wine, and changes it
into water. Whence then is it clear that these things are formed of earth, when the
nature of the earth is, according to what has been said, contrary to that of the
body? I cannot discover by reasoning, I accept it by faith only. If then things
which take place daily, and which we handle, require faith, much more do those
which are more mysterious and more spiritual than these. For as the earth, which
is soulless and motionless, was empowered by the will of God, and such
wonders were worked in it; much more when the Spirit is present with the water,
do all those things so strange and transcending reason, easily take place.
2. Do not then disbelieve these things, because you see them not; thou dost
not see your soul, and yet you believe that you have a soul, and that it is a
something different besides the body.
But Christ led him not in by this example, but by another; the instance of
the soul, though it is incorporeal, He did not adduce for that reason, because His
hearer's disposition was as yet too dull. He sets before him another, which has no
connection with the density of solid bodies, yet does not reach so high as to the
incorporeal natures; that is, the movement of wind. He begins at first with water,
which is lighter than earth, but denser than air. And as in the beginning earth was
the subject material, but the whole was of Him who molded it; so also now water
is the subject material, and the whole is of the grace of the Spirit: then, "man

became a living soul," [Genesis 2:7]; now he becomes "a quickening Spirit." But
great is the difference between the two. Soul affords not life to any other than
him in whom it is; Spirit not only lives, but affords life to others also. Thus, for
instance, the Apostles even raised the dead. Then, man was formed last, when
the creation had been accomplished; now, on the contrary, the new man is
formed before the new creation; he is born first, and then the world is fashioned
anew. [1 Corinthians 15:45] And as in the beginning He formed him entire, so
He creates him entire now. Then He said, "Let us make for him a help" [Genesis
2:18, Septuagint], but here He said nothing of the kind. What other help shall he
need, who has received the gift of the Spirit? What further need of assistance has
he, who belongs to the Body of Christ? Then He made man in the image of God,
now He has united him with God Himself; then He bade him rule over the fishes
and beasts, now He has exalted our first-fruits above the heavens; then He gave
him a garden for his abode, now He has opened heaven to us; then man was
formed on the sixth day, when the world was almost finished; but now on the
first, at the very beginning, at the time when light was made before. From all
which it is plain, that the things accomplished belonged to another and a better
life, and to a condition having no end.
The first creation then, that of Adam, was from earth; the next, that of the
woman, from his rib; the next, that of Abel, from seed; yet we cannot arrive at
the comprehension of any one of these, nor prove the circumstances by
argument, though they are of a most earthly nature; how then shall we be able to
give account of the unseen generation by Baptism, which is far more exalted
than these, or to require arguments for that strange and marvelous Birth? Since
even Angels stand by while that Generation takes place, but they could not tell
the manner of that marvelous working, they stand by only, not performing
anything, but beholding what takes place. The Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, works all. Let us then believe the declaration of God; that is more
trustworthy than actual seeing. The sight often is in error, it is impossible that
God's Word should fail; let us then believe it; that which called the things that