they get the advantage of us, and are the first to seize the prize, and soar higher,
like so many eagles: while we, like jackdaws, are ever living in the steam and
smoke; for truly is it the business of jackdaws, and of greedy dogs, to be setting
one's thoughts upon caterers and cooks. Hearken about the women of old; they
were great characters, great women and admirable; such were Sarah, Rebekah,
Rachel, Deborah, and Hannah; and such there were also in the days of Christ.
Yet did they in no case outstrip the men, but occupied the second rank. But now
it is the very contrary; women outstrip and eclipse us. How contemptible! What
a shame is this! We hold the place of the head, and are surpassed by the body.
We are ordained to rule over them; not merely that we may rule, but that we may
rule in goodness also; for he that rules, ought especially to rule in this respect, by
excelling in virtue; whereas if he is surpassed, he is no longer ruler. Perceive ye
how great is the power of Christ's coming? How He dissolved the curse? For
indeed there are more virgins than before among women, there is more modesty
in those virgins, and there are more widows. No woman would lightly utter so
much as an unseemly word. Wherefore then, tell me, do you use filthy speech?
For tell me not that they were virgins in despondency or despair.
The sex is fond of ornament, and it has this failing. Yet even in this you
husbands surpass them, who pride yourselves even upon them, as your own
proper ornament; for I do not think that the wife is so ostentatious of her own
jewels, as the husband is of those of his wife. He is not so proud of his own
golden girdle, as he is of his wife's wearing jewels of gold. So that even of this
you are the causes, who light the spark and kindle up the flame. But what is
more, it is not so great a sin in a woman as in a man. You are ordained to
regulate her; in every way you claim to have the preëminence. Show her then in
this also, that you take no interest in this costliness of hers, by your own apparel.
It is more suitable for a woman to adorn herself, than for a man. If then thou
escape not the temptation, how shall she escape it? They have moreover their
share of vainglory, but this is common to them with men. They are in a measure
passionate, and this again is common to them with men. But as to those things

wherein they excel, these are no longer common to them with men; their
sanctity, I mean, their fervency, their devotion, their love towards Christ.
Wherefore then, one may say, did Paul exclude them from the teacher's seat?
And here again is a proof how great a distance they were from the men, and that
the women of those days were great. For, tell me, while Paul was teaching, or
Peter, or those saints of old, had it been right that a woman should intrude into
the office? Whereas we have gone on till we have come so debased, that it is
worthy of question, why women are not teachers. So truly have we come to the
same weakness as they. These things I have said not from any desire to elate
them, but to shame ourselves, to chastise, and to admonish us, that so we may
resume the authority that belongs to us, not inasmuch as we are greater in size,
but because of our foresight, our protection of them, and our virtue. For thus
shall the body also be in the order which befits it, when it has the best head to
rule. And God grant that all, both wives and husbands, may live according to His
good pleasure, that we may all in that terrible day be counted worthy to enjoy the
lovingkindness of our Master, and to attain those good things which are
promised in Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to the Father, together with the
Holy Ghost, be glory, might, and honor, now and forever and ever. Amen.