FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.2.

to conform us to Christ, chiefly with regard to His Passion, for it was
then that these gifts shone with the greatest splendor. Yet neither
does this appear to be a satisfactory distinction. Because Our Lord
Himself wished us to be conformed to Him, chiefly in humility and
meekness, according to Mt. 11:29: "Learn of Me, because I am meek
and humble of heart," and in charity, according to Jn. 15:12: "Love
one another, as I have loved you." Moreover, these virtues were
especially resplendent in Christ's Passion.
Accordingly, in order to differentiate the gifts from the virtues, we
must be guided by the way in which Scripture expresses itself, for
we find there that the term employed is "spirit" rather than "gift." For
thus it is written (Is. 11:2,3): "The spirit . . . of wisdom and of
understanding . . . shall rest upon him," etc.: from which words we
are clearly given to understand that these seven are there set down
as being in us by Divine inspiration. Now inspiration denotes motion
from without. For it must be noted that in man there is a twofold
principle of movement, one within him, viz. the reason; the other
extrinsic to him, viz. God, as stated above (Question 9, Articles 4,6):
moreover the Philosopher says this in the chapter On Good Fortune
(Ethic. Eudem. vii, 8).
Now it is evident that whatever is moved must be proportionate to its
mover: and the perfection of the mobile as such, consists in a
disposition whereby it is disposed to be well moved by its mover.
Hence the more exalted the mover, the more perfect must be the
disposition whereby the mobile is made proportionate to its mover:
thus we see that a disciple needs a more perfect disposition in order
to receive a higher teaching from his master. Now it is manifest that
human virtues perfect man according as it is natural for him to be
moved by his reason in his interior and exterior actions.
Consequently man needs yet higher perfections, whereby to be
disposed to be moved by God. These perfections are called gifts, not
only because they are infused by God, but also because by them
man is disposed to become amenable to the Divine inspiration,
according to Is. 50:5: "The Lord . . . hath opened my ear, and I do not
resist; I have not gone back." Even the Philosopher says in the
chapter On Good Fortune (Ethic. Eudem., vii, 8) that for those who
are moved by Divine instinct, there is no need to take counsel
according to human reason, but only to follow their inner
promptings, since they are moved by a principle higher than human
reason. This then is what some say, viz. that the gifts perfect man for
acts which are higher than acts of virtue.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.68, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: Sometimes these gifts are called virtues, in the
broad sense of the word. Nevertheless, they have something over
and above the virtues understood in this broad way, in so far as they
are Divine virtues, perfecting man as moved by God. Hence the
Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 1) above virtue commonly so called, places a
kind of "heroic" or "divine virtue [arete heroike kai theia]," in respect
of which some men are called "divine."
Reply to Objection 2: The vices are opposed to the virtues, in so far
as they are opposed to the good as appointed by reason; but they
are opposed to the gifts, in as much as they are opposed to the
Divine instinct. For the same thing is opposed both to God and to
reason, whose light flows from God.
Reply to Objection 3: This definition applies to virtue taken in its
general sense. Consequently, if we wish to restrict it to virtue as
distinguished from the gifts, we must explain the words, "whereby
we lead a good life" as referring to the rectitude of life which is
measured by the rule of reason. Likewise the gifts, as distinct from
infused virtue, may be defined as something given by God in relation
to His motion; something, to wit, that makes man to follow well the
promptings of God.
Reply to Objection 4: Wisdom is called an intellectual virtue, so far
as it proceeds from the judgment of reason: but it is called a gift,
according as its work proceeds from the Divine prompting. The same
applies to the other virtues.