incapable of motion. For when you insult, this is not the voice of the soul, but of
anger; when you talk filthily, it is lewdness, and not she that spoke; when you
detract, it is envy; when you scheme, covetousness. These are not her works, but
those of the affections and the diseases belonging to her. As then corruption
comes not simply of the body, but of the death and the passion which is thus in
the body; so also, in truth, these things come of the passions which grow upon
the soul. For if you will hear a voice from a living soul, hear Paul saying,
"Having food and covering, we shall be therewith content:" [1 Timothy 6:8] and
"Godliness is great gain:" [1 Timothy 6:6] and, "The world is crucified unto me,
and I unto the world." [Galatians 6:14] Hear Peter saying, "Silver and gold have
I none, but such as I have, give I you." [Acts 3:6] Hear Job giving thanks and
saying, "The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away." [Job 1:21] These things
are the words of a living soul, of a soul discharging the functions proper to it.
Thus also Jacob said, "If the Lord will give me bread to eat and raiment to put
on." [Genesis 28:20] Thus also Joseph, "How shall I do this wickedness, and sin
before God?" [Genesis 39:9] But not so that barbarian woman; but as one
drunken and insane , so spoke she, saying, "Lie with me." [Genesis 39:7] These
things then knowing, let us earnestly covet the living soul, let us flee the dead
one, that we may also obtain the life to come; of which may all we be made
partakers, through the grace and love toward men of our Lord Jesus Christ,
though Whom and with Whom, to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be
glory, might, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 7 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 3:7-8
2 Corinthians 3:7, 8
But if the ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, came with
glory, so that the children of Israel could not look steadfastly upon the face of
Moses, for the glory of his face; which glory was passing away: how shall not
rather the ministration of the Spirit be with glory?
He said that the tables of Moses were of stone, as [also] they were written
with letters; and that these were of flesh, I mean the hearts of the Apostles, and
had been written on by the Spirit; and that the letter indeed kills, but the Spirit
gives life. There was yet wanting to this comparison the addition of a further and
not trifling particular, that of the glory of Moses; such as in the case of the New
Covenant none saw with the eyes of the body. And even for this cause it
appeared a great thing in that the glory was perceived by the senses; (for it was
seen by the bodily eyes, even though it might not be approached;) but that of the
New Covenant is perceived by the understanding. For to the weaker sort the
apprehension of such a superiority is not clear; but the other did more take them,
and turn them unto itself. Having then fallen upon this comparison and being set
upon showing the superiority [in question], which yet was exceedingly difficult
because of the dulness of the hearers; see what he does, and with what method
he proceeds in it, first by arguments placing the difference before them, and
constructing these out of what he had said before.
For if that ministration were of death, but this of life, doubtless, says he, the
latter glory is also greater than the former. For since he could not exhibit it to the
bodily eyes, by this logical inference he established its superiority, saying,
2 Corinthians 3:8. "But if the ministration of death came with glory, how