he had also set off Titus, namely, his love towards them. But whereas as yet they
were not known to them, 'Receive them,' he says, 'as brethren, as messengers of
the churches, as acting for the glory of Christ.' On which account he adds;

2 Corinthians 8:24
"Wherefore show ye unto them, to the person of the churches, the proof of
your love, and of our glorying on your behalf."
'Now show,' he says, 'how ye love us; and how we do not lightly nor vainly
boast in you: and this you will show, if you show forth love towards them.' Then
he also makes his words more solemn, by saying, "unto the person of the
churches." He means, to the glory, the honor, of the churches. 'For if you honor
them, you have honored the churches that sent them. For the honor passes not to
them alone, but also to those that sent them forth, who ordained them, and more
than these, unto the glory of God.' For when we honor those that minister to
Him, the kind reception passes unto Him, unto the common body of the
churches. Now this too is no light thing, for great is the potency of that assembly.
3. Certain it is at least that the prayer of the churches loosed Peter from his
chains, opened the mouth of Paul; their voice in no slight degree equips those
that arrive unto spiritual rule. Therefore indeed it is that both he who is going to
ordain calls at that time for their prayers also, and that they add their votes and
assent by acclamations which the initiated know: for it is not lawful before the
uninitiated to unbare all things. But there are occasions in which there is no
difference at all between the priest and those under him; for instance, when we
are to partake of the awful mysteries; for we are all alike counted worthy of the
same things: not as under the Old Testament [when] the priest ate some things
and those under him others, and it was not lawful for the people to partake of
those things whereof the priest partook. But not so now, but before all one body
is set and one cup. And in the prayers also, one may observe the people
contributing much. For in behalf of the possessed, in behalf of those under
penance, the prayers are made in common both by the priest and by them; and all
say one prayer, the prayer replete with pity. Again when we exclude from the

holy precincts those who are unable to partake of the holy table, it behooves that
another prayer be offered, and we all alike fall upon the ground, and all alike rise
up. Again, in the most awful mysteries themselves, the priest prays for the
people and the people also pray for the priest; for the words, "with your spirit,"
are nothing else than this. The offering of thanksgiving again is common: for
neither does he give thanks alone, but also all the people. For having first taken
their voices, next when they assent that it is "meet and right so to do," then he
begins the thanksgiving. And why do you marvel that the people any where utter
anything with the priest, when indeed even with the very Cherubim, and the
powers above, they send up in common those sacred hymns? Now I have said all
this in order that each one of the laity also may be wary , that we may understand
that we are all one body, having such difference among ourselves as members
with members; and may not throw the whole upon the priests but ourselves also
so care for the whole Church as for a body common to us. For this course will
provide for our greater safety, and for your greater growth unto virtue. Here, at
least, in the case of the Apostles, how frequently they admitted the laity to share
in their decisions. For when they ordained the seven, [Acts 6:2-3] they first
communicated with the people; and when Peter ordained Matthias, with all that
were then present, both men and women. [Acts 1:15, etc.] For here is no pride of
rulers nor slavishness in the ruled; but a spiritual rule, in this particular usurping
most, in taking on itself the greater share of the labor and of the care which is on
your behalf, not in seeking larger honors. For so ought the Church to dwell as
one house; as one body so to be all disposed; just as therefore there is both one
Baptism, and one table, and one fountain, and one creation, and one Father. Why
then are we divided, when so great things unite us; why are we torn asunder? For
we are compelled again to bewail the same things, which I have lamented often.
The state in which we are calls for lamentation; so widely are we severed from
each other, when we ought to image the conjunction of one body. For in this way
will he that is greater, be able to gain even from him that is less. For if Moses
learned from his father-in-law somewhat expedient which himself had not