fortune, is the very point he insists upon. For this inheritance by lot depends not
on virtue, but, as one might say, on fortuitous circumstances. It is as though he
had said, lots were cast, and He has chosen us; but the whole is of deliberate
choice. Men predestinated, that is to say, having chosen them to Himself, He has
separated. He saw us, as it were, chosen by lot before we were born. For
marvellous is the foreknowledge of God, and acquainted with all things before
their beginning.
But mark now how on all occasions he takes pains to point out, that it is not
the result of any change of purpose, but that these matters had been thus
modeled from the very first, so that we are in no wise inferior to the Jews in this
respect; and how, in consequence, he does every thing with this view. How then
is it that Christ Himself says, "I was not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house
of Israel?" [Matthew 15:24] And said again to his disciples, "Go not into any
way of the Gentiles, and enter not into any city of the Samaritans." [Matthew
10:5] And Paul again himself says, "It was necessary that the word of God
should first be spoken to you. Seeing ye thrust it from you and judge yourselves
unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles." [Acts 13:46] These
expressions, I say, are used with this design, that no one may suppose that this
work came to pass incidentally only. "According to the purpose," he says, "of
Him who works all things after the counsel of His will." That is to say, He had no
after workings; having modeled all things from the very first, thus he leads
forward all things "according to the counsel of His will." So that it was not
merely because the Jews did not listen that He called the Gentiles, nor was it of
mere necessity, nor was it on any inducement arising from them.
Ver. 12, 13. "To the end that we should be unto the praise of His glory, we
who had before hoped in Christ. In whom you also having heard the word of the
truth, the Gospel of your salvation."
That is to say, through whom. Observe how he on all occasions speaks of
Christ, as the Author of all things, and in no case gives Him the title of a
subordinate agent, or a minister. And so again, elsewhere, in his Epistle to the

Hebrews, he says, "that God, having of old time spoken unto the Fathers in the
prophets, has at the end of these days spoken unto us in His Son," [Hebrews 1:1]
that is "through" His Son.
"The word of truth," he says, no longer that of the type, nor of the image.
"The Gospel of your salvation." And well does he call it the Gospel of
salvation, intimating in the one word a contrast to the law, in the other, a contrast
with punishment to come. For what is the message, but the Gospel of salvation,
which forbears to destroy those that are worthy of destruction.
Ver. 14. "In whom having also believed, you were sealed with the Holy
Spirit of promise, which is an earnest of our inheritance."
Here again, the word "sealed," is an indication of special forecast. He does
not speak of our being predestinated only, nor of our being allotted, but further,
of our being sealed. For just as though one were to make those who should fall
to his lot manifest, so also did God separate them for believing, and sealed them
for the allotment of the things to come.
You see how, in process of time, He makes them objects of wonder. So long
as they were in His foreknowledge, they were manifest to no one, but when they
were sealed, they became manifest, though not in the same way as we are; for
they will be manifest except a few. The Israelites also were sealed, but that was
by circumcision, like the brutes and reasonless creatures. We too are sealed, but
it is as sons, "with the Spirit."
But what is meant by, "with the Spirit of promise?" Doubtless it means that
we have received that Spirit according to promise. For there are two promises,
the one by the prophets, the other from the Son.
By the Prophets.— Hearken to the words of Joel; "I will pour out My spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your old men
shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions," [Joel 2:28] And hearken
again to the words of Christ; "But you shall receive power, when the Holy Ghost
has come upon you, and you shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." [Acts 1:8] And