such matters as these? Why, were there no other sin at all, how great punishment
ought we not to suffer for these very speeches themselves, because we are so
insensate, so wretched, and so indolent, as, even with so vast a privilege before
us, to talk thus? Oh! How much shall you have to lament, when you shall then
consider them that have done good! When you shall behold slaves and base-born
who have labored but a little here, there made partakers of the royal throne, will
not these things be worse to you than torment? For if even now, when you see
any in high reputation, though you are suffering no evil, you regard this as worse
than any punishment, and by this alone art consumed, and bemoanest yourself,
and weepest, and judgest it to be as bad as ten thousand deaths; what shall you
suffer then? Why, even were there no hell at all, the very thought of the
kingdom, were it not enough to destroy and consume you? And that such will be
the case, we have enough in our own experience of things to teach us. Let us not
then vainly flatter our own souls with speeches like these; no, let us take heed,
let us have a regard for our own salvation, let us make virtue our care, let us
rouse ourselves to the practice of good works, that we may be counted worthy to
attain to this exceeding glory, in Jesus Christ our Lord with whom to the Father,
together with the Holy Spirit be glory, might, honor, now and ever, and for ages
of ages. Amen.

## Homily 5 on Ephesians

Chapter II. Verses 11, 12
"Wherefore remember, that aforetime ye the Gentiles in the flesh, who are
called Uncircumcision by that which is called Circumcision in the flesh made by
hands; that you were at that time separate from Christ, alienated from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of the promise,
having no hope, and without God in the world."
There are many things to show the loving-kindness of God. First, the fact,
that by Himself He has saved us, and by Himself through such a method as this.
Secondly, that He has saved us, as being what we were. Thirdly, that He has
exalted us to the place where we are. For all these things both contain in
themselves the greatest demonstration of His loving-kindness, and they are the
very subjects which Paul is now agitating in his Epistle. He had been saying, that
when we were dead through our trespasses, and children of wrath, He saved us;
He is now telling us further, to whom He has made us equal. "Wherefore," says
he, "remember;" because it is usual with us, one and all, when we are raised
from a state of great meanness to corresponding, or perhaps a greater, dignity,
not so much as even to retain any recollection of our former condition, being
nourished in this our new glory. On this account it is that he says, "Wherefore
remember."— "Wherefore." Why, "wherefore?" Because we have been created
unto good works, and this were sufficient to induce us to cultivate virtue;
"remember,"— for that remembrance is sufficient to make us grateful to our
Benefactor,— "that you were aforetime Gentiles." Observe how he lowers the
superior advantages of the Jews and admires the disadvantages of the Gentiles;
disadvantage indeed it was not, but he is arguing with each respectively from
their character and manner of life.
"Who are called Uncircumcision."