2 Corinthians 9:9
As it is written,
He has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor;
His righteousness abides for ever.
This is the import of "abound;" for the words, "he has dispersed abroad,"
signify nothing else but the giving plentifully. For if the things themselves abide
not, yet their results abide. For this is the thing to be admired, that when they are
kept they are lost; but when dispersed abroad they abide, yea, abide for ever.
Now by "righteousness," here, he means love towards men. For this makes
righteous, consuming sins like a fire when it is plentifully poured out.
3. Let us not therefore nicely calculate, but sow with a profuse hand. Do
you see not how much others give to players and harlots? Give at any rate the
half to Christ, of what they give to dancers. As much as they give of ostentation
to those upon the stage, so much at any rate give thou unto the hungry. For they
indeed even clothe the persons of wantons with untold gold; but thou not even
with a threadbare garment the flesh of Christ, and that though beholding it
naked. What forgiveness does this deserve, yea, how great a punishment does it
not deserve, when he indeed bestows so much upon her that ruins and shames
him, but thou not the least thing on Him that saves you and makes you brighter?
But as long as you spend it upon your belly and on drunkenness and dissipation ,
thou never thinkest of poverty: but when need is to relieve poverty, you have
become poorer than any body. And when feeding parasites and flatterers, you are
as joyous as though you had fountains to spend from ; but if you chance to see a
poor man, then the fear of poverty besets you. Therefore surely we shall in that
day be condemned, both by ourselves and by others, both by those that have
done well and those that have done amiss. For He will say to you, 'Wherefore
were you not thus magnanimous in things where it became you? But here is a

man who, when giving to an harlot, thought not of any of these things; while
thou, bestowing upon your Master Who has bid you "not be anxious" [Matthew
6:25], art full of fear and trembling.' And what forgiveness then shall you
deserve? For if a man who has received will not overlook, but will requite the
favor, much more will Christ. For He that gives even without receiving, how will
He not give after receiving? 'What then,' says one, 'when some who have spent
much come to need other men's help?' You speak of those that have spent their
all; when you yourself bestowest not a farthing. Promise to strip yourself of
every thing and then ask questions about such men; but as long as you are a
niggard and bestowest little of your substance, why throw me out excuses and
pretenses? For neither am I leading you to the lofty peak of entire poverty but for
the present I require you to cut off superfluities and to desire a sufficiency alone.
Now the boundary of sufficiency is the using those things which it is impossible
to live without. No one debars you from these; nor forbids you your daily food. I
say food, not feasting; raiment, not ornament. Yea rather, if one should enquire
accurately, this is in the best sense feasting. For, consider. Which should we say
more truly feasted, he whose diet was herbs, and who was in sound health and
suffered no uneasiness: or he who had the table of a Sybarite, and was full of ten
thousand disorders? Very plainly the former. Therefore let us seek nothing more
than this, if we would at once live luxuriously and healthfully: and let us set
these boundaries to sufficiency. And let him that can be satisfied with pulse and
can keep in good health, seek for nothing more; but let him who is weaker and
requires to be dieted with garden herbs, not be hindered of this. But if any be
even weaker than this and require the support of flesh in moderation, we will not
debar him from this either. For we do not advise these things, to kill and injure
men but to cut off what is superfluous; and that is superfluous which is more
than we need. For when we are able even without a thing to live healthfully and
respectably, certainly the addition of that thing is a superfluity.
4. Thus let us think also in regard of clothing and of the table and of a
dwelling house and of all our other wants; and in every thing inquire what is