John 16:13-15
"He shall not speak of Himself; but whatsoever He shall hear, that shall He
speak; and He will show you things to come. He shall glorify Me; for He shall
receive of Mine, and shall show it unto you. All things that the Father has are
Mine."
For since He had told them, that "'He shall teach you, and bring to your
remembrance' [John 14:26], and shall comfort you in your afflictions," (which
He Himself did not,) and that "it is expedient for you that I should depart" [John
16:7], and that He should come, and, "'now you are not able to bear' [John
16:12], but then ye shall be able," and, that "He shall lead you into all truth"
[John 16:13]; lest hearing these things they should suppose the Spirit to be the
greater, and so fall into an extreme opinion of impiety, therefore He says, "He
shall receive of Mine," that is, "whatsoever things I have told you, He shall also
tell you." When He says, "He shall speak nothing of Himself," He means,
"nothing contrary, nothing of His own opposed to My words." As then in saying
respecting Himself, "I speak not of Myself" [John 14:10], He means that He
speaks nothing beside what the Father says, nothing of His own against Him, or
differing from Him, so also with respect to the Spirit. But the, "of Mine," means,
"of what I know," "of My own knowledge"; "for the knowledge of Me and of the
Spirit is one."
"And He will tell you things to come." He excited their minds, for the race
of man is for nothing so greedy, as for learning the future. This, for instance,
they continually asked Him, "Where are you going?" "Which is the way?" To
free them therefore from this anxiety, He says, "He shall foretell you all things,
so that you shall not meet with them without warning."
"He shall glorify Me." How? "In My name He shall grant His inward
workings." For since at the coming of the Spirit they were about to do greater
miracles, therefore, again introducing the Equality of Honor, He says, "He shall

glorify Me."
What means He by, "all truth"? For this also He testifies of Him, that "He
shall guide us into all truth." [John 16:13] Because He was clothed with the
flesh, and because He would not seem to speak concerning Himself, and because
they did not yet know clearly concerning the Resurrection, and were too
imperfect, and also because of the Jews, that they might not think they were
punishing Him as a transgressor; therefore He spoke no great thing continually,
nor plainly drew them away from the Law. But when the disciples were cut off
from them, and were for the future without; and when many were about to
believe, and to be released from their sins; and when there were others who
spoke of Him, He with good reason spoke not great things concerning Himself.
"So that it proceeded not from ignorance of Mine," He says, "that I told you not
what I should have told you, but from the infirmity of the hearers." On this
account having said, "He shall lead you into all truth," He added, "He shall not
speak of Himself." For to show that the Spirit needs not teaching, hear Paul
saying, "So also the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God." [1
Corinthians 2:11] "As then the spirit of man, not learning from another, knows;
so also the Holy Spirit 'shall receive of Mine,'" that is, "shall speak in unison
with what is Mine."
"All things that the Father has are Mine." "Since then those things are
Mine, and He shall speak from the things of the Father, He shall speak from
Mine."
3. "But why did not the Spirit come before He departed?" Because the curse
not having yet been taken away, sin not yet loosed, but all being yet subject to
vengeance, He could not come. "It is necessary then," says He, "that the enmity
be put away, that we be reconciled to God, and then receive that Gift." But why
says He, "I will send Him"? [John 16:7] It means, "I will prepare you beforehand
to receive Him." For, how can that which Is everywhere, be "sent"? Besides, He
also shows the distinction of the Persons. On these two accounts He thus speaks;
and also, since they were hardly to be drawn away from Himself, exhorting them