SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.4.

and of conclusions drawn therefrom.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking of the gift of knowledge,
in so far as it extends to works; for action is ascribed to knowledge,
yet not action solely, nor primarily: and in this way it directs piety.
Hence the Reply to the Second Objection is clear.
Reply to Objection 3: As we have already stated (Question 8, Article
5) about the gift of understanding, not everyone who understands,
has the gift of understanding, but only he that understands through a
habit of grace: and so we must take note, with regard to the gift of
knowledge, that they alone have the gift of knowledge, who judge
aright about matters of faith and action, through the grace bestowed
on them, so as never to wander from the straight path of justice. This
is the knowledge of holy things, according to Wis. 10:10: "She
conducted the just . . . through the right ways . . . and gave him the
knowledge of holy things."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the third beatitude, "Blessed are they

that mourn," etc. corresponds to the gift of knowledge?
Objection 1: It would seem that the third beatitude, "Blessed are they
that mourn," does not correspond to the gift of knowledge. For, even
as evil is the cause of sorrow and grief, so is good the cause of joy.
Now knowledge brings good to light rather than evil, since the latter
is known through evil: for "the straight line rules both itself and the
crooked line" (De Anima i, 5). Therefore the aforesaid beatitude does
not suitably correspond to the gift of knowledge.
Objection 2: Further, consideration of truth is an act of knowledge.
Now there is no sorrow in the consideration of truth; rather is there
joy, since it is written (Wis. 8:16): "Her conversation hath no
bitterness, nor her company any tediousness, but joy and gladness."
Therefore the aforesaid beatitude does not suitably correspond with
the gift of knowledge.
Objection 3: Further, the gift of knowledge consists in speculation,
before operation. Now, in so far as it consists in speculation, sorrow
does not correspond to it, since "the speculative intellect is not
concerned about things to be sought or avoided" (De Anima iii, 9).
Therefore the aforesaid beatitude is not suitably reckoned to
correspond with the gift of knowledge.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte iv):
"Knowledge befits the mourner, who has discovered that he has
been mastered by the evil which he coveted as though it were good."
I answer that, Right judgment about creatures belongs properly to
knowledge. Now it is through creatures that man's aversion from
God is occasioned, according to Wis. 14:11: "Creatures . . . are
turned to an abomination . . . and a snare to the feet of the unwise,"
of those, namely, who do not judge aright about creatures, since
they deem the perfect good to consist in them. Hence they sin by
placing their last end in them, and lose the true good. It is by forming
a right judgment of creatures that man becomes aware of the loss (of
which they may be the occasion), which judgment he exercises
through the gift of knowledge.
Hence the beatitude of sorrow is said to correspond to the gift of