SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

distinct virtue from latria, which pays due service to the lordship of
God. It is, moreover, a species of observance, because by
observance we honor all those who excel in dignity, while dulia
properly speaking is the reverence of servants for their master, dulia
being the Greek for servitude.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as religion is called piety by way of
excellence, inasmuch as God is our Father by way of excellence, so
again latria is called dulia by way of excellence, inasmuch as God is
our Lord by way of excellence. Now the creature does not partake of
the power to create by reason of which latria is due to God: and so
this gloss drew a distinction, by ascribing latria to God in respect of
creation, which is not communicated to a creature, but dulia in
respect of lordship, which is communicated to a creature.
Reply to Objection 2: The reason why we love our neighbor is God,
since that which we love in our neighbor through charity is God
alone. Wherefore the charity with which we love God is the same as
that with which we love our neighbor. Yet there are other friendships
distinct from charity, in respect of the other reasons for which a man
is loved. In like manner, since there is one reason for serving God
and another for serving man, and for honoring the one or the other,
latria and dulia are not the same virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: Movement towards an image as such is
referred to the thing represented by the image: yet not every
movement towards an image is referred to the image as such, and
consequently sometimes the movement to the image differs
specifically from the movement to the thing. Accordingly we must
reply that the honor or subjection of dulia regards some dignity of a
man absolutely. For though, in respect of that dignity, man is made
to the image or likeness of God, yet in showing reverence to a
person, one does not always refer this to God actually.
Or we may reply that the movement towards an image is, after a
fashion, towards the thing, yet the movement towards the thing need
not be towards its image. Wherefore reverence paid to a person as
the image of God redounds somewhat to God: and yet this differs
from the reverence that is paid to God Himself, for this in no way
refers to His image.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether dulia has various species?

Objection 1: It seems that dulia has various species. For by dulia we
show honor to our neighbor. Now different neighbors are honored
under different aspects, for instance king, father and master, as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. ix, 2). Since this difference of aspect in the
object differentiates the species of virtue, it seems that dulia is
divided into specifically different virtues.
Objection 2: Further, the mean differs specifically from the extremes,
as pale differs from white and black. Now hyperdulia is apparently a
mean between latria and dulia: for it is shown towards creatures
having a special affinity to God, for instance to the Blessed Virgin as
being the mother of God. Therefore it seems that there are different
species of dulia, one being simply dulia, the other hyperdulia.
Objection 3: Further, just as in the rational creature we find the
image of God, for which reason it is honored, so too in the irrational
creature we find the trace of God. Now the aspect of likeness
denoted by an image differs from the aspect conveyed by a trace.
Therefore we must distinguish a corresponding difference of dulia:
and all the more since honor is shown to certain irrational creatures,
as, for instance, to the wood of the Holy Cross.
On the contrary, Dulia is condivided with latria. But latria is not
divided into different species. Neither therefore is dulia.
I answer that, Dulia may be taken in two ways. In one way it may be
taken in a wide sense as denoting reverence paid to anyone on
account of any kind of excellence, and thus it comprises piety and
observance, and any similar virtue whereby reverence is shown
towards a man. Taken in this sense it will have parts differing
specifically from one another. In another way it may be taken in a
strict sense as denoting the reverence of a servant for his lord, for
dulia signifies servitude, as stated above (Article 3). Taken in this
sense it is not divided into different species, but is one of the
species of observance, mentioned by Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii), for
the reason that a servant reveres his lord under one aspect, a soldier
his commanding officer under another, the disciple his master under
another, and so on in similar cases.