conversation, but after death is judgment and punishment. "For in hell," it is
said, "who will confess unto you?"
How then were "the gates of brass burst, and the bars of iron broken in
sunder"? By His body; for then first was a body shown, immortal, and
destroying the tyranny of death. And besides, this indicates the destruction of the
might of death, not the loosing of the sins of those who had died before His
coming. And if this were not so, but He have delivered all that were before Him
from hell, how says He, "It shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and
Gomorrha?" [Matthew 10:15] For this saying supposes that those are also to be
punished; more mildly indeed, yet still that they are to be punished. And yet they
did also suffer here the most extreme punishment, nevertheless not even this will
deliver them. And if it is so with them, much more with such as have suffered
nothing.
"What then?" one may say, "were they wronged, who lived before His
coming?" By no means, for men might then be saved, even though they had not
confessed Christ. For this was not required of them, but not to worship idols, and
to know the true God. "For the Lord your God," it is said, "is one Lord."
[Deuteronomy 6:4] Therefore the Maccabees were admired, because for the
observance of the law they suffered what they did suffer; and the three children,
and many others too among the Jews, having shown forth a very virtuous life,
and having maintained the standard of this their knowledge, had nothing more
required of them. For then it was sufficient for salvation, as I have said already,
to know God only; but now it is so no more, but there is need also of the
knowledge of Christ. Therefore He said, "If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin."
So likewise with regard to the rule of practice. Then murder was the
destruction of him that committed it, but now even to be angry. And then to
commit adultery, and to lie with another man's wife, brought punishment, but
now even to look with unchaste eyes. For as the knowledge, so also the rule of
life is now made stricter. So that there was no need of a forerunner there.

And besides, if unbelievers are after death to be saved on their believing, no
man shall ever perish. For all will then repent and adore. And in proof that this is
true, hear Paul saying, "Every tongue shall confess, and every knee shall bow, of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth."
[Philippians 2:10-11] And, "The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death."
[1 Corinthians 15:26] But there is no advantage in that submission, for it comes
not of a rightly disposed choice, but of the necessity of things, as one may say,
thenceforth taking place.
Let us not then any more bring in such old wives' doctrines, and Jewish
fables. Hear at least what Paul says touching these things. "For as many as have
sinned without law, shall also perish without law;" [Romans 2:12] where his
discourse is of those who lived in the time before the law; and, "As many as have
sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law," [Romans 2:12] speaking of all
after Moses. And, "That the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men," [Romans 1:18] and, "indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that works evil, of the
Jew first, and also of the Gentile." [Romans 2:8-9] And yet countless were the
evils which the Gentiles have suffered in this world, and this is declared alike by
the histories of the heathens, and by the Scriptures that are in our hands. For who
could recount the tragic calamities of the Babylonians, or those of the
Egyptians? But in proof that they who, not having known Christ before His
coming in the flesh, yet refrained from idolatry and worshipped God only, and
showed forth an excellent life, shall enjoy all the blessings; hear what is said:
"But glory, and honor, and peace to every one that works good, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile." Do you see that for their good deeds there are many
rewards, and chastisements again, and penalties for such as have done the
contrary?
4. Where now, tell me, are the utter unbelievers in hell? Why, if those
before Christ's coming, who had not so much as heard the name of hell, nor of a
resurrection, and were punished here, shall suffer punishment there also; how