and pure pleasure; since now at any rate you are overwhelmed with jeers,
working for yourself many causes of vexation arising out of these things. For
should any of these things be missing, consider how many are the evils that have
their birth therefrom, how many maidservants are beaten, how many men put to
trouble, how many led to execution, how many cast into prison. And trials arise
hence, and actions, and countless curses and accusations against the wife from
the husband, against the hus band from her friends, against the soul from itself.
"But it will not be lost." In the first place, this is not easy to secure, but even if it
be kept safe constantly, yet by being kept, it occasions much anxiety and care
and discomfort, and no advantage.
For what kind of profit arises from hence to the house? What advantage to
the woman herself who wears it? No advantage indeed, but much unseemliness,
and accusation from every quarter? How will you be able to kiss Christ's feet,
and cling to them, when thus dressed? From this adorning He turns away. For
this cause He vouchsafed to be born in the house of the carpenter, or rather not
even in that house, but in a shed, and a manger. How then will you be able to
behold Him, not having beauty that is desirable in His eyes, not wearing the
array that is lovely before Him, but what is hateful. For he that comes unto Him
must not deck himself out with such garments, but be clothed with virtue.
Consider what after all these jewels are. Nothing else than earth and ashes.
Mix water with them, and they are clay. Consider and be ashamed to make clay
your master, forsaking all, and abiding by it, and carrying and bearing it about,
even when you enter into a church, when most of all you ought to flee from it.
For neither for this cause was the church built, that you should display therein
these riches, but spiritual riches. But you, as though thou were entering into a
pompous procession, thus deckest yourself out on every side, imitating the
women on the stage, even so do you carry about in profusion that ridiculous
mass.
Therefore, I tell you, you come for mischief to many, and when the
congregation is dismissed, in their houses, at their tables, one may hear the more

part describing these things. For they have left off saying, thus and thus said the
prophet and the apostle, and they describe the costliness of your garments, the
size of your precious stones, and all the other unseemliness of them that wear
these things.
This makes you backward in almsgiving, and your husbands. For one of
you would not readily consent to break up one of these ornaments to feed a poor
man. For when you would choose even yourself to be in distress rather than to
behold these things broken to pieces, how should you feed another at the cost of
them?
For most women feel towards these things, as to some living beings, and
not less than towards their children. "God forbid," you say. Prove me this then,
prove it by your works, as now at least I see the contrary. For who ever of those
that are completely taken captive, by melting down these things, would rescue a
child's soul from death? And why do I say a child's? Who has redeemed his own
soul thereby, when perishing? Nay, on the contrary, the more part even set it to
sale for these things every day. And should any bodily infirmity take place, they
do everything, but if they see their soul depraved, they take no such pains, but
are careless both about their children's soul, and their own soul, in order that
these things may remain to rust with time.
And while you are wearing jewels worth ten thousand talents, the member
of Christ has not the enjoyment so much as of necessary food. And whereas the
common Lord of all has imparted to all alike of heaven, and of the things in
Heaven, and of the spiritual table, thou dost not impart to Him even of perishing
things, on purpose that you may continue perpetually bound with these grievous
chains.
Hence the countless evils, hence the fornications of the men, when you
prepare them to cast off self-restraint, when you teach them to take delight in
these things with which the harlot women deck themselves. For this cause they
are so quickly taken captive. For if you had instructed him to look down upon
these things, and to take delight in chastity, godly fear and humility, he would