wonderful man being no vain imitator, as it seems, of the martyr. For for so long
a time he laboured there, sending letters continually to the emperor, wearying the
authorities, and bringing the ministry of the body to bear upon the martyr. For
you know, doubtless, and remember that when the midday summer sun
possessed the heaven, he together with his acquaintances, used to walk there
everyday, not as spectator only, but also, as intending to be a sharer in what was
going on. For he often handled stone, and dragged a rope, and listened, in
advance of the workmen themselves, to one who wanted to erect any building.
For he knew, he knew what rewards lie in store for him for these things. And on
this account he continued doing service to the martyrs, not only by splendid
buildings nor even by continual feasts, but by a better method than these. And
what is this? He imitates their life, emulates their courage, throughout according
to his ability he keeps the image of the martyrs alive, in himself. For see, they
gave their bodies to the slaughter, he has mortified the members of his flesh
which are upon the earth. They stopped the flame of fire, he quenched the flame
of lust. They fought against the teeth of beasts, but this man bore off the most
dangerous of our passions, anger. For all these things let us give thanks to God,
because he has thus granted us noble martyrs, and pastors worthy of martyrs, for
the perfecting of the saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ
[Ephesians 4:12] with whom be glory, honor, and might to the Father, with the
Holy and lifegiving Spirit, now and always, for ever and ever. Amen.

Concerning Lowliness of Mind
There is an allusion at the beginning of this Homily to some remarks
recently made on the parable of the Pharisee and the Publican. These occur in
Chrysostom's fifth Homily against the Anomæans, one of a set of Homilies
which, from internal evidence, may be assigned to the close of the year 386, or
beginning of 387. The following homily therefore was delivered at Antioch,
probably just before Christmas 386. There were some persons who explained the
words of St. Paul cited in the title as signifying that provided Christ was
preached it mattered not whether the actual doctrines taught were true or
heretical. The main object of the homily is to vindicate the language of the
Apostle from this erroneous and mischievous interpretation.
1. When lately we made mention of the Pharisee and the publican, and
hypothetically yoked two chariots out of virtue and vice; we pointed out each
truth, how great is the gain of humbleness of mind, and how great the damage of
pride. For this, even when conjoined with righteousness and fastings and tithes,
fell behind; while that, even when yoked with sin, out-stripped the Pharisee's
pair, even although the charioteer it had was a poor one. For what was worse
than the publican? But all the same since he made his soul contrite, and called
himself a sinner; which indeed he was; he surpassed the Pharisee, who had both
fastings to tell of and tithes; and was removed from any vice. On account of
what, and through what? Because even if he was removed from greed of gain
and robbery, he had rooted over his soul the mother of all evils— vain-glory and
pride. On this account Paul also exhorts and says "Let each one prove his own
work; and then he will have his ground of boasting for himself, and not for the
other." Whereas he publicly came forward as an accuser of the whole world; and
said that he himself was better than all living men. And yet even if he had set
himself before ten only, or if five, or if two, or if one, not even was this