see his children dissipating his property, strolling idly about; let him feel no
concern for them; when beaten let him not even be pained; shall we call him a
man of wealth? By no means; although his wealth is his own. "To me," he says,
"to live is Christ;" if you will enquire of my life, it is He. "And to die is gain."
Wherefore? Because I shall more clearly be present with Him; so that my death
is rather a coming to life; they who kill me will work on me no dreadful thing,
they will only send me onward to my proper life, and free me from that which is
not mine. What then, while thou were here, were thou not Christ's? Yes, and in a
high degree.
Ver. 22. "But if to live in the flesh—if this is the fruit of my work, then what I
shall choose I know not."
Lest any should say, If what you say is life, wherefore has Christ left you
here? "It is," he says, "the fruit of my work;" so that it is possible to use to good
purpose the present life, while not living it. Lest you should think that reproach
is cast upon life. For if we gain no advantage here, wherefore do we not make
away with ourselves, nor slay ourselves? By no means, he answers. It is open to
us to profit even here, if we live not this, but another life. But perchance one will
say, does this bear you fruit? Yes! He answers. Where are now the heretics?
Behold now; "to live in the flesh," this is "the fruit of his work." "That which I
now live in the flesh, I live in faith;" therefore it is "the fruit of my work."
"And what I shall choose I know not." Marvelous! How great was his
philosophy! How has he both cast out the desire of the present life, and yet
thrown no reproach upon it! For in that he says, "to die is gain," by this he has
cast out the desire, but in that he says, "to live in the flesh is the fruit of my
work," here he shows that the present life also is needful, if we use it as need is,
if we bear fruit; since if it be unfruitful, it is no longer life. For we despise those
trees which bear no fruit, as though they were dry, and give them up to the fire.
Life itself belongs to that middle class of indifferent things, while to live well or
ill is in ourselves. We do not then hate life, for we may live well too. So even if
we use it ill, we do not even then cast the blame on it. And wherefore? Because

not itself, but the free choice of those who use it ill is to blame. For God has
made you live, that you may live to Him. But you, by living through corruption
unto sin, makest yourself accountable for all blame. What do you say, tell me.
You know not what to choose? Here has he revealed a great mystery, in that his
departure was in his own power; for where choice is, there have we power.
"What I shall choose," says he, "I know not." Is it in your own power? Yes, he
answers, if I would ask this grace of God.
Ver. 23. "I am in a strait between the two, having the desire."
See the affection of this blessed one; in this way too he comforts them,
when they see that he is master of his own choice, and that this is done not by
man's sin, but by the dispensation of God. Why mourn ye, says he, at my death?
It had been far better to have passed away long since. "For to depart," he says,
"and to be with Christ, is very far better."
Ver. 24. "Yet to abide in the flesh is more needful for your sake."
These words were to prepare them for his death when it came, that they
might bear it nobly: this was to teach true wisdom. "It is good for me to depart
and be with Christ," for even death is a thing indifferent; since death itself is no
ill, but to be punished after death is an ill. Nor is death a good, but it is good
after our departure "to be with Christ." What follows death is either good or ill.
Let us then not simply grieve for the dead, nor joy for the living simply. But
how? Let us grieve for sinners, not only when dying, but also while living. Let
us joy for the just, not only while living, but also when dead. For those though
living are dead, while these although dead, yet live: those even while here are to
be pitied of all, because they are at enmity with God; the other even when they
have departed Thither, are blessed, because they are gone to Christ. Sinners,
wherever they are, are far from the King. Therefore they are subjects for tears;
while the just, be they here, or be they there, are with the King; and there, in a
higher and nearer degree, not through an entrance, or by faith, but "face to face."
[1 Corinthians 13:12]
Let us then not make wailings for the dead simply, but for those who have