why He threatened hell and promised the kingdom, that He might be loved of us.
Let us then so love Him as we ought to love Him. For this is the great reward,
this is royalty and pleasure, this is enjoyment, and glory, and honor, this is light,
this is the great happiness, which language (or reasoning) cannot set before us,
nor mind conceive. Yet indeed I do not know how I was led so far in this way of
speaking, and came to be exhorting men who do not even think slightly of power
and glory here for Christ's sake, to think slightly of the kingdom. Yet still those
great and noble men even attained to this measure of love. Hear, for instance,
how Peter burns with love towards Him, setting Him before soul, and life, and
all things. And when he had denied Him, it was not the punishment he was
grieved for, but that he had denied Him Whom he longed for, which was more
bitter to him than any punishment. And all this did he show before the grace of
the Spirit was given. And he perseveringly pressed the question, "Where are you
going?" [John 13:36] and before this; "To whom shall we go?" [John 6:67]; and
again; "I will follow You wherever You go." [Luke 22:33?] Thus He was all
things to them, and neither heaven nor the kingdom of heaven did they count of,
in comparison of Him they longed for. For You are all these things unto me, he
means. And why doest thou marvel that Peter was so minded? Hear now what
the Prophet says: "What have I in heaven, and what is there upon earth, that I
should desire in comparison of You?" [Psalm 73:25] Now what he means is
nearly this. Neither of things above nor of things below desire I any, save You
only. This is passion; this is love. Can we so love, it will not be things present
only, but even things to come, which we shall reckon as nothing compared with
that love-charm, and even here shall we enjoy the Kingdom, delighting ourselves
in the love of Him. And how is this to be? One may say. Let us reflect how oft
we insult Him after numberless goodnesses, yet He stands and calls us to Him,
and how often we run by Him, but He still does not overlook us, but runs to us,
and draws us to Him, and catches us in unto Himself. For if we consider these
things, and such as these, we shall be enabled to kindle this longing. For if it
were a common man that so loved, but a king who was thus beloved, would he

not feel a respect for the greatness of the love? Most assuredly he would. But
when the case is reversed, and His Beauty (S. "that beauty") is unspeakable, and
the glory and the riches too of Him that loves us, and our vileness so great,
surely we deserve the utmost punishment, vile as we are and outcasts, who are
treated with so exceeding great love by One so great and wonderful, and yet wax
wanton against His love? He needs not anything of ours, and yet He does not
even now cease loving us. We need much what is His, and for all that we cleave
not unto His love, but money we value above Him, and man's friendship, and
ease of body, and power, and fame, before Him who values nothing more than
us. For He had One Son, Very (Lit. "true-born") and Only-Begotten, and He
spared not even Him for us. But we value many things above Him. Were there
not then good reason for a hell and torment, even were it twofold or threefold or
manifold what it is? For what can we have to say for ourselves, if even Satan's
injunctions we value more than the Laws of Christ, and are reckless of our own
salvation that we may choose the works of wickedness, before Him who suffered
all things for us? And what pardon do these things deserve? What excuse have
they? Not one even. (5 manuscripts [οὐδὲ μιἵς].) Let us stop then after this in our
headlong course, and let us grow again sober; and reckoning up all these things,
let us send up glory unto Him by our works (for words alone suffice not thereto),
that we may also enjoy the glory that comes of Him, which may we all attain
unto by the grace and love toward man of our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom,
and with Whom, to the Father be glory, with the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever.
Amen.