whole multitude my involuntary sins: And if he was not ashamed to confess,
much more were it our duty to do so. For says the prophet, "Set thou forth your
cause, that you may be justified." [Isaiah 43:26] Great is the violence of this evil,
everything is overturned by it and annihilated. We have forsaken the Lord, and
have become slaves of honor. We are no longer able to rebuke those who are
under our rule, because we ourselves also are possessed with the same fever as
they. We who are appointed by God to heal others, need the physician ourselves.
What further hope of recovery is there left, when even the very physicians
themselves need the healing hand of others?
I have not said these things without an object, nor am I making
lamentations to no purpose, but with the view that one and all, with our women
and children, having sprinkled ourselves with ashes, and girded ourselves about
with sackcloth, may keep a long fast, may beseech God Himself to stretch forth
His hand to us, and to stay the peril. For need is there indeed of His hand, that
mighty, that marvelous hand. Greater things are required of us than of the
Ninevites. "Yet three days," said the prophet, "and Nineveh shall be overthrown."
[Jonah 3:4] A fearful message, and burdened with tremendous threat. And how
should it be otherwise? To expect that within three days, the city should become
their tomb, and that all should perish in one common judgment. For if, when it
happens that two children die at the same time in one house, the hardship
becomes intolerable, and if to Job this of all things seemed the most intolerable,
that the roof fell in upon all his children, and they were thus killed; what must it
be to behold not one house, nor two children, but a nation of a hundred and
twenty thousand buried beneath the ruins!
You know how terrible a disaster is this, for lately has this very warning
happened to us, not that any prophet uttered a voice, for we are not worthy to
hear such a voice, but the warning crying aloud from on high more distinctly
than any trumpet. However, as I was saying, "Yet three days," said the prophet,
"and Nineveh shall be overthrown." A terrible warning indeed, but now we have
nothing even like that; no, there are no longer "three days," nor is there a

Nineveh to be overthrown, but many days are already past since the Church
throughout all the world has been overthrown, and leveled with the ground, and
all alike are overwhelmed in the evil; nay more, of those that are in high places
the stress is so much the greater. Wonder not therefore if I should exhort you to
do greater things than the Ninevites; and why? Nay more, I do not now proclaim
a fast only, but I suggest to you the remedy which raised up that city also when
falling. And what was that? "God saw their works," says the prophet, "that they
turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil which He said He would
do unto them." [Jonah 3:10] This let us do, both we and you. Let us renounce the
passion for riches, the lust for glory, beseeching God to stretch forth His hand,
and to raise up our fallen members. And well may we, for our fear is not for the
same objects as theirs; for then indeed it was only stones and timbers that were
to fall, and bodies that were to perish; but now it is none of these; no, but souls
are about to be delivered over to hell fire. Let us implore, let us confess unto
Him, let us give thanks unto Him for what is past, let us entreat Him for what is
to come, that we may be counted worthy to be delivered from this fierce and
most terrible monster, and to lift up our thanksgivings to the loving God and
Father with whom, to the Son, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might,
and honor, now, henceforth, and for ever and ever. Amen.