Reply to Objection 1: Because perfections flowing from God to
creatures exist in a higher state in God Himself (Question 4, Article
2), whenever a name taken from any created perfection is attributed
to God, it must be separated in its signification from anything that
belongs to that imperfect mode proper to creatures. Hence
knowledge is not a quality of God, nor a habit; but substance and
pure act.
Reply to Objection 2: Whatever is divided and multiplied in creatures
exists in God simply and unitedly (Question 13, Article 4). Now man
has different kinds of knowledge, according to the different objects
of His knowledge. He has "intelligence" as regards the knowledge of
principles; he has "science" as regards knowledge of conclusions;
he has "wisdom," according as he knows the highest cause; he has
"counsel" or "prudence," according as he knows what is to be done.
But God knows all these by one simple act of knowledge, as will be
shown (Article 7). Hence the simple knowledge of God can be named
by all these names; in such a way, however, that there must be
removed from each of them, so far as they enter into divine
predication, everything that savors of imperfection; and everything
that expresses perfection is to be retained in them. Hence it is said,
"With Him is wisdom and strength, He hath counsel and
understanding" (Job 12:13).
Reply to Objection 3: Knowledge is according to the mode of the one
who knows; for the thing known is in the knower according to the
mode of the knower. Now since the mode of the divine essence is
higher than that of creatures, divine knowledge does not exist in God
after the mode of created knowledge, so as to be universal or
particular, or habitual, or potential, or existing according to any such
mode.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether God understands Himself?

Objection 1: It seems that God does not understand Himself. For it is
said by the Philosopher (De Causis), "Every knower who knows his
own essence, returns completely to his own essence." But God does
not go out from His own essence, nor is He moved at all; thus He
cannot return to His own essence. Therefore He does not know His
own essence.
Objection 2: Further, to understand is a kind of passion and
movement, as the Philosopher says (De Anima iii); and knowledge
also is a kind of assimilation to the object known; and the thing
known is the perfection of the knower. But nothing is moved, or
suffers, or is made perfect by itself, "nor," as Hilary says (De Trin.
iii), "is a thing its own likeness." Therefore God does not understand
Himself.
Objection 3: Further, we are like to God chiefly in our intellect,
because we are the image of God in our mind, as Augustine says
(Gen. ad lit. vi). But our intellect understands itself, only as it
understands other things, as is said in De Anima iii. Therefore God
understands Himself only so far perchance as He understands other
things.
On the contrary, It is written: "The things that are of God no man
knoweth, but the Spirit of God" (1 Cor. 2:11).
I answer that, God understands Himself through Himself. In proof
whereof it must be known that although in operations which pass to
an external effect, the object of the operation, which is taken as the
term, exists outside the operator; nevertheless in operations that
remain in the operator, the object signified as the term of operation,
resides in the operator; and accordingly as it is in the operator, the
operation is actual. Hence the Philosopher says (De Anima iii) that
"the sensible in act is sense in act, and the intelligible in act is
intellect in act." For the reason why we actually feel or know a thing
is because our intellect or sense is actually informed by the sensible
or intelligible species. And because of this only, it follows that sense
or intellect is distinct from the sensible or intelligible object, since
both are in potentiality.