SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.9.

our enemies from the general prayers which we offer up for others:
but it is a matter of perfection, and not of obligation, to pray for them
individually, except in certain special cases.
Reply to Objection 1: The imprecations contained in Holy Writ may
be understood in four ways. First, according to the custom of the
prophets "to foretell the future under the veil of an imprecation," as
Augustine states [De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 21]. Secondly, in the
sense that certain temporal evils are sometimes inflicted by God on
the wicked for their correction. Thirdly, because they are understood
to be pronounced, not against the men themselves, but against the
kingdom of sin, with the purpose, to wit, of destroying sin by the
correction of men. Fourthly, by way of conformity of our will to the
Divine justice with regard to the damnation of those who are
obstinate in sin.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine states in the same book (De
Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 22), "the martyrs' vengeance is the overthrow
of the kingdom of sin, because they suffered so much while it
reigned": or as he says again (Questions. Vet. et Nov. Test. lxviii),
"their prayer for vengeance is expressed not in words but in their
minds, even as the blood of Abel cried from the earth." They rejoice
in vengeance not for its own sake, but for the sake of Divine justice.
Reply to Objection 3: It is lawful to attack one's enemies, that they
may be restrained from sin: and this is for their own good and for the
good of others. Consequently it is even lawful in praying to ask that
temporal evils be inflicted on our enemies in order that they may
mend their ways. Thus prayer and deed will not be contrary to one
another.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether the seven petitions of the Lord's Prayer

are fittingly assigned?
Objection 1: It would seem that the seven petitions of the Lord's
Prayer are not fittingly assigned. It is useless to ask for that to be
hallowed which is always holy. But the name of God is always holy,
according to Lk. 1:49, "Holy is His name." Again, His kingdom is
everlasting, according to Ps. 144:13, "Thy kingdom is a kingdom of
all ages." Again, God's will is always fulfilled, according to Isa 46:10,
"All My will shall be done." Therefore it is useless to ask for "the
name of God to be hallowed," for "His kingdom to come," and for
"His will to be done."
Objection 2: Further, one must withdraw from evil before attaining
good. Therefore it seems unfitting for the petitions relating to the
attainment of good to be set forth before those relating to the
removal of evil.
Objection 3: Further, one asks for a thing that it may be given to one.
Now the chief gift of God is the Holy Ghost, and those gifts that we
receive through Him. Therefore the petitions seem to be unfittingly
assigned, since they do not correspond to the gifts of the Holy
Ghost.
Objection 4: Further, according to Luke, only five petitions are
mentioned in the Lord's Prayer, as appears from the eleventh
chapter. Therefore it was superfluous for Matthew to mention seven.
Objection 5: Further, it seems useless to seek to win the
benevolence of one who forestalls us by his benevolence. Now God
forestalls us by His benevolence, since "He first hath loved us" ( 1
Jn. 4:19). Therefore it is useless to preface the petitions with the
words our "Father Who art in heaven," which seem to indicate a
desire to win God's benevolence.
On the contrary, The authority of Christ, who composed this prayer,
suffices.
I answer that, The Lord's Prayer is most perfect, because, as
Augustine says (ad Probam Ep. cxxx, 12), "if we pray rightly and
fittingly, we can say nothing else but what is contained in this prayer