1 Corinthians 15:5
5. "And that He appeared to Cephas:" he names immediately the most
credible of all. "Then to the twelve."

1 Corinthians 15:6
"Then he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the
greater part remain until now, but some are fallen asleep."

1 Corinthians 15:7
"Then he appeared to James; then to all the Apostles."

1 Corinthians 15:8
"And last of all, as unto one born out of due time, he appeared to me also."
Thus, since he had mentioned the proof from the Scriptures, he adds also
that by the events, producing as witnesses of the resurrection, after the prophets,
the apostles and other faithful men. Whereas if he meant that other resurrection,
the deliverance from sin, it were idle for him to say, He appeared to such and
such an one; for this is the argument of one who is establishing the resurrection
of the body, not of one obscurely teaching deliverance from sins. Wherefore
neither said he once for all, "He appeared," although it were sufficient for him to
do so, setting down the expression in common: but now both twice and thrice,
and almost in each several case of them that had seen Him he employs it. For
"He appeared," says he, "to Cephas, He appeared to above five hundred
brethren, He appeared to me also." Yet surely the Gospel says the contrary, that
He was seen of Mary first. [Mark 16:9] But among men He was seen of him first
who did most of all long to see Him.
But of what twelve apostles does he here speak ? For after He was received
up, Matthias was taken into the number, not after the resurrection immediately.
But it is likely that He appeared even after He was received up. At any rate, this
our apostle himself after His ascension was both called, and saw Him. Therefore
neither does he set down the time, but simply and without defining recounts the
appearance. For indeed it is probable that many took place; wherefore also John
said, "This third time He was manifested." [John 21:14]
"Then He appeared to above five hundred brethren." Some say that "above
," is above from heaven; that is, "not walking upon earth, but above and
overhead He appeared to them:" adding, that it was Paul's purpose to confirm,
not the resurrection only, but also the ascension. Others say that the expression,
"above five hundred," means, "more than five hundred."

"Of whom the greater part remain until now." Thus, "though I relate events
of old," says he, "yet have I living witnesses." "But some are fallen asleep." He
said not, "are dead," but, "are fallen asleep," by this expression also again
confirming the resurrection. "After that, He was seen of James." I suppose, His
brother. For the Lord is said to have Himself ordained him and made him Bishop
in Jerusalem first. "Then to all the apostles." For there were also other apostles,
as the seventy.
"And last of all he appeared unto me also, as unto one born out of due
time." This is rather an expression of modesty than any thing else. For not
because he was the least, therefore did he appear to him after the rest. Since even
if He did call him last, yet he appeared more illustrious than many which were
before him, yea rather than all. And the five hundred brethren too were not
surely better than James, because He appeared to them before him.
Why did He not appear to all at the same time? That He might first sow the
seeds of faith. For he that saw Him first and was exactly and fully assured, told it
unto the residue: then their report coming first placed the hearer in expectation
of this great wonder, and made way before for the faith of sight. Therefore
neither did He appear to all together, nor in the beginning to many, but to one
alone first, and him the leader of the whole company and the most faithful: since
indeed there was great need of a most faithful soul to be first to receive this
sight. For those who saw him after others had seen him, and heard it from them,
had in their testimony what contributed in no small degree to their own faith and
tended to prepare their mind beforehand; but he who was first counted worthy to
see Him, had need, as I have said, of great faith, not to be confounded by a sight
so contrary to expectation. Therefore he appears to Peter first. For he that first
confessed Him to be Christ was justly also counted worthy first to behold His
resurrection. And not on this account alone does He appear to him first, but also
because he had denied Him, more abundantly to comfort him and to signify that
he is not despaired of, before the rest He vouchsafed him even this sight and to
him first entrusted His sheep. Therefore also He appeared to the women first.