one another, but this is not "from a good conscience," not "from a pure" but from
an impure "heart," not from "faith unfeigned," but from that which is false and
hypocritical. For faith points out the truth, and a sincere faith produces love,
which he who truly believes in God cannot endure to lay aside.
Ver. 6. "From which some having swerved have turned aside to vain
jangling."
He has well said, "swerved," for it requires skill, to shoot straight and not
beside the mark, to have the direction of the Spirit. For there are many things to
turn us aside from the right course, and we should look but to one object.
Ver. 7. "Desiring to be teachers of the law."
Here we see another cause of evil, the love of power. Wherefore Christ said,
"Be not called Rabbi" [Matthew 23:8]; and the Apostle again, "For neither do
they keep the law, but that they may glory in your flesh." [Galatians 6:13] They
desire preëminence, he means, and on that account disregard truth.
"Understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm."
Here he censures them, because they know not the end and aim of the Law,
nor the period for which it was to have authority. But if it was from ignorance,
why is it called a sin? Because it was incurred not only from their desiring to be
teachers of the law, but from their not retaining love. Nay, and their very
ignorance arose from these causes. For when the soul abandons itself to carnal
things, the clearness of its vision is dimmed, and falling from love it drops into
contentiousness, and the eye of the mind is blinded. For he that is possessed by
any desire for these temporal things, intoxicated, as he is, with passion, cannot
be an impartial judge of truth.
"Not knowing whereof they affirm."
For it is probable that they spoke of the law, and enlarged on its
purifications and other bodily rites. The Apostle then forbearing to censure
these, as either nothing, or at best a shadow and figure of spiritual things,
proceeds in a more engaging way to praise the law, calling the Decalogue here
the law, and by means of it discarding the rest. For if even these precepts punish

transgressors, and become useless to us, much more the others.
Ver. 8, 9. "But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully.
Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man."
The law, he seems to say, is good, and again, not good. What then? If one
use it not lawfully, is it not good? Nay even so it is good. But what he means is
this; if any one fulfills it in his actions; for that is to "use it lawfully" as here
intended. But when they expound it in their words, and neglect it in their deeds,
that is using it unlawfully. For such an one uses it, but not to his own profit. And
another way may be named besides. What is it? That the law, if you use it aright,
sends you to Christ. For since its aim is to justify man, and it fails to effect this,
it remits us to Him who can do so. Another way again of using the law lawfully,
is when we keep it, but as a thing superfluous. And how as a thing superfluous?
As the bridle is properly used, not by the prancing horse that champs it, but by
that which wears it only for the sake of appearance, so he uses the law lawfully,
who governs himself, though not as constrained by the letter of it. He uses the
law lawfully who is conscious that he does not need it, for he who is already so
virtuous that he fulfills it not from fear of it, but from a principle of virtue, uses
it lawfully and safely: that is, if one so use it, not as being in fear of it, but
having before his eyes rather the condemnation of conscience than the
punishment hereafter. Moreover he calls him a righteous man, who has attained
unto virtue. He therefore uses the law lawfully, who does not require to be
instructed by it. For as points in reading are set before children; but he who does
what they direct, without their aid, from other knowledge, shows more skill, and
is a better reader; so he who is above the law, is not under the schooling of the
law. For he keeps it in a much higher degree, who fulfills it not from fear, but
from a virtuous inclination; since he that fears punishment does not fulfill it in
the same manner as he that aims at reward. He that is under the law does it not as
he that is above the law. For to live above the law is to use it lawfully. He uses it
lawfully, and keeps it, who achieves things beyond the law, and who does not
need its instructions. For the law, for the most part, is prohibition of evil; now