causes that was established by God, God is said to `turn,' or `repent.' Hence Gregory
says that God does not change His counsel, though He sometimes changes His
sentence, not the sentence which declares His eternal arrangements, but the sentence
which declares the order of inferior causes, according to which Ezechias was to die, or
some nation to be punished for its sins. Such change of sentence is called in
metaphorical language `repentance,' inasmuch as God behaves like one repentant, to
whom it belongs to change what He has done. In the same way God is said
metaphorically to be `angry,' inasmuch as by punishing He produces the effect of anger.
(B. I, Chap.XCI ad fin.)

## CHAPTER XCVI--That God does not hear all Prayers
THERE is no anomaly in the prayers of petitioners being sometimes not granted by
God. For God fulfils the desires of His rational creature inasmuch as that creature
desires good: but sometimes it happens that what is asked is not true but seeming
good, which is simply evil: such a prayer is not within the hearing of God. Hence it is
said: Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss (James iv, 3).
2. It is suitable that God should fulfil our desires in so far as He moves us to desire. If
therefore the movement of desire on our part is not kept up by earnestness in prayer,
there is nothing to be surprised at if the prayer does not gain its due effect. Hence the
Lord [St Luke] says: We ought always to pray and not to faint (Luke xviii, 1); and the
Apostle, Pray without ceasing (1 Thess. v, 17).
3. It befits God to hear the prayer of the rational creature inasmuch as that creature
draws nigh to Him. But one draws nigh to God by contemplation and devout affection
and humble and firm intention. That prayer therefore which does not so draw nigh to
God is not within God's hearing. Hence it is said: He hath regarded the prayer of the
humble (Ps. ci, 18); and, Let him ask in faith, debating not within himself (James i, 6).
4. God hears the prayers of the pious on the ground of friendship. He then who turns
away from the friendship of God is not worthy to have his prayer heard. Hence it is
said: Whosoever turns away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be
abominable (Prov. xxviii, 9): Though ye multiply prayers, I will not hear: for your hands
are full of blood (Isai. i, 15). This is why sometimes a friend of God is not heard, when
he prays for those who are not God's friends, as it was said: Do not thou pray for this
people, nor take unto thee praise and supplication for them, and do not withstand me:
for I will not hear thee (Jerem. vii, 16).
It happens sometimes that for very friendship one denies his friend's petition, knowing it
to be hurtful to him, or the contrary to be better for him, as a physician refuses what his
patient asks for. No wonder then if God, who fulfils the desires put before Him by His
rational creature for the love that He bears to that creature, fails sometimes to fulfil the
petition of those whom He singularly loves, that He may fulfil it otherwise with something
more helpful to the salvation of the petitioner, as we read in 2 Cor. xii, 7-9; and the Lord
says to some: Ye know not what ye ask (Matt. xx, 22). Therefore Augustine says (Ep.
ad Paulin. et Theras.): "The Lord is good in often not giving what we will, to give instead
what we should prefer."