Matt. xxv. 41.

them." And as then the condemnation of sinners extended to others who approved of them, and
joined in their society; so also is it the case at present, that "a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump." And as the wrath of God did then descend upon the unrighteous, here also does the apostle
likewise say: "For the wrath of God shall be revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of those men who hold back the truth in unrighteousness." And as, in those
times, vengeance came from God upon the Egyptians who were subjecting Israel to unjust
punishment, so is it now, the Lord truly declaring, "And shall not God avenge His own elect, which
cry day and night unto Him? I tell you, that He will avenge them speedily." So says the apostle,
in like manner, in the Epistle to the Thessalonians: "Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled rest with us, at the
revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ from heaven with His mighty angels, and in a flame of fire, to
take vengeance upon those who know not God, and upon those that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ: who shall also be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of His power; when He shall come to be glorified in His saints, and
to be admired in all them who have believed in Him."
### Chapter XXVIII.—Those persons prove themselves senseless who exaggerate the mercy of
Christ, but are silent as to the judgment, and look only at the more abundant grace of the
New Testament; but, forgetful of the greater degree of perfection which it demands from us,
they endeavour to show that there is another God beyond Him who created the world.
1. Inasmuch, then, as in both Testaments there is the same righteousness of God [displayed]
when God takes vengeance, in the one case indeed typically, temporarily, and more moderately;
but in the other, really, enduringly, and more rigidly: for the fire is eternal, and the wrath of God
which shall be revealed from heaven from the face of our Lord (as David also says, "But the face
of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth"),
entails a heavier punishment on those who incur it,—the elders pointed out that those men are
devoid of sense, who, [arguing] from what happened to those who formerly did not obey God, do
endeavour to bring in another Father, setting over against [these punishments] what great things
the Lord had done at His coming to save those who received Him, taking compassion upon them;
while they keep silence with regard to His judgment; and all those things which shall come upon

Rom. i. 18.

such as have heard His words, but done them not, and that it were better for them if they had not
been born, and that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the judgment than for
that city which did not receive the word of His disciples.
2. For as, in the New Testament, that faith of men [to be placed] in God has been increased,
receiving in addition [to what was already revealed] the Son of God, that man too might be a partaker
of God; so is also our walk in life required to be more circumspect, when we are directed not merely
to abstain from evil actions, but even from evil thoughts, and from idle words, and empty talk, and
scurrilous language: thus also the punishment of those who do not believe the Word of God, and
despise His advent, and are turned away backwards, is increased; being not merely temporal, but
rendered also eternal. For to whomsoever the Lord shall say, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire," these shall be damned for ever; and to whomsoever He shall say, "Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you for eternity," these do receive the
kingdom for ever, and make constant advance in it; since there is one and the same God the Father,
and His Word, who has been always present with the human race, by means indeed of various
dispensations, and has wrought out many things, and saved from the beginning those who are saved,
(for these are they who love God, and follow the Word of God according to the class to which they
belong,) and has judged those who are judged, that is, those who forget God, and are blasphemous,
and transgressors of His word.
3. For the self-same heretics already mentioned by us have fallen away from themselves, by
accusing the Lord, in whom they say that they believe. For those points to which they call attention
with regard to the God who then awarded temporal punishments to the unbelieving, and smote the
Egyptians, while He saved those that were obedient; these same [facts, I say,] shall nevertheless
repeat themselves in the Lord, who judges for eternity those whom He doth judge, and lets go free
for eternity those whom He does let go free: and He shall [thus] be discovered, according to the
language used by these men, as having been the cause of their most heinous sin to those who laid
hands upon Him, and pierced Him. For if He had not so come, it follows that these men could not
have become the slayers of their Lord; and if He had not sent prophets to them, they certainly could
not have killed them, nor the apostles either. To those, therefore, who assail us, and say, If the
Egyptians had not been afflicted with plagues, and, when pursuing after Israel, been choked in the
sea, God could not have saved His people, this answer may be given;—Unless, then, the Jews had
become the slayers of the Lord (which did, indeed, take eternal life away from them), and, by killing
the apostles and persecuting the Church, had fallen into an abyss of wrath, we could not have been