rich unto all (and upon all)." [Romans 3:22] You see how he sets Him forth as
exceedingly desiring our salvation, since He even reckons this to be riches to
Himself; so that they are not even now to despair, or fancy that, provided they
would repent, they were unpardonable. For He who considers it as riches to
Himself to save us, will not cease to be rich. Since even this is riches, the fact of
the gift being shed forth unto all. For since what distresses him the most was,
that they, who were in the enjoyment of a prerogative over the whole world,
should now by the faith be degraded from these thrones, and be no wit better off
than others, he brings the Prophets in constantly as foretelling, that they would
have equal honor with them. "For whosoever," he says, "believes in Him shall
not be ashamed" [Isaiah 28:16]; and, "Whosoever shall call upon the Name of
the Lord shall be saved." [Joel 2:32] And the "whosoever" is put in all cases, that
they might not say anything in reply. But there is nothing worse than vainglory.
For it was this, this most especially, which proved their ruin. Whence Christ also
said to them, "How can you believe, which receive glory one of another, and seek
not the glory which comes of God only?" [John 5:44] This, with ruin, exposes
men also to much ridicule and before the punishment in the other world involves
them in ills unnumbered in this. And if it seem good, that you may learn this
clearly, leaving for the present the heavens which that puts us out of, and the hell
which it thrusts us into, let us investigate the whole matter as here before us.
What then can be more wasteful than this? What more disgraceful, or more
offensive? For that this disorder is a wasteful one is plain from the people who
spend to no purpose whatsoever on theatres, horse-races, and other such
irrelevant expenditures: from those that build the fine and expensive houses, and
fit up everything in a useless style of extravagance, on which I must not enter in
this discourse. But that a person diseased in this way must needs be extravagant,
and expensive, and rapacious, and covetous, anybody can see. For that he may
have food to give the brute, he thrusts his hand into the substance of others. And
why do I talk of substance? It is not money only but souls also that this fire
devours, and it works not death here only, but also hereafter. For vanity is the

mother of hell, and greatly kindles that fire, and the venomous worm. One may
see that it has power even over the dead. And what can be worse than this? For
the other passions are put an end to by death, but this even after death shows its
force, and strives to display its nature even in the dead corpse. For when men
give orders on their death-bed to raise to them fine monuments, which will waste
all their substance, and take pains to lay out beforehand a vast extravagance in
their funeral, and in their lifetime insult the poor that come to them for a penny
and a single loaf, but when they are dead give a rich banquet to the worm, why
seek any more exorbitant thraldom to the disease? From this mischief also
irregular loves are conceived. For there are many whom it is not the beauty of
the appearance, nor the desire of lying with her, but the wish to boast that "I have
made conquest of such an one," has even drawn into adultery. And why need I
mention the other mischiefs that spring of this? For I had rather be long (3
manuscripts [διηνεκὥς]) the slave of ten thousand savages, than of vanity once.
For even they do not put such commands upon their captives, as this vice lays
upon its votaries. Because it says, Be thou every one's slave, be he nobler or be
he lower than yourself. Despise your soul, neglect virtue, laugh at freedom,
immolate your salvation, and if you do any good thing, do it not to please God,
but to display it to the many, that for these things you may even lose your crown.
And if you give alms, or if you fast, undergo the pains, but take care to lose the
gain. What can be more cruel than these commands? Hence grudging bears
sway, hence haughtiness, hence covetousness, the mother of evils. For the swarm
of domestics, and the black servants liveried in gold, and the hangers on, and the
flatterers, and the silver-tinselled chariots, and the other absurdities greater than
these, are not had for any pleasure's sake or necessity, but for mere vanity. Yes,
one will say, but that this affliction is an evil, anybody can see; but how we are
to keep quite clear of it, this is what you should tell us. Well then, in the first
place, if you persuade yourself that this disorder is a baneful one, you will have
made a very good beginning towards correcting it. For when a man is sick, he
speedily sends for the physician, if he be first made acquainted with the fact that