Simão Rodrigues introduced the Society into Portugal in 1540 and founded the college at Coimbra in 1542. At the time of this letter there were eighty scholastics studying at the college, and from various sources, notably from Rodrigues, who was provincial, and from Martín de Santa Cruz, 1 who was rector of the community, Ignatius learned of certain "holy follies" practiced by these young Jesuits. Their excessive fervor led them to discipline themselves in the city streets, preach half-clothed, and raise penitential cries in the middle of the night. These "holy follies" seem to have had the provincial's approval. Rodrigues wrote to Ignatius at the beginning of 1547, 2 telling him about the outstanding fervor among the scholastics and noted that there was division in the community regarding public manifestations of that fervor, and so he asked Ignatius to write them a letter on this very point. In his letter Ignatius tells the scholastics of the need to restrain their fervor. Excess can easily lead to pride, loss of health, as well as other inconveniences and, thus, he instructs them to put an end to their practices. The letter has three parts: (1) Ignatius praises the fervor in the young Jesuits and encourages them to continue to be fervent in their vocation; (2) he then tells them of the need to restrain that fervor, lists the harm that can arise from excessive fervor, and suggests that if they want to arrive at discretion they must practice obedience; (3) finally, he enumerates the ways that the young scholastics may exercise zeal during their years of study. The headings within the letter have been added for the sake of clarity; the original letter was written in Spanish [Ep . 1:495-510].

May the grace and everlasting love of Christ our Lord be ever our protection and help. Amen.

Introduction

Master Simão's letter and that of Santa Cruz bring me continued news about you, and God, from whom all good things come, knows what comfort and joy it gives me to see that He so helps you, not only in your studies but in your pursuit of virtue as well. Indeed, the fragrance of these virtues has carried to very distant lands, to the encouragement and edification of many. If every Christian should rejoice because of the common obligation we all have of seeking God's honor and the welfare of His image, which has been redeemed by the blood and death of Jesus Christ, I have a special reason for rejoicing in our Lord, seeing that I have a distinct obligation of keeping you in my heart with a special affection. May our Creator and Redeemer be ever blessed and praised for all, since it is from His liberality that every blessing and grace flows, and may it please Him every day to open more and more the fountain of His mercy to increase and advance what He has already begun in your souls. I have no doubt concerning that Supreme Goodness, who is so eager to share His blessings, or of that everlasting love which makes Him more eager to bestow perfection on us than we are to receive it. If this were not so, our Lord Jesus Christ would never encourage us to hope for what we can have only from His generous hand. For He tells us: Be you therefore perfect, as also your heavenly Father is perfect [Matt. 5:48]. Thus it is certain that for His part He is ready to bestow it, on condition that we have a vessel of humility and desire to receive His graces, and that He sees that we use well the gifts we have received and cooperate diligently and earnestly with His grace.