are, because they, with their blind minds, cannot discern them, they, too,
who are blind from their birth, ought to deny that there is a sun. The light
then shineth in darkness; but if the darkness comprehend it not, let them
first be illuminated by the gift of God, that they may be believers, and let
them begin to be light in comparison with the unbelievers; and when this
foundation is first laid, let them be built up to see what they believe, that
at some time they may be able to see. For some things are so believed,
that they cannot be seen at all. For Christ is not to be seen a second time
on the cross; but unless this be believed which has been so done and seen,
that it is not now to be hoped for as about to be and to be seen, there is no
coming to Christ, such as without end He is to be seen. But as far as
relates to the discerning in some way by the understanding that highest,
ineffable, incorporeal, and unchangeable nature the sight of the human
mind can nowhere better exercise itself, so only that the rule of faith
govern it, than in that which man himself has in his own nature better
than the other animals, better also than the other parts of his own soul,
which is the mind itself, to which has been assigned a certain sight of
things invisible, and to which, as though honorably presiding in a higher
and inner place, the bodily senses also bring word of all things, that they
may be judged, and than which there is no higher, to which it is to be
subject, and by which it is to be governed, except God.
50. But among these many things which I have now said, and of which
there is nothing that I dare to profess myself to have said worthy of the
ineffableness of that highest Trinity, but rather to confess that the
wonderful knowledge of Him is too great for me, and that I cannot attain
to it: O thou, my soul, where dost thou feel thyself to be? where dost thou
lie? where dost thou stand? until all thy infirmities be healed by Him who
has forgiven all thy iniquities.2 Thou perceivest thyself assuredly to be in
that inn whither that Samaritan brought him Whom he found with many
wounds inflicted by thieves, half-dead. And yet thou hast seen many
things that are true, not by those eyes by which colored objects are seen,
but by those for which he prayed who said, "Let mine eyes behold the
things that are equal." Certainly, then, thou hast seen many things that
are true, and hast distinguished them from that light by the light of which
thou hast seen them. Lift up thine eyes to the light itself, and fix them
upon it if thou canst. For so thou wilt see how the birth of the Word of

God differs from the procession of the Gift of God, on account of which
the only-begotten Son did not say that the Holy Spirit is begotten of the
Father, otherwise He would be His brother, but that He proceeds from
Him. Whence, since the Spirit of both is a kind of consubstantial
communion of Father and Son, He is not called, far be it from us to say
so, the Son of both. But thou canst not fix thy sight there, so as to discern
this lucidly and clearly; I know thou canst not. I say the truth, I say to
myself, I know what I cannot do; yet that light itself shows to thee these
three things in thyself, wherein thou mayest recognize an image of the
highest Trinity itself, which thou canst not yet contemplate with steady
eye. Itself shows to thee that there is in thee a true word, when it is born
of thy knowledge, i.e. when we say what we know: although we neither
utter nor think of any articulate word that is significant in any tongue of
any nation, but our thought is formed by that which we know; and there
is in the mind's eye of the thinker an image resembling that thought
which the memory contained, will or love as a third combining these two
as parent and offspring. And he who can, sees and discerns that this will
proceeds indeed from thought (for no one wills that of which he is
absolutely ignorant what or of what sort it is), yet is not an image of the
thought: and so that there is insinuated in this intelligible thing a sort of
difference between birth and procession, since to behold by thought is
not the same as to desire, or even to enjoy will. Thou, too, hast been able
, although thou hast not been, neither art, able to unfold
with adequate speech what, amidst the clouds of bodily likenesses, which
cease not to flit up and down before human thoughts, thou hast scarcely
seen. But that light which is not thyself shows thee this too, that these
incorporeal likenesses of bodies are different from the truth, which, by
rejecting them, we contemplate with the understanding. These, and other
things similarly certain, that light hath shown to thine inner eyes. What
reason, then, is there why thou canst not see that light itself with steady
eye, except certainly infirmity? And what has produced this in thee,
except iniquity? Who, then, is it that healeth all thine infirmities, unless it
be He that forgiveth all thine iniquities? And therefore I will now at
length finish this book by a prayer better than by an argument.