THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.6.

drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself." Now
the gloss says on this passage: "He eats and drinks unworthily who
is in sin, or who handles it irreverently." Therefore, if anyone, while
in mortal sin, receives this sacrament, he purchases damnation, by
sinning mortally.
I answer that, In this sacrament, as in the others, that which is a
sacrament is a sign of the reality of the sacrament. Now there is a
twofold reality of this sacrament, as stated above (Question 73,
Article 6): one which is signified and contained, namely, Christ
Himself; while the other is signified but not contained, namely,
Christ's mystical body, which is the fellowship of the saints.
Therefore, whoever receives this sacrament, expresses thereby that
he is made one with Christ, and incorporated in His members; and
this is done by living faith, which no one has who is in mortal sin.
And therefore it is manifest that whoever receives this sacrament
while in mortal sin, is guilty of lying to this sacrament, and
consequently of sacrilege, because he profanes the sacrament: and
therefore he sins mortally.
Reply to Objection 1: When Christ appeared under His proper
species, He did not give Himself to be touched by men as a sign of
spiritual union with Himself, as He gives Himself to be received in
this sacrament. And therefore sinners in touching Him under His
proper species did not incur the sin of lying to Godlike things, as
sinners do in receiving this sacrament.
Furthermore, Christ still bore the likeness of the body of sin;
consequently He fittingly allowed Himself to be touched by sinners.
But as soon as the body of sin was taken away by the glory of the
Resurrection, he forbade the woman to touch Him, for her faith in
Him was defective, according to Jn. 20:17: "Do not touch Me, for I am
not yet ascended to My Father," i.e. "in your heart," as Augustine
explains (Tract. cxxi in Joan.). And therefore sinners, who lack living
faith regarding Christ are not allowed to touch this sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: Every medicine does not suit every stage of
sickness; because the tonic given to those who are recovering from
fever would be hurtful to them if given while yet in their feverish
condition. So likewise Baptism and Penance are as purgative
medicines, given to take away the fever of sin; whereas this
sacrament is a medicine given to strengthen, and it ought not to be
given except to them who are quit of sin.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.80, C.6.

Reply to Objection 3: By the greatest gifts Augustine understands
the soul's virtues, "which no one uses to evil purpose," as though
they were principles of evil. Nevertheless sometimes a man makes a
bad use of them, as objects of an evil use, as is seen in those who
are proud of their virtues. So likewise this sacrament, so far as the
sacrament is concerned, is not the principle of an evil use, but the
object thereof. Hence Augustine says (Tract. lxii in Joan.): "Many
receive Christ's body unworthily; whence we are taught what need
there is to beware of receiving a good thing evilly . . . For behold, of a
good thing, received evilly, evil is wrought": just as on the other
hand, in the Apostle's case, "good was wrought through evil well
received," namely, by bearing patiently the sting of Satan.
Reply to Objection 4: Christ's body is not received by being seen,
but only its sacrament, because sight does not penetrate to the
substance of Christ's body, but only to the sacramental species, as
stated above (Question 76, Article 7). But he who eats, receives not
only the sacramental species, but likewise Christ Himself Who is
under them. Consequently, no one is forbidden to behold Christ's
body, when once he has received Christ's sacrament, namely,
Baptism: whereas the non-baptized are not to be allowed even to see
this sacrament, as is clear from Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. vii). But only
those are to be allowed to share in the eating who are united with
Christ not merely sacramentally, but likewise really.
Reply to Objection 5: The fact of a man being unconscious of his sin
can come about in two ways. First of all through his own fault, either
because through ignorance of the law (which ignorance does not
excuse him), he thinks something not to be sinful which is a sin, as
for example if one guilty of fornication were to deem simple
fornication not to be a mortal sin; or because he neglects to examine
his conscience, which is opposed to what the Apostle says (1 Cor.
11:28): "Let a man prove himself, and so let him eat of that bread,
and drink of the chalice." And in this way nevertheless the sinner
who receives Christ's body commits sin, although unconscious
thereof, because the very ignorance is a sin on his part.
Secondly, it may happen without fault on his part, as, for instance,
when he has sorrowed over his sin, but is not sufficiently contrite:
and in such a case he does not sin in receiving the body of Christ,
because a man cannot know for certain whether he is truly contrite.
It suffices, however, if he find in himself the marks of contrition, for