sake, seeing that so it is, even when they are wrought by saints? For Paul says, [1
Corinthians 3:22] "All things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or
life, or death:" and again, [Ephesians 4:11-12] "He gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the saints,
unto the work of ministering." For if it were not so, there would have been no
security against universal corruption. For it may be that rulers are wicked and
polluted, and their subjects good and virtuous; that laymen may live in piety, and
priests in wickedness; and there could not have been either baptism, or the body
of Christ, or oblation, through such, if in every instance grace required merit.
But as it is, God uses to work even by unworthy persons, and in no respect is the
grace of baptism damaged by the conduct of the priest: else would the receiver
suffer loss. Accordingly, though such things happen rarely, still, it must be
owned, they do happen. Now these things I say, lest any one of the bystanders
busying himself about the life of the priest, should be offended as concerning the
things solemnized ([τὰ τελούμενα]). "For man introduces nothing into the things
which are set before us , but the whole is a work of the power of God, and He it
is who initiates ([ὁ μυσταγωγῶν]) you into the mysteries."
3. "And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto
carnal. I fed you with milk, and not with meat. For you were not able [to bear
it.]"
For lest he should seem to have spoken ambitiously ([φιλοτιμίας ἕνεκα], to
obtain favor) these things which he has just spoken; "the spiritual man judges all
things," and, "he himself is judged of no man," and, "we have the mind of
Christ;" with a view also to repress their pride: observe what he says. "Not on
this account," says he, "was I silent, because I was not able to tell you more, but
because 'you are carnal: neither yet now are you able.'"
Why said he not, "you are not willing," but "you are not able?" Even
because he put the latter for the former. For as to the want of ability, it arises
from the want of will. Which to them indeed is a matter of accusation, but to
their teacher, of excuse. For if they had been unable by nature, one might

perhaps have been forgiven them; but since it was from choice, they were bereft
of all excuse. He then speaks of the particular point also which makes them
carnal. "For whereas there is among you strife, and jealousy, and division, are
you not carnal and walk as men?" Although he had fornications also and
uncleannesses of theirs to speak of, he sets down rather that offense which he
had been a good while endeavoring to correct. Now if "jealousy" makes men
carnal, it is high time for us to bewail bitterly, and to clothe ourselves with
sackcloth and lie in ashes. For who is pure from this passion? Except indeed I
am but conjecturing the case of others from myself. If "jealousy" makes men
"carnal," and suffers them not to be "spiritual," although they prophesy and
show forth other wonderful works; now, when not even so much grace is with
us, what place shall we find for our own doings; when not in this matter alone,
but also in others of greater moment, we are convicted.
4. From this place we learn that Christ had good reason for saying, [John
3:20] "He that does evil comes not to light;" and that unclean life is an obstacle
to high doctrines, not suffering the clear-sightedness of the understanding to
show itself. As then it is not in any case possible for a person in error, but living
uprightly, to remain in error; so it is not easy for one brought up in iniquity,
speedily to look up to the height of the doctrines delivered to us, but he must be
clean from all the passions who is to hunt after the truth: for whoso is freed from
these shall be freed also from his error and attain unto the truth. For do not, I
beseech you, think that abstinence merely from covetousness or fornication may
suffice you for this purpose. Not so. All must concur in him that seeks the truth.
Wherefore says Peter, [Acts 10:34-35] "Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons; but in every nation he that fears Him, and works
righteousness, is acceptable to Him:" that is, He calls and attracts him unto the
truth. Do you see not Paul, that he was more vehement than any one in warring
and persecuting? Yet because he led an irreproachable life, and did these things
not through human passion, he was both received, and reached a mark beyond
all. But if any one should say, "How does such a one, a Greek, who is kind, and