1 Corinthians 1:16
Then, having abashed those who were unsound in this respect and
subjoining, "I baptized also the house of Stephanas," he again drags down their
pride, saying besides, "I know not whether I baptized any other." For by this he
signifies that neither did he seek much to enjoy the honor accruing hereby from
the multitude, nor did he set about this work for glory's sake.

1 Corinthians 1:17
And not by these only, but also by the next words, he greatly represses their
pride, saying, "Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel:" for the
more laborious part, and that which needed much toil and a soul of iron, and that
on which all depended, was this. And therefore it was that Paul had it put into his
hand.
And why, not being sent to baptize, did he baptize? Not in contention with
Him that sent him, but in this instance laboring beyond his task. For he says not,
"I was forbidden," but, "I was not sent for this, but for that which was of the
greatest necessity." For preaching the Gospel is a work perhaps for one or two;
but baptizing, for everyone endowed with the priesthood. For a man being
instructed and convinced, to take and baptize him is what any one whatever
might do: for the rest, it is all effected by the will of the person drawing near,
and the grace of God. But when unbelievers are to be instructed, there must be
great labor, great wisdom. And at that time there was danger also annexed. In the
former case the whole thing is done, and he is convinced, who is on the point of
initiation: and it is no great thing when a man is convinced, to baptize him. But
in the later case the labor is great, to change the deliberate will, to alter the turn
of mind, and to tear up error by the roots, and to plant the truth in its place.
Not that he speaks out all this, neither does he argue in so many words that
Baptism has no labor, but that preaching has. For he knows how always to
subdue his tone, whereas in the comparison with heathen wisdom he is very
earnest, the subject enabling him to use more vehemency of language.
Not therefore in opposition to Him that sent him did he baptize; but, as in
the case of the widows , though the apostles had said, [Acts 6:2] "it is not fit that
we should leave the Word of God and serve tables," he discharged the office
[Acts 12:25. τὴν διακονίαν] of a deacon, not in opposition to them, but as

something beyond his task: so also here. For even now, we commit this matter to
the simpler sort of presbyters, but the word of doctrine unto the wiser: for there
is the labor and the sweat. Wherefore he says himself, [1 Timothy 5:17] "Let the
Elders who rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the word and in teaching." For as to teach the wrestlers in the games is
the part of a spirited and skilful trainer, but to place the crown on the conquerors
head may be that of one who cannot even wrestle, (although it be the crown
which adds splendor to the conqueror,) so also in Baptism. It is impossible to be
saved without it, yet it is no great thing which the baptizer does, finding the will
ready prepared.
7. "Not in wisdom of words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none
effect."
Having brought down the swelling pride of those who were arrogant
because of their baptizing, he changes his ground afterwards to meet those who
boasted about heathen wisdom, and against them he puts on his armor with more
vehemency. For to those who were puffed up with baptizing he said, "I give
thanks that I baptized no one;" and, "for Christ sent me not to baptize." He
speaks neither vehemently nor argumentatively, but, having just hinted his
meaning in a few words, passes on quickly. But here at the very outset he gives a
severe blow, saying, "Lest the Cross of Christ be made void." Why then pride
yourself on a thing which ought to make you hide your face? Since, if this
wisdom is at war with the Cross and fights with the Gospel, it is not meet to
boast about it, but to retire with shame. For this was the cause why the Apostles
were not wise; not through any weakness of the Gift, but lest the Gospel
preached suffer harm. The sort of people therefore above mentioned were not
those employed in advocating the Word: rather they were among its defamers.
The unlearned men were the establishers of it. This was able to check vain glory,
this to repress arrogance, this to enforce moderation.
"But if it was 'not by wisdom of speech,' why did they send Apollos who was
eloquent?" It was not, he replies, through confidence in his power of speech, but