the plants make use of the earth for their nourishment, and animals
make use of plants, and man makes use of both plants and animals.
Therefore it is in keeping with the order of nature, that man should
be master over animals. Hence the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 5) that
the hunting of wild animals is just and natural, because man thereby
exercises a natural right. Secondly, this is proved by the order of
Divine Providence which always governs inferior things by the
superior. Wherefore, as man, being made to the image of God, is
above other animals, these are rightly subject to his government.
Thirdly, this is proved from a property of man and of other animals.
For we see in the latter a certain participated prudence of natural
instinct, in regard to certain particular acts; whereas man possesses
a universal prudence as regards all practical matters. Now whatever
is participated is subject to what is essential and universal.
Therefore the subjection of other animals to man is proved to be
natural.
Reply to Objection 1: A higher power can do many things that an
inferior power cannot do to those which are subject to them. Now an
angel is naturally higher than man. Therefore certain things in regard
to animals could be done by angels, which could not be done by
man; for instance, the rapid gathering together of all the animals.
Reply to Objection 2: In the opinion of some, those animals which
now are fierce and kill others, would, in that state, have been tame,
not only in regard to man, but also in regard to other animals. But
this is quite unreasonable. For the nature of animals was not
changed by man's sin, as if those whose nature now it is to devour
the flesh of others, would then have lived on herbs, as the lion and
falcon. Nor does Bede's gloss on Gn. 1:30, say that trees and herbs
were given as food to all animals and birds, but to some. Thus there
would have been a natural antipathy between some animals. They
would not, however, on this account have been excepted from the
mastership of man: as neither at present are they for that reason
excepted from the mastership of God, Whose Providence has
ordained all this. Of this Providence man would have been the
executor, as appears even now in regard to domestic animals, since
fowls are given by men as food to the trained falcon.
Reply to Objection 3: In the state of innocence man would not have
had any bodily need of animals---neither for clothing, since then they
were naked and not ashamed, there being no inordinate motions of
concupiscence---nor for food, since they fed on the trees of

paradise---nor to carry him about, his body being strong enough for
that purpose. But man needed animals in order to have experimental
knowledge of their natures. This is signified by the fact that God led
the animals to man, that he might give them names expressive of
their respective natures.
Reply to Objection 4: All animals by their natural instinct have a
certain participation of prudence and reason: which accounts for the
fact that cranes follow their leader, and bees obey their queen. So all
animals would have obeyed man of their own accord, as in the
present state some domestic animals obey him.