obstructed, he submitted to be let down through the roof. So ready in contrivance
is desire, so rich in resource is love. "For he also that seeks finds, and to him
that knocks it shall be opened." [Luke 11:10] The man did not say to his friends
"What is the meaning of this? Why make this ado? Why push on? Let us wait
until the house is cleared and the assembly is dissolved: the crowds will
withdraw, we shall then be able to approach him privately and confer about
these matters. Why should you expose my misfortunes in the midst of all the
spectators, and let me down from the roof-top, and behave in an unseemly
manner?" That man said none of these things either to himself or to his bearers,
but regarded it as an honour to have so many persons made witnesses of his cure.
And not from this circumstance only was it possible to discern his faith but also
from the actual words of Christ. For after he had been let down and presented
Christ said to him, "Son! Be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you." And
when he heard these words he was not indignant, he did not complain, he did not
say to the physician "What mean you by this? I came to be healed of one thing
and you heal another. This is an excuse and a pretence and a screen of
incompetence. Do you forgive sins which are invisible?" He neither spoke nor
thought any of these things, but waited, allowing the physician to adopt the
method of healing which He desired. For this reason also Christ did not go to
him, but waited for him to come, that He might exhibit his faith to all. For could
He not have made the entrance easy? But He did none of these things; in order
that He might exhibit the man's zeal and fervent faith to all. For as He went to
the man who had been suffering thirty and eight years because he had no one to
aid him, so did He wait for this man to come to him because he had many friends
that He might make his faith manifest by the man being brought to Him, and
inform us of the other man's loneliness by going to him, and disclose the
earnestness of the one and the patience of the other to all and especially to those
who were present. For some envious and misanthropical Jews were accustomed
to grudge the benefits done to their neighbours and to find fault with His
miracles, sometimes on account of the special season, saying that He healed on

the sabbath day; sometimes on account of the life of those to whom the benefit
was done, saying "if this man were a prophet He would have known who the
woman was who touched Him:" [Luke 7:39] not knowing that it is the special
mark of a physician to associate with the infirm and to be constantly seen by the
side of the sick, not to avoid them, or hurry from their presence— which in fact
was what He expressly said to those murmurers; "They that are whole have no
need of a physician but they that are sick." [Matthew 9:12] Therefore in order to
prevent their making the same accusations again He proves first of all that they
who come to Him are deserving of a cure on account of the faith which they
exhibit. For this reason He exhibited the loneliness of one man, and the fervent
faith and zeal of the other: for this reason He healed the one on the Sabbath, the
other not on the Sabbath: in order that when you see them accusing and rebuking
Christ on another day you may understand that they accused him on the former
occasion also not because of their respect for the law, but because they could not
contain their own malice. But why did He not first address Himself to the cure of
the paralytic, but said, "Son! Be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you?" He
did this very wisely. For it is a habit with physicians to destroy the originating
cause of the malady before they remove the malady itself. Often for example
when the eyes are distressed by some evil humour and corrupt discharge, the
physician, abandoning any treatment of the disordered vision, turns his attention
to the head, where the root and origin of the infirmity is: even so did Christ act:
He represses first of all the source of the evil. For the source and root and mother
of all evil is the nature of sin. This it is which enervates our bodies: this it is
which brings on disease: therefore also on this occasion He said, "Son! Be of
good cheer, your sins are forgiven you." And on the other He said, "Behold! You
are made whole, sin no more lest some worse thing happen unto you," intimating
to both that these maladies were the offspring of sin. And in the beginning and
outset of the word disease as the consequence of sin attacked the body of Cain.
For after the murder of his brother, after that act of wickedness, his body was
subject to palsy. For trembling is the same thing as palsy. For when the strength