and each one of those that came after did hereby wreck himself in impiety,
fancying some equality with God:— since, I say, this was the stronghold of our
evils, and the root and fountain of all wickedness, He, preparing a remedy
suitable to the disease, laid this law first as a strong and safe foundation. For this
being fixed as a base, the builder in security lays on it all the rest. But if this be
taken away, though a man reach to the Heavens in his course of life, it is all
easily undermined, and issues in a grievous end. Though fasting, prayer,
almsgiving, temperance, any other good thing whatever, be gathered together in
you; without humility all fall away and perish.
It was this very thing that took place in the instance of the Pharisee. For
even after he had arrived at the very summit, he "went down" [Luke 18:14] with
the loss of all, because he had not the mother of virtues: for as pride is the
fountain of all wickedness, so is humility the principle of all self-command.
Wherefore also He begins with this, pulling up boasting by the very root out of
the soul of His hearers.
"And what," one may ask, "is this to His disciples, who were on every
account humble? For in truth they had nothing to be proud of, being fishermen,
poor, ignoble, and illiterate." Even though these things concerned not His
disciples, yet surely they concerned such as were then present, and such as were
hereafter to receive the disciples, lest they should on this account despise them.
But it were truer to say that they did also concern His disciples. For even if not
then, yet by and by they were sure to require this help, after their signs and
wonders, and their honor from the world, and their confidence towards God. For
neither wealth, nor power, nor royalty itself, had so much power to exalt men, as
the things which they possessed in all fullness. And besides, it was natural that
even before the signs they might be lifted up, at that very time when they saw
the multitude, and all that audience surrounding their Master; they might feel
some human weakness. Wherefore He at once represses their pride.
And He does not introduce what He says by way of advice or of
commandments, but by way of blessing, so making His word less burthensome,

and opening to all the course of His discipline. For He said not, "This or that
person," but "they who do so, are all of them blessed." So that though you be a
slave, a beggar, in poverty, a stranger, unlearned, there is nothing to hinder you
from being blessed, if you emulate this virtue.
4. Now having begun, as you see, where most need was, He proceeds to
another commandment, one which seems to be opposed to the judgment of the
whole world. For whereas all think that they who rejoice are enviable, those in
dejection, poverty, and mourning, wretched, He calls these blessed rather than
those; saying thus,
"Blessed are they that mourn." [Matthew 5:4]
Yet surely all men call them miserable. For therefore He wrought the
miracles beforehand, that in such enactments as these He might be entitled to
credit.
And here too again he designated not simply all that mourn, but all that do
so for sins: since surely that other kind of mourning is forbidden, and that
earnestly, which relates to anything of this life. This Paul also clearly declared,
when he said, "The sorrow of the world works death, but godly sorrow works
repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of."
These then He too Himself calls blessed, whose sorrow is of that kind; yet
not simply them that sorrow did He designate, but them that sorrow intensely.
Therefore He did not say, "they that sorrow," but "they that mourn." For this
commandment again is fitted to teach us entire self-control. For if those who
grieve for children, or wife, or any other relation gone from them, have no
fondness for gain or pleasure during that period of their sorrow; if they aim not
at glory, are not provoked by insults, nor led captive by envy, nor beset by any
other passion, their grief alone wholly possessing them; much more will they
who mourn for their own sins, as they ought to mourn, show forth a self-denial
greater than this.
Next, what is the reward for these? "For they shall be comforted," says He.
Where shall they be comforted! Tell me. Both here and there. For since the