destitute of all defence or excuse shall we be, if, after having had the benefit of
such great grace, we attain not even to the same measure of virtue as they did,
now when death is only a name, devoid of reality. For death is nothing more than
a sleep, a journey, a migration, a rest, a tranquil haven; an escape from trouble,
and a freedom from the cares of this present life!
2. But here let us dismiss the subject of consolation; it is the fifth day we
are engaged in speaking words of comfort to your Charity, and we might now
seem to be troublesome. For what has been already said is sufficient for those
who give heed; but to those who are pusillanimous it will be no gain, even
though we were to add to what we have said. It is now time to direct our
teaching to the exposition of the Scriptures. For as, if we had said nothing in
reference to the present calamity, one might have condemned us for cruelty, and
a want of humanity; so, were we always discoursing of this, we might justly be
condemned for pusillanimity. Commending then your hearts to God, who is able
to speak into your minds, and to expel all grief from within, let us now take up
our accustomed manner of instruction; and that especially since every exposition
of Scripture is matter of comfort and relief. So that, although we may seem to be
desisting from the topic of consolation, we shall again light upon the same
subject by means of Scriptural exposition. For that all Scripture furnishes
consolation to those who give attention to it, I will make manifest to you from its
own evidence. For I shall not go about among the Scripture narratives to search
out certain arguments consolatory; but in order that I may make the proof of the
matter which I have undertaken plainer, we will take in hand the book which has
to day been read to us; and bringing forward, if you will, the introduction and
commencement of it, which may especially seem to present no trace of
consolation, but to be altogether foreign to topics of comfort, I will make that
which I affirm evident.
3. What then is this introduction? "In the beginning God made the heaven
and the earth, and the earth was invisible, and unformed, and darkness was
upon the face of the abyss." Do these words seem to some of you incapable of

affording consolation under distress? Is it not an historical narrative, and an
instruction about the creation?
Would you then that I show the consolation that is hidden in this saying?
Arouse yourselves then, and attend with earnestness to the things which are
about to be spoken. For when you hear that God made the heaven, the earth, the
sea, the air, the waters, the multitude of stars, the two great lights, the plants, the
quadrupeds, the swimming and the flying animals, and all things without
exception which you see, for you, and for your safety and honour; do you not
straightway take comfort and receive this as the strongest proof of the love of
God, when you think that He produced such a world as this, so fair, so vast and
wonderful, for such a puny being as yourself! When therefore you hear that, "In
the beginning God made the heaven and the earth," run not hastily over the
declaration; but traverse in your mind the breadth of the earth; and reflect how
He has spread out so sumptuous and exquisite a table for us, and provided us
with such abundant gladness. And this is, indeed, the most marvellous thing, that
He gave us not such a world as this in payment for services done; or as a
recompense for good works; but at the very time He formed us, He honoured our
race with this kingdom. For He said, "Let us make man after our image, and
after our likeness." [Genesis 1:26] What is the sense of this, "after our image,
and after our likeness?" The image of government is that which is meant; and as
there is no one in heaven superior to God, so let there be none upon earth
superior to man. This then is one, and the first respect, in which He did him
honour; by making him after His own image; and secondly, by providing us with
this principality, not as a payment for services, but making it entirely the gift of
His own love toward man; and thirdly, in that He conferred it upon us as a thing
of nature. For of governments there are some natural, and others which are
elective;— natural as of the lion over the quadrupeds, or as that of the eagle over
the birds; elective, as that of an Emperor over us; for he does not reign over his
fellow-servants by any natural authority. Therefore it is that he oftentimes loses
his sovereignty. For such are things which are not naturally inherent; they readily