10:28], for that hand is strong; but when we fall away from that hand and that
help, then are we lost, then are we exposed, ready to be snatched away, as a
"bowing wall, and a tottering fence" [Psalm 62:3]; when the wall is weak, it will
be easy for all to surmount. Think not this which I am about to say refers to
Jerusalem alone, but to all men. And what was spoken of Jerusalem? "Now will I
sing to my well-beloved a song of my beloved touching His vineyard. My wellbeloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill, and I made a fence about it, and
surrounded it with a dike, and planted it with the vine of Sorech, and built a
tower in the midst of it, and also dug a wine press in it, and I looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth thorns. And now, O men of Judah
and inhabitants of Jerusalem, judge between Me and My vineyard. What should
have been done to My vineyard, that I have not done to it? Wherefore, when I
looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth thorns? Now therefore I
will tell you what I will do to My vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof,
and it shall be for a prey, and I will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be
trodden down. And I will leave My vineyard, and it shall not be pruned or dug,
but thorns shall come up upon it, as upon a desert land. I will also command the
clouds, that they rain no rain upon it. For the vineyard of the Lord of Sabaoth is
the house of Israel, and the men of Judah His pleasant plant. I looked that it
should do judgment, but it did iniquity, and a cry instead of righteousness."
[Isaiah 5:1-7, Septuagint] This is spoken also of every soul. For when God who
loves man has done all that is needful and man then brings forth thorns instead
of grapes, He will take away the fence, and break down the wall, and we shall be
for a prey. For hear what another prophet speaks in his lamentations: "Why have
you broken down her fences, so that all they which pass by the way do pluck
her? The boar out of the wood does ravage it, and the wild beasts of the field
feed on it." [Psalm 80:12-13] In the former place He speaks of the Mede and the
Babylonian, here nought is said of them, but "the boar," and "the solitary beast"
is the Devil and all his host, because of the ferocity and impurity of his
disposition. For when it would show us his rapacity, it says, "As a roaring lion

he walks about, seeking whom he may devour" [1 Peter 5:8]: when his
poisonous, his deadly, his destructive nature, it calls him a snake, and a scorpion;
"For tread," says He, "upon serpents and scorpions, and upon all the power of
the enemy" [Luke 10:19]: when it would represent his strength as well as his
venom, it calls him a dragon; as when it says, This dragon "whom you have
formed to take his pastime therein." [Psalm 104:26] Scripture everywhere calls
him a dragon, and a crooked serpent, and an adder [Psalm 74:13-14]; he is a
beast of many folds, and varied in his devices, and his strength is great, he
moves all things, he disturbs all things, he turns all things up and down. [Isaiah
27:1; 51:9; Ezekiel 29:3; 32:2] But fear not, neither be afraid; watch only, and he
will be as a sparrow; "for," says He, "tread upon serpents and scorpions." If we
will, He causes him to be trodden down under our feet.
See now what scorn is it, yea, what misery, to see him standing over our
heads, who has been given to us to tread down. And whence is this? It is of
ourselves. If we choose, he becomes great; and if we choose, he becomes of
small power. If we take heed to ourselves, and take up our stand with Him who
is our King, he draws himself in, and will be no better than a little child in his
warfare against us. Whenever we stand apart from Him, he puffs himself up
greatly, he utters terrible sounds, he grinds his teeth, because he finds us without
our greatest help. For he will not approach to us, except God permit him; for if
he dared not to enter into the herd of swine, except by God's permission, how
much less into men's souls. But God does permit him, either chastening or
punishing us, or making us more approved, as in the case of Job. Do you see that
he came not to him, neither dared to be near him, but trembled and quaked? Why
speak I of Job? When he leaped upon Judas, he dared not to seize on him wholly,
and to enter into him, until Christ had severed him from the sacred band. He
attacked him indeed from without, but he dared not enter in, but when he saw
him cut off from that holy flock, he leaped upon him with more than wolfish
vehemence, and left him not till he had slain him with a double death.
These things are written for our admonition. What gain have we from