through sense. Hence the more perfect is their sense, the more
perfect is their power of self-movement. Such as have only the sense
of touch, as shellfish, move only with the motion of expansion and
contraction; and thus their movement hardly exceeds that of plants.
Whereas such as have the sensitive power in perfection, so as to
recognize not only connection and touch, but also objects apart from
themselves, can move themselves to a distance by progressive
movement. Yet although animals of the latter kind receive through
sense the form that is the principle of their movement, nevertheless
they cannot of themselves propose to themselves the end of their
operation, or movement; for this has been implanted in them by
nature; and by natural instinct they are moved to any action through
the form apprehended by sense. Hence such animals as move
themselves in respect to an end they themselves propose are
superior to these. This can only be done by reason and intellect;
whose province it is to know the proportion between the end and the
means to that end, and duly coordinate them. Hence a more perfect
degree of life is that of intelligible beings; for their power of selfmovement is more perfect. This is shown by the fact that in one and
the same man the intellectual faculty moves the sensitive powers;
and these by their command move the organs of movement. Thus in
the arts we see that the art of using a ship, i.e. the art of navigation,
rules the art of ship-designing; and this in its turn rules the art that is
only concerned with preparing the material for the ship.
But although our intellect moves itself to some things, yet others are
supplied by nature, as are first principles, which it cannot doubt; and
the last end, which it cannot but will. Hence, although with respect to
some things it moves itself, yet with regard to other things it must be
moved by another. Wherefore that being whose act of understanding
is its very nature, and which, in what it naturally possesses, is not
determined by another, must have life in the most perfect degree.
Such is God; and hence in Him principally is life. From this the
Philosopher concludes (Metaph. xii, 51), after showing God to be
intelligent, that God has life most perfect and eternal, since His
intellect is most perfect and always in act.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated in Metaph. ix, 16, action is twofold.
Actions of one kind pass out to external matter, as to heat or to cut;
whilst actions of the other kind remain in the agent, as to
understand, to sense and to will. The difference between them is
this, that the former action is the perfection not of the agent that
moves, but of the thing moved; whereas the latter action is the

perfection of the agent. Hence, because movement is an act of the
thing in movement, the latter action, in so far as it is the act of the
operator, is called its movement, by this similitude, that as
movement is an act of the thing moved, so an act of this kind is the
act of the agent, although movement is an act of the imperfect, that
is, of what is in potentiality; while this kind of act is an act of the
perfect, that is to say, of what is in act as stated in De Anima iii, 28.
In the sense, therefore, in which understanding is movement, that
which understands itself is said to move itself. It is in this sense that
Plato also taught that God moves Himself; not in the sense in which
movement is an act of the imperfect.
Reply to Objection 2: As God is His own very existence and
understanding, so is He His own life; and therefore He so lives that
He has not principle of life.
Reply to Objection 3: Life in this lower world is bestowed on a
corruptible nature, that needs generation to preserve the species,
and nourishment to preserve the individual. For this reason life is
not found here below apart from a vegetative soul: but this does not
hold good with incorruptible natures.