Homily 21 on the Gospel of John
John 1:49-50
"Nathanael answered and says unto Him, Rabbi, You are the Son of God, You are
the King of Israel. Jesus answered, and said unto him, Because I said unto you, I
saw you under the fig-tree, do you believe? You shall see greater things than
these."
1. Beloved, we need much care, much watchfulness, to be able to look into
the depth of the Divine Scriptures. For it is not possible to discover their
meaning in a careless way, or while we are asleep, but there needs close search,
and there needs earnest prayer, that we may be enabled to see some little way
into the secrets of the divine oracles. Today, for instance, here is no trifling
question proposed to us, but one which requires much zeal and enquiry. For
when Nathanael said, "You are the Son of God," Christ replies, "Because I said
unto you, I saw you under the fig-tree, do you believe? You shall see greater
things than these."
Now what is the question arising from this passage? It is this. Peter, when
after so many miracles and such high doctrine he confessed that, "You are the
Son of God" [Matthew 16:16], is called "blessed," as having received the
revelation from the Father; while Nathanael, though he said the very same thing
before seeing or hearing either miracles or doctrine, had no such word addressed
to him, but as though he had not said so much as he ought to have said, is
brought to things greater still. What can be the reason of this? It is, that Peter and
Nathanael both spoke the same words, but not both with the same intention.
Peter confessed Him to be "The Son of God" but as being Very God; Nathanael,
as being mere man. And whence does this appear? From what he said after these
words; for after, "You are the Son of God," he adds, "You are the King of Israel."
But the Son of God is not "King of Israel" only, but of all the world.

And what I say is clear, not from this only, but also from what follows. For
Christ added nothing more to Peter, but as though his faith were perfect, said,
that upon this confession of his He would build the Church; but in the other case
He did nothing like this, but the contrary. For as though some large, and that the
better, part were wanting to his confession He added what follows. For what says
He?

John 1:51
"Verily, verily I say unto you, Hereafter you shall see heaven open, and the
Angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of Man."
Do you see how He leads him up little by little from the earth, and causes
him no longer to imagine Him a man merely? For One to whom Angels minister,
and on whom Angels ascend and descend, how could He be man? For this
reason He said, "You shall see greater things than these." And in proof of this,
He introduces the ministry of Angels. And what He means is something of this
kind: "Does this, O Nathanael, seem to you a great matter, and have you for this
confessed me to be King of Israel? What then will you say, when you see the
Angels ascending and descending upon Me?" Persuading him by these words to
own Him Lord also of the Angels. For on Him as on the King's own Son, the
royal ministers ascended and descended, once at the season of the Crucifixion,
again at the time of the Resurrection and the Ascension, and before this also,
when they "came and ministered unto Him" [Matthew 4:11], when they
proclaimed the glad tidings of His birth, and cried, "Glory to God in the highest,
and on earth peace" [Luke 2:14], when they came to Mary, when they came to
Joseph.
And He does now what He has done in many instances; He utters two
predictions, gives present proof of the one, and confirms that which has to be
accomplished by that which is so already. For of His sayings some had been
proved, such as, "Before Philip called you, under the fig-tree I saw you"; others
had yet to come to pass, and had partly done so, namely, the descending and
ascending of the Angels, at the Crucifixion, the Resurrection, and the Ascension;
and this He renders credible by His words even before the event. For one who
had known His power by what had gone before, and heard from Him of things to
come, would more readily receive this prediction too.
What then does Nathanael? To this he makes no reply. And therefore at this