SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.2.

communication.
Accordingly, since there is a communication between man and God,
inasmuch as He communicates His happiness to us, some kind of
friendship must needs be based on this same communication, of
which it is written (1 Cor. 1:9): "God is faithful: by Whom you are
called unto the fellowship of His Son." The love which is based on
this communication, is charity: wherefore it is evident that charity is
the friendship of man for God.
Reply to Objection 1: Man's life is twofold. There is his outward life in
respect of his sensitive and corporeal nature: and with regard to this
life there is no communication or fellowship between us and God or
the angels. The other is man's spiritual life in respect of his mind,
and with regard to this life there is fellowship between us and both
God and the angels, imperfectly indeed in this present state of life,
wherefore it is written (Phil. 3:20): "Our conversation is in heaven."
But this "conversation" will be perfected in heaven, when "His
servants shall serve Him, and they shall see His face" (Apoc. 22:3,4).
Therefore charity is imperfect here, but will be perfected in heaven.
Reply to Objection 2: Friendship extends to a person in two ways:
first in respect of himself, and in this way friendship never extends
but to one's friends: secondly, it extends to someone in respect of
another, as, when a man has friendship for a certain person, for his
sake he loves all belonging to him, be they children, servants, or
connected with him in any way. Indeed so much do we love our
friends, that for their sake we love all who belong to them, even if
they hurt or hate us; so that, in this way, the friendship of charity
extends even to our enemies, whom we love out of charity in relation
to God, to Whom the friendship of charity is chiefly directed.
Reply to Objection 3: The friendship that is based on the virtuous is
directed to none but a virtuous man as the principal person, but for
his sake we love those who belong to him, even though they be not
virtuous: in this way charity, which above all is friendship based on
the virtuous, extends to sinners, whom, out of charity, we love for
God's sake.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.22, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether charity is something created in the soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not something created in
the soul. For Augustine says (De Trin. viii, 7): "He that loveth his
neighbor, consequently, loveth love itself." Now God is love.
Therefore it follows that he loves God in the first place. Again he
says (De Trin. xv, 17): "It was said: God is Charity, even as it was
said: God is a Spirit." Therefore charity is not something created in
the soul, but is God Himself.
Objection 2: Further, God is the life of the soul spiritually just as the
soul is the life of the body, according to Dt. 30:20: "He is thy life."
Now the soul by itself quickens the body. Therefore God quickens
the soul by Himself. But He quickens it by charity, according to 1 Jn.
3:14: "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the brethren." Therefore God is charity itself.
Objection 3: Further, no created thing is of infinite power; on the
contrary every creature is vanity. But charity is not vanity, indeed it
is opposed to vanity; and it is of infinite power, since it brings the
human soul to the infinite good. Therefore charity is not something
created in the soul.
On the charity, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. iii, 10): "By charity I
mean the movement of the soul towards the enjoyment of God for
His own sake." But a movement of the soul is something created in
the soul. Therefore charity is something created in the soul.
I answer that, The Master looks thoroughly into this question in
Question 17
of the First Book, and concludes that charity is not something
created in the soul, but is the Holy Ghost Himself dwelling in the
mind. Nor does he mean to say that this movement of love whereby
we love God is the Holy Ghost Himself, but that this movement is
from the Holy Ghost without any intermediary habit, whereas other
virtuous acts are from the Holy Ghost by means of the habits of
other virtues, for instance the habit of faith or hope or of some other
virtue: and this he said on account of the excellence of charity.
But if we consider the matter aright, this would be, on the contrary,