252. Our relationship with the followers of Islam has taken on great importance, since they are
now significantly present in many traditionally Christian countries, where they can freely worship
and become fully a part of society. We must never forget that they “profess to hold the faith of
Abraham, and together with us they adore the one, merciful God, who will judge humanity on the
last day”. The sacred writings of Islam have retained some Christian teachings; Jesus and
Mary receive profound veneration and it is admirable to see how Muslims both young and old,
men and women, make time for daily prayer and faithfully take part in religious services. Many of
them also have a deep conviction that their life, in its entirety, is from God and for God. They also
acknowledge the need to respond to God with an ethical commitment and with mercy towards
those most in need.

253. In order to sustain dialogue with Islam, suitable training is essential for all involved, not only
so that they can be solidly and joyfully grounded in their own identity, but so that they can also
acknowledge the values of others, appreciate the concerns underlying their demands and shed
light on shared beliefs. We Christians should embrace with affection and respect Muslim
immigrants to our countries in the same way that we hope and ask to be received and respected in
countries of Islamic tradition. I ask and I humbly entreat those countries to grant Christians
freedom to worship and to practice their faith, in light of the freedom which followers of Islam enjoy
in Western countries! Faced with disconcerting episodes of violent fundamentalism, our respect for
true followers of Islam should lead us to avoid hateful generalisations, for authentic Islam and the
proper reading of the Koran are opposed to every form of violence.

254. Non-Christians, by God’s gracious initiative, when they are faithful to their own consciences,
can live “justified by the grace of God”, and thus be “associated to the paschal mystery of
Jesus Christ”. But due to the sacramental dimension of sanctifying grace, God’s working in
them tends to produce signs and rites, sacred expressions which in turn bring others to a
communitarian experience of journeying towards God. While these lack the meaning and
efficacy of the sacraments instituted by Christ, they can be channels which the Holy Spirit raises
up in order to liberate non-Christians from atheistic immanentism or from purely individual religious
experiences. The same Spirit everywhere brings forth various forms of practical wisdom which
help people to bear suffering and to live in greater peace and harmony. As Christians, we can also
benefit from these treasures built up over many centuries, which can help us better to live our own
beliefs.

Social dialogue in a context of religious freedom