reason, implanted in their minds, moves them, and reveals to them [the truth] that there is one God,
the Lord of all.
2. And on this account all things have been [by general consent] placed under the sway of Him
who is styled the Most High, and the Almighty. By calling upon Him, even before the coming of
our Lord, men were saved both from most wicked spirits, and from all kinds of demons, and from
every sort of apostate power. This was the case, not as if earthly spirits or demons had seen Him,
but because they knew of the existence of Him who is God over all, at whose invocation they
trembled, as there does tremble every creature, and principality, and power, and every being endowed
with energy under His government. By way of parallel, shall not those who live under the empire
of the Romans, although they have never seen the emperor, but are far separated from him both by
land and sea, know very well, as they experience his rule, who it is that possesses the principal
power in the state? How then could it be, that those angels who were superior to us [in nature], or
even He whom they call the Creator of the world, did not know the Almighty, when even dumb
animals tremble and yield at the invocation of His name? And as, although they have not seen Him,
yet all things are subject to the name of our Lord, so must they also be to His who made and
established all things by His word, since it was no other than He who formed the world. And for
this reason do the Jews even now put demons to flight by means of this very adjuration, inasmuch
as all beings fear the invocation of Him who created them.
3. If, then, they shrink from affirming that the angels are more irrational than the dumb animals,
they will find that it behoved these, although they had not seen Him who is God over all, to know
His power and sovereignty. For it will appear truly ridiculous, if they maintain that they themselves
indeed, who dwell upon the earth, know Him who is God over all whom they have never seen, but
will not allow Him who, according to their opinion, formed them and the whole world, although
He dwells in the heights and above the heavens, to know those things with which they themselves,
though they dwell below, are acquainted. [This is the case], unless perchance they maintain that
Bythus lives in Tartarus below the earth, and that on this account they have attained to a knowledge
of Him before those angels who have their abode on high. Thus do they rush into such an abyss of
madness as to pronounce the Creator of the world void of understanding. They are truly deserving
of pity, since with such utter folly they affirm that He (the Creator of the world) neither knew His
Mother, nor her seed, nor the Pleroma of the Æons, nor the Propator, nor what the things were
which He made; but that these are images of those things which are within the Pleroma, the Saviour
having secretly laboured that they should be so formed [by the unconscious Demiurge], in honour
of those things which are above.