SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.3.

should be traced to their principles. Now in practical matters wherein
the precepts of the Law direct us, the end has the character of
principle, as stated above (Question 23, Article 7, ad 2; Question 26,
Article 1, ad 1): and the love of God is the end to which the love of
our neighbor is directed. Therefore it behooved us to receive
precepts not only of the love of God but also of the love of our
neighbor, on account of those who are less intelligent, who do not
easily understand that one of these precepts is included in the other.
Reply to Objection 1: Although charity is one virtue, yet it has two
acts, one of which is directed to the other as to its end. Now
precepts are given about acts of virtue, and so there had to be
several precepts of charity.
Reply to Objection 2: God is loved in our neighbor, as the end is
loved in that which is directed to the end; and yet there was need for
an explicit precept about both, for the reason given above.
Reply to Objection 3: The means derive their goodness from their
relation to the end, and accordingly aversion from the means derives
its malice from the same source and from no other
Reply to Objection 4: Love of our neighbor includes love of God, as
the end is included in the means, and vice versa: and yet it behooved
each precept to be given explicitly, for the reason given above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.43, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether two precepts of charity suffice?

Objection 1: It would seem that two precepts of charity do not
suffice. For precepts are given about acts of virtue. Now acts are
distinguished by their objects. Since, then, man is bound to love four
things out of charity, namely, God, himself, his neighbor and his own
body, as shown above (Question 25, Article 12; Question 26), it
seems that there ought to be four precepts of charity, so that two are
not sufficient.
Objection 2: Further, love is not the only act of charity, but also joy,
peace and beneficence. But precepts should be given about the acts
of the virtues. Therefore two precepts of charity do not suffice.
Objection 3: Further, virtue consists not only in doing good but also
in avoiding evil. Now we are led by the positive precepts to do good,
and by the negative precepts to avoid evil. Therefore there ought to
have been not only positive, but also negative precepts about
charity; and so two precepts of charity are not sufficient.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Mt. 22:40): "On these two
commandments dependeth the whole Law and the prophets."
I answer that, Charity, as stated above (Question 23, Article 1), is a
kind of friendship. Now friendship is between one person and
another, wherefore Gregory says (Hom. in Ev. xvii): "Charity is not
possible between less than two": and it has been explained how one
may love oneself out of charity (Question 25, Article 4). Now since
good is the object of dilection and love, and since good is either an
end or a means, it is fitting that there should be two precepts of
charity, one whereby we are induced to love God as our end, and
another whereby we are led to love our neighbor for God's sake, as
for the sake of our end
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 23),
"though four things are to be loved out of charity, there was no need
of a precept as regards the second and fourth," i.e. love of oneself
and of one's own body. "For however much a man may stray from
the truth, the love of himself and of his own body always remains in
him." And yet the mode of this love had to be prescribed to man,
namely, that he should love himself and his own body in an ordinate