wife, and child, will he not surely be seen torn in pieces, before he has opened
his mouth? And if there be added moreover a tumult and strife of husband and
wife in the house, will they not stone him to death before he steps on the
threshold? And if he also be one whom they may readily despise, and who
enjoins galling things, and commands them who are living in luxury to practise
self restraint, and together with this the conflict be against those who are far
more in numbers and who excel him, is it not quite manifest that he will be
utterly destroyed? Yet nevertheless, this, which is impossible to be done in one
house, this has Christ accomplished in all the world, through precipices and
furnaces, and ravines, and rocks, and land and sea at war with Him, bringing in
the healers of the world.
And if you are minded to learn these things more distinctly, I mean, the
famines, the pestilences, the earthquakes, the other calamities, peruse the history
about these things composed by Josephus, and you will know all accurately.
Therefore Himself too said, "Be not troubled, for all must be;" and, "He that
endures to the end, the same shall be saved;" and, "The gospel shall surely be
preached in all the world." For when weakened and faint at the fear of what had
been said, He braces them up by saying, Though ten thousand things be done,
the gospel must be preached in every part of the world, and then shall the end
come.
4. Do you see in what a state things were then, and how manifold was the
war? And this is the beginning, when each of the things to be effected most
required quiet. In what state then were they? For nothing hinders us from
resuming the same things again. The first war was that of the deceivers; "For
there shall come," He says, "false Christs and false prophets:" the second, that
of the Romans, "For you shall hear," He says, "of wars:" the third, that which
brings on the "famines:" the fourth, "the pestilences" and "the earthquakes:" the
fifth, "they shall deliver you into afflictions:" the sixth, "you shall be hated of all
men:" the seventh, "They shall betray one another, and hate one another" (an
intestine war does He here make known); then, "false Christs," and false

brethren; then, "the love of the most shall wax cold," which is the cause of all the
ills.
Do you see numberless kinds of war, new and strange? Yet nevertheless in
the midst of these things, and much more (for with the intestine wars was
mingled also that of kinsmen), the gospel prevailed over the whole earth. "For
the gospel," He says, "shall be preached in the whole world."
Where then are they who set up the power of a nativity and the cycle of
times against the doctrines of the church? For who has ever recorded that
another Christ appeared; that such a thing took place? Although they falsely
affirm other things, that ten myriads of years passed, yet this they cannot even
feign. Of what kind of cycle then would ye speak? For there was never another
Sodom, nor another Gomorrha, nor another flood. How long do ye trifle, talking
of a cycle and nativity?
How then, it is said, do many of the things they say come to pass? Because
you have bereaved yourself of the help God bestows, and betrayed yourself, and
placed yourself without His providence; therefore does the evil spirit turn and
twist about your matters as he will.
But not so among the saints, or rather not even among us sinners, who
utterly despise it. For although our practice is beyond endurance, yet because by
God's grace we cling with much exactness to the doctrines of the truth, we are
above the malice of the evil spirits.
And altogether, what is a nativity? Nothing else than injustice, and
confusion, and that all things are borne along at random; or rather not at random
only; but more than this, with folly.
"And if there is not any nativity, whence is such a one rich? Whence is such
a one poor?"
I know not: for in this way I will for a time reason with you, instructing you
not to be curious about all things; neither in consequence of this to go on at
random and rashly. For neither because you are ignorant of this, ought thou to
feign the things that are not. It is better to be ignorant well, than to learn ill. For