SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether prophecy is only about future

contingencies?
Objection 1: It would seem that prophecy is only about future
contingencies. For Cassiodorus says [Prol. super Psalt. i] that
"prophecy is a Divine inspiration or revelation, announcing the issue
of things with unchangeable truth." Now issues pertain to future
contingencies. Therefore the prophetic revelation is about future
contingencies alone.
Objection 2: Further, according to 1 Cor. 12, the grace of prophecy is
differentiated from wisdom and faith, which are about Divine things;
and from the discernment of spirits, which is about created spirits;
and from knowledge, which is about human things. Now habits and
acts are differentiated by their objects, as stated above (FS, Question
54, Article 2). Therefore it seems that the object of prophecy is not
connected with any of the above. Therefore it follows that it is about
future contingencies alone.
Objection 3: Further, difference of object causes difference of
species, as stated above (FS, Question 54, Article 2). Therefore, if
one prophecy is about future contingencies, and another about other
things, it would seem to follow that these are different species of
prophecy.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. i super Ezech.) that some
prophecies are "about the future, for instance (Is. 7:14), 'Behold a
virgin shall conceive, and bear a son'"; some are "about the past, as
(Gn. 1:1), 'In the beginning God created heaven and earth'"; some are
"about the present," as (1 Cor. 14:24,25), "If all prophesy, and there
come in one that believeth not . . . the secrets of his heart are made
manifest." Therefore prophecy is not about future contingencies
alone.
I answer that, A manifestation made by means of a certain light can
extend to all those things that are subject to that light: thus the
body's sight extends to all colors, and the soul's natural knowledge
extends to whatever is subject to the light of the active intellect. Now
prophetic knowledge comes through a Divine light, whereby it is
possible to know all things both Divine and human, both spiritual
and corporeal; and consequently the prophetic revelation extends to

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.4.

them all. Thus by the ministry of spirits a prophetic revelation
concerning the perfections of God and the angels was made to Is.
6:1, where it is written, "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and
elevated." Moreover his prophecy contains matters referring to
natural bodies, according to the words of Is. 40:12, "Who hath
measured the waters in the hollow of His hand," etc. It also contains
matters relating to human conduct, according to Is. 58:1, "Deal thy
bread to the hungry," etc.; and besides this it contains things
pertaining to future events, according to Is. 47:9, "Two things shall
come upon thee suddenly in one day, barrenness and widowhood."
Since, however, prophecy is about things remote from our
knowledge, it must be observed that the more remote things are
from our knowledge the more pertinent they are to prophecy. Of
such things there are three degrees. One degree comprises things
remote from the knowledge, either sensitive or intellective, of some
particular man, but not from the knowledge of all men; thus a
particular man knows by sense things present to him locally, which
another man does not know by human sense, since they are
removed from him. Thus Eliseus knew prophetically what his
disciple Giezi had done in his absence (4 Kgs. 5:26), and in like
manner the secret thoughts of one man are manifested prophetically
to another, according to 1 Cor. 14:25; and again in this way what one
man knows by demonstration may be revealed to another
prophetically.
The second degree comprises those things which surpass the
knowledge of all men without exception, not that they are in
themselves unknowable, but on account of a defect in human
knowledge; such as the mystery of the Trinity, which was revealed
by the Seraphim saying: "Holy, Holy, Holy," etc. (Is. 6:3).
The last degree comprises things remote from the knowledge of all
men, through being in themselves unknowable; such are future
contingencies, the truth of which is indeterminate. And since that
which is predicated universally and by its very nature, takes
precedence of that which is predicated in a limited and relative
sense, it follows that revelation of future events belongs most
properly to prophecy, and from this prophecy apparently takes its
name. Hence Gregory says (Hom. i super Ezech.): "And since a
prophet is so called because he foretells the future, his name loses
its significance when he speaks of the past or present."