and with the Father the Comforter, flying down at the uttering of the Voice and
resting on Him. Truly therefore did he say, "We beheld His glory, the glory as of
the Only-Begotten of the Father."
2. Yet he says it not only on account of these things, but also on account of
what followed them; for no longer do shepherds only, and widow women, and
aged men, declare to us the good tidings, but the very voice of the things
themselves, sounding clearer than any trumpet, and so loudly, that the sound was
straightway heard even in this land. "For," says one, "his fame went into all
Syria" [Matthew 4:24]; and He revealed Himself to all, and all things
everywhere exclaimed, that the King of Heaven had come. Evil spirits
everywhere fled and started away from Him, Satan covered his face and retired,
death at that time retreated before Him, and afterwards disappeared altogether;
every kind of infirmity was loosed, the graves let free the dead, the devils those
whom they had maddened, and diseases the sick. And one might see things
strange and wonderful, such as with good cause the prophets desired to see, and
saw not. One might see eyes fashioned [John 9:6-7], (might see) Him showing to
all in short space and on the more noble portion of the body, that admirable thing
which all would have desired to see, how God formed Adam from the earth;
palsied and distorted limbs fastened and adapted to each other, dead hands
moving, palsied feet leaping amain, ears that were stopped re-opened, and the
tongue sounding aloud which before was tied by speechlessness. For having
taken in hand the common nature of men, as some excellent workman might take
a house decayed by time, He filled up what was broken off, banded together its
crevices and shaken portions, and raised up again what was entirely fallen down.
And what should one say of the fashioning of the soul, so much more
admirable than that of the body? The health of our bodies is a great thing, but
that of our souls is as much greater as the soul is better than the body. And not
on this account only, but because our bodily nature follows withersoever the
Creator will lead it, and there is nothing to resist, but the soul being its own
mistress, and possessing power over its acts, does not in all things obey God,

unless it will to do so. For God will not make it beautiful and excellent, if it be
reluctant and in a manner constrained by force, for this is not virtue at all; but He
must persuade it to become so of its own will and choice. And so this cure is
more difficult than the other; yet even this succeeded, and every kind of
wickedness was banished. And as He re-ordered the bodies which He cured, not
to health only, but to the highest vigor, so did He not merely deliver the souls
from extremist wickedness, but brought them to the very summit of excellence.
A publican became an Apostle, and a persecutor, blasphemer, and injurious,
appeared as herald to the world, and the Magi became teachers of the Jews, and
a thief was declared a citizen of Paradise, and a harlot shone forth by the
greatness of her faith, and of the two women, of Canaan and Samaria, the latter
who was another harlot, undertook to preach the Gospel to her countrymen, and
having enclosed a whole city in her net, so brought them to Christ; while the
former by faith and perseverance, procured the expulsion of an evil spirit from
her daughter's soul; and many others much worse than these were straightway
numbered in the rank of disciples, and at once all the infirmities of their bodies
and diseases of their souls were transformed, and they were fashioned anew to
health and exactest virtue. And of these, not two or three men, not five, or ten, or
twenty, or an hundred only, but entire cities and nations, were very easily
remodeled. Why should one speak of the wisdom of the commands, the
excellency of the heavenly laws, the good ordering of the angelic polity? For
such a life has He proposed to us, such laws appointed for us, such a polity
established, that those who put these things into practice, immediately become
angels and like to God, as far as is in our power, even though they may have
been worse than all men.
3. The Evangelist therefore having brought together all these things, the
marvels in our bodies, in our souls, in the elements (of our faith), the
commandments, those gifts ineffable and higher than the heavens, the laws, the
polity, the persuasion, the future promises, His sufferings, uttered that voice so
wonderful and full of exalted doctrine, saying, "We beheld His glory, the glory as