with Him who keeps them more exactly than any. And for this we shall be most
severely punished. For when we are charged with it, what shall we be able to say
about the loss of them? what pretext to put forward? What defence? For what
reason is there why you did not give? Do you disbelieve that you will receive it
again? And how can this be reasonable? For He that has given to one that has not
given, how shall He not much rather give after He has received? Does the sight
of them please you? Well then, give much the more for this reason, that you may
there be the more delighted, when no one can take them from you. Since now if
you keep them, you will even suffer countless evils. For as a dog, so does the
devil leap upon them that are rich, wishing to snatch from them, as from a child
that holds a sippet or a cake. Let us then give them to our Father, and if the devil
see this done, he will certainly withdraw: and when he has withdrawn, then will
the Father safely give them all to you, when he cannot trouble, in that world to
come. For now surely they that be rich differ not from little children that are
troubled by dogs, while all are barking round them, tearing and pulling; not men
only, but ignoble affections; as gluttony, drunkenness, flattery, uncleanness of
every kind. And when we have to lend, we are very anxious about those that
give much, and look particularly for those that are frank dealers. But here we do
the opposite. For God, Who deals frankly, and gives not one in the hundred, but
a hundred-fold, we desert, and those who will not return us even the capital,
these we seek after. For what return will our belly make us, that consumes the
larger share of our goods? Dung and corruption. Or what will vainglory? Envy
and grudging. Or what nearness? Care and anxiety. Or what uncleanness? Hell
and the venomous worm! For these are the debtors of them that be rich, who pay
this interest upon the capital, evils at present, and dreadful things in expectation.
Shall we then lead to these, pray, with such punishment for interest, and shall we
not trust the same to Christ (4 manuscripts om. [τᾥ]) Who holds forth unto us
heaven, immortal life, blessings unutterable? And what excuse shall we have?
For how do you come not to give to Him, who will assuredly return, and return
in greater abundance? Perhaps it is because it is so long before He repays. Yet

surely He repays even here. For He is true which says, "Seek the kingdom of
heaven, and all these things shall be added to you." [Matthew 6:33] Do you see
this extreme munificence? Those goods, He says, have been stored up for you,
and are not diminishing: but these here I give by way of increase and surplus.
But, besides all this, the very fact of its being so long before you will receive it,
does but make your riches the greater: since the interest is more.
For in the case of those who have money lent them, we see that this is what
the lenders do, lending, that is, with greater readiness to those who refund a long
time after. For he that straightway repays the whole, cuts off the progression of
the interest, but he that keeps possession of it for a longer time, makes also the
gain from it greater. Shall we then, while in man's case we are not offended at
the delay, but even use artifices to make it greater, in the case of God be so littleminded, as on this very ground to be backward and to retract? And yet, as I said,
He both gives here, and along with the reason mentioned, as planning also some
other greater advantage to us, He there keeps the whole in store. For the
abundance of what is given, and the excellency of that gift, transcends this
present worthless life. Since in this perishable and doomed body there is not
even the possibility of receiving those unfading crowns; nor in our present state,
perturbed and full of trouble, and liable to many changes as it is, of attaining to
that unchangeable unperturbed lot. Now you, if any one were to owe you gold,
and while you were staying in a foreign country, and had neither servants, nor
any means to convey it across to the place of your abode, were to promise to pay
you the loan, would beseech him in countless ways to have it paid down not in
the foreign land, but at home rather. But do you think right to receive those
spiritual and unutterable things in this world? Now what madness this would
show! For if you receive them here, you must have them corruptible to a
certainty; but if you wait for that time, He will repay you them incorruptible and
unalloyed. If you receive here, you have gotten lead; but if there, tried gold. Still
He does not even deprive you of the goods of this life. For along with that
promise He has placed another also, to the following effect, That every one that