THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.2.

man is brought to the perfect age. So therefore does man receive
spiritual life in Baptism, which is a spiritual regeneration: while in
Confirmation man arrives at the perfect age, as it were, of the
spiritual life. Hence Pope Melchiades says: "The Holy Ghost, Who
comes down on the waters of Baptism bearing salvation in His flight,
bestows at the font, the fulness of innocence; but in Confirmation He
confers an increase of grace. In Baptism we are born again unto life;
after Baptism we are strengthened." And therefore it is evident that
Confirmation is a special sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: Concerning the institution of this sacrament
there are three opinions. Some (Alexander of Hales, Summa Theol. P.
IV, Q. IX; St. Bonaventure, Sent. iv, D, 7) have maintained that this
sacrament was instituted neither by Christ, nor by the apostles; but
later in the course of time by one of the councils. Others (Pierre de
Tarentaise, Sent. iv, D, 7) held that it was instituted by the apostles.
But this cannot be admitted; since the institution of a new sacrament
belongs to the power of excellence, which belongs to Christ alone.
And therefore we must say that Christ instituted this sacrament not
by bestowing, but by promising it, according to Jn. 16:7: "If I go not,
the Paraclete will not come to you, but if I go, I will send Him to you."
And this was because in this sacrament the fulness of the Holy
Ghost is bestowed, which was not to be given before Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension; according to Jn. 7:39: "As yet the Spirit
was not given, because Jesus was not yet glorified."
Reply to Objection 2: Confirmation is the sacrament of the fulness of
grace: wherefore there could be nothing corresponding to it in the
Old Law, since "the Law brought nothing to perfection" (Heb. 7:19).
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 65, Article 4), all the
sacraments are in some way necessary for salvation: but some, so
that there is no salvation without them; some as conducing to the
perfection of salvation; and thus it is that Confirmation is necessary
for salvation: although salvation is possible without it, provided it be
not omitted out of contempt.
Reply to Objection 4: Those who receive Confirmation, which is the
sacrament of the fulness of grace, are conformed to Christ,
inasmuch as from the very first instant of His conception He was
"full of grace and truth" (Jn. 1:14). This fulness was made known at

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.72, C.2.

His Baptism, when "the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape . . .
upon Him" (Lk. 3:22). Hence (Lk. 4:1) it is written that "Jesus being
full of the Holy Ghost, returned from the Jordan." Nor was it fitting to
Christ's dignity, that He, Who is the Author of the sacraments,
should receive the fulness of grace from a sacrament.