Reply to Objection 2: God is bound to nobody but Himself. Hence,
when it is said that God can only do what He ought, nothing else is
meant by this than that God can do nothing but what is befitting to
Himself, and just. But these words "befitting" and "just" may be
understood in two ways: one, in direct connection with the verb "is";
and thus they would be restricted to the present order of things; and
would concern His power. Then what is said in the objection is false;
for the sense is that God can do nothing except what is now fitting
and just. If, however, they be joined directly with the verb
"can" (which has the effect of extending the meaning), and then
secondly with "is," the present will be signified, but in a confused
and general way. The sentence would then be true in this sense:
"God cannot do anything except that which, if He did it, would be
suitable and just."
Reply to Objection 3: Although this order of things be restricted to
what now exists, the divine power and wisdom are not thus
restricted. Whence, although no other order would be suitable and
good to the things which now are, yet God can do other things and
impose upon them another order.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether God can do better than what He does?

Objection 1: It seems that God cannot do better than He does. For
whatever God does, He does in a most powerful and wise way. But a
thing is so much the better done as it is more powerfully and wisely
done. Therefore God cannot do anything better than He does.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine thus argues (Contra Maximin. iii, 8):
"If God could, but would not, beget a Son His equal, He would have
been envious." For the same reason, if God could have made better
things than He has done, but was not willing so to do, He would have
been envious. But envy is far removed from God. Therefore God
makes everything of the best. He cannot therefore make anything
better than He does.
Objection 3: Further, what is very good and the best of all cannot be
bettered; because nothing is better than the best. But as Augustine
says (Enchiridion 10), "each thing that God has made is good, and,
taken all together they are very good; because in them all consists
the wondrous beauty of the universe." Therefore the good in the
universe could not be made better by God.
Objection 4: Further, Christ as man is full of grace and truth, and has
the Spirit without measure; and so He cannot be better. Again
created happiness is described as the highest good, and thus cannot
be better. And the Blessed Virgin Mary is raised above all the choirs
of angels, and so cannot be better than she is. God cannot therefore
make all things better than He has made them.
On the contrary, It is said (Eph. 3:20): "God is able to do all things
more abundantly than we desire or understand."
I answer that, The goodness of anything is twofold; one, which is of
the essence of it---thus, for instance, to be rational pertains to the
essence of man. As regards this good, God cannot make a thing
better than it is itself; although He can make another thing better
than it; even as He cannot make the number four greater than it is;
because if it were greater it would no longer be four, but another
number. For the addition of a substantial difference in definitions is
after the manner of the addition of unity of numbers (Metaph. viii, 10).
Another kind of goodness is that which is over and above the