had such strength and power as to sever their children from them, they, as
attempting things impossible, would even desist. Wherefore also He leaves the
fathers, and addresses His discourse to the children, instructing the former not to
make the attempt, as attempting things impracticable.
Then lest they should be indignant, or count it hard, see which way He
makes His argument tend: in that having said, "Who hates not father and
mother," He adds, "and his own life." For why do you speak to me of parents,
says He, and brothers, and sisters, and wife? Nothing is nearer than the life to
any man: yet if you hate not this also, you must bear in all things the opposite of
his lot who loves me.
And not even simply to hate it was His command, but so as to expose it to
war, and to battles, and to slaughters, and blood. "For he that bears not his cross,
and comes after me, cannot be my disciple." Thus He said not merely that we
must stand against death, but also against a violent death; and not violent only,
but ignominious too.
And He discourses nothing as yet of His own passion, that when they had
been for a time instructed in these things, they might more easily receive His
word concerning it. Is there not, therefore, cause for amazement, how on their
hearing these things, their soul did not wing its way from the body, the hardships
being everywhere at hand, and the good things in expectation? How then did it
not flee away? Great was both the power of the speaker, and the love of the
hearers. Wherefore though hearing things far more intolerable and galling than
those great men, Moses and Jeremiah, they continued to obey, and to say nothing
against it.
"He that finds his life," says He, "shall lose it: and he that loses his life for
my sake, shall find it." [Matthew 10:39] Do you see how great the damage to
such as love it unduly? How great the gain to them that hate it? I mean, because
the injunctions were disagreeable, when He was bidding them set themselves
against parents, and children, and nature, and kindred, and the world, and their
very soul, He sets forth the profit also, being very great. Thus, "These things,"

says He, "so far from harming, will very greatly profit; and their opposites will
injure;" urging them, as He ever does, by the very things which they desire. For
why are you willing to despise your life? Because you love it? Then for that very
reason despise it, and so you will advantage it in the highest degree, and do the
part of one that loves it.
And mark an instance of unspeakable consideration. For not in respect of
our parents only does He practise this reasoning, nor of our children, but with
regard to our life, which is nearer than all; that the other point may thenceforth
become unquestionable, and they may learn that they will in this way profit
those of their kindred likewise, as much as may be; since so it is in the case even
of our life, which is more essential to us than all.
4. Now these things were enough to recommend men to receive them, their
appointed healers. Yea, who would choose but receive with all readiness them
that were so noble, such true heroes, and as lions running about the earth, and
despising all that pertained to themselves, so that others might be saved? Yet
nevertheless He proffers also another reward, indicating that He is caring here
for the entertainers more than for the guests.
And the first honor He confers is by saying,
"He that receives you, receives me, and he that receives me, receives Him
that sent me." [Matthew 10:40]
With this, what may compare? That one should receive the Father and the
Son! But He holds out herewith another reward also.
" He," says He, "that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall
receive a prophet's reward; and he that receives a righteous man in the name of
a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward." [Matthew 10:41]
And as before He threatens punishment to such as do not receive them, here
He defines also a certain refreshment for the good. And to teach you His greater
care for them, He said not simply, "He that receives a prophet," or "He that
receives a righteous man," but subjoined, "in the name of a prophet," and, "in
the name of a righteous man;" that is, if not for any worldly preferment, nor for