A people of many faces

115. The People of God is incarnate in the peoples of the earth, each of which has its own culture.
The concept of culture is valuable for grasping the various expressions of the Christian life present
in God’s people. It has to do with the lifestyle of a given society, the specific way in which its
members relate to one another, to other creatures and to God. Understood in this way, culture
embraces the totality of a people’s life. Each people in the course of its history develops its
culture with legitimate autonomy. This is due to the fact that the human person, “by nature
stands completely in need of life in society” and always exists in reference to society, finding
there a concrete way of relating to reality. The human person is always situated in a culture:
“nature and culture are intimately linked”. Grace supposes culture, and God’s gift becomes
flesh in the culture of those who receive it.

116. In these first two Christian millennia, countless peoples have received the grace of faith,
brought it to flower in their daily lives and handed it on in the language of their own culture.
Whenever a community receives the message of salvation, the Holy Spirit enriches its culture with
the transforming power of the Gospel. The history of the Church shows that Christianity does not
have simply one cultural expression, but rather, “remaining completely true to itself, with
unswerving fidelity to the proclamation of the Gospel and the tradition of the Church, it will also
reflect the different faces of the cultures and peoples in which it is received and takes root”. In
the diversity of peoples who experience the gift of God, each in accordance with its own culture,
the Church expresses her genuine catholicity and shows forth the “beauty of her varied face”.
In the Christian customs of an evangelized people, the Holy Spirit adorns the Church, showing her
new aspects of revelation and giving her a new face. Through inculturation, the Church “introduces
peoples, together with their cultures, into her own community”, for “every culture offers positive
values and forms which can enrich the way the Gospel is preached, understood and lived”. In
this way, the Church takes up the values of different cultures and becomes sponsa ornata
monilibus suis, “the bride bedecked with her jewels” (cf. Is 61:10)”.

117. When properly understood, cultural diversity is not a threat to Church unity. The Holy Spirit,
sent by the Father and the Son, transforms our hearts and enables us to enter into the perfect
communion of the blessed Trinity, where all things find their unity. He builds up the communion

and harmony of the people of God. The same Spirit is that harmony, just as he is the bond of love
between the Father and the Son. It is he who brings forth a rich variety of gifts, while at the
same time creating a unity which is never uniformity but a multifaceted and inviting harmony.
Evangelization joyfully acknowledges these varied treasures which the Holy Spirit pours out upon
the Church. We would not do justice to the logic of the incarnation if we thought of Christianity as
monocultural and monotonous. While it is true that some cultures have been closely associated
with the preaching of the Gospel and the development of Christian thought, the revealed message
is not identified with any of them; its content is transcultural. Hence in the evangelization of new
cultures, or cultures which have not received the Christian message, it is not essential to impose a
specific cultural form, no matter how beautiful or ancient it may be, together with the Gospel. The
message that we proclaim always has a certain cultural dress, but we in the Church can
sometimes fall into a needless hallowing of our own culture, and thus show more fanaticism than
true evangelizing zeal.