the subject, but would have plainly said that the Jews supposed so, but that Jesus
did not make Himself equal to God. As in another place he does this very thing,
when he perceives that something was said in one way, and understood in
another; as, "Destroy this Temple," said Christ, "and in three days I will raise It
up" [John 2:19]; speaking of His Flesh. But the Jews, not understanding this, and
supposing that the words were spoken of the Jewish Temple, said, "Forty and six
years was this temple in building, and will You rear it up in three days?" Since
then He said one thing, and they imagined another, (for He spoke of His Flesh,
and they thought that the words were spoken of their Temple,) the Evangelist
remarking on this, or rather correcting their imagination, goes on to say, "But He
spoke of the Temple of His Body." So that here also, if Christ had not made
Himself equal with God, had not wished to establish this, and yet the Jews had
imagined that He did, the writer would here also have corrected their
supposition, and would have said, "The Jews thought that He made Himself
equal to God, but indeed He spoke not of equality." And this is done not in this
place only, nor by this Evangelist only, but again elsewhere another Evangelist is
seen to do the same. For when Christ warned His disciples, saying, "Beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees" [Matthew 16:6], and they reasoned
among themselves, saying, "It is because we have taken no bread," and He
spoke of one thing, calling their doctrine "leaven," but the disciples imagined
another, supposing that the words were said of bread; it is not now the Evangelist
who sets them right, but Christ Himself, speaking thus, "How is it that you do
not understand, that I spoke not to you concerning bread?" But here there is
nothing of the kind.
"But," says some one, to remove this very thought Christ has added,

John 5:19
"'The Son can do nothing of Himself.'"
Man! He does the contrary. He says this not to take away, but to confirm,
His Equality. But attend carefully, for this is no common question. The
expression "of Himself" is found in many places of Scripture, with reference
both to Christ and to the Holy Ghost, and we must learn the force of the
expression, that we may not fall into the greatest errors; for if one take it
separately by itself in the way in which it is obvious to take it, consider how
great an absurdity will follow. He said not that He could do some things of
Himself and that others He could not, but universally,
4. "The Son can do nothing of Himself." I ask then my opponent, "Can the
Son do nothing of Himself, tell me?" If he reply, "that He can do nothing," we
will say, that He has done of Himself the very greatest of all goods. As Paul cries
aloud, saying, "Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
with God, but made Himself of no reputation, and took upon Him the form of a
servant." [Philippians 2:6-7] And again, Christ Himself in another place says, "I
have power to lay down My life, and I have power to take it again": and, "No
man takes it from Me, but I lay it down of Myself." [John 10:18] Do you see that
He has power over life and death, and that He wrought of Himself so mighty a
Dispensation? And why speak I concerning Christ, when even we, than whom
nothing can be meaner, do many things of ourselves? Of ourselves we choose
vice, of ourselves we go after virtue, and if we do it not of ourselves, and not
having power, we shall neither suffer hell if we do wrong, nor enjoy the
Kingdom if we do right.
What then means, "Can do nothing of Himself"? That He can do nothing in
opposition to the Father, nothing alien from, nothing strange to Him, which is
especially the assertion of One declaring an Equality and entire agreement.
But wherefore said He not, that "He does nothing contrary," instead of, "He