to cleanse; this is the deacon who is called a minister: and under
this last all the lower Orders are comprised. But the Orders derive
their sacramental nature from their relation to the greatest of the
sacraments, and consequently the number of Orders depends on
this.
Reply to Objection 2: In the early Church, on account of the fewness
of ministers, all the lower ministries were entrusted to the deacons,
as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii), where he says: "Some of the
ministers stand at the closed door of the Church, others are
otherwise occupied in the exercise of their own order; others place
the sacred bread and the chalice of benediction on the altar and offer
them to the priests." Nevertheless all the power to do all these things
was included in the one power of the deacon, though implicitly. But
afterwards the Divine worship developed, and the Church committed
expressly to several persons that which had hitherto been
committed implicitly in one Order. This is what the Master means,
when He says in the text (Sent. iv, D, 24) that the Church instituted
other Orders.
Reply to Objection 3: The orders are directed to the sacrament of the
Eucharist chiefly, and to the other sacraments consequently, for
even the other sacraments flow from that which is contained in that
sacrament. Hence it does not follow that the orders ought to be
distinguished according to the sacraments.
Reply to Objection 4: The angels differ specifically [FP, Question 50,
Article 4]: for this reason it is possible for them to have various
modes of receiving Divine things, and hence also they are divided
into various hierarchies. But in men there is only one hierarchy,
because they have only one mode of receiving Divine things, which
results from the human species, namely through the images of
sensible objects. Consequently the distinction of orders in the
angels cannot bear any relation to a sacrament as it is with us, but
only a relation to the hierarchical actions which among them each
Order exercises on the Orders below. In this respect our Orders
correspond to theirs; since in our hierarchy there are three Orders,
distinguished according to the three hierarchical actions, even as in
each angelic hierarchy.
Reply to Objection 5: The office of psalmist is not an Order, but an
office annexed to an Order. For the psalmist is also styled precentor
because the psalms are recited with chant. Now precentor is not the

name of a special Order, both because it belongs to the whole choir
to sing, and because he has no special relation to the sacrament of
the Eucharist. Since, however, it is a particular office, it is sometimes
reckoned among the Orders, taking these in a broad sense.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the Order should be divided into those

that are sacred and those that are not?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Orders ought not to be divided
into those that are sacred and those that are not. For all the Orders
are sacraments, and all the sacraments are sacred. Therefore all the
Orders are sacred.
Objection 2: Further, by the Orders of the Church a man is not
appointed to any other than Divine offices. Now all these are sacred.
Therefore all the Orders also are sacred.
On the contrary, The sacred Orders are an impediment to the
contracting of marriage and annul the marriage that is already
contracted. But the four lower orders neither impede the contracting
nor annul the contract. Therefore these are not sacred Orders.
I answer that, An Order is said to be sacred in two ways. First, in
itself, and thus every order is sacred, since it is a sacrament.
Secondly, by reason of the matter about which it exercises an act,
and thus an Order is called sacred, if it exercises an act about some
consecrated thing. In this sense there are only three sacred Orders,
namely the priesthood and diaconate, which exercise an act about
the consecrated body and blood of Christ, and the subdiaconate,
which exercises an act about the consecrated vessels. Wherefore
continency is enjoined them, that they who handle holy things may
themselves be holy and clean.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.