John 7:8
"Go ye up to the feast: I go not up yet."
To show that He said these things not as needing them, or desiring to be
flattered by them, but permitting them to do what pertained to Jews. "How then,"
says some one, "went He up after saying, 'I go not up'?" He said not, once for
all, "I go not up," but, "now," that is, "not with you."
"For My time is not yet fulfilled."
And yet He was about to be crucified at the coming Passover. "How then
went He not up also? For if He went not up because the time was not yet come,
He ought not to have gone up at all." But He went not up for this purpose, that
He might suffer, but that He might instruct them. "But wherefore secretly? Since
He might by going openly both have been amidst them, and have restrained their
unruly impulses as He often did." It was because He would not do this
continually. Since had He gone up openly, and again blinded them, He would
have made His Godhead to shine through in a greater degree, which at present
behooved not, but He rather concealed it. And since they thought that His
remaining was from cowardice, He shows them the contrary, and that it was
from confidence, and a dispensation, and that knowing beforehand the time
when He should suffer, He would, when it should at length be at hand, be most
desirous of going up to Jerusalem. And methinks by saying, "Go ye up," He
meant, "Think not that I compel you to stay with Me against your will," and this
addition of, "My time is not yet fully come," is the expression of one declaring
that miracles must be wrought and sermons spoken, so that greater multitudes
might believe, and the disciples be made more steadfast by seeing the boldness
and the sufferings of their Master.
3. Learn we then, from what has been said, His kindness and gentleness;
"Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart" [Matthew 11:29]; and let us cast
away all bitterness. If any exalt himself against us, let us be humble; if any be

bold, let us wait upon him; if any bite and devour us with mocks and jests, let us
not be overcome; lest in defending ourselves we destroy ourselves. For wrath is
a wild beast, a wild beast keen and angry. Let us then repeat to ourselves
soothing charms drawn from the holy Scripture, and say, "You are earth and
ashes." "Why is earth and ashes proud?" [Sirach 10:9], and, "The sway of his
fury shall be his destruction" [Sirach 1:22]: and, "The wrathful man is not
comely" [Proverbs 11:25, Septuagint]; for there is nothing more shameful,
nothing uglier than a visage inflamed with anger. As when you stir up mud there
is an ill savor, so when a soul is disturbed by passion there is great indecency
and unpleasantness. "But," says some one, "I endure not insult from mine
enemies." Wherefore? Tell me. If the charge be true, then you ought, even before
the affront, to have been pricked at heart, and thank your enemy for his rebukes;
if it be false, despise it. He has called you poor, laugh at him; he has called you
base-born and foolish, then mourn for him; for "He that says to his brother, You
fool, shall be in danger of hell fire." [Matthew 5:22] Whenever therefore one
insults you, consider the punishment that he undergoes; then shall you not only
not be angry, but shall even shed tears for him. For no man is angry with one in a
fever or inflammation, but pities and weeps for all such; and such a thing is a
soul that is angry. Nay, if even thou desire to avenge yourself, hold your peace,
and you have dealt your enemy a mortal blow; while if you add reviling to
reviling, you have kindled a fire. "But," says some one, "the bystanders accuse
us of weakness if we hold our peace." No, they will not condemn your weakness,
but admire you for your wisdom. Moreover, if you are stung by insolence, you
become insolent; and being stung, compel men to think that what has been said
of you is true. Wherefore, tell me, does a rich man laugh when he is called poor?
Is it not because he is conscious that he is not poor? If therefore we will laugh at
insults, we shall afford the strongest proof that we are not conscious of the faults
alleged. Besides, how long are we to dread the accounts we render to men? How
long are we to despise our common Lord, and be nailed to the flesh? "For
whereas there is among you strife, and envying, and divisions, are you not