John 20:15
"Woman, why do you weep? Whom do you seek?"
This showed that He knew what she wished to ask, and led her to make
answer. And the woman, understanding this, does not again mention the name of
Jesus, but as though her questioner knew the subject of her enquiry replies,
"Sir, if you have borne him hence, tell me where you have laid him, and I
will take him away."
Again she speaks of laying down, and taking away, and carrying, as though
speaking of a corpse. But her meaning is this; "If you have borne him hence for
fear of the Jews, tell me, and I will take him." Great is the kindness and loving
affection of the woman, but as yet there is nothing lofty with her. Wherefore He
now sets the matter before her, not by appearance, but by Voice. For as He was
at one time known to the Jews, and at another time unperceived though present;
so too in speaking, He, when He chose, then made Himself known; as also when
He said to the Jews, "Whom do you seek?" they knew neither the Countenance
nor the Voice until He chose. And this was the case here. And He named her
name only, reproaching and blaming her that she entertained such fancies
concerning One who lived. But how was it that,

John 20:16
"She turned herself, and says," if so be that He was speaking to her? It seems to
me, that after having said, "Where have ye laid him?" she turned to the Angels to
ask why they were astonished, and that then Christ, by calling her by name,
turned her to Himself from them, and revealed Himself by His Voice; for when
He called her "Mary," then she knew Him; so that the recognition was not by His
appearance, but by His Voice. And if any say, "Whence is it clear that the Angels
were awestruck, and that on this account the woman turned herself," they will in
this place say, "whence is it clear that she would have touched Him, and fallen at
His feet?" Now as this is clear from His saying, "Touch Me not," so is the other
clear from its saying, that she turned herself. But wherefore, said He,

John 20:17
"Touch Me not"?
2. Some assert, that she asked for spiritual grace, because she had heard
Him when with the disciples say, "If I go to the Father, 'I will ask Him, and He
shall give you another Comforter.'" [c. xiv. 3, 16] But how could she who was
not present with the disciples have heard this? Besides, such an imagination is
far from the meaning here. And how should she ask, when He had not yet gone
to the Father? What then is the sense? Methinks that she wished still to converse
with Him as before, and that in her joy she perceived nothing great in Him,
although He had become far more excellent in the Flesh. To lead her therefore
from this idea, and that she might speak to Him with much awe, (for neither with
the disciples does He henceforth appear so familiar as before,) He raises her
thoughts, that she should give more reverent heed to Him. To have said,
"Approach Me not as you did before, for matters are not in the same state, nor
shall I henceforth be with you in the same way," would have been harsh and
high-sounding; but the saying,
"I am not yet ascended to the Father," though not painful to hear, was the
saying of One declaring the same thing. For by saying, "I am not yet ascended,"
He shows that He hastes and presses there; and that it was not meet that One
about to depart there, and no longer to converse with men, should be looked on
with the same feelings as before. And the sequel shows that this is the case.
"Go and say unto the brethren, that I go unto My Father, and your Father,
unto My God and your God."
Yet He was not about to do so immediately, but after forty days. How then
says He this? With a desire to raise their minds, and to persuade them that He
departs into the heavens. But the, "To My Father and your Father, to My God,
and your God," belongs to the Dispensation, since the "ascending" also belongs
to His Flesh. For He speaks these words to one who had no high thoughts. "Is