call the doers to account. Why then, in a far worse condition than those who are
possessed of evil sprits are we that sin. We do not, indeed, foam at the mouth,
nor distort our eyes, or throw about our hands convulsively; but as for this,
would that we did it in our body and not in our soul! Will you that I show you a
soul, foaming, filthy, and a distortion of the mind's eyes? Think of those who are
in a passion and drunken with rage; can any form be filthier than the words they
discharge? In very deed it is like a sputtering of noisome slaver. And just as the
possessed know none of those who are present, so neither do these. Their
understanding darkened, their eyes distorted, they see not who is friend, who foe,
who worthy of respect, who contemptible, but they see all alike without a
difference. And then, do you not see them, how they tremble, just like those
others? But they do not fall to the ground, say you? True, but their soul lies on
the ground and falls there in convulsions: since had it stood upright, it would not
have come into the condition it is in. Or think you not that it betokens a soul
abjectly sprawling and lost to all self-possession, the things men can do and say
when drunken with rage? There is also another form of madness worse than this.
What may this be? When men cannot so much as suffer themselves to vent their
anger, but instead of that nourish within their own bosoms, to their own proper
hurt, as it were a very hangman with his lash, the rancorous remembrance of
wrongs. For it is a bane to themselves first, the malice that they bear. To say
nothing of the things to come, what torture, think you, must that man undergo in
the scourging of his soul, as day by day he looks how he may avenge himself on
his enemy? He chastises himself first, and suffers punishment, swelling (with
suppressed passion), fighting against himself, setting himself on fire. For needs
must the fire be always burning within you: while raising the fever to such a
height, and not suffering it to wane, you think you are inflicting some evil on the
other, whereas you are wasting yourself, ever bearing about with you a flame
which is always at its height, and not letting your soul have rest, but evermore
being in a state of fury, and having your thoughts in a turmoil and tempest. What
is more grievous than this madness, to be always smarting with pain, and ever

swelling and inflamed? For such are the souls of the resentful: when they see
him on whom they wish to be revenged, straightway it is as if a blow were struck
them: if they hear his voice, they cower and tremble: if they be on their bed, they
picture to themselves numberless revenges, hanging, torturing that enemy of
theirs: and if, beside all this, they see him also to be in renown, O! The misery
they suffer! Forgive him the offense, and free yourself from the torment. Why
continue always in a state of punishment, that you may once punish him, and
take your revenge? Why establish for yourself a hectic disease? Why, when your
wrath would fain depart from you, do you keep it back? Let it not remain until
the evening, says Paul. [Ephesians 4:26] For like some eating rot or moth, even
so does it gnaw through the very root of our understanding. Why shut up a beast
within your bowels? Better a serpent or an adder to lie within your heart, than
anger and resentment: for those indeed would soon have done with us, but this
remains forever fixing in us its fangs, instilling its poison, letting loose upon us
an invading host of bitter thoughts. "That he should laugh me to scorn," say you,
"that he should despise me!" O wretched, miserable man, would you not be
ridiculed by your fellow-servant, and would you be hated by your Master?
Would you not be despised by your fellow-servant, and do you despise your
Master?
To be despised by him, is it more than you can bear, but do you not think
that God is indignant, because you ridicule Him, because you despise Him, when
you will not do as He bids you? But that your enemy will not even ridicule you,
is manifest from hence (that), whereas if you follow up the revenge, great is the
ridicule, great the contempt, for this is a mark of a little mind; on the contrary, if
you forgive him, great is the admiration, for this is a mark of greatness of soul.
But you will say, he knows not this. Let God know it, that you may have the
greater reward. For He says, "Lend to those of whom you hope not to receive."
[Luke 6:34] So let us also do good to those who do not even perceive that one is
doing them good, that they may not, by returning to us praise or any other thing,
lessen our reward. For when we receive nothing from men, then we shall receive