SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.3.

and scorpions, and upon all the power of the enemy: and nothing
shall hurt you."
It is not, however, lawful to adjure them for the purpose of learning
something from them, or of obtaining something through them, for
this would amount to holding fellowship with them: except perhaps
when certain holy men, by special instinct or Divine revelation, make
use of the demons' actions in order to obtain certain results: thus we
read of the Blessed James [the Greater; Apocrypha, N.T., Hist.
Certam. Apost. vi, 19] that he caused Hermogenes to be brought to
him, by the instrumentality of the demons.
Reply to Objection 1: Origen is speaking of adjuration made, not
authoritatively by way of compulsion, but rather by way of a friendly
appeal.
Reply to Objection 2: Necromancers adjure and invoke the demons
in order to obtain or learn something from them: and this is unlawful,
as stated above. Wherefore Chrysostom, commenting on our Lord's
words to the unclean spirit (Mk. 1:25), "Speak no more, and go out of
the man," says: "A salutary teaching is given us here, lest we believe
the demons, however much they speak the truth."
Reply to Objection 3: This argument considers the adjuration
whereby the demon's help is besought in doing or learning
something: for this savors of fellowship with them. On the other
hand, to repulse the demons by adjuring them, is to sever oneself
from their fellowship.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.89, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is lawful to adjure an irrational

creature?
Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to adjure an irrational creature.
An adjuration consists of spoken words. But it is useless to speak to
one that understands not, such as an irrational creature. Therefore it
is vain and unlawful to adjure an irrational creature.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly wherever adjuration is admissible,
swearing is also admissible. But swearing is not consistent with an
irrational creature. Therefore it would seem unlawful to employ
adjuration towards one.
Objection 3: Further, there are two ways of adjuring, as explained
above (Articles 1,2). One is by way of appeal; and this cannot be
employed towards irrational creatures, since they are not masters of
their own actions. The other kind of adjuration is by way of
compulsion: and, seemingly, neither is it lawful to use this towards
them, because we have not the power to command irrational
creatures, but only He of Whom it was said (Mt. 8:27): "For the winds
and the sea obey Him." Therefore in no way, apparently, is it lawful
to adjure irrational creatures.
On the contrary, Simon and Jude are related to have adjured
dragons and to have commanded them to withdraw into the desert.
[Historiae Certam. Apost. vi. 19.]
I answer that, Irrational creatures are directed to their own actions by
some other agent. Now the action of what is directed and moved is
also the action of the director and mover: thus the movement of the
arrow is an operation of the archer. Wherefore the operation of the
irrational creature is ascribed not only to it, but also and chiefly to
God, Who disposes the movements of all things. It is also ascribed
to the devil, who, by God's permission, makes use of irrational
creatures in order to inflict harm on man.
Accordingly the adjuration of an irrational creature may be of two
kinds. First, so that the adjuration is referred to the irrational
creature in itself: and in this way it would be vain to adjure an
irrational creature. Secondly, so that it be referred to the director and
mover of the irrational creature, and in this sense a creature of this