and one angel to another angel, seeing that among men, and also among angels, one is
superior to another. And since among men he who is superior on one point is inferior on
another, it would follow that men should interchange latria in their mutual dealings,
which is absurd.
4. Man ought to pay God something special in recognition of the special benefit of his
creation; and that is the worship of latria.
5. Latria means service, and service is due to the master. Now he is properly and truly
called master, who lays down to others precepts of conduct, and himself takes a
precept of conduct from none: for he who executes the arrangement of a superior is
rather minister than master. But God's providence disposes all things to their due
actions: hence in Holy Writ the angels and the heavenly bodies are said to minister both
to God, whose ordinance they execute, and to us, to whose benefit their actions tend.
Therefore the worship of latria, due to the sovereign master, is to be paid only to the
sovereign principle of the universe.
6. Among all acts of latria, a unique rank belongs to sacrifice: for genuflections,
prostrations and other such marks of honour may be paid even to man, although with
another intention than they are paid to God: but no one ever thought to offer sacrifice
except to him whom he regarded as God, or affected so to regard. The outward rite of
sacrifice represents the inward true sacrifice, whereby the human mind offers itself to
God, as to the principle of its creation, the author of its activity, the term of its
happiness. Therefore to God alone should man offer sacrifice and the worship of latria,
and not to any created spirits whatsoever.
Hence it is said: He shall be slain who offers sacrifice to any gods but to the Lord alone
(Exod. xxii, 20): The Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and him only shalt thou serve (Deut.
vi, 13). And because it is an undue thing for the worship of latria to be paid to any other
than the first principle of all things, and only an evil-minded rational creature will incite
others to undue acts; evidently men have been set on to the aforesaid undue worships
by the instigation of devils, who have presented themselves to men to be adored in
place of God, seeking divine honour. Hence it is said: All the gods of the heathen are
devils (Ps. xcv, 5): The things which the heathen sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and
not to God (1 Cor. x, 20).

## CHAPTER CXXI--That the Divine Law directs man to a Rational Use of Corporeal and
Sensible Things
AS man's mind may be raised to God by corporeal and sensible things, provided that
they are duly used to show reverence to God, so also the undue use of them either
totally withdraws the mind from God, fixing the final intention of the will upon inferior
things, or clogs the mind's aspiration after God, making it take unnecessary
interest in such things. Now the divine law is given for this end chiefly, to lead man
to cling to God. It is a function therefore of divine law to direct man in his affection for
and use of corporeal and sensible things.
2. As man's mind is subordinate to God, so his body is subordinate to his soul, and his
lower powers to his reason. It belongs therefore to divine providence, the plan of which,
as proposed by God to man, is the divine law, to see that all things keep their order.
Therefore that divine law must so direct man as that his lower powers shall be subject to
his reason, and his body to his soul, and exterior things shall serve his necessity.
4. Every lawgiver must comprise in his legislation those enactments without which the
law could not be observed. Now law being set over reason, man could not follow
the law unless all other things belonging to man were subjected to reason.
Hence it is said: Your reasonable service (Rom. xii, i); and, This is the will of God, your
sanctification (1 Thess. iv, 9).
Hereby is excluded the error of such as say that those acts alone are sinful, whereby
our neighbour is either hurt or shocked.