forum and all tumults of the forum, and from all such matters, and even
continuing in ease and quietness. What then? After that the torch of love had set
him on fire, see how it made this plain and home-keeping man strong to endure
and fond of toil. And of this hear not what I say, but what the patriarch himself
says: how finding fault with his kinsman, his words are, "These twenty years am
I with you." [Genesis 31:36] And how were thou these twenty years? (For this
also he adds,) "Consumed by the heat in the day time, and with the frost by night,
and sleep departed from my eyes." Thus speaks that "plain man, keeping at
home," and living that easy life.
Again, that he was timid is evident, in that, expecting to see Esau, he was
dead with fear. But see again, how this timid man became bolder than a lion
under the influence of love. For putting himself forward like some champion
before the rest, he was ready to be first in receiving that savage and slaughterbreathing brother as he supposed him to be, and with his own body to purchase
the safety of his wives: and him whom he feared and shuddered at, he desired to
behold himself foremost in the array. For this fear was not so strong as his
affection for his wives. Do you see how, being timid, he became suddenly
adventurous, not by changing his character, but being invigorated by love? For
that after this also he was timid, is evident by his changing from place to place.
But let no man consider what has been said to be a charge against that
righteous man: since being timid is no reproach, for this is a man's nature; but
the doing any thing unseemly for timidity's sake. For it is possible for one that is
timid by nature to become courageous through piety. What did Moses? Did he
not, through fear of a single Egyptian, fly, and go away into banishment?
Nevertheless, this fugitive who could not endure the menace of a single man,
after that he tasted of the honey of love, nobly and without compulsion from any
man, was forward to perish together with them whom he loved. "For if you will
forgive their sin," says he, forgive; and if not, blot me, I pray you, out of Your
book which you have written. [Exodus 32:32]
9. Moreover, that love makes also the fierce moderate, and the wanton

chaste, we have no longer need of any examples: this being evident to all men.
Though a man be more savage than any wild beast, no sheep so gentle as he is
rendered by love. Thus, what could be more savage and frantic than Saul? But
when his daughter let his enemy go, he uttered not against her even a bitter
word. And he that unsparingly put to the sword all the priests for David's sake,
seeing that his daughter had sent him away from the house, was not indignant
with her even as far as words; and this when so great a fraud had been contrived
against him: because he was restrained by the stronger bridle of love.
Now as moderation, so chastity, is an ordinary effect of love. If a man love
his own wife as he ought to love, even though he be never so much inclined to
wantoness, he will not endure to look upon another woman, on account of his
affection for her. "For love," [Canticles 8:5] says one, "is strong as death." So
that from no other source does wanton behavior arise than from want of love.
Since then love is the Artificer of all virtue, let us with all exactness implant
her in our own souls, that she may produce for us many blessings, and that we
may have her fruit continually abounding, the fruit which is ever fresh and never
decays. For thus shall we obtain no less than eternal blessings: which may we all
obtain, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the
Father, and also the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, and honor, now and for ever,
and world without end. Amen.