"But whence does it appear that they will believe another?" From their
hating Christ, since they who turn aside from Him who comes according to the
will of God will, it is quite plain, receive the enemy of God. And marvel not if
He now puts forward Moses, although He said, "I receive not witness from man,"
for He referrs them not to Moses, but to the Scriptures of God. However, since
the Scriptures terrified them less, He brings round His discourse to the very
person (of Moses), setting over against them their Lawgiver as their accuser, thus
rendering the terror more impressive; and each of their assertions He refutes.
Observe: they said that they persecuted Him through love for God, He shows
that they did so through hating God; they said that they held fast to Moses, He
shows that they acted thus because they believed not Moses. For had they been
zealous for the law, they ought to have received Him who fulfilled it; if they
loved God they ought to have believed One who drew them to Him, if they
believed Moses they ought to have done homage to One of whom Moses
prophesied. "But" (says Christ) "if Moses is disbelieved before My coming, it is
nothing unlikely that I, who am heralded by him, should be driven away by you."
As then He had shown from their conduct towards Himself that they who
admired John (really) despised him, so now He shows that they who thought that
they believed Moses, believed him not, and turns back on their own head all that
they thought to put forward in their own behalf. "So far," He says, "am I from
drawing you away from the Law, that I call your Lawgiver himself to be your
accuser."
That the Scriptures testified of Him He declared, but where they testify He
added not; desiring to inspire them with greater awe, and to prompt them to
search, and to reduce them to the necessity of questioning. For had He told them
readily and without their questioning, they would have rejected the testimony;
but now, if they gave any heed to His words, they needed first of all to ask, and
learn from Him what that testimony was. On this account He deals the more
largely in assertions and threats, not in proofs only, that even so He may bring
them over by fear of what He says; but they even so were silent. Such a thing is

wickedness; whatsoever a man say or do it is not stirred to move, but remains
keeping its peculiar venom.
Wherefore we must cast out all wickedness from our souls, and never more
contrive any deceit; for, says one, "To the perverse God sends crooked paths"
[Proverbs 21:8, Septuagint]; and, "The holy spirit of discipline will flee deceit,
and remove from thoughts that are without understanding." [Wisdom 1:5] For
nothing makes men so foolish as wickedness; since when a man is treacherous,
unfair, ungrateful, (these are different forms of wickedness,) when without
having been wronged he grieves another, when he weaves deceits, how shall he
not exhibit an example of excessive folly? Again, nothing makes men so wise as
virtue; it renders them thankful and fair-minded, merciful, mild, gentle, and
candid; it is wont to be the mother of all other blessings. And what is more
understanding than one so disposed? For virtue is the very spring and root of
prudence, just as all wickedness has its beginning in folly. For, the insolent man
and the angry become the prey of their respective passions from lack of wisdom;
on which account the prophet said, "There is no soundness in my flesh: my
wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness" [Psalm 38:3-4]:
showing that all sin has its beginning in folly: and so the virtuous man who has
the fear of God is more understanding than any; wherefore a wise man has said,
"The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." [Proverbs 1:7] If then to fear
God is to have wisdom, and the wicked man has not that fear, he is deprived of
that which is wisdom indeed—and deprived of that which is wisdom indeed, he
is more foolish than any. And yet many admire the wicked as being able to do
injustice and harm, not knowing that they ought to deem them wretched above
all men, who thinking to injure others thrust the sword against themselves—an
act of extremest folly, that a man should strike himself and not even know that
he does so, but should think that he is injuring another while he is killing
himself. Wherefore Paul, knowing that we slay ourselves when we smite others,
says, "Why do ye not rather take wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer yourselves
to be defrauded?" [1 Corinthians 6:7] For the not suffering wrong consists in