obtain." They had not then yet, as it seems, attained. And having said thus, he
teaches them also the manner.

1 Corinthians 9:25
"And every man that strives in the games is temperate in all things."
What is, "all things?" He does not abstain from one and err in another, but
he masters entirely gluttony and lasciviousness and drunkenness and all his
passions. "For this," says he, "takes place even in the heathen games. For
neither is excess of wine permitted to those who contend at the time of the
contest, nor wantonness, lest they should weaken their vigor, nor yet so much as
to be busied about any thing else, but separating themselves altogether from all
things they apply themselves to their exercise only." Now if there these things be
so where the crown falls to one, much more here, where the incitement in
emulation is more abundant. For here neither is one to be crowned alone, and the
rewards also far surpass the labors. Wherefore also he puts it so as to shame
them, saying, "Now they do it receive to a corruptible crown, but we an
incorruptible."

1 Corinthians 9:26
2. "I therefore so run, as not uncertainly."
Thus having shamed them from those that are without, he next brings
forward himself also, which kind of thing is a most excellent method of
teaching: and accordingly we find him every where doing so.
But what is, "not uncertainly?" "Looking to some mark," says he, not at
random and in vain, as you do. For what profit have ye of entering into idoltemples, and exhibiting for-truth that perfectness? None. But not such am I, but
all things whatsoever I do, I do for the salvation of my neighbor. Whether I show
forth perfectness, it is for their sake; or condescension, for their sake again:
whether I surpass Peter in declining to receive [compensation], it is that they
may not be offended; or descend lower than all, being circumcised and shaving
my head, it is that they may not be subverted. This is, "not uncertainly." But you,
why do you eat in idol-temples, tell me? Nay, you can not assign any reasonable
cause. For "meat commends you not to God; neither if you eat are you the better,
nor if you eat not are you the worse." [1 Corinthians 8:8] Plainly then you run at
random: for this is, "uncertainly."
"So fight I, as not beating the air." This he says, again intimating that he
acted not at random nor in vain. "For I have one at whom I may strike, i.e., the
devil. But thou dost not strike him, but simply throwest away your strength."
Now so far then, altogether bearing with them, he thus speaks. For since he
had dealt somewhat vehemently with them in the preceding part, he now on the
contrary keeps back his rebuke, reserving for the end of the discourse the deep
wound of all. Since here he says that they act at random and in vain; but
afterwards signifies that it is at the risk of no less than utter ruin to their own
soul, and that even apart from all injury to their brethren, neither are they
themselves guiltless in daring so to act.