whole corpse, but the head? 'The tongue,' she says, 'that pained me, that I long to
see silent.' But the contrary will happen, as indeed it also has done, thou
wretched and miserable one! It will cry louder afterwards, when it is cut out. For
then indeed it cried in Judæa only, but now it will reach to the ends of the world;
and wheresoever you enter into a church, whether it be among the Moors, or
among the Persians, or even unto the British isles themselves, you hear John
crying, "It is not lawful for you to have your brother Phillip's wife." But she,
unknowing to reason in any such way, urges and presses, and thrusts on the
senseless tyrant to the murder, fearing lest he change his mind. But from this too
learn thou again the power of virtue. Not even when he was shut up and bound
and silent, does she bear the righteous man. Do you see how weak a thing vice
is? How unclean? For in the place of meats it brings in a human head upon a
charger. What is more polluted, what more accursed, what more immodest, than
that damsel? What a voice she uttered in that theatre of the devil, in that banquet
of demons! Do you see this tongue and that; the one bringing healthful
medicines, the other one with poison on it, and made the purveyor to a devilish
banquet. But wherefore did she not command him to be murdered within there,
at the feast, when her pleasure would have been greater? She feared lest if he
should come there and be seen, he should change them all by his look, by his
boldness. Therefore surely it is that she demands his head, wishing to set up a
bright trophy of fornication; and give it to her mother. Do you see the wages of
dancing, do you see the spoils of that devilish plot? I mean not the head of John,
but her paramour himself. For if one examine it carefully, against the king that
trophy was set up, and the victress was vanquished, and the beheaded was
crowned, and proclaimed victor, even after his death shaking more vehemently
the hearts of the offenders. And that what I have said is no [mere] boast, ask of
Herod himself; who, when he heard of the miracles of Christ, said, "This is John,
he is risen from the dead: and therefore do these powers work in him." [Matthew
14:2] So lively was the fear, so abiding the agony he retained; and none had
power to cast down the terror of his conscience, but that incorruptible Judge

continued to take him by the throat, and day by day to demand of him
satisfaction for the murder. Knowing, then, these things, let us not fear to suffer
evil, but to do evil; for that indeed is victory, but this defeat.
Wherefore also Paul said, "Why not rather take wrong, why not rather be
defrauded. Nay, you yourselves do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren."
For by the suffering evil [come] those crowns, those prizes, that proclamation [of
victory]. And this may be seen in all the saints. Since then they all were thus
crowned, thus proclaimed, let us too travel this road, and let us pray indeed that
we enter not into temptation; but if it should come, let us make stand with much
manliness and display the proper readiness of mind, that we may obtain the good
things to come, through the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, might,
honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.