Again, Jerome, in a letter to Magnus, a famous orator of Rome, having enumerated many doctors
of Scripture, such as Basil and Gregory, adds: "All these have so intermingled in their books the
teachings and the sayings of the philosophers that one knows not which to admire first in them,
their secular erudition or their knowledge of the Scriptures." But this they would not have done
had such been illicit or useless.

Also Jerome in a letter to Pammachius about the death of Paula says: you have become enamored
of the captive woman, secular wisdom, and captivated by her beauty, cut her hair and her finger
nails, cut away the enticement of her tresses and the adornments of her words, bathe her with
prophetic niter, and, lying with her, say: 'His left hand under my head, and his right hand shall
embrace me' (Cant. 8:3), and many children will the captive woman give to you, and from the
Moabite, Israelites will be born to you." Therefore with fruitful results some make use of secular
wisdom.

Again Augustine (II De Trinitate) says: "I shall not be without zeal in seeking out knowledge of
God, whether through Scripture or creatures"; but knowledge of God through creaturegis given
in philosophy; therefore it is not unfitting that in sacred doctrine one should make use of
philosophical reasoning.

Again Augustine (Book II, De doctrina Christiana) says: "If the philosophers have by chance
uttered truths helpful to our faith, they are not only not to be feared, but rather those truths ought
to be taken from them as from unjust possessors and used to our advantage." Thus the
conclusion is as before.

Also on the saying in Dan. 1:8, "But Daniel purposed in his heart," the gloss says: "If anyone
ignorant of mathematics should write in opposition to the mathematicians, or knowing nothing of

philosophy should argue against the philosophers, would he not be derided?" But doctors of
sacred Scripture must at times argue with philosophers; therefore it is needful that they make use
of philosophy.

Response. I answer that it must be said that gifts of grace are added to those of nature in such a
way that they do not destroy the latter, but rather perfect them; wherefore also the light of faith,
which is gratuitously infused into our minds, does not destroy the natural light of cognition,
which is in us by natuise. For although the natural light of the human mind is insufficient to
reveal those truths revealed by faith, yet it is impossible that those things which God has
manifested to us by faith should be contrary to those which are evident to us by natural
knowledge. In this case one would necessarily be false: and since both kinds of truth are from
God, God would be the author of error, a thing which is impossible. Rather, since in imperfect
things there is found some imitation of the perfect, though the image is deficient, in those things
known by natural reason there are certain similitudes of the truths revealed by faith. Now, as
sacred doctrine is founded upon the light of faith, so philosophy depends upon the light of
natural reason; wherefore it is impossible that philosophical truths are contrary to those that are
of faith; but they are deficient as compared to them. Nevertheless they incorporate some
similitudes of those higher truths, and some things that are preparatory for them, just as nature is
the preamble to grace.