having reminded us of the cross and blood of our Lord. "For you are bought,"
says he, "with a price; be not ye the servants of men." Consider, says he, the
price that has been paid for you, and you will be a slave to no man; by the price
meaning the cross.
Since not merely by the fingers ought one to engrave it, but before this by
the purpose of the heart with much faith. And if in this way you have marked it
on your face, none of the unclean spirits will be able to stand near you, seeing
the blade whereby he received his wound, seeing the sword which gave him his
mortal stroke. For if we, on seeing the places in which the criminals are
beheaded, shudder; think what the devil must endure, seeing the weapon,
whereby Christ put an end to all his power, and cut off the head of the dragon.
Be not ashamed then of so great a blessing, lest Christ be ashamed of you,
when He comes with His glory, and the sign appears before Him, shining beyond
the very sunbeam. For indeed the cross comes then, uttering a voice by its
appearance, and pleading with the whole world for our Lord, and signifying that
no part has failed of what pertained to Him.
This sign, both in the days of our forefathers and now, has opened doors
that were shut up; this has quenched poisonous drugs; this has taken away the
power of hemlock; this has healed bites of venomous beasts. For if it opened the
gates of hell, and threw wide the archways of Heaven, and made a new entrance
into Paradise, and cut away the nerves of the devil; what marvel, if it prevailed
over poisonous drugs, and venomous beasts, and all other such things.
This therefore do thou engrave upon your mind, and embrace the salvation
of our souls. For this cross saved and converted the world, drove away error,
brought back truth, made earth Heaven, fashioned men into angels. Because of
this, the devils are no longer terrible, but contemptible; neither is death, death,
but a sleep; because of this, all that wars against us is cast to the ground, and
trodden under foot.
If any one therefore say to you, Do you worship the crucified? Say, with
your voice all joy, and your countenance gladdened, "I do both worship Him,

and will never cease to worship." And if he laugh, weep for him, because he is
mad. Thank the Lord, that He has bestowed on us such benefits, as one cannot so
much as learn without His revelation from above. Why, this is the very reason of
his laughing, that "the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit."
[1 Corinthians 2:14] Since our children too feel this, when they see any of the
great and marvellous things; and if you bring a child into the mysteries, he will
laugh. Now the heathen are like these children; or rather they are more imperfect
even than these; wherefore also they are more wretched, in that not in an
immature age, but when full grown, they have the feelings of babes; wherefore
neither are they worthy of indulgence.
But let us with a clear voice, shouting both loud and high, cry out and say
(and should all the heathen be present, so much the more confidently), that the
cross is our glory, and the sum of all our blessings, and our confidence, and all
our crown. I would that also with Paul I were able to say, "By which the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world;" [Galatians 6:14] but I cannot,
restrained as I am by various passions.
8. Wherefore I admonish both you, and surely before you myself, to be
crucified to the world, and to have nothing in common with the earth, but to set
your love on your country above, and the glory and the good things that come
from it. For indeed we are soldiers of a heavenly King, and are clad with
spiritual arms. Why then take we upon ourselves the life of traders, and
mountebanks, nay rather of worms? For where the King is, there should also the
soldier be. Yea, we have become soldiers, not of them that are far off, but of
them that are near. For the earthly king indeed would not endure that all should
be in the royal courts, and at his own side, but the King of the Heavens wills all
to be near His royal throne.
And how, one may say, is it possible for us, being here, to stand by that
throne? Because Paul too being on earth was where the seraphim, where the
cherubim are; and nearer to Christ, than these the body guards to the king. For
these turn about their faces in many directions, but him nothing beguiled nor