FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.6.

by means of its proper act.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 17, Article 1), when
we were treating of the acts of the will and reason, the will moves
and precedes the reason, in one way, and the reason moves and
precedes the will in another: so that both the movement of the will
can be called rational, and the act of the reason, voluntary.
Accordingly sin is found in the reason, either through being a
voluntary defect of the reason, or through the reason being the
principle of the will's act.
The Reply to the Third Objection is evident from what has been said
(ad 1).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.74, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the sin of morose delectation is in the

reason?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sin of morose delectation is not
in the reason. For delectation denotes a movement of the appetitive
power, as stated above (Question 31, Article 1). But the appetitive
power is distinct from the reason, which is an apprehensive power.
Therefore morose delectation is not in the reason.
Objection 2: Further, the object shows to which power an act
belongs, since it is through the act that the power is directed to its
object. Now a morose delectation is sometimes about sensible
goods, and not about the goods of the reason. Therefore the sin of
morose delectation is not in the reason.
Objection 3: Further, a thing is said to be morose through taking a
length of time. But length of time is no reason why an act should
belong to a particular power. Therefore morose delectation does not
belong to the reason.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 12) that "if the consent
to a sensual delectation goes no further than the mere thought of the
pleasure, I deem this to be like as though the woman alone had
partaken of the forbidden fruit." Now "the woman" denotes the lower
reason, as he himself explains (De Trin. xii, 12). Therefore the sin of
morose delectation is in the reason.
I answer that, As stated (Article 5), sin may be in the reason, not only
in respect of reason's proper act, but sometimes in respect of its
directing human actions. Now it is evident that reason directs not
only external acts, but also internal passions. Consequently when
the reason fails in directing the internal passions, sin is said to be in
the reason, as also when it fails in directing external actions. Now it
fails, in two ways, in directing internal passions: first, when it
commands unlawful passions; for instance, when a man deliberately
provokes himself to a movement of anger, or of lust: secondly, when
it fails to check the unlawful movement of a passion; for instance,
when a man, having deliberately considered that a rising movement
of passion is inordinate, continues, notwithstanding, to dwell
[immoratur] upon it, and fails to drive it away. And in this sense the
sin of morose delectation is said to be in the reason.