be delivered from their error. And tell me not, "I have a wife, and children
belonging to me, and am master of a household, and cannot duly practise all
this." For though you had none of these, yet if you be careless, all is lost; though
you are encompassed with all these, yet if you be earnest, you shall attain unto
virtue. For there is but one thing that is wanted, the preparation of a generous
mind; and neither age, nor poverty, nor wealth, nor reverse of fortune, nor
anything else, will be able to impede you. Since in fact both old and young, and
men having wives, and bringing up children, and working at crafts, and serving
as soldiers, have duly performed all that is enjoined. For so Daniel was young,
and Joseph a slave, and Aquila wrought at a craft, and the woman who sold
purple was over a workshop, and another was the keeper of a prison, and another
a centurion, as Cornelius; and another in ill health, as Timothy; and another a
runaway, as Onesimus; but nothing proved an hindrance to any of these, but all
were approved, both men and women, both young and old, both slaves and free,
both soldiers and people.
Let us not then make vain pretexts, but let us provide a thoroughly good
mind, and whatsoever we may be, we shall surely attain to virtue, and arrive at
the good things to come; by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom be unto the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, glory,
might, honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 44 on Matthew

Matt. XII. 46-49.
" While He yet talked to the people, behold, His mother and His brethren
stood without, desiring to speak with Him. Then one said unto Him, Behold, Your
mother and Your brethren stand without, desiring to speak with You. But He
answered and said unto him that told Him, Who is my mother, and my brethren?
And He stretched forth His hand towards His disciples, and said, Behold my
mother and my brethren."
That which I was lately saying, that when virtue is wanting all things are
vain, this is now also pointed out very abundantly. For I indeed was saying, that
age and nature, and to dwell in the wilderness, and all such things, are alike
unprofitable, where there is not a good mind; but today we learn in addition
another thing, that even to have borne Christ in the womb, and to have brought
forth that marvellous birth, has no profit, if there be not virtue.
And this is hence especially manifest. "For while He yet talked to the
people," it is said, "one told Him, Your mother and Your brethren seek You. But
He says, who is my mother, and who are my brethren?"
And this He said, not as being ashamed of His mother, nor denying her that
bare Him; for if He had been ashamed of her, He would not have passed through
that womb; but as declaring that she has no advantage from this, unless she do
all that is required to be done. For in fact that which she had essayed to do, was
of superfluous vanity; in that she wanted to show the people that she has power
and authority over her Son, imagining not as yet anything great concerning Him;
whence also her unseasonable approach. See at all events both her selfconfidence and theirs. Since when they ought to have gone in, and listened with
the multitude; or if they were not so minded, to have waited for His bringing His
discourse to an end, and then to have come near; they call Him out, and do this