enviable? No doubt you will say government, and wealth, and public reputation.
And yet what is more wretched than these things when they are compared with
the liberty of Christians. For the ruler is subjected to the wrath of the populace
and to the irrational impulses of the multitude, and to the fear of higher rulers,
and to anxieties on behalf of those who are ruled, and the ruler of yesterday
becomes a private citizen today; for this present life in no wise differs from a
stage, but just as there, one man fills the position of a king, a second of a
general, and a third of a soldier, but when evening has come on the king is no
king, the ruler no ruler, and the general no general, even so also in that day each
man will receive his due reward not according to the outward part which he has
played but according to his works. Well! Is glory a precious thing which perishes
like the power of grass? Or wealth, the possessors of which are pronounced
unhappy? "For woe" we read, "to the rich;" [Luke 6:24] and again, "Woe unto
them who trust in their strength and boast themselves in the multitude of their
riches!" But the Christian never becomes a private person after being a ruler, or a
poor man after being rich, or without honour after being held in honour; but he
abides rich even when he is poor, and is exalted when he strives to humble
himself; and from the rule which he exercises no human being can depose him,
but only one of those rulers who are under the power of this world's potentate of
darkness.
"Marriage is right," you say; I also assent to this. For "marriage," we read,
"is honourable and the bed undefiled; but fornicators and adulterers God will
judge;" [Hebrews 13:4] but it is no longer possible for you to observe the right
conditions of marriage. For if he who has been attached to a heavenly
bridegroom deserts him, and joins himself to a wife the act is adultery, even if
you call it marriage ten thousand times over; or rather it is worse than adultery in
proportion as God is greater than man. Let no one deceive you saying: "God has
not forbidden to marry;" I know this as well as you; He has not forbidden to
marry, but He has forbidden to commit adultery, may you be preserved from ever
engaging yourself in marriage! And why do you marvel if marriage is judged as

if it were adultery, when God is disregarded? Slaughter has brought about
righteousness, and mercy has been a cause of condemnation more than slaughter;
because the latter has been according to the mind of God but the former has been
forbidden. It was reckoned to Phinees for righteousness that he pierced to death
the woman who committed fornication, together with the fornicator;
[Numbers 25:7-11] but Samuel, that saint of God although he wept and mourned
and entreated for whole nights, could not rescue Saul from the condemnation
which God issued against him, because he saved, contrary to the design of God,
the king of the alien tribes whom he ought to have slain. [1 Samuel xv] If then
mercy has been a cause of condemnation more than slaughter because God was
disobeyed, what wonder is it if marriage condemns more than adultery when it
involves the rejection of Christ? For, as I said at the beginning, if you were a
private person no one would indict you for shunning to serve as a soldier; but
now you are no longer your own master, being engaged in the service of so great
a king. For if the wife has not power over her own body, but the husband,
[1 Corinthians 7:4] much more they who live in Christ must be unable to have
authority over their body. He who is now despised, the same will then be our
judge; think ever on Him and the river of fire: "For a river of fire" we read,
"winds before His face;" [Daniel 7:10] for it is impossible for one who has been
delivered over by Him to the fire to expect any end of his punishment. But the
unseemly pleasures of this life no-wise differ from shadows and dreams; for
before the deed of sin is completed, the conditions of pleasure are extinguished;
and the punishments for these have no limit. And the sweetness lasts for a little
while but the pain is everlasting.
Tell me, what is there stable in this world? Wealth which often does not last
even to the evening? Or glory? Hear what a certain righteous man says: "My life
is swifter than a runner." [Job 9:25] For as they dash away before they stand
still, even so does this glory take to flight before it has fairly reached us. Nothing
is more precious than the soul; and even they who have gone to the extremity of
folly have not been ignorant of this; for "there is no equivalent of the soul" is the