the time and the place, (for it was the depth of night,) and would not give heed to
His words, but would be continually turning about, and imagining that they
heard those who were to set upon them; and that more especially when their
Master's speech made them expect evil. For, "yet a little while," He says, "and I
am not with you," and, "the ruler of this world comes." Since now when they
heard these and the like words they were troubled, as though they should
certainly be taken immediately, He leads them to another place, in order that
thinking themselves in safety, they might listen to Him without fear. For they
were about to hear lofty doctrines. Therefore He says, "Arise, let us go hence."
Then He adds, and says, "I am the Vine, you are the branches." What wills He to
imply by the comparison? That the man who gives no heed to His words can
have no life, and that the miracles about to take place, would be wrought by the
power of Christ. "My Father is the Husbandman." "How then? Does the Son
need a power working within?" Away with the thought! This example does not
signify this. Observe with what exactness He goes through the comparison. He
says not that the "root" enjoys the care of the Husbandman, but, "the branches."
And the foot is brought in in this place for no other purpose, but that they may
learn that they can work nothing without His power, and that they ought to be
united with Him by faith as the branch with the vine.

John 15:2
"Every branch in Me that bears not fruit the Father takes away."
Here He alludes to the manner of life, showing that without works it is not
possible to be in Him.
"And every branch that bears fruit, He purges it."
That is, "causes it to enjoy great care." Yet the root requires care rather than
the branches, in being dug about, and cleared, yet about this He says nothing
here, but all about the branches. Showing that He is sufficient to Himself, and
that the disciples need much help from the Husbandman, although they be very
excellent. Wherefore He says, "that which bears fruit, He purges it." The one
branch, because it is fruitless, cannot even remain in the Vine, but for the other,
because it bears fruit, He renders it more fruitful. This, some one might assert,
was said with relation also to the persecutions then coming upon them. For the
"purges it," is "prunes," which makes the branch bear better. Whence it is
shown, that persecutions rather make men stronger. Then, lest they should ask
concerning whom He said these things, and lest He should throw them back into
anxiety, He says,

John 15:3
"Now you are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you."
Do you see how He introduces Himself as tending the branches? "I have
cleansed you," He says; yet above He declares that the Father does this. But
there is no separation between the Father and the Son. "And now your part also
must be performed." Then to show that He did not this as needing their ministry,
but for their advancement, He adds,