divine omnipotence, because it cannot have the aspect of possibility.
Hence it is better to say that such things cannot be done, than that
God cannot do them. Nor is this contrary to the word of the angel,
saying: "No word shall be impossible with God." For whatever
implies a contradiction cannot be a word, because no intellect can
possibly conceive such a thing.
Reply to Objection 1: God is said to be omnipotent in respect to His
active power, not to passive power, as was shown above (Article 1).
Whence the fact that He is immovable or impassible is not repugnant
to His omnipotence.
Reply to Objection 2: To sin is to fall short of a perfect action; hence
to be able to sin is to be able to fall short in action, which is
repugnant to omnipotence. Therefore it is that God cannot sin,
because of His omnipotence. Nevertheless, the Philosopher says
(Topic. iv, 3) that God can deliberately do what is evil. But this must
be understood either on a condition, the antecedent of which is
impossible---as, for instance, if we were to say that God can do evil
things if He will. For there is no reason why a conditional proposition
should not be true, though both the antecedent and consequent are
impossible: as if one were to say: "If man is a donkey, he has four
feet." Or he may be understood to mean that God can do some
things which now seem to be evil: which, however, if He did them,
would then be good. Or he is, perhaps, speaking after the common
manner of the heathen, who thought that men became gods, like
Jupiter or Mercury.
Reply to Objection 3: God's omnipotence is particularly shown in
sparing and having mercy, because in this is it made manifest that
God has supreme power, that He freely forgives sins. For it is not for
one who is bound by laws of a superior to forgive sins of his own
free will. Or, because by sparing and having mercy upon men, He
leads them on to the participation of an infinite good; which is the
ultimate effect of the divine power. Or because, as was said above
(Question 21, Article 4), the effect of the divine mercy is the
foundation of all the divine works. For nothing is due to anyone,
except on account of something already given him gratuitously by
God. In this way the divine omnipotence is particularly made
manifest, because to it pertains the first foundation of all good
things.
Reply to Objection 4: The absolute possible is not so called in

reference either to higher causes, or to inferior causes, but in
reference to itself. But the possible in reference to some power is
named possible in reference to its proximate cause. Hence those
things which it belongs to God alone to do immediately---as, for
example, to create, to justify, and the like---are said to be possible in
reference to a higher cause. Those things, however, which are of
such kind as to be done by inferior causes are said to be possible in
reference to those inferior causes. For it is according to the
condition of the proximate cause that the effect has contingency or
necessity, as was shown above (Question 14, Article 1, ad 2). Thus is
it that the wisdom of the world is deemed foolish, because what is
impossible to nature, it judges to be impossible to God. So it is clear
that the omnipotence of God does not take away from things their
impossibility and necessity.