fencing off, and taking away everything injurious. But in the case of the earth all
depends upon the husbandman, for it is a lifeless subject, and prepared only to be
passive. But in the spiritual soil it is quite otherwise. All is not the teachers' part,
but half at least, if not more, that of the disciples. It is our part indeed to cast the
seed, but yours to do the things spoken for your recollection, by your works to
show the fruits, to pull up the thorns by the roots.
For wealth truly is a thorn, bearing no fruit, both uncomely to the sight, and
unpleasant for use, injuring those that meddle with it, not only not itself bearing
fruit, but even hindering that which was shooting forth. Such is wealth. It not
only does not bear eternal fruit but it even hinders those who wish to gain it.
Thorns are the food of irrational camels; they are devoured and consumed by
fire, being useful for nothing. Such also is wealth, useful for nothing, but to
kindle the furnace, to light up The Day that burns as an oven, to nourish passions
void of reason, revenge and anger. For such is also the camel that feeds on
thorns. For it is said by those who are acquainted with such things, that there is
no animal so implacable, so sulky and revengeful, as a camel. Such is wealth. It
nourishes the unreasonable passions of the soul but it pierces and wounds the
rational, as is the case with thorns. This plant is hard and rough, and grows up of
itself.
Let us see how it grows up, that we may root it out. It grows in places that
are precipitous, stony and dry, where there is no moisture. When therefore
anyone is rough and precipitous, that is unmerciful, the thorn grows in him. But
when the sons of husbandmen wish to root them up, they do it not with iron.
How then? Having set fire to it, they in that way extract all the bad quality of the
land. For since it is not enough to cut away the upper part, while the root remains
below, nor even to extirpate the root, (for it remains in the earth from its bad
quality, and, as when some pestilence has assailed the body, there are still left the
remains of it,) the fire from above, drawing up all that moisture of the thorns,
like some poison, extracts it by means of the heat from the bowels of the earth.
For as the cupping glass placed upon the part draws all the disorder to itself, so

also the fire draws off all the base quality that was in the thorns, and makes the
land pure.
On what account then do I say these things? Because it behooves you to
purge off all affection for riches. With us also there is a fire that draws this bad
quality from the soul; I mean that of the Spirit. This if we let work on them, we
shall be able not only to dry up the thorns, but also the humor from them, since if
they be deeply fixed, all is rendered vain. For mark, has a rich man entered here,
or also a rich woman? She does not regard how she shall hear the oracles of
God, but how she shall make a show, how she shall sit with pomp, how with
much glory, how she shall surpass all other women in the costliness of her
garments, and render herself more dignified both by her dress, and look, and
gait. And all her care and concern is, Did such a woman see me? Did she admire
me? Is my beauty handsomely set off? So that her garments may not rot, nor be
rent; and about this is all her care. In like manner also the rich man enters,
meaning to exhibit himself to the poor man, and to strike him with awe by the
garments which are about him, and by the number of his slaves, who also stand
round, driving off the crowd. But he from his great pride does not condescend
even to do this but considers it a work so unworthy of a gentleman, that although
excessively puffed up, he cannot bear to do it, but commits it to his slaves. For to
do this requires truly servile and impudent manners. Then when he is seated, the
cares of his house immediately intrude themselves, distracting him on every
side. The pride that possesses his soul overflows. He thinks that he does a favor
both to us, and to the people, and perhaps even to God, because he has entered
into the house of God. But he who is thus inflamed, how shall he ever be cured?
Tell me then, if any one should go to the shop of a physician, and not ask a
favor of the physician, but think that he was doing him a favor, and declining to
request a medicine for his wound, should concern himself about his garments;
would he go away having received any benefit? I think not indeed. But, with
your leave, I will tell you the cause of all these things. They think when they
enter in here, that they enter into our presence, they think that what they hear