FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.5.

contrary to human good, through being opposed to the things
mentioned above---either in respect of the end, as when an authority
imposes on his subjects burdensome laws, conducive, not to the
common good, but rather to his own cupidity or vainglory---or in
respect of the author, as when a man makes a law that goes beyond
the power committed to him---or in respect of the form, as when
burdens are imposed unequally on the community, although with a
view to the common good. The like are acts of violence rather than
laws; because, as Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 5), "a law that is not
just, seems to be no law at all." Wherefore such laws do not bind in
conscience, except perhaps in order to avoid scandal or
disturbance, for which cause a man should even yield his right,
according to Mt. 5:40,41: "If a man . . . take away thy coat, let go thy
cloak also unto him; and whosoever will force thee one mile, go with
him other two."
Secondly, laws may be unjust through being opposed to the Divine
good: such are the laws of tyrants inducing to idolatry, or to
anything else contrary to the Divine law: and laws of this kind must
nowise be observed, because, as stated in Acts 5:29, "we ought to
obey God rather than man."
Reply to Objection 1: As the Apostle says (Rm. 13:1,2), all human
power is from God . . . "therefore he that resisteth the power," in
matters that are within its scope, "resisteth the ordinance of God";
so that he becomes guilty according to his conscience.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument is true of laws that are contrary
to the commandments of God, which is beyond the scope of (human)
power. Wherefore in such matters human law should not be obeyed.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument is true of a law that inflicts
unjust hurt on its subjects. The power that man holds from God does
not extend to this: wherefore neither in such matters is man bound
to obey the law, provided he avoid giving scandal or inflicting a more
grievous hurt.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether all are subject to the law?

Objection 1: It would seem that not all are subject to the law. For
those alone are subject to a law for whom a law is made. But the
Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:9): "The law is not made for the just man."
Therefore the just are not subject to the law.
Objection 2: Further, Pope Urban says [Decretals. caus. xix, qu. 2]:
"He that is guided by a private law need not for any reason be bound
by the public law." Now all spiritual men are led by the private law of
the Holy Ghost, for they are the sons of God, of whom it is said (Rm.
8:14): "Whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God." Therefore not all men are subject to human law.
Objection 3: Further, the jurist says [Pandect. Justin. i, ff., tit. 3, De
Leg. et Senat.] that "the sovereign is exempt from the laws." But he
that is exempt from the law is not bound thereby. Therefore not all
are subject to the law.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 13:1): "Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers." But subjection to a power seems to
imply subjection to the laws framed by that power. Therefore all men
should be subject to human law.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 90, Articles 1,2; Article 3, ad
2), the notion of law contains two things: first, that it is a rule of
human acts; secondly, that it has coercive power. Wherefore a man
may be subject to law in two ways. First, as the regulated is subject
to the regulator: and, in this way, whoever is subject to a power, is
subject to the law framed by that power. But it may happen in two
ways that one is not subject to a power. In one way, by being
altogether free from its authority: hence the subjects of one city or
kingdom are not bound by the laws of the sovereign of another city
or kingdom, since they are not subject to his authority. In another
way, by being under a yet higher law; thus the subject of a proconsul
should be ruled by his command, but not in those matters in which
the subject receives his orders from the emperor: for in these
matters, he is not bound by the mandate of the lower authority, since
he is directed by that of a higher. In this way, one who is simply
subject to a law, may not be a subject thereto in certain matters, in
respect of which he is ruled by a higher law.