your partner of life, she who in the most intimate relations and in the highest
degree, is united with you; when she, like a base slave, is dishonored by you.
Wherefore also such a man, if indeed one must call him a man and not rather a
wild beast, I should say, was like a parricide and a murderer of his mother. For if
for a wife's sake we were commanded to leave even father and mother, not
wronging them but fulfilling a divine law; and a law so grateful to our parents
themselves that even they, the very persons whom we are leaving, are thankful,
and bring it about with great eagerness; what but extreme frenzy can it be to
insult her for whose sake God bade us leave even our parents?
But we may well ask, Is it only madness? There is the shame too: I would
fain know who can endure it. And what description can set it before us; when
shrieks and wailings are borne along the alleys, and there is a running to the
house of him that is so disgracing himself, both of the neighbors and the passers
by, as though some wild beast were ravaging within? Better were it that the earth
should gape asunder for one so frantic, than that he should be seen at all in the
forum after it.
"But the woman is insolent," says he. Consider nevertheless that she is a
woman, the weaker vessel, whereas you are a man. For therefore were thou
ordained to be ruler; and were assigned to her in place of a head, that you might
bear with the weakness of her that is set under you. Make then your rule
glorious. And glorious it will be when the subject of it meets with no dishonor
from you. And as the monarch will appear so much the more dignified, as he
manifests more dignity in the officer under him; but if he dishonor and
depreciate the greatness of that rank, he is indirectly cutting off no small portion
of his own glory likewise: so also thou dishonor her who governs next to
yourself, wilt in no common degree mar the honor of your governance.
Considering therefore all these things, command yourself: and withal think
also of that evening on which the father having called you, delivered you his
daughter as a kind of deposit, and having separated her from all, from her
mother, from himself, from the family, entrusted her entire guardianship to your

right hand. Consider that (under God) through her you have children and hast
become a father, and be thou also on that account gentle towards her.
Do you see not the husbandmen, how the earth which has once received the
seed, they tend with all various methods of culture, though it have ten thousand
disadvantages; e.g., though it be an unkindly soil or bear ill weeds, or though it
be vexed with excessive rain through the nature of its situation? This also do
thou. For thus shall you be first to enjoy both the fruit and the calm. Since your
wife is to you both a harbor, and a potent healing charm to rejoice your heart.
Well then: if you shall free your harbor from winds and waves, you shall enjoy
much tranquility on your return from the market-place: but if you fill it with
clamor and tumult, thou dost but prepare for yourself a more grievous
shipwreck. In order then to prevent this, let what I advise be done: When any
thing uncomfortable happens in the household, if she be in the wrong console
her and do not aggravate the discomfort. For even if you should lose all, nothing
is more grievous than to have a wife without good-will sharing your abode. And
whatever offense you can mention, you will tell me of nothing so very painful as
being at strife with her. So that if it were only for such reasons as these, let her
love be more precious than all things. For if one another's burdens are to be
borne, much more our own wife's.
Though she be poor do not upbraid her: though she be foolish, do not
trample on her, but train her rather: because she is a member of you, and you
have become one flesh. "But she is trifling and drunken and passionate." You
ought then to grieve over these things, not to be angry; and to beseech God, and
exhort her and give her advice, and do every thing to remove the evil. But if you
strike her thou dost aggravate the disease: for fierceness is removed by
moderation, not by rival fierceness. With these things bear in mind also the
reward from God: that when it is permitted you to cut her off, and you do not so
for the fear of God, but bearest with so great defects, fearing the law appointed
in such matters which forbids to put away a wife whatsoever disease she may
have: you shall receive an unspeakable reward. Yea, and before the reward you