Reply to Objection 3: Incorporeal things, of which there are no
phantasms, are known to us by comparison with sensible bodies of
which there are phantasms. Thus we understand truth by
considering a thing of which we possess the truth; and God, as
Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i), we know as cause, by way of excess
and by way of remotion. Other incorporeal substances we know, in
the present state of life, only by way of remotion or by some
comparison to corporeal things. And, therefore, when we understand
something about these things, we need to turn to phantasms of
bodies, although there are no phantasms of the things themselves.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the judgment of the intellect is hindered

through suspension of the sensitive powers?
Objection 1: It would seem that the judgment of the intellect is not
hindered by suspension of the sensitive powers. For the superior
does not depend on the inferior. But the judgment of the intellect is
higher than the senses. Therefore the judgment of the intellect is not
hindered through suspension of the senses.
Objection 2: Further, to syllogize is an act of the intellect. But during
sleep the senses are suspended, as is said in De Somn. et Vigil. i and
yet it sometimes happens to us to syllogize while asleep. Therefore
the judgment of the intellect is not hindered through suspension of
the senses.
On the contrary, What a man does while asleep, against the moral
law, is not imputed to him as a sin; as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit.
xii, 15). But this would not be the case if man, while asleep, had free
use of his reason and intellect. Therefore the judgment of the
intellect is hindered by suspension of the senses.
I answer that, As we have said above (Article 7), our intellect's proper
and proportionate object is the nature of a sensible thing. Now a
perfect judgment concerning anything cannot be formed, unless all
that pertains to that thing's nature be known; especially if that be
ignored which is the term and end of judgment. Now the Philosopher
says (De Coel. iii), that "as the end of a practical science is action, so
the end of natural science is that which is perceived principally
through the senses"; for the smith does not seek knowledge of a
knife except for the purpose of action, in order that he may produce
a certain individual knife; and in like manner the natural philosopher
does not seek to know the nature of a stone and of a horse, save for
the purpose of knowing the essential properties of those things
which he perceives with his senses. Now it is clear that a smith
cannot judge perfectly of a knife unless he knows the action of the
knife: and in like manner the natural philosopher cannot judge
perfectly of natural things, unless he knows sensible things. But in
the present state of life whatever we understand, we know by
comparison to natural sensible things. Consequently it is not
possible for our intellect to form a perfect judgment, while the
senses are suspended, through which sensible things are known to