Solomon intimated, when he said, "It is not wonderful if any one be taken
stealing; for he steals that he may satisfy his soul that is hungry; but the
adulterer, by the lack of understanding, destroys his own soul." But what he
means is to this effect. The thief is a grievous offender, but not so grievous a one
as the adulterer: for the former, though it be a sorry reason for his conduct, yet at
the same time has to plead the necessity arising from indigence; but the latter,
when no necessity compels him, by his mere madness rushes into the gulph of
iniquity. This also may be said with regard to those who swear. For they have not
any pretext to allege, but merely their contempt.
12. I know, indeed, that I may seem to be too tedious and burdensome; and
that I may be thought to give annoyance by continuing this admonition. But
nevertheless, I do not desist, in order that you may even be shamed by my
shamelessness to abstain from the custom of oaths. For if that unmerciful and
cruel judge, paying respect to the importunity of the widow, changed his custom,
much more will you do this; and especially when he who is exhorting you, does
it not for himself, but for your salvation. Or rather, indeed, I cannot deny that I
do this for myself; for I consider your benefit as my own success. But I could
wish that you, even as I labour, and weary myself for your safety, would in like
manner make your own souls a matter of anxiety to yourselves; and then
assuredly this work of reformation would be perfected. And what need is there to
multiply words? For if there were no hell, neither punishment for the
contumacious, nor reward for the obedient; and I had come to you, and asked
this in the way of a favour, would ye not have consented? Would ye not have
granted my petition, when I asked so trifling a favour? But when it is God who
asks this favour, and for the sake of yourselves, who are to grant it, and not for
Himself, Who is to receive it; who is there so ungracious, who is there so
miserable and wretched, that he will not grant this favour to God, when He asks
it; and especially when he himself who grants it, is in future to enjoy the benefit
of it? Considering these things then, repeat over to yourselves, when you depart
hence, all that has been said; and correct in every way those who take no heed to

it; to the end that we may receive the recompense of other men's good actions, as
well as our own, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by Whom, and with Whom be glory to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, for ever
and ever. Amen.

## Homily 11 on the Statues
Thanksgiving to God for deliverance from the evils expected owing to
the sedition; and recollection of the events which took place at the time. Also
against those who find fault with the structure of the human body, and in
general concerning the creation of man; and, in conclusion, on success in
avoiding oaths.
1. When I think of the past tempest, and of the present calm, I cease not
saying, "Blessed be God, who makes all things, and changes them; who has
brought light out of darkness; who leads to the gates of hell, and brings back;
who chastises, but kills not." And this I desire you too to repeat constantly, and
never to desist. For if He has benefitted us by deeds, what pardon shall we
deserve, if we do not requite Him even by words. Therefore, I exhort that we
never cease to give Him thanks; since if we are grateful for the former benefits,
it is plain that we shall enjoy others also, which are greater. Let us say, then,
continually, Blessed be God, who has permitted us to spread before you in
security the accustomed table, while He has also granted you to hear our word
with assurance of safety! Blessed be God, that we no longer run hither flying
from the danger without, but only from desire to hear; that we no longer meet
one another with agony, trembling, and anxious thoughts; but with much
confidence, having shaken off all our fear. Our condition, indeed, on former days
was nothing better than that of those who are tossed up and down in the midst of
the deep; and expecting shipwreck every hour. We were scared all day long by
innumerable rumours, and disturbed and agitated on every side; and were every
day busy and curious to know who had come from the court? what news he had
brought? And whether what was reported was true or false? Our nights too we
passed without sleep, and while we looked upon the city, we wept over it, as if it
were on the eve of its destruction.