belong, and to what the forbearing and meek? Does not the soul of the ([ἐ]
[κείνου]) one seem to be in a kind of solitary retreat, enjoying exceeding quiet;
while that of ([τούτου]) the other is like a market-place and tumult and the midst
of cities, where great is the clamor of those going out, the noise of camels,
mules, asses: of men shouting loud to those that meet them, that they may not be
trodden under foot: and again, of silver-beaters, of braziers, of men thrusting and
pushing this way and that and some overborne, some overbearing? But the soul
of ([τούτου]) the former is like some mountain-top, with its delicate air, its pure
sunshine, its limpid gushing fountains, its multitude of charming flowers, while
the vernal meads and gardens put on their plumage of shrubs and flowers, and
glance with rifling waters: and if any sound is heard there, it is sweet, and
calculated to affect the ear with a sense of much delight. For either the warbling
birds perch on the outermost spray of the branching trees, and cicadas,
nightingales and swallows, blended in one harmony, perform a kind of concerted
music; or the zephyr gently stirring the leaves, draws whistling tones from pines
and firs, resembling oft the notes of the swan: and roses, violets, and other
flowers, gently swayed, and ([κυανίζοντα]) dark-dimpling, show like a sea just
rippled over with gentle undulations. Nay, many are the images one might find.
Thus, when one looks at the roses, one shall fancy that he beholds in them the
rainbow; in the violets a waving sea; in the lilies, the sky. But not by the
spectacle alone, and the beholding, does such an one then cause delight: but also
in the very body of him that looks to the meadow, rather it refreshes him, and
causes him to breathe freely, so that he thinks himself more in heaven than on
earth. There is withal a sound of a different kind, when water from the mountainsteep, borne by its own force through ravines gently plashes over its pebbly bed
with lulling noise, and so relaxes our frame with the pleasurable sensations, as
quickly to draw over our eyes the soft languor of slumber. You have heard the
description with pleasure: perhaps also it has made you enamored of solitude.
But sweeter far than this solitude is the soul * * of the long-suffering. For it was
not for the sake of describing a meadow, nor for the sake of making a display of

language, that we have broached this similitude: but the object was, that, seeing
how great is the delight of the long suffering, and how, by converse with a long
suffering man, one would be far more both delighted and benefited, than by
frequenting such spots, you may follow after such men. For when not even a
breath of violence proceeds from such a soul, but mild and engaging words, then
indeed does that gentle softness of the zephyr find its counterpart: entreaties
also, devoid of all arrogance, but forming the resemblance to those winged
warblers,— how is not this far better? For not the body is fanned by the soft
breeze of speech; no, it refreshes our souls heated and glowing. A physician, by
ever so great attention, could not so speedily rid a man of the fever, as a patient
man would cool, by the breath of his own words, a person who was passionate
and burning with wrath. And why do I speak of a physician? Not even iron,
made red-hot and dipped into water, so quickly parts with its heat, as does the
passionate man when he comes in contact with the soul of the long-suffering.
But as, if it chance that singing birds find their way into the market, they go for
nothing there, just so is it with our precepts when they light upon souls addicted
to wrathful passions. Assuredly, sweeter is gentleness than bitterness and
frowardness.— Well, but the one was God's bidding, the other the devil's. Do
you see that it was not for nothing that I said, even if there were no devil or God
in the case, the things enjoined would be enough in themselves to ([ἀ]
[ποστἥσαι]) revolt us? For the one is both agreeable to himself, and serviceable
to others, the other displeasing to himself, and hurtful to others. Nothing is more
unpleasant than a man in a passion, nothing more noisome, more odious, more
shocking, as also nothing more pleasing than one who knows not what it is to be
in a passion. Better dwell with a wild beast than with a passionate man. For the
beast, when once tamed, abides by its law; but the man, no matter how often you
have tamed him, again turns wild, unless however he should of himself settle
down into some such habit (of gentleness).
For as a bright sunny day and winter with all its gloom, so are the soul of
the angry and that of the gentle. However, let us at present look not to the