Therefore, as a thing is called natural because it is according to the
inclination of nature, so a thing is called voluntary because it is
according to the inclination of the will. Therefore, just as it is
impossible for a thing to be at the same time violent and natural, so
it is impossible for a thing to be absolutely coerced or violent, and
voluntary.
But necessity of end is not repugnant to the will, when the end
cannot be attained except in one way: thus from the will to cross the
sea, arises in the will the necessity to wish for a ship.
In like manner neither is natural necessity repugnant to the will.
Indeed, more than this, for as the intellect of necessity adheres to
the first principles, the will must of necessity adhere to the last end,
which is happiness: since the end is in practical matters what the
principle is in speculative matters. For what befits a thing naturally
and immovably must be the root and principle of all else
appertaining thereto, since the nature of a thing is the first in
everything, and every movement arises from something immovable.
Reply to Objection 1: The words of Augustine are to be understood
of the necessity of coercion. But natural necessity "does not take
away the liberty of the will," as he says himself (De Civ. Dei v, 10).
Reply to Objection 2: The will, so far as it desires a thing naturally,
corresponds rather to the intellect as regards natural principles than
to the reason, which extends to opposite things. Wherefore in this
respect it is rather an intellectual than a rational power.
Reply to Objection 3: We are masters of our own actions by reason
of our being able to choose this or that. But choice regards not the
end, but "the means to the end," as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii,
9). Wherefore the desire of the ultimate end does not regard those
actions of which we are masters.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the will desires of necessity, whatever it

desires?
Objection 1: It would seem that the will desires all things of
necessity, whatever it desires. For Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that
"evil is outside the scope of the will." Therefore the will tends of
necessity to the good which is proposed to it.
Objection 2: Further, the object of the will is compared to the will as
the mover to the thing movable. But the movement of the movable
necessarily follows the mover. Therefore it seems that the will's
object moves it of necessity.
Objection 3: Further, as the thing apprehended by sense is the
object of the sensitive appetite, so the thing apprehended by the
intellect is the object of the intellectual appetite, which is called the
will. But what is apprehended by the sense moves the sensitive
appetite of necessity: for Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ix, 14) that
"animals are moved by things seen." Therefore it seems that
whatever is apprehended by the intellect moves the will of necessity.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Retract. i, 9) that "it is the will by
which we sin and live well," and so the will extends to opposite
things. Therefore it does not desire of necessity all things
whatsoever it desires.
I answer that, The will does not desire of necessity whatsoever it
desires. In order to make this evident we must observe that as the
intellect naturally and of necessity adheres to the first principles, so
the will adheres to the last end, as we have said already (Article 1).
Now there are some things intelligible which have not a necessary
connection with the first principles; such as contingent propositions,
the denial of which does not involve a denial of the first principles.
And to such the intellect does not assent of necessity. But there are
some propositions which have a necessary connection with the first
principles: such as demonstrable conclusions, a denial of which
involves a denial of the first principles. And to these the intellect
assents of necessity, when once it is aware of the necessary
connection of these conclusions with the principles; but it does not
assent of necessity until through the demonstration it recognizes the
necessity of such connection. It is the same with the will. For there