Reply to Objection 2: In things created, even when what is derived
from a principle is co-equal in duration with its principle, the
principle still comes first in the order of nature and reason, if
formally considered as principle. If, however, we consider the
relations of cause and effect, or of the principle and the thing
proceeding therefrom, it is clear that the things so related are
simultaneous in the order of nature and reason, inasmuch as the one
enters the definition of the other. But in God the relations
themselves are the persons subsisting in one nature. So, neither on
the part of the nature, nor on the part the relations, can one person
be prior to another, not even in the order of nature and reason.
Reply to Objection 3: The order of nature means not the ordering of
nature itself, but the existence of order in the divine Persons
according to natural origin.
Reply to Objection 4: Nature in a certain way implies the idea of a
principle, but essence does not; and so the order of origin is more
correctly called the order of nature than the order of essence.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Son is equal to the Father in

greatness?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Son is not equal to the Father in
greatness. For He Himself said (Jn. 14:28): "The Father is greater
than I"; and the Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:28): "The Son Himself shall
be subject to Him that put all things under Him."
Objection 2: Further, paternity is part of the Father's dignity. But
paternity does not belong to the Son. Therefore the Son does not
possess all the Father's dignity; and so He is not equal in greatness
to the Father.
Objection 3: Further, wherever there exist a whole and a part, many
parts are more than one only, or than fewer parts; as three men are
more than two, or than one. But in God a universal whole exists, and
a part; for under relation or notion, several notions are included.
Therefore, since in the Father there are three notions, while in the
Son there are only two, the Son is evidently not equal to the Father.
On the contrary, It is said (Phil. 2:6): "He thought it not robbery to be
equal with God."
I answer that, The Son is necessarily equal to the Father in
greatness. For the greatness of God is nothing but the perfection of
His nature. Now it belongs to the very nature of paternity and filiation
that the Son by generation should attain to the possession of the
perfection of the nature which is in the Father, in the same way as it
is in the Father Himself. But since in men generation is a certain kind
of transmutation of one proceeding from potentiality to act, it follows
that a man is not equal at first to the father who begets him, but
attains to equality by due growth, unless owing to a defect in the
principle of generation it should happen otherwise. From what
precedes (Question 27, Article 2; Question 33, Articles 2,3), it is
evident that in God there exist real true paternity and filiation. Nor
can we say that the power of generation in the Father was defective,
nor that the Son of God arrived at perfection in a successive manner
and by change. Therefore we must say that the Son was eternally
equal to the Father in greatness. Hence, Hilary says (De Synod. Can.
27): "Remove bodily weakness, remove the beginning of conception,
remove pain and all human shortcomings, then every son, by reason