SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.2.

not restitution properly so called.
Reply to Objection 2: In so far as the word restitution denotes
something done over again, it implies identity of object. Hence it
would seem originally to have applied chiefly to external things,
which can pass from one person to another, since they remain the
same both substantially and in respect of the right of dominion. But,
even as the term "commutation" has passed from such like things to
those actions and passions which confer reverence or injury, harm
or profit on another person, so too the term "restitution" is applied,
to things which though they be transitory in reality, yet remain in
their effect; whether this touch his body, as when the body is hurt by
being struck, or his reputation, as when a man remains defamed or
dishonored by injurious words.
Reply to Objection 3: Compensation is made by the distributor to the
man to whom less was given than his due, by comparison of thing
with thing, when the latter receives so much the more according as
he received less than his due: and consequently it pertains to
commutative justice.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether restitution of what has been taken away

is necessary for salvation?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not necessary to restore what
has been taken away. For that which is impossible is not necessary
for salvation. But sometimes it is impossible to restore what has
been taken, as when a man has taken limb or life. Therefore it does
not seem necessary for salvation to restore what one has taken from
another.
Objection 2: Further, the commission of a sin is not necessary for
salvation, for then a man would be in a dilemma. But sometimes it is
impossible, without sin, to restore what has been taken, as when one
has taken away another's good name by telling the truth. Therefore it
is not necessary for salvation to restore what one has taken from
another.
Objection 3: Further, what is done cannot be undone. Now
sometimes a man loses his personal honor by being unjustly
insulted. Therefore that which has been taken from him cannot be
restored to him: so that it is not necessary for salvation to restore
what one has taken.
Objection 4: Further, to prevent a person from obtaining a good thing
is seemingly the same as to take it away from him, since "to lack
little is almost the same as to lack nothing at all," as the Philosopher
says (Phys. ii, 5). Now when anyone prevents a man from obtaining a
benefice or the like, seemingly he is not bound to restore the
benefice, since this would be sometimes impossible. Therefore it is
not necessary for salvation to restore what one has taken.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. ad Maced. cxliii): "Unless a
man restore what he has purloined, his sin is not forgiven."
I answer that, Restitution as stated above (Article 1) is an act of
commutative justice, and this demands a certain equality. Wherefore
restitution denotes the return of the thing unjustly taken; since it is
by giving it back that equality is reestablished. If, however, it be
taken away justly, there will be equality, and so there will be no need
for restitution, for justice consists in equality. Since therefore the
safeguarding of justice is necessary for salvation, it follows that it is