of the heaven.
Or by the water, as stated, we may understand the matter of bodies
to be signified.
Reply to Objection 2: The solution is clear from what has been said,
according to the last two opinions. But according to the first opinion,
Basil gives two replies (Hom. iii in Hexaem.). He answers first, that a
body seen as concave beneath need not necessarily be rounded, or
convex, above. Secondly, that the waters above the firmament are
not fluid, but exist outside it in a solid state, as a mass of ice, and
that this is the crystalline heaven of some writers.
Reply to Objection 3: According to the third opinion given, the
waters above the firmament have been raised in the form of vapors,
and serve to give rain to the earth. But according to the second
opinion, they are above the heaven that is wholly transparent and
starless. This, according to some, is the primary mobile, the cause of
the daily revolution of the entire heaven, whereby the continuance of
generation is secured. In the same way the starry heaven, by the
zodiacal movement, is the cause whereby different bodies are
generated or corrupted, through the rising and setting of the stars,
and their various influences. But according to the first opinion these
waters are set there to temper the heat of the celestial bodies, as
Basil supposes (Hom. iii in Hexaem.). And Augustine says (Gen. ad
lit. ii, 5) that some have considered this to be proved by the extreme
cold of Saturn owing to its nearness to the waters that are above the
firmament.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the firmament divides waters from

waters?
Objection 1: It would seem that the firmament does not divide waters
from waters. For bodies that are of one and the same species have
naturally one and the same place. But the Philosopher says (Topic. i,
6): "All water is the same species." Water therefore cannot be
distinct from water by place.
Objection 2: Further, should it be said that the waters above the
firmament differ in species from those under the firmament, it may
be argued, on the contrary, that things distinct in species need
nothing else to distinguish them. If then, these waters differ in
species, it is not the firmament that distinguishes them.
Objection 3: Further, it would appear that what distinguishes waters
from waters must be something which is in contact with them on
either side, as a wall standing in the midst of a river. But it is evident
that the waters below do not reach up to the firmament. Therefore
the firmament does not divide the waters from the waters.
On the contrary, It is written (Gn. 1:6): "Let there be a firmament
made amidst the waters; and let it divide the waters from the waters."
I answer that, The text of Genesis, considered superficially, might
lead to the adoption of a theory similar to that held by certain
philosophers of antiquity, who taught that water was a body infinite
in dimension, and the primary element of all bodies. Thus in the
words, "Darkness was upon the face of the deep," the word "deep"
might be taken to mean the infinite mass of water, understood as the
principle of all other bodies. These philosophers also taught that not
all corporeal things are confined beneath the heaven perceived by
our senses, but that a body of water, infinite in extent, exists above
that heaven. On this view the firmament of heaven might be said to
divide the waters without from those within---that is to say, from all
bodies under the heaven, since they took water to be the principle of
them all.
As, however, this theory can be shown to be false by solid reasons,
it cannot be held to be the sense of Holy Scripture. It should rather
be considered that Moses was speaking to ignorant people, and that