wisdom. For they have not given over so disputing who have professed to
be lovers of wisdom rather than wise men.
3. In disputing, then, about wisdom, they have defined it thus: Wisdom is
the knowledge of things human and divine. And hence, in the last book, I
have not withheld the admission, that the cognizance of both subjects,
whether divine or human, may be called both knowledge and wisdom.
But according to the distinction made in the apostle's words, "To one is
given the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge," this
definition is to be divided, so that the knowledge of things divine shall be
called wisdom, and that of things human appropriate to itself the name of
knowledge; and of the latter I have treated in the thirteenth book, not
indeed so as to attribute to this knowledge everything whatever that can
be known by man about things human, wherein there is exceeding much
of empty vanity and mischievous curiosity, but only those things by which
that most wholesome faith, which leads to true blessedness, is begotten,
nourished, defended, strengthened; and in this knowledge most of the
faithful are not strong, however exceeding strong in the faith itself. For it
is one thing to know only what man ought to believe in order to attain to
a blessed life, which must needs be an eternal one; but another to know in
what way this belief itself may both help the pious, and be defended
against the impious, which last the apostle seems to call by the special
name of knowledge. And when I was speaking of this knowledge before,
my especial business was to commend faith, first briefly distinguishing
things eternal from things temporal, and there discoursing of things
temporal; but while deferring things eternal to the present book, I
showed also that faith respecting things eternal is itself a thing temporal,
and dwells in time in the hearts of believers, and yet is necessary in order
to attain the things eternal themselves. I argued also, that faith respecting
the things temporal which He that is eternal did and suffered for us as
man, which manhood He bare in time and carried on to things eternal, is
profitable also for the obtaining of things eternal; and that the virtues
themselves, whereby in this temporal and mortal life men live prudently,
bravely, temperately, and justly, are not true virtues, unless they are
referred to that same faith, temporal though it is, which leads on
nevertheless to things eternal.

### CHAP. 2.—THERE IS A KIND OF TRINITY IN THE HOLDING, CONTEMPLATING, AND LOVING OF FAITH TEMPORAL, BUT ONE THAT DOES NOT YET ATTAIN TO BEING PROPERLY AN IMAGE OF GOD.

4. Wherefore since, as it is written, "While we are in the body, we are
absent from the Lord; for we walk by faith, not by sight;" undoubtedly, so
long as the just man lives by faith,6 howsoever he lives according to the
inner man, although he aims at truth and reaches on to things eternal by
this same temporal faith, nevertheless in the holding, contemplating, and
loving this temporal faith, we have not yet reached such a trinity as is to
be called an image of God; lest that should seem to be constituted in
things temporal which ought to be so in things eternal. For when the
human mind sees its own faith, whereby it believes what it does not see, it
does not see a thing eternal. For that will not always exist, which certainly
will not then exist, when this pilgrimage, whereby we are absent from
God, in such way that we must needs walk by faith, shall be ended, and
that sight shall have succeeded it whereby we shall see face to face; just as
now, because we believe although we do not see, we shall deserve to see,
and shall rejoice at having been brought through faith to sight. For then it
will be no longer faith, by which that is believed which is not seen; but
sight, by which that is seen which is believed. And then, therefore,
although we remember this past mortal life, and call to mind by
recollection that we once believed what we did not see, yet that faith will
be reckoned among things past and done with, not among things present
and always continuing. And hence also that trinity which now consists in
the remembering, contemplating, and loving this same faith while
present and continuing, will then be found to be done with and past, and
not still enduring. And hence it is to be gathered, that if that trinity is
indeed an image of God, then this image itself would have to be reckoned,
not among things that exist always, but among things transient.