Mary uttered this fiat in faith. In faith she entrusted herself to God without reserve and
"devoted herself totally as the handmaid of the Lord to the person and work of her
Son." And as the Fathers of the Church teach-she conceived this Son in her mind before
she conceived him in her womb: precisely in faith! Rightly therefore does Elizabeth
praise Mary: "And blessed is she who believed that there would be a fulfillment of what
was spoken to her from the Lord." These words have already been fulfilled: Mary of
Nazareth presents herself at the threshold of Elizabeth and Zechariah's house as the
Mother of the Son of God. This is Elizabeth's joyful discovery: "The mother of my Lord
comes to me"!

14. Mary's faith can also be compared to that of Abraham, whom St. Paul calls "our
father in faith" (cf. Rom. 4:12). In the salvific economy of God's revelation, Abraham's
faith constitutes the beginning of the Old Covenant; Mary's faith at the Annunciation
inaugurates the New Covenant. Just as Abraham "in hope believed against hope, that he

should become the father of many nations" (cf. Rom. 4:18), so Mary, at the
Annunciation, having professed her virginity ("How shall this be, since I have no
husband?") believed that through the power of the Most High, by the power of the Holy
Spirit, she would become the Mother of God's Son in accordance with the angel's
revelation: "The child to be born will be called holy, the Son of God" (Lk. 1:35).

However, Elizabeth's words "And blessed is she who believed" do not apply only to that
particular moment of the Annunciation. Certainly the Annunciation is the culminating
moment of Mary's faith in her awaiting of Christ, but it is also the point of departure from
which her whole "journey towards God" begins, her whole pilgrimage of faith. And on
this road, in an eminent and truly heroic manner- indeed with an ever greater heroism of
faith-the "obedience" which she professes to the word of divine revelation will be
fulfilled. Mary's "obedience of faith" during the whole of her pilgrimage will show
surprising similarities to the faith of Abraham. Just like the Patriarch of the People of
God, so too Mary, during the pilgrimage of her filial and maternal fiat, "in hope believed
against hope." Especially during certain stages of this journey the blessing granted to her
"who believed" will be revealed with particular vividness. To believe means "to abandon
oneself" to the truth of the word of the living God, knowing and humbly recognizing
"how unsearchable are his judgments and how inscrutable his ways" (Rom. 11:33). Mary,
who by the eternal will of the Most High stands, one may say, at the very center of those
"inscrutable ways" and "unsearchable judgments" of God, conforms herself to them in the
dim light of faith, accepting fully and with a ready heart everything that is decreed in the
divine plan.