## Homily 49 on Matthew

Matt. XIV. 13.
"But when Jesus heard of it, He departed thence by ship into a desert place
apart; and when the multitudes had heard thereof, they followed Him on foot out
of all the cities."
See Him on every occasion "departing," For not by His appearance only,
but by His actions He would have this confirmed, because He knew the devil's
craft, and that he would leave nothing undone to destroy this doctrine.
He then for this end retires; but the multitudes not even so withdraw
themselves from Him, but they follow, riveted to Him, and not even John's
tragical end alarmed them. So great a thing is earnest desire, so great a thing is
love; in such wise does it overcome and dispel all dangers.
Therefore they straightway also received their reward. For "Jesus," it is
said, "went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with compassion
toward them, and He healed their sick." [Matthew 14:14]
For great as their assiduity was, yet nevertheless His doings exceeded what
any diligence could earn. Wherefore He sets forth also His motive for so healing
them, His mercy, intense mercy: and He heals all.
And He requires not faith here. For both by coming to Him, and by leaving
their cities, and by diligently seeking Him, and by abiding with Him even when
hunger was pressing, they display their own faith.
But He is about to feed them also. And He does not this of Himself, but
waits to be entreated; on every occasion, as I have said, maintaining this rule, not
to spring onward to His miracles, preventing them, but upon some call.
And why did none of the multitude come near and speak for them? They
reverenced Him exceedingly, and felt not even their hunger, through their
longing to stay with Him. Neither indeed do His disciples, when they had come

to Him, say, "Feed them;" for as yet they were rather in an imperfect state; but
what?
"And when it was evening," it is said, "His disciples came to Him, saying,
This is a desert place, and the time is now passed; send the multitude away, that
they may go and buy themselves victuals." [Matthew 14:15]
For if even after the miracle they forgot what had been done, and after the
baskets, supposed Him to be speaking of loaves, when He gave the name of
"leaven" to the doctrine of the Pharisees; [Matthew 16:6] much less, when they
had never yet had experience of such a miracle, would they have expected any
such thing. And yet He had made a beginning by actually healing many sick; but
nevertheless, not even from this did they expect the miracle of the loaves; so
imperfect were they as yet.
But mark thou, I pray, the Teacher's skill, how distinctly He summons them
on towards believing. For He said not at once, "I feed them;" which indeed
would not have been easily received; but what?
"But Jesus," so it is written, said unto them, "They need not depart; give ye
them to eat." [Matthew 14:16]
He said not, "I give them," but, "Give ye them;" for as yet their regard to
Him was as to a man. But they not even so are awakened, but still reason as with
a man, saying,
"We have but five loaves, and two fishes." [Matthew 14:17]
Wherefore Mark also says, "They understood not the saying, for their heart
was hardened."
They continuing therefore to crawl on the ground, then at length He brings
in His own part, and says, "Bring them hither to me." For although the place be
desert, yet He that feeds the world is here; and although the time be now past,
yet He that is not subject to time is discoursing with you.
But John says also, that they were "barley loaves," [John 6:9] not
mentioning it without object, but teaching us to trample under foot the pride of
costly living. Such was the diet of the prophets also.