SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.7.

the works of the other moral virtues (for instance, fasting, which is
an act of abstinence; and being continent, which is an act of
chastity) are better and more meritorious, if they be done in
fulfilment of a vow, since thus they belong to the divine worship,
being like sacrifices to God. Wherefore Augustine says (De Virg. viii)
that "not even is virginity honorable as such, but only when it is
consecrated to God, and cherished by godly continence."
Secondly, because he that vows something and does it, subjects
himself to God more than he that only does it; for he subjects
himself to God not only as to the act, but also as to the power, since
in future he cannot do something else. Even so he gives more who
gives the tree with its fruit, than he that gives the fruit only, as
Anselm [Eadmer] observes (De Simil. viii). For this reason, we thank
even those who promise, as stated above (Article 5, ad 2).
Thirdly, because a vow fixes the will on the good immovably and to
do anything of a will that is fixed on the good belongs to the
perfection of virtue, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 4), just as
to sin with an obstinate mind aggravates the sin, and is called a sin
against the Holy Ghost, as stated above (Question 14, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 1: The passage quoted should be understood as
referring to necessity of coercion which causes an act to be
involuntary and excludes devotion. Hence he says pointedly: "Lest
that which we are free to do be done without devotion and
unwillingly." On the other hand the necessity resulting from a vow is
caused by the immobility of the will, wherefore it strengthens the will
and increases devotion. Hence the argument does not conclude.
Reply to Objection 2: According to the Philosopher, necessity of
coercion, in so far as it is opposed to the will, causes sorrow. But the
necessity resulting from a vow, in those who are well disposed, in so
far as it strengthens the will, causes not sorrow but joy. Hence
Augustine says (Ep. ad Arment. et Paulin. cxxcii): "Repent not of thy
vow: thou shouldst rather rejoice that thou canst no longer do what
thou mightest lawfully have done to thy detriment." If, however, the
very deed, considered in itself, were to become disagreeable and
involuntary after one has taken the vow, the will to fulfil it remaining
withal, it is still more meritorious than if it were done without the
vow, since the fulfilment of a vow is an act of religion which is a
greater virtue than abstinence, of which fasting is an act.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.7.

Reply to Objection 3: He who does something without having vowed
it has an immovable will as regards the individual deed which he
does and at the time when he does it; but his will does not remain
altogether fixed for the time to come, as does the will of one who
makes a vow: for the latter has bound his will to do something, both
before he did that particular deed, and perchance to do it many
times.