2. But wherefore does He still go on, when the others have withdrawn, to
speak to these also in parables? They had become wiser by His sayings, so as
even to understand. At any rate, to them He says afterwards,
"Have ye understood all these things? They say unto Him, Yea, Lord." So
completely, together with its other objects, did the parable effect this too, that it
made them more clear sighted. What then says He again?
"The Kingdom of Heaven is like treasure hid in a field, the which when a
man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof sells all that he has, and buys that
field. Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a merchant man seeking goodly
pearls, who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that
he had, and bought it."
Much as in the other place, the mustard seed and the leaven have but some
little difference from each other, so here also these two parables, that of the
treasure and that of the pearl. This being of course signified by both, that we
ought to value the gospel above all things. And the former indeed, of the leaven
and of the mustard seed, was spoken with a view to the power of the gospel, and
to its surely prevailing over the world; but these declare its value, and great
price. For as it extends itself like mustard seed, and prevails like leaven, so it is
precious like a pearl, and affords full abundance like a treasure. We are then to
learn not this only, that we ought to strip ourselves of everything else, and cling
to the gospel, but also that we are to do so with joy; and when a man is
dispossessing himself of his goods, he is to know that the transaction is gain, and
not loss.
Do you see how both the gospel is hid in the world, and the good things in
the gospel?
Except thou sell all, you buy not; except thou have such a soul, anxious and
inquiring, you find not. Two things therefore are requisite, abstinence from
worldly matters, and watchfulness. For He says "One seeking goodly pearls, who
when he had found one of great price, sold all and bought it." For the truth is
one, and not in many divisions.

And much as he that has the pearl knows indeed himself that he is rich, but
others know not, many times, that he is holding it in his hand (for there is no
corporeal bulk); just so also with the gospel, they that have hold of it know that
they are rich, but the unbelievers, not knowing of this treasure, are in ignorance
also of our wealth.
3. After this, that we may not be confident in the gospel merely preached,
nor think that faith only suffices us for salvation, He utters also another, an awful
parable. Which then is this? That of the net.
"For the kingdom of Heaven is like a net, that was cast into the sea, and
gathered of every kind; which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat
down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away."
And wherein does this differ from the parable of the tares? For there too the
one are saved, the other perish; but there, for choosing of wicked doctrines; and
those before this again, for not giving heed to His sayings, but these for
wickedness of life; who are the most wretched of all, having attained to His
knowledge, and being caught, but not even so capable of being saved.
Yet surely He says elsewhere, that the shepherd Himself separates them, but
here He says the angels do this; [Matthew 25:32] and so with respect to the tares.
How then is it? At one time He discourses to them in a way more suited to their
dullness, at another time in a higher strain.
And this parable He interprets without so much as being asked, but of His
own motion He explained it by one part of it, and increased their awe. For lest,
on being told, "They cast the bad away," you should suppose that ruin to be
without danger; by His interpretation He signified the punishment, saying, "They
will cast them into the furnace." [Matthew 13:50] And He declared the gnashing
of teeth, and the anguish, that it is unspeakable.
Do you see how many are the ways of destruction? By the rock, by the
thorns, by the wayside, by the tares, by the net. Not without reason therefore did
He say, "Broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go
away by it." [Matthew 7:13]