SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.4.

but are subject to it as instruments which reason employs in order to
attain its proper end: and that they are opposed to reason is owing
to the fact that the sensitive appetite fails to tend towards them in
accord with the mode of reason. Hence it belongs properly to moral
virtue to moderate those passions which denote a pursuit of the
good.
On the other hand, the movement of the sensitive appetite in flying
from sensible evil is mostly in opposition to reason, not through
being immoderate, but chiefly in respect of its flight: because, when
a man flies from sensible and bodily evils, which sometimes
accompany the good of reason, the result is that he flies from the
good of reason. Hence it belongs to moral virtue to make man while
flying from evil to remain firm in the good of reason.
Accordingly, just as the virtue of fortitude, which by its very nature
bestows firmness, is chiefly concerned with the passion, viz. fear,
which regards flight from bodily evils, and consequently with daring,
which attacks the objects of fear in the hope of attaining some good,
so, too, temperance, which denotes a kind of moderation, is chiefly
concerned with those passions that tend towards sensible goods,
viz. desire and pleasure, and consequently with the sorrows that
arise from the absence of those pleasures. For just as daring
presupposes objects of fear, so too such like sorrow arises from the
absence of the aforesaid pleasures.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (FS, Question 23, Articles 1,2;
FS, Question 25, Article 1), when we were treating of the passions,
those passions which pertain to avoidance of evil, presuppose the
passions pertaining to the pursuit of good; and the passions of the
irascible presuppose the passions of the concupiscible. Hence,
while temperance directly moderates the passions of the
concupiscible which tend towards good, as a consequence, it
moderates all the other passions, inasmuch as moderation of the
passions that precede results in moderation of the passions that
follow: since he that is not immoderate in desire is moderate in hope,
and grieves moderately for the absence of the things he desires.
Reply to Objection 2: Desire denotes an impulse of the appetite
towards the object of pleasure and this impulse needs control, which
belongs to temperance. on the other hand fear denotes a withdrawal
of the mind from certain evils, against which man needs firmness of
mind, which fortitude bestows. Hence temperance is properly about

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.4.

desires, and fortitude about fears.
Reply to Objection 3: External acts proceed from the internal
passions of the soul: wherefore their moderation depends on the
moderation of the internal passions.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.5.