for the operation about to be launched cannot say that their labor is not in the service of their king. Even if death should overtake one before he begins to work exteriorly for his neighbor, he shall not for that reason have failed in the service of his neighbor, having helped him by the mere fact of his preparation. But besides the intention for the future, he should each day offer himself to God for his neighbor. As God is willing to accept the offering, he can serve as an instrument for the help of his neighbor no less than he would have done by preaching or hearing confessions.

Growth in Virtue, a Necessary Requirement for the Apostolate

The second way is to attain a high degree of virtue, because you will thus be able to make your neighbor such as you are yourselves. For it is God's will that the process of generation observed in material things be observed in things spiritual, mutatis mutandis . Philosophy and experience teach us that in the generation of man or animals, besides the general causes such as the heavens, another cause or agent of the same species is required which possesses the same form as that which is to be transmitted, and for this reason it is said that "the sun and man beget man." 8 In like manner, to transmit the form of humility, patience, charity, and so forth, to others, God wills that the immediate cause, which He uses as instrument, such as the preacher or confessor, be humble, charitable, and patient. With the result, as I have said, that, when you benefit yourselves by growing in virtue, you are also of great service to the neighbor. You are preparing an instrument that is not less, but better, fitted to confer grace by leading a virtuous life than by leading a learned one, though both learning and virtue are required if the instrument is to be perfect.

Good Example

The third way of helping the neighbor is by the example of a good life. In this respect, as I have told you, the good odor of your lives has spread abroad and exerts a good influence even beyond the limits of Portugal. I trust that the author of all good will continue His gifts and increase them in you, so that, as you daily grow in perfection, the fragrance of your virtues and the resulting edification will likewise grow, even without your seeking it.

Holy Desires and Prayers

The fourth way of helping your neighbor is very far-reaching indeed, and consists in holy desires and prayers. The demands of your life of study do not permit you to devote much time to prayer, yet you can make up for this by desires, since the time you devote to your various exercises is a continuous prayer, seeing that you are engaged in them only for God's service. But in this and other matters, you have close at hand those who can advise you as to details. Indeed, for that reason part of what I have written could have been omitted, but so seldom do I write to you that I thought I could give myself the consolation of writing at some length.