profiting by reason of his own indisposition. Nevertheless, as stated
above, it may in some way profit another, who is disposed.
Reply to Objection 4: Although the sinner's deed is not living in so
far as it is his own, it may be living in so far as it is another's, as
stated above.
Since, however, the arguments in the contrary sense would seem to
show that it matters not whether one obtain suffrages from good or
from evil persons, we must reply to them also.
Reply to Objection 5: Although one cannot know for certain about
another whether he be in the state of salvation, one may infer it with
probability from what one sees outwardly of a man: for a tree is
known by its fruit (Mt. 7:16).
Reply to Objection 6: In order that suffrage avail another, it is
requisite that the one for whom it is performed be capable of availing
by it: and a man has become capable of this by his own works which
he did in his life-time. This is what Augustine means to say.
Nevertheless, those works must be such that they can profit him,
and this depends not on the person for whom the suffrage is
performed, but rather on the one who offers the suffrages whether by
performing them or by commanding them.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether suffrages offered by the living for the

dead profit those who offer them?
Objection 1: It would seem that suffrages offered by the living for the
dead do not profit those who offer them. For according to human
justice a man is not absolved from his own debt if he pay a debt for
another man. Therefore a man is not absolved from his own debt for
the reason that by offering suffrages he has paid the debt of the one
for whom he offered them.
Objection 2: Further, whatever a man does, he should do it as best
he can. Now it is better to assist two than one. Therefore if one who
by suffrages has paid the debt of a dead person is freed from his
own debt, it would seem that one ought never to satisfy for oneself,
but always for another.
Objection 3: Further, if the satisfaction of one who satisfies for
another profits him equally with the one for whom he satisfies, it will
likewise equally profit a third person if he satisfy for him at the same
time, and likewise a fourth and so on. Therefore he might satisfy for
all by one work of satisfaction; which is absurd.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 34:13): "My prayer shall be turned
into my bosom." Therefore, in like manner, suffrages that are offered
for others profit those who satisfy.
Further, the Damascene says in the sermon "On those who fell
asleep in the faith: Just as when about to anoint a sick man with the
ointment or other holy oil, first of all he, " namely the anointer,
"shares in the anointing and thus proceeds to anoint the patient, so
whoever strives for his neighbor's salvation first of all profits himself
and afterwards his neighbor." And thus the question at issue is
answered.
I answer that, The work of suffrage that is done for another may be
considered in two ways. First, as expiating punishment by way of
compensation which is a condition of satisfaction: and in this way
the work of suffrage that is counted as belonging to the person for
whom it is done, while absolving him from the debt of punishment,
does not absolve the performer from his own debt of punishment,
because in this compensation we have to consider the equality of