Spirit. For he has made ready his soul, as some well-fashioned and jeweled lyre
with strings of gold, and yielded it for the utterance of something great and
sublime to the Spirit.
3. Seeing then it is no longer the fisherman the son of Zebedee, but He who
knows "the deep things of God" [1 Corinthians 2:10], the Holy Spirit I mean,
that strikes this lyre, let us hearken accordingly. For he will say nothing to us as
a man, but what he says, he will say from the depths of the Spirit, from those
secret things which before they came to pass the very Angels knew not; since
they too have learned by the voice of John with us, and by us, the things which
we know. And this has another Apostle declared, saying, "To the intent that unto
the principalities and powers might be known by the Church the manifold
wisdom of God." [Ephesians 3:10] If then principalities, and powers, and
Cherubim, and Seraphim, learned these things by the Church, it is very clear that
they were exceedingly earnest in listening to this teaching; and even in this we
have been not a little honored, that the Angels learned things which before they
knew not with us; I do not at present speak of their learning by us also. Let us
then show much silence and orderly behavior; not today only, nor during the day
on which we are hearers, but during all our life, since it is at all times good to
hear Him. For if we long to know what is going on in the palace, what, for
instance, the king has said, what he has done, what counsel he is taking
concerning his subjects, though in truth these things are for the most part nothing
to us; much more is it desirable to hear what God has said, especially when all
concerns us. And all this will this man tell us exactly, as being a friend of the
King Himself, or rather, as having Him speaking within himself, and from Him
hearing all things which He hears from the Father. "I have called you friends,"
He says, "for all things that I have heard of My Father, I have made known unto
you." [John 15:15]
4. As then we should all run together if we saw one from above bend down
"on a sudden" from the height of heaven, promising to describe exactly all things
there, even so let us be disposed now. It is from thence that this Man speaks to

us; He is not of this world, as Christ Himself declares, "You are not of the world"
[John 15:19], and He has speaking within him the Comforter, the Omnipresent,
who knows the things of God as exactly as the soul of man knows what belongs
to herself, the Spirit of holiness, the righteous Spirit, the guiding Spirit, which
leads men by the hand to heaven, which gives them other eyes, fitting them to
see things to come as though present, and giving them even in the flesh to look
into things heavenly. To Him then let us yield ourselves during all our life in
much tranquillity. Let none dull, none sleepy, none sordid, enter here and tarry;
but let us remove ourselves to heaven, for there He speaks these things to those
who are citizens there. And if we tarry on earth, we shall gain nothing great from
thence. For the words of John are nothing to those who do not desire to be freed
from this swinish life, just as the things of this world to him are nothing. The
thunder amazes our souls, having sound without significance; but this man's
voice troubles none of the faithful, yea, rather releases them from trouble and
confusion; it amazes the devils only, and those who are their slaves. Therefore
that we may know how it amazes them, let us preserve deep silence, both
external and mental, but especially the latter; for what advantage is it that the
mouth be hushed, if the soul is disturbed and full of tossing? I look for that calm
which is of the mind, of the soul, since it is the hearing of the soul which I
require. Let then no desire of riches trouble us, no lust of glory, no tyranny of
anger, nor the crowd of other passions besides these; for it is not possible for the
ear, except it be cleansed, to perceive as it ought the sublimity of the things
spoken; nor rightly to understand the awful and unutterable nature of these
mysteries, and all other virtue which is in these divine oracles. If a man cannot
learn well a melody on pipe or harp, unless he in every way strain his attention;
how shall one, who sits as a listener to sounds mystical, be able to hear with a
careless soul?
5. Wherefore Christ Himself exhorted, saying, "Give not that which is holy
unto the dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine." [Matthew 7:6] He called
these words "pearls," though in truth they be much more precious than they,