THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.4.

manifested to the disciples, namely, the truth of the Resurrection,
and the glory of Him who rose. Now in order to manifest the truth of
the Resurrection, it sufficed for Him to appear several times before
them, to speak familiarly to them, to eat and drink, and let them
touch Him. But in order to manifest the glory of the risen Christ, He
was not desirous of living with them constantly as He had done
before, lest it might seem that He rose unto the same life as before.
Hence (Lk. 24:44) He said to them: "These are the words which I
spoke to you, while I was yet with you." For He was there with them
by His bodily presence, but hitherto He had been with them not
merely by His bodily presence, but also in mortal semblance. Hence
Bede in explaining those words of Luke, "while I was with you,"
says: "that is, while I was still in mortal flesh, in which you are yet:
for He had then risen in the same flesh, but was not in the same state
of mortality as they."
Reply to Objection 1: Christ's frequent appearing served to assure
the disciples of the truth of the Resurrection; but continual
intercourse might have led them into the error of believing that He
had risen to the same life as was His before. Yet by His constant
presence He promised them comfort in another life, according to Jn.
16:22: "I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice; and your joy
no man shall take from you."
Reply to Objection 2: That Christ did not stay continually with the
disciples was not because He deemed it more expedient for Him to
be elsewhere: but because He judged it to be more suitable for the
apostles' instruction that He should not abide continually with them,
for the reason given above. But it is quite unknown in what places
He was bodily present in the meantime, since Scripture is silent, and
His dominion is in every place (Cf. Ps. 102:22).
Reply to Objection 3: He appeared oftener on the first day, because
the disciples were to be admonished by many proofs to accept the
faith in His Resurrection from the very out set: but after they had
once accepted it, they had no further need of being instructed by so
many apparitions. Accordingly one reads in the Gospel that after the
first day He appeared again only five times. For, as Augustine says
(De Consens. Evang. iii), after the first five apparitions "He came
again a sixth time when Thomas saw Him; a seventh time was by the
sea of Tiberias at the capture of the fishes; the eighth was on the
mountain of Galilee, according to Matthew; the ninth occasion is
expressed by Mark, 'at length when they were at table,' because no

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.4.

more were they going to eat with Him upon earth; the tenth was on
the very day, when no longer upon the earth, but uplifted into the
cloud, He was ascending into heaven. But, as John admits, not all
things were written down. And He visited them frequently before He
went up to heaven," in order to comfort them. Hence it is written (1
Cor. 15:6,7) that "He was seen by more than five hundred brethren at
once . . . after that He was seen by James"; of which apparitions no
mention is made in the Gospels.
Reply to Objection 4: Chrysostom in explaining Mt. 26:32---"after I
shall be risen again, I will go before you into Galilee," says (Hom.
lxxxiii in Matth.), "He goes not to some far off region in order to
appear to them, but among His own people, and in those very
places" in which for the most part they had lived with Him; "in order
that they might thereby believe that He who was crucified was the
same as He who rose again." And on this account "He said that He
would go into Galilee, that they might be delivered from fear of the
Jews."
Consequently, as Ambrose says (Expos. in Luc.), "The Lord had sent
word to the disciples that they were to see Him in Galilee; yet He
showed Himself first to them when they were assembled together in
the room out of fear. (Nor is there any breaking of a promise here,
but rather a hastened fulfilling out of kindness)" [Catena Aurea in
Luc. xxiv, 36]: "afterwards, however, when their minds were
comforted, they went into Galilee. Nor is there any reason to prevent
us from supposing that there were few in the room, and many more
on the mountain." For, as Eusebius [Of Caesarea; Cf. Migne, P. G.,
xxii, 1003] says, "Two Evangelists, Luke and John, write that He
appeared in Jerusalem to the eleven only; but the other two said that
an angel and our Saviour commanded not merely the eleven, but all
the disciples and brethren, to go into Galilee. Paul makes mention of
them when he says (1 Cor. 15:6): 'Then He appeared to more then
five hundred brethren at once.'" The truer solution, however, is this,
that while they were in hiding in Jerusalem He appeared to them at
first in order to comfort them; but in Galilee it was not secretly, nor
once or twice, that He made Himself known to them with great
power, "showing Himself to them alive after His Passion, by many
proofs," as Luke says (Acts 1:3). Or as Augustine writes (De
Consens. Evang. iii): "What was said by the angel and by our Lord--that He would 'go before them into Galilee,' must be taken
prophetically. For if we take Galilee as meaning 'a passing,' we must
understand that they were going to pass from the people of Israel to