he to sleep after all, with pangs of the belly, restless famine besetting him, and
that often while it is freezing, and the rain coming down on him? And while
thou, having washed, returnest home from the bath, in a glow with soft raiment,
merry of heart and rejoicing, and hastening unto a banquet prepared and costly:
he, driven every where about the market place by cold and hunger, takes his
round, stooping low and stretching out his hands; nor has he even spirit without
trembling to make his suit for his necessary food to one so full fed and so bent
on taking his ease; nay, often he has to retire with insult. When therefore you
have returned home, when you lie down on your couch, when the lights round
your house shine bright, when the table is prepared and plentiful, at that time call
to rememberance that poor miserable man wandering about, like the dogs in the
alleys, in darkness and in mire; except indeed when, as is often the case, he has
to depart thence, not unto house, nor wife, nor bed, but unto a pallet of straw;
even as we see the dogs baying all through the night. And thou, if you see but a
little drop falling from the roof, throwest the whole house into confusion, calling
your slaves and disturbing every thing: while he, laid in rags, and straw, and dirt,
has to bear all the cold.
What wild beast would not be softened by these things? Who is there so
savage and inhuman that these things should not make him mild? And yet there
are some who are arrived at such a pitch of cruelty as even to say that they
deserve what they suffer. Yea, when they ought to pity, and weep, and help to
alleviate men's calamities, they on the contrary visit them with savage and
inhuman censures. Of these I should be glad to ask, Tell me, why do they
deserve what they suffer? Is it because they would be fed and not starve?
No, you will reply; but because they would be fed in idleness. And thou,
dost not thou wanton in idleness? What say I? Are you not oft-times toiling in an
occupation more grievous than any idleness, grasping, and oppressing, and
coveting? Better were it if you too were idle after this sort; for it is better to be
idle in this way, than to be covetous. But now thou even tramplest on the
calamities of others, not only idling, not only pursuing an occupation worse than

idleness, but also maligning those who spend their days in misery.
And let us farther narrate to them the disasters of others; the untimely
bereavements, the dwellers in prison, those who are torn to pieces before
tribunals, those who are trembling for life; the unlooked for widowhood of
women; the sudden reverse of the rich: and with this let us soften their minds.
For by our narrations concerning others, we shall induce them by all means to
fear these evils in their own case too. For when they hear that the son of such an
one who was a covetous and grasping man, or ([ἠ τοῦ δεῖνος] instead of [ἦν];
[τοῦ δεῖνος]) the wife of such an one who did many tyrannical actions, after the
death of her husband endured afflictions without end; the injured persons setting
upon the wife and the children, and a general war being raised from all quarters
against his house; although a man be the most senseless of beings, yet expecting
himself also to suffer the same, and fearing for his own lest they undergo the
same fate, he will become more moderate. Now we find life full of many such
histories, and we shall not be at a loss for correctives of this kind.
But when we speak these things, let us not speak them as giving advice or
counsel, lest our discourse become too irksome: but as in the order of the
narrative and by association with something else, let us proceed in each case
unto that kind of conversation, and let us be constantly putting them upon stories
of the kind, permitting them to speak of no subject except these which follow:
How such an one's splendid and famous mansion fell down; How it is so entirely
desolate that all things that were in it have come into the hands of others; How
many trials have taken place daily about this same property, what a stir; How
many of that man's relations ([οἴκεται], probably [οἰκεῖοι]) have died either
beggars, or inhabitants of a prison.
All these things let us speak as in pity for the deceased, and as depreciating
things present; in order that by fear and by pity we may soften the cruel mind.
And when we see men shrinking into themselves at these narrations, then and
not till then let us introduce to their notice also the doctrine of hell, not as
terrifying these, but in compassion for others. And let us say, But why speak of