SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.8.

They coincide when a man employs force in order unlawfully to
violate a virgin. This force is employed sometimes both towards the
virgin and towards her father; and sometimes towards the father and
not to the virgin, for instance if she allows herself to be taken away
by force from her father's house. Again, the force employed in rape
differs in another way, because sometimes a maid is taken away by
force from her parents' house, and is forcibly violated: while
sometimes, though taken away by force, she is not forcibly violated,
but of her own consent, whether by act of fornication or by the act of
marriage: for the conditions of rape remain no matter how force is
employed. There is rape without seduction if a man abduct a widow
or one who is not a virgin. Hence Pope Symmachus says [Ep. v ad
Caesarium; Cf. can. Raptores xxxvi, qu. 2], "We abhor abductors
whether of widows or of virgins on account of the heinousness of
their crime."
There is seduction without rape when a man, without employing
force, violates a virgin unlawfully.
Reply to Objection 1: Since rape frequently coincides with seduction,
the one is sometimes used to signify the other.
Reply to Objection 2: The employment of force would seem to arise
from the greatness of concupiscence, the result being that a man
does not fear to endanger himself by offering violence.
Reply to Objection 3: The rape of a maiden who is promised in
marriage is to be judged differently from that of one who is not so
promised. For one who is promised in marriage must be restored to
her betrothed, who has a right to her in virtue of their betrothal:
whereas one that is not promised to another must first of all be
restored to her father's care, and then the abductor may lawfully
marry her with her parents' consent. Otherwise the marriage is
unlawful, since whosoever steals a thing he is bound to restore it.
Nevertheless rape does not dissolve a marriage already contracted,
although it is an impediment to its being contracted. As to the decree
of the council in question, it was made in abhorrence of this crime,
and has been abrogated. Wherefore Jerome [Can. Tria. xxxvi, qu. 2]
declares the contrary: "Three kinds of lawful marriage," says he, "are
mentioned in Holy Writ. The first is that of a chaste maiden given
away lawfully in her maidenhood to a man. The second is when a
man finds a maiden in the city, and by force has carnal knowledge of

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.8.

her. If the father be willing, the man shall endow her according to the
father's estimate, and shall pay the price of her purity [Dt. 22:23-29].
The third is, when the maiden is taken away from such a man, and is
given to another at the father's will."
We may also take this decree to refer to those who are promised to
others in marriage, especially if the betrothal be expressed by words
in the present tense.
Reply to Objection 4: The man who is just married has, in virtue of
the betrothal, a certain right in her: wherefore, although he sins by
using violence, he is not guilty of the crime of rape. Hence Pope
Gelasius says [Can. Lex illa, xxvii, qu. 2; xxxvi, qu. 1]: "This law of
bygone rulers stated that rape was committed when a maiden, with
regard to whose marriage nothing had so far been decided, was
taken away by force."