figures, the shape of a man scratched with white lines upon a black ground is
called a man as well as that which has received the correct coloring; and in the
case of statues, the figure whether formed of gold or of plaster, is alike called a
statue, though in the one case as a model, in the other as a reality.
2. Do not then, because the same words are used, suppose that the things
are identical, nor yet diverse either; for in that they were models they did not
differ from the truth; but in that they merely preserved the outline, they were less
than the truth. What is the difference in all these instances? Will you that we take
in hand and proceed to examine one or two of the cases mentioned? Thus the
rest will be plain to you; and we shall see that the first were lessons for children,
the last for high-minded full-grown men; that the first laws were made as for
mortals, the latter as for angels.
Whence then shall we begin? From the sonship itself? What then is the
distinction between the first and second? The first is the honor of a name, in the
second the thing goes with it. Of the first the Prophet says, "I have said, You are
gods, and all of you are children of the Most High" [Psalm 82:6]; but of the
latter, that they "were born of God." How, and in what way? By the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. For they, even after they had
received the title of sons, retained the spirit of slavery, (for while they remained
slaves they were honored with this appellation,) but we being made free,
received the honor, not in name, but in deed. And this Paul has declared and
said, "For you have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but you have
received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father." [Romans 8:15]
For having been born again, and, as one may say, thoroughly remade, we so are
called "sons." And if one consider the character of the holiness, what the first
was and what the second, he will find there also great difference. They when
they did not worship idols, nor commit fornication or adultery, were called by
this name; but we become holy, not by refraining from these vices merely, but by
acquiring things greater. And this gift we obtain first by means of the coming
upon us of the Holy Ghost; and next, by a rule of life far more comprehensive

than that of the Jews. To prove that these words are not mere boasting hear what
He says to them, "You shall not use divination, nor make purification of your
children, for you are a holy people." So that holiness with them consisted in
being free from the customs of idolatry; but it is not so with us. "That she may be
holy," says Paul, "in body and spirit." [1 Corinthians 7:34] "Follow peace, and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord" [Hebrews 12:14]: and,
"Perfecting holiness in the fear of God." [2 Corinthians 7:1] For the word "holy"
has not force to give the same meaning in every case to which it is applied; since
God is called "Holy," though not as we are. What, for instance, does the Prophet
say, when he heard that cry raised by the flying Seraphim? "Woe is me! Because
I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips"
[Isaiah 6:5]; though he was holy and clean; but if we be compared with the
holiness which is above, we are unclean. Angels are holy, Archangels are holy,
the Cherubim and Seraphim themselves are holy, but of this holiness again there
is a double difference; that is, in relation to us, and to the higher powers. We
might proceed to all the other points, but then the discussion would become too
long, and its extent too great. We will therefore desist from proceeding farther,
and leave it to you to take in hand the rest, for it is in your power at home to put
these things together, and examine their difference, and in the same way to go
over what remains. "Give," says one, "a starting place to the wise, and he
becomes wiser." [Proverbs 9:9 , Septuagint] The beginning is from us, but the
end will be from you. We must now resume the connection.
After having said, "Of His fullness have all we received," he adds, "and
grace for grace." For by grace the Jews were saved: "I chose you," says God,
"not because you were many in number, but because of your fathers."
[Deuteronomy 7:7, Septuagint] If now they were chosen by God not for their
own good deeds, it is manifest that by grace they obtained this honor. And we
too all are saved by grace, but not in like manner; not for the same objects, but
for objects much greater and higher. The grace then that is with us is not like
theirs. For not only was pardon of sins given to us, (since this we have in