SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.3.

unfitting that monks or priests should be advocates in any cause
whatever, or that clerics should plead in a secular court, because
such persons are engaged in Divine things. Secondly, on account of
some personal defect, either of body (for instance a blind man
whose attendance in a court of justice would be unbecoming) or of
soul, for it ill becomes one who has disdained to be just himself, to
plead for the justice of another. Wherefore it is unbecoming that
persons of ill repute, unbelievers, and those who have been
convicted of grievous crimes should be advocates. Nevertheless this
unbecomingness is outweighed by necessity: and for this reason
such persons can plead either their own cause or that of persons
closely connected with them. Moreover, clerics can be advocates in
the cause of their own church, and monks in the cause of their own
monastery, if the abbot direct them to do so.
Reply to Objection 1: Certain persons are sometimes debarred by
unbecomingness, and others by inability from performing works of
mercy: for not all the works of mercy are becoming to all persons:
thus it ill becomes a fool to give counsel, or the ignorant to teach.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as virtue is destroyed by "too much" and
"too little," so does a person become incompetent by "more" and
"less." For this reason some, like religious and clerics, are debarred
from pleading in causes, because they are above such an office; and
others because they are less than competent to exercise it, such as
persons of ill-repute and unbelievers.
Reply to Objection 3: The necessity of pleading the causes of others
is not so pressing as the necessity of pleading one's own cause,
because others are able to help themselves otherwise: hence the
comparison fails.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether an advocate sins by defending an unjust

cause?
Objection 1: It would seem that an advocate does not sin by
defending an unjust cause. For just as a physician proves his skill by
healing a desperate disease, so does an advocate prove his skill, if
he can defend an unjust cause. Now a physician is praised if he
heals a desperate malady. Therefore an advocate also commits no
sin, but ought to be praised, if he defends an unjust cause.
Objection 2: Further, it is always lawful to desist from committing a
sin. Yet an advocate is punished if he throws up his brief (Decret. II,
qu. iii, can. Si quem poenit.). Therefore an advocate does not sin by
defending an unjust cause, when once he has undertaken its
defense.
Objection 3: Further, it would seem to be a greater sin for an
advocate to use unjust means in defense of a just cause (e.g. by
producing false witnesses, or alleging false laws), than to defend an
unjust cause, since the former is a sin against the form, the latter
against the matter of justice. Yet it is seemingly lawful for an
advocate to make use of such underhand means, even as it is lawful
for a soldier to lay ambushes in a battle. Therefore it would seem
that an advocate does not sin by defending an unjust cause.
On the contrary, It is said (2 Paralip. 19:2): "Thou helpest the
ungodly . . . and therefore thou didst deserve . . . the wrath of the
Lord." Now an advocate by defending an unjust cause, helps the
ungodly. Therefore he sins and deserves the wrath of the Lord.
I answer that, It is unlawful to cooperate in an evil deed, by
counseling, helping, or in any way consenting, because to counsel
or assist an action is, in a way, to do it, and the Apostle says (Rm.
1:32) that "they . . . are worthy of death, not only they that do" a sin,
"but they also that consent to them that do" it. Hence it was stated
above (Question 62, Article 7), that all such are bound to restitution.
Now it is evident that an advocate provides both assistance and
counsel to the party for whom he pleads. Wherefore, if knowingly he
defends an unjust cause, without doubt he sins grievously, and is
bound to restitution of the loss unjustly incurred by the other party
by reason of the assistance he has provided. If, however, he defends