therefore the wicked man prospers, it is for evil on his own head, that having
here received the reward of those few good things, he may hereafter be utterly
punished yonder; for this cause does he receive his recompense in this life. And
happy is he most of all who is punished here, that having put away all his sins,
he may depart approved, and pure, and without having to be called to account.
And this Paul teaches us when he says, "For this cause many [are] weak and
sickly among you, and many sleep." [1 Corinthians 11:30] And again, "I have
delivered such an one to Satan." [1 Corinthians 5:5] And the prophet says, "for
she has received of the Lord's hand her sins double" [Isaiah 40:2]; and again
David, "Behold mine enemies that they are multiplied above the hairs of my head
and [with] an unjust hatred have they hated me": "and forgive Thou all my sins."
[Psalm 25:19] And again another: "O Lord, our God, give peace unto us; for You
have rendered all things to us again." [Isaiah 26:12]
These however are [the words] of one showing that good men receive here
the punishments of their sins. But where are the wicked [mentioned] who receive
their good things here, and there are utterly punished? Hear Abraham saying to
the rich man, "You received good things," and "Lazarus evil things." [Luke
16:25] What good things? For in this place by saying "you receive," and not thou
"had taken, " he shows that it was according to what was due to him that each
was treated, and that the one was in prosperity, and the other in adversity. And he
says, "Therefore he is comforted" here (for you see him pure from sins) "and you
are tormented." Let us not then be perplexed when we see sinners well off here;
but when we ourselves are afflicted, let us rejoice. For this very thing is paying
off the penalty of sins.
7. Let us not then seek relaxation: for Christ promised tribulation to His
disciples and Paul says, "All Who will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution." [2 Timothy 3:12] No noble-spirited wrestler, when in the lists,
seeks for baths, and a table full of food and wine. This is not for a wrestler, but
for a sluggard. For the wrestler contends with dust, with oil, with the heat of the
sun's ray, with much sweat, with pressure and constraint. This is the time for

contest and for fighting, therefore also for being wounded, and for being bloody
and in pain. Hear what the blessed Paul says, "So fight I, not as one that beats
the air." [1 Corinthians 9:26] Let us consider that our whole life is in combats,
and then we shall never seek rest, we shall never feel it strange when we are
afflicted: no more than a boxer feels it strange, when he combats. There is
another season for repose. By tribulation we must be made perfect.
And even if there be no persecution, nor tribulation, yet there are other
afflictions which befall us every day. And if we do not bear these, we should
scarcely endure those. "There has no temptation taken you," it is said, "but such
as is common to man." [1 Corinthians 10:13] Let us then pray indeed to God that
we may not come into temptation; but if we come into it, let us bear it nobly. For
that indeed is the part of prudent men, not to throw themselves upon dangers; but
this of noble men and true philosophers. Let us not then lightly cast ourselves
upon [dangers], for that is rashness; nor yet, if led into them, and called by
circumstances let us give in, for that is cowardice. But if indeed the Gospel call
us, let us not refuse; but in a simple case, when there is no reason, nor need, nor
necessity which calls us in the fear of God, let us not rush in. For this is mere
display, and useless ambition. But should any of those things which are injurious
to religion occur, then though it be necessary to endure ten thousand deaths, let
us refuse nothing. Challenge not trials, when you find the things that concern
godliness prosper as you desire. Why draw down needless dangers which bring
no gain?
These things I say, because I wish you to observe the laws of Christ who
commands us to "pray that we enter not into temptation" [Matthew 26:41], and
commands us to "take up the cross and follow" Him. [Matthew 16:24] For these
things are not contradictory, nay they are rather exceedingly in harmony. Do
thou be so prepared as is a valiant soldier, be continually in your armor, sober,
watchful, ever looking for the enemy: do not however breed wars, for this is not
[the act] of a soldier but of a mover of sedition. But if on the other hand the
trumpet of godliness call you, go forth immediately, and make no account of