should be ready to walk after Him?" [Deuteronomy 10:12] So that when He bids
you love Him, He then most of all shows that He loves you. For nothing does so
secure our salvation as to love Him. See then, how that all His commandments
even tend together to our repose and salvation and good report. For when he
says, "Blessed are the merciful, blessed are the pure in heart, blessed are the
meek, blessed are the poor in spirit, blessed are the peacemakers;" [Matthew
5:3-9] He Himself indeed reaps no advantage from these, but he enjoins them for
our adorning and attuning; and when He says, "I was an hungred," it is not as
needing that ministry from us, but as exciting you to humanity. For He was well
able even without you to feed the poor man; but as bestowing upon you an
exceeding treasure, he laid these commands upon you. For if the sun, which is
but a creature, needs not our eyes; for he abides in his own proper brightness,
even though none should look upon him, and we it is who are the gainers when
we enjoy his beams; much more is this so with God. But that you may learn this
in yet another way; how great will you have the distance to be between God and
us? As great as between gnats and us, or much greater? Quite plainly it is much
greater, yea, infinite. If then we vainglorious creatures need not service nor
honor from gnats, much rather the Divine Nature [none from us], seeing It is
impassible and needing nothing. The measure of that which He enjoys by us is
but the greatness of our benefit, and the delight He takes in our salvation. For
this reason He also oftentimes relinquishes His own, and seeks yours. "For if
any," he says, have a wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with
him, let him not put her away; [1 Corinthians 7:12] and, "He that puts away his
wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery." Do you
see what unspeakable goodness? 'If a wife be a harlot,' He says, 'I do not compel
the husband to live with her; and if she be an unbeliever, I do not forbid him.'
Again, 'if you be grieved against any one, I command him that has grieved you
to leave My gift and to run to you.' For He says, "If you are offering your gift,
and there remember that your brother has anything against you, leave your gift
before the altar, and go your way, first be reconciled to your brother, and then

come and offer your gift." [Matthew 5:23-24] And what says the parable of him
that had devoured his all? [Matthew 18:24, etc.] Does it not show this? For when
he had eaten up those ten thousand talents, He had mercy on him, and let him go;
but when he demanded of his fellowservant an hundred pence, he both called
him wicked and delivered him over to the punishment. So great account does He
make of your ease. The barbarian was about to sin against the wife of the just
man, and He says, "I spared you from sinning against me." [Genesis 20:6] Paul
persecuted the Apostles, and He says to him, "Why do you persecute Me?"
Others are hungry, and He Himself says He is an hungred, and wanders about
naked and a stranger, wishing to shame you, and so to force you into the way of
almsgiving.
Reflecting then upon the love, how great He has shown in all things, and
still shows it to be, both having vouchsafed to make Himself known to us,
(which is the greatest crown of good things, and light to the understanding and
instruction in virtue,) and to lay down laws for the best mode of life, and having
done all things for our sakes, having given His Son, and promised a kingdom,
and invited us to those unspeakable good things, and prepared for us a most
blessed life, let us do and say every thing so as both to appear worthy of His love
and to obtain the good things to come; whereunto may we all attain, through the
grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ; with Whom to the Father,
with the Holy Spirit, be glory now and ever, and world without end. Amen.