SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: Prophecy is there defined according to its
proper signification; and it is in this sense that it is differentiated
from the other gratuitous graces.
Reply to Objection 2: This is evident from what has just been said.
We might also reply that all those things that are the matter of
prophecy have the common aspect of being unknowable to man
except by Divine revelation; whereas those that are the matter of
"wisdom," "knowledge," and the "interpretation of speeches," can be
known by man through natural reason, but are manifested in a
higher way through the enlightening of the Divine light. As to "faith,"
although it is about things invisible to man, it is not concerned with
the knowledge of the things believed, but with a man's certitude of
assent to things known by others.
Reply to Objection 3: The formal element in prophetic knowledge is
the Divine light, which being one, gives unity of species to prophecy,
although the things prophetically manifested by the Divine light are
diverse.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.170, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether by the Divine revelation a prophet knows

all that can be known prophetically?
Objection 1: It would seem that by the Divine revelation a prophet
knows all that can be known prophetically. For it is written (Amos
3:7): "The Lord God doth nothing without revealing His secret to His
servants the prophets." Now whatever is revealed prophetically is
something done by God. Therefore there is not one of them but what
is revealed to the prophet.
Objection 2: Further, "God's works are perfect" (Dt. 32:4). Now
prophecy is a "Divine revelation," as stated above (Article 3).
Therefore it is perfect; and this would not be so unless all possible
matters of prophecy were revealed prophetically, since "the perfect
is that which lacks nothing" (Phys. iii, 6). Therefore all possible
matters of prophecy are revealed to the prophet.
Objection 3: Further, the Divine light which causes prophecy is more
powerful than the right of natural reason which is the cause of
human science. Now a man who has acquired a science knows
whatever pertains to that science; thus a grammarian knows all
matters of grammar. Therefore it would seem that a prophet knows
all matters of prophecy.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. i super Ezech.) that "sometimes
the spirit of prophecy indicates the present to the prophet's mind
and nowise the future; and sometimes it points not to the present but
to the future." Therefore the prophet does not know all matters of
prophecy.
I answer that, Things which differ from one another need not exist
simultaneously, save by reason of some one thing in which they are
connected and on which they depend: thus it has been stated above
(FS, Question 65, Articles 1,2) that all the virtues must needs exist
simultaneously on account of prudence and charity. Now all the
things that are known through some principle are connected in that
principle and depend thereon. Hence he who knows a principle
perfectly, as regards all to which its virtue extends, knows at the
same time all that can be known through that principle; whereas if
the common principle is unknown, or known only in a general way, it
does not follow that one knows all those things at the same time, but