by the same kind of tie as the father was, the tie, namely of
consanguinity, albeit in a different degree on account of his being
more distant from the stock: whereas one who is connected with
another through carnal intercourse does not share in the same
stock, but is as it were an extraneous addition thereto: whence
arises another kind of tie known by the name of "affinity." This is
expressed in the verse:
Marriage makes a new kind of connection,
While birth makes a new degree, because, to wit, the person
begotten is in the same kind of relationship, but in a different degree,
whereas through carnal intercourse he enters into a new kind of
relationship.
Reply to Objection 1: Although a cause is more potent than its effect,
it does not always follow that the same name is applicable to the
cause as to the effect, because sometimes that which is in the effect,
is found in the cause not in the same but in a higher way; wherefore
it is not applicable to both cause and effect under the same name or
under the same aspect, as is the case with all equivocal effective
causes. Thus, then, the union of husband and wife is stronger than
the union of the wife with her husband's kindred, and yet it ought not
to be named affinity, but matrimony which is a kind of unity; even as
a man is identical with himself, but not with his kinsman.
Reply to Objection 2: Blood-relations are in a way separate, and in a
way connected: and it happens in respect of their connection that a
person who is connected with one of them is in some way connected
with all of them. But on account of their separation and distance
from one another it happens that a person who is connected with
one of them in one way is connected with another in another way,
either as to the kind of connection or as to the degree.
Reply to Objection 3: Further, a relation results sometimes from a
movement in each extreme, for instance fatherhood and sonship,
and a relation of this kind is really in both extremes. Sometimes it
results from the movement of one only, and this happens in two
ways. In one way when a relation results from the movement of one
extreme without any movement previous or concomitant of the other
extreme; as in the Creator and the creature, the sensible and the
sense, knowledge and the knowable object: and then the relation is

in one extreme really and in the other logically only. In another way
when the relation results from the movement of one extreme without
any concomitant movement, but not without a previous movement of
the other; thus there results equality between two men by the
increase of one, without the other either increasing or decreasing
then, although previously he reached his actual quantity by some
movement or change, so that this relation is founded really in both
extremes. It is the same with consanguinity and affinity, because the
relation of brotherhood which results in a grown child on the birth of
a boy, is caused without any movement of the former's at the time,
but by virtue of that previous movement of his wherein he was
begotten; wherefore at the time it happens that there results in him
the aforesaid relation through the movement of another. Likewise
because this man descends through his own birth from the same
stock as the husband, there results in him affinity with the latter's
wife, without any new change in him.