FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.3.

the point of nearly the whole chapter. We must therefore say that
pride, even as denoting a special sin, is the beginning of every sin.
For we must take note that, in voluntary actions, such as sins, there
is a twofold order, of intention, and of execution. In the former order,
the principle is the end, as we have stated many times before
(Question 1, Article 1, ad 1; Question 18, Article 7, ad 2; Question 15,
Article 1, ad 2; Question 25, Article 2). Now man's end in acquiring all
temporal goods is that, through their means, he may have some
perfection and excellence. Therefore, from this point of view, pride,
which is the desire to excel, is said to be the "beginning" of every
sin. On the other hand, in the order of execution, the first place
belongs to that which by furnishing the opportunity of fulfilling all
desires of sin, has the character of a root, and such are riches; so
that, from this point of view, covetousness is said to be the "root" of
all evils, as stated above (Article 1).
This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.
Reply to Objection 2: Apostasy from God is stated to be the
beginning of pride, in so far as it denotes a turning away from God,
because from the fact that man wishes not to be subject to God, it
follows that he desires inordinately his own excellence in temporal
things. Wherefore, in the passage quoted, apostasy from God does
not denote the special sin, but rather that general condition of every
sin, consisting in its turning away from God. It may also be said that
apostasy from God is said to be the beginning of pride, because it is
the first species of pride. For it is characteristic of pride to be
unwilling to be subject to any superior, and especially to God; the
result being that a man is unduly lifted up, in respect of the other
species of pride.
Reply to Objection 3: In desiring to excel, man loves himself, for to
love oneself is the same as to desire some good for oneself.
Consequently it amounts to the same whether we reckon pride or
self-love as the beginning of every evil.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.84, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether any other special sins, besides pride and

avarice, should be called capital?
Objection 1: It would seem that no other special sins, besides pride
and avarice, should be called capital. Because "the head seems to be
to an animal, what the root is to a plant," as stated in De Anima ii,
text. 38: for the roots are like a mouth. If therefore covetousness is
called the "root of all evils," it seems that it alone, and no other sin,
should be called a capital vice.
Objection 2: Further, the head bears a certain relation of order to the
other members, in so far as sensation and movement follow from the
head. But sin implies privation of order. Therefore sin has not the
character of head: so that no sins should be called capital.
Objection 3: Further, capital crimes are those which receive capital
punishment. But every kind of sin comprises some that are punished
thus. Therefore the capital sins are not certain specific sins.
On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 17) enumerates certain special
vices under the name of capital.
I answer that, The word capital is derived from "caput" [a head]. Now
the head, properly speaking, is that part of an animal's body, which
is the principle and director of the whole animal. Hence,
metaphorically speaking, every principle is called a head, and even
men who direct and govern others are called heads. Accordingly a
capital vice is so called, in the first place, from "head" taken in the
proper sense, and thus the name "capital" is given to a sin for which
capital punishment is inflicted. It is not in this sense that we are now
speaking of capital sins, but in another sense, in which the term
"capital" is derived from head, taken metaphorically for a principle or
director of others. In this way a capital vice is one from which other
vices arise, chiefly by being their final cause, which origin is formal,
as stated above (Question 72, Article 6). Wherefore a capital vice is
not only the principle of others, but is also their director and, in a
way, their leader: because the art or habit, to which the end belongs,
is always the principle and the commander in matters concerning the
means. Hence Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 17) compares these capital vices
to the "leaders of an army."