division of matter, there are many souls of one species; while it is
quite impossible for many angels to be of one species.
Reply to Objection 2: Everything has unity in the same way that it
has being; consequently we must judge of the multiplicity of a thing
as we judge of its being. Now it is clear that the intellectual soul, by
virtue of its very being, is united to the body as its form; yet, after the
dissolution of the body, the intellectual soul retains its own being. In
like manner the multiplicity of souls is in proportion to the
multiplicity of the bodies; yet, after the dissolution of the bodies, the
souls retain their multiplied being.
Reply to Objection 3: Individuality of the intelligent being, or of the
species whereby it understands, does not exclude the understanding
of universals; otherwise, since separate intellects are subsistent
substances, and consequently individual, they could not understand
universals. But the materiality of the knower, and of the species
whereby it knows, impedes the knowledge of the universal. For as
every action is according to the mode of the form by which the agent
acts, as heating is according to the mode of the heat; so knowledge
is according to the mode of the species by which the knower knows.
Now it is clear that common nature becomes distinct and multiplied
by reason of the individuating principles which come from the
matter. Therefore if the form, which is the means of knowledge, is
material---that is, not abstracted from material conditions---its
likeness to the nature of a species or genus will be according to the
distinction and multiplication of that nature by means of
individuating principles; so that knowledge of the nature of a thing in
general will be impossible. But if the species be abstracted from the
conditions of individual matter, there will be a likeness of the nature
without those things which make it distinct and multiplied; thus there
will be knowledge of the universal. Nor does it matter, as to this
particular point, whether there be one intellect or many; because,
even if there were but one, it would necessarily be an individual
intellect, and the species whereby it understands, an individual
species.
Reply to Objection 4: Whether the intellect be one or many, what is
understood is one; for what is understood is in the intellect, not
according to its own nature, but according to its likeness; for "the
stone is not in the soul, but its likeness is," as is said, De Anima iii,
8. Yet it is the stone which is understood, not the likeness of the
stone; except by a reflection of the intellect on itself: otherwise, the

objects of sciences would not be things, but only intelligible species.
Now it happens that different things, according to different forms,
are likened to the same thing. And since knowledge is begotten
according to the assimilation of the knower to the thing known, it
follows that the same thing may happen to be known by several
knowers; as is apparent in regard to the senses; for several see the
same color, according to different likenesses. In the same way
several intellects understand one object understood. But there is
this difference, according to the opinion of Aristotle, between the
sense and the intelligence---that a thing is perceived by the sense
according to the disposition which it has outside the soul ---that is,
in its individuality; whereas the nature of the thing understood is
indeed outside the soul, but the mode according to which it exists
outside the soul is not the mode according to which it is understood.
For the common nature is understood as apart from the individuating
principles; whereas such is not its mode of existence outside the
soul. But, according to the opinion of Plato, the thing understood
exists outside the soul in the same condition as those under which it
is understood; for he supposed that the natures of things exist
separate from matter.
Reply to Objection 5: One knowledge exists in the disciple and
another in the master. How it is caused will be shown later on
(Question 117, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 6: Augustine denies a plurality of souls, that
would involve a plurality of species.