distinguished on the first day, and adorned on the fourth, the middle
part distinguished on the middle day, and adorned on the fifth, and
the third part distinguished on the third day, and adorned on the
sixth. But Augustine, while agreeing with the above writers as to the
last three days, differs as to the first three, for, according to him,
spiritual creatures are formed on the first day, and corporeal on the
two others, the higher bodies being formed on the first these two
days, and the lower on the second. Thus, then, the perfection of the
Divine works corresponds to the perfection of the number six, which
is the sum of its aliquot parts, one, two, three; since one day is
assigned to the forming of spiritual creatures, two to that of
corporeal creatures, and three to the work of adornment.
Reply to Objection 1: According to Augustine, the work of creation
belongs to the production of formless matter, and of the formless
spiritual nature, both of which are outside of time, as he himself says
(Confess. xii, 12). Thus, then, the creation of either is set down
before there was any day. But it may also be said, following other
holy writers, that the works of distinction and adornment imply
certain changes in the creature which are measurable by time;
whereas the work of creation lies only in the Divine act producing
the substance of beings instantaneously. For this reason, therefore,
every work of distinction and adornment is said to take place "in a
day," but creation "in the beginning" which denotes something
indivisible.
Reply to Objection 2: Fire and air, as not distinctly known by the
unlettered, are not expressly named by Moses among the parts of
the world, but reckoned with the intermediate part, or water,
especially as regards the lowest part of the air; or with the heaven, to
which the higher region of air approaches, as Augustine says (Gen.
ad lit. ii, 13).
Reply to Objection 3: The production of animals is recorded with
reference to their adorning the various parts of the world, and
therefore the days of their production are separated or united
according as the animals adorn the same parts of the world, or
different parts.
Reply to Objection 4: The nature of light, as existing in a subject,
was made on the first day; and the making of the luminaries on the
fourth day does not mean that their substance was produced anew,
but that they then received a form that they had not before, as said

above (Question 70, Article 1. ad 2).
Reply to Objection 5: According to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. iv, 15),
after all that has been recorded that is assigned to the six days,
something distinct is attributed to the seventh---namely, that on it
God rested in Himself from His works: and for this reason it was
right that the seventh day should be mentioned after the six. It may
also be said, with the other writers, that the world entered on the
seventh day upon a new state, in that nothing new was to be added
to it, and that therefore the seventh day is mentioned after the six,
from its being devoted to cessation from work.