is short; so that you must needs stand; faint not when the slaughter is achieved.
Moral. If then it is a warfare, if such are the forces arrayed against us, if
"the principalities" are incorporeal, if they are "rulers of the world," if they are
"the spiritual hosts of wickedness," how, tell me, can you live in self-indulgence?
How can you be dissolute? How if we are unarmed, shall we be able to
overcome? These words let every one repeat to himself every day, whenever he
is under the influence of anger, or of lust, whenever he is aiming, and all to no
profit, after this languid life. Let him hearken to the blessed Paul, saying to him,
"Our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against the principalities,
against the powers." A harder warfare this than that which is matter of sense, a
fiercer conflict. Think how long time this enemy is wrestling, for what it is that
he is fighting, and be more guarded than ever. "Nay," a man will say, "but as he
is the devil, he ought to have been removed out of the way, and then all had been
saved." These are the pretenses to which some of your indolent ones in selfdefense give utterance. When you ought to be thankful, O man, that, if you have
a mind, you have the victory over such a foe, you are on the contrary even
discontented, and givest utterance to the words of some sluggish and sleepy
soldier. You know the points of attack, if you choose. Reconnoiter on all sides,
fortify yourself. Not against the devil alone is the conflict, but also against his
powers. How then, you may say, are we to wrestle with the darkness? By
becoming light. How with the "spiritual hosts of wickedness"? By becoming
good. For wickedness is contrary to good, and light drives away darkness. But if
we ourselves too be darkness, we shall inevitably be taken captive. How then
shall we overcome them? If, what they are by nature, that we become by choice,
free from flesh and blood, thus shall we vanquish them. For once it was probable
that the disciples would have many persecutors, "imagine not," he would say,
"that it is they who war with you. They that really war with you, are the spirits
that work in them. Against them is our conflict." Two things he provides for by
these considerations; he renders them in themselves more courageous and he lets
loose their wrath against those who war against them. And wherefore is our

conflict against these? Since we have also an invincible ally, the grace of the
Spirit. We have been taught an art, such as shall enable us to wrestle not against
men, but against spirits. Nay, if we have a mind, neither shall we wrestle at all;
for it is because we choose it, that there is a struggle, since so great is the power
of Him that dwells in us, as that He said, "Behold, I have given you authority to
tread upon serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy." [Luke
10:19] All power has He given us, both of wrestling and of not wrestling. It is
because we are slothful, that we have to wrestle with them; for that Paul wrestled
not, hear what he says himself, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Shall tribulation, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword?" [Romans 8:35] And again hear his words, "God shall bruise Satan
under your feet shortly." [Romans 16:20] For he had him under his subjection;
whence also he said, "I charge you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of
her." [Acts 16:18] And this is not the language of one wrestling; for he that
wrestles has not yet conquered, and he that has conquered no longer wrestles; he
has subdued, has taken his captive. And so Peter again wrestled not with the
devil, but he did that which was better than wrestling. In the case of the faithful,
the obedient, the catechumens, they prevailed over him to vast advantage and
over his powers. Hence too was it that the blessed Paul said, "For we are not
ignorant of his devices" [2 Corinthians 2:11], which was the way moreover in
which he especially overcame him; and again hear his words, "And no marvel—
if his ministers also fashion themselves as ministers of righteousness." [2
Corinthians 11:14-15] So well knew he every part of the conflict, and nothing
escaped him. Again, "For the mystery of lawlessness," says he, "does already
work." [2 Thessalonians 2:7]
But against us is the struggle; for hearken again to him, saying, "I am
persuaded, that neither angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor powers, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of Christ." [Romans 8:38] He says not simply, "from Christ," but, "from
the love of Christ." For many there are who are united forsooth to Christ, and