spoken unto them of grievous wars, that they might learn, that together with the
fearful things here, the torments there also await them, He brings them in
mourning and separated from the elect, and consigned to hell; by this again
rousing the disciples, and indicating from how many evils they should be
delivered, and how many good things they shall enjoy.
4. And why now does He call them by angels, if He comes thus openly? To
honor them in this way also. But Paul says, that they "shall be caught up in
clouds." And He said this also, when He was speaking concerning a resurrection.
"For [1 Thessalonians 4:16] the Lord Himself," it is said, "shall descend from
Heaven with a shout, with the voice of an archangel." So that when risen again,
the angels shall gather them together, when gathered together the clouds shall
catch them up; and all these things are done in a moment, in an instant. For it is
not that He abiding above calls them, but He Himself comes with the sound of a
trumpet. And what mean the trumpets and the sound? They are for arousing, for
gladness, to set forth the amazing nature of the things then doing, for grief to
them that are left.
Woe is me for that fearful day! For though we ought to rejoice when we
hear these things, we feel pain, and are dejected, and our countenance is sad. Or
is it I only that feel thus, and do ye rejoice at hearing of these things? For upon
me at least there comes a kind of shudder when these things are said, and I
lament bitterly, and groan from the very depth of my heart. For I have no part in
these things, but in those that are spoken afterwards, that are said unto the
virgins, unto him that buried the talents he had received, unto the wicked
servant. For this cause I weep, to think from what glory we are to be cast out,
from what hope of blessings, and this perpetually, and forever, to spare ourselves
a little labor. For if indeed this were a great toil, and a grievous law, we ought
even so to do all things; nevertheless many of the remiss would seem to have at
least some pretext, a poor pretext indeed, yet would they seem to have some, that
the toil was great, and the time endless, and the burden intolerable; but now we
can put forward no such objection; which circumstance most of all will gnaw us

no less than hell at that time, when for want of a slight endeavor, and a little toil,
we shall have lost Heaven, and the unspeakable blessings. For both the time is
short, and the labor small, and yet we faint and are supine. Thou strivest on
earth, and the crown is in Heaven; you are punished of men, and art honored of
God; the race is for two days, and the reward for endless ages; the struggle is a
corruptible body, and the rewards in an incorruptible.
And apart from these things, we should consider another point also, that
even if we do not choose to suffer any of the things that are painful for Christ's
sake, we must in other ways most assuredly endure them. For neither, though
you should not have died for Christ, will you be immortal; neither though you
should not have cast away your riches for Christ, will you go away hence with
them. These things He requires of you, which although He should not require
them, you will have to give up, because you are mortal; He wills you to do these
by your choice, which you must do by necessity. So much only He requires to be
added, that it be done for His sake; since that these things befall men and pass
away, comes to pass of natural necessity. Do you see how easy the conflict?
What it is altogether necessary for you to suffer, that choose to suffer for my
sake; let this only be added, and I have sufficient obedience. The gold which you
intend to lend to another, this lend to me, both at more profit, and in greater
security. Your body, wherewith you are going to warfare for another, make it to
war for me, for indeed I surpass your toils with recompenses in the most
abundant excess. Yet thou in all other matters preferrest him that gives you more
as well in loans, as in marketing and in warfare; but Christ alone, when giving
more, and infinitely more than all, thou dost not receive. And what is this so
great hostility? What is this so great enmity? Where will there be any excuse or
defense left for you, when the reasons for which you prefer man to man avail not
to induce you to prefer God to man?
Why do you commit your treasure to the earth? "Give it into my hand," He
says. Does not the earth's Lord seem to you more worthy of trust than the earth?
This indeed restores that which you laid in it, though oftentimes not even this,