think it no hardship. So clean was their soul from love of glory. "And after that
they had held their peace, James answered," etc. [Acts 15:13] (b) Peter indeed
spoke more strongly, but James here more mildly: for thus it behooves one in
high authority, to leave what is unpleasant for others to say, while he himself
appears in the milder part. (a) But what means it, "How God first ([πρὥτον]) did
visit?" [Acts 15:14] (It means) from the beginning ([ἐ] [ξ ἀρχἥς]). (c) Moreover
he well says, "Symeon expounded" ([ἐ] [ξηγήσατο]) (or, interpreted), implying
that he too spoke the mind of others. "And to this agree," etc. Observe how he
shows that this is a doctrine of old time. "To take out of the Gentiles," he says, "a
people for His Name." [Acts 15:15] Not simply, Chose, but, "for His Name," that
is for His glory. His Name is not shamed by the taking ([προλήψει]) the Gentiles
first, but it is even a greater glory.— Here some even great thing is hinted at: that
these are chosen before all. "After this I will return, and rebuild the tabernacle of
David which is fallen down." [Acts 15:16] But if one would look into the matter
closely, the kingdom of David does in fact now stand, his Offspring reigning
everywhere. For what is the good of the buildings and the city, with none
obeying there? And what is the harm arising from the destruction of the city,
when all are willing to give their very souls? There is that come which is more
illustrious than David: in all parts of the world is he now sung. This has come to
pass: if so, then must this also come to pass, "And I will build again the ruins
thereof, and I will set it up:" to what end? "that the residue of men may seek the
Lord, and all the Gentiles, upon whom My Name is called." [Acts 15:17] If then
it was to this end that the city rose again (namely) because of Him (that was to
come) of them, it shows that of the building of the city the cause is, the calling of
the Gentiles. Who are "the residue?" those who are then left. "And all the
Gentiles, upon whom My Name is called:" but observe, how he keeps the due
order, and brings them in second. "Says the Lord, which does these things." Not
"says" (only), but "does." Why then, it was God's work.— "But the question is
other than this (namely), what Peter spoke more plainly, whether they must be
circumcised. Then why do you harangue about these matters?" For what the

objectors asserted, was not that they must not be received upon believing, but
that it must be with the Law. And upon this Peter well pleaded: but then, as this
very thing above all others troubled the hearers, therefore he sets this to rights
again ([θεραπεύει]). And observe, that which was needful to be enacted as a rule,
that it is not necessary to keep the Law, this Peter introduced: but the milder part,
the truth which was received of old, this James says, and dwells upon that
concerning which nothing is written, in order that having soothed their minds by
that which is acknowledged, he may opportunely introduce this likewise.
"Wherefore," says he, "my sentence is, not to trouble them which from among the
Gentiles do turn unto God" [Acts 15:19], that is, not to subvert: for, if God called
them, and these observances subvert, we fight against God. And again, "them
which from the Gentiles," he says, "do turn." And he says well, with authority,
the " my sentence is. But that we write unto them that they abstain from
pollutions of idols, and from fornication"— (b) and yet they often insisted upon
these points in discoursing to them — but, that he may seem also to honor the
Law (he mentions), these also, speaking (however) not as from Moses but from
the Apostles, and to make the commandments many, he has divided the one into
two (saying), "and from things strangled, and from blood." [Acts 15:20] For
these, although relating to the body, were necessary to be observed, because
(these things) caused great evils, "For Moses has of old times in every city," etc.
[Acts 15:21] This above all quieted them. ([ἀ] [νέπαυσεν]) (a) For this cause I
affirm that it is good (so "to write to them.") Then why do we not write the same
injunctions to Jews also? Moses discourses unto them. See what condescension
(to their weakness)! Where it did no harm, he set him up as teacher, and indulged
them with a gratification which hindered nothing, by permitting Jews to hear
him in regard of these matters, even while leading away from him them of the
Gentiles. See what wisdom! He seems to honor him, and to set him up as the
authority for his own people, and by this very thing he leads away the Gentiles
from him! "Being read in the synagogues every sabbath day." Then why do they
not learn (what is to be learned) out of him, for instance * *? Through the