SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.3.

worship. For the end of divine worship is in the first place to give
reverence to God, and in this respect the first species of this genus
is "idolatry," which unduly gives divine honor to a creature. The
second end of religion is that man may be taught by God Whom he
worships; and to this must be referred "divinatory" superstition,
which consults the demons through compacts made with them,
whether tacit or explicit. Thirdly, the end of divine worship is a
certain direction of human acts according to the precepts of God the
object of that worship: and to this must be referred the superstition
of certain "observances."
Augustine alludes to these three (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 20), where he
says that "anything invented by man for making and worshipping
idols is superstitious," and this refers to the first species. Then he
goes on to say, "or any agreement or covenant made with the
demons for the purpose of consultation and of compact by tokens,"
which refers to the second species; and a little further on he adds:
"To this kind belong all sorts of amulets and such like," and this
refers to the third species.
Reply to Objection 1: As Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv), "good results
from a cause that is one and entire, whereas evil arises from each
single defect." Wherefore several vices are opposed to one virtue, as
stated above (Article 1; Question 10, Article 5). The saying of the
Philosopher is true of opposites wherein there is the same reason of
multiplicity.
Reply to Objection 2: Divinations and certain observances come
under the head of superstition, in so far as they depend on certain
actions of the demons: and thus they pertain to compacts made with
them.
Reply to Objection 3: Hypocritical religion is taken here for "religion
as applied to human observances," as the gloss goes on to explain.
Wherefore this hypocritical religion is nothing else than worship
given to God in an undue mode: as, for instance, if a man were, in
the time of grace, to wish to worship God according to the rite of the
Old Law. It is of religion taken in this sense that the gloss speaks
literally.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.91, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.92, C.1.

## QUESTION 93 — OF SUPERSTITION CONSISTING IN UNDUE WORSHIP

OF THE TRUE GOD

Prologue
We must now consider the species of superstition. We shall treat (1)
Of the superstition which consists in giving undue worship to the
true God; (2) Of the superstition of idolatry; (3) of divinatory
superstition; (4) of the superstition of observances.
Under the first head there are two points of inquiry:
(1) Whether there can be anything pernicious in the worship of the
true God?
(2) Whether there can be anything superfluous therein?

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.92, C.2.