THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.43, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the miracles which Christ worked were a

sufficient proof of His Godhead?
Objection 1: It would seem that the miracles which Christ worked
were not a sufficient proof of His Godhead. For it is proper to Christ
to be both God and man. But the miracles which Christ worked have
been done by others also. Therefore they were not a sufficient proof
of His Godhead.
Objection 2: Further, no power surpasses that of the Godhead. But
some have worked greater miracles than Christ, for it is written (Jn.
14:12): "He that believeth in Me, the works that I do, he also shall do,
and greater than these shall he do." Therefore it seems that the
miracles which Christ worked are not sufficient proof of His
Godhead.
Objection 3: Further, the particular is not a sufficient proof of the
universal. But any one of Christ's miracles was one particular work.
Therefore none of them was a sufficient proof of His Godhead, by
reason of which He had universal power over all things.
On the contrary, our Lord said (Jn. 5:36): "The works which the
Father hath given Me to perfect . . . themselves . . . give testimony of
Me."
I answer that, The miracles which Christ worked were a sufficient
proof of His Godhead in three respects. First, as to the very nature of
the works, which surpassed the entire capability of created power,
and therefore could not be done save by Divine power. For this
reason the blind man, after his sight had been restored, said (Jn.
9:32,33): "From the beginning of the world it has not been heard, that
any man hath opened the eyes of one born blind. Unless this man
were of God, he could not do anything."
Secondly, as to the way in which He worked miracles---namely,
because He worked miracles as though of His own power, and not by
praying, as others do. Wherefore it is written (Lk. 6:19) that "virtue
went out from Him and healed all." Whereby it is proved, as Cyril
says (Comment. in Lucam) that "He did not receive power from
another, but, being God by nature, He showed His own power over
the sick. And this is how He worked countless miracles." Hence on

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.43, C.5.

Mt. 8:16: "He cast out spirits with His word, and all that were sick He
healed," Chrysostom says: "Mark how great a multitude of persons
healed, the Evangelists pass quickly over, not mentioning one by
one . . . but in one word traversing an unspeakable sea of miracles."
And thus it was shown that His power was co-equal with that of God
the Father, according to Jn. 5:19: "What things soever" the Father
"doth, these the Son doth also in like manner"; and, again (Jn. 5:21):
"As the Father raiseth up the dead and giveth life, so the Son also
giveth life to whom He will."
Thirdly, from the very fact that He taught that He was God; for unless
this were true it would not be confirmed by miracles worked by
Divine power. Hence it was said (Mk. 1:27): "What is this new
doctrine? For with power He commandeth the unclean spirits, and
they obey Him."
Reply to Objection 1: This was the argument of the Gentiles.
Wherefore Augustine says (Ep. ad Volusian. cxxxvii): "No suitable
wonders; say they, show forth the presence of so great majesty, for
the ghostly cleansing" whereby He cast out demons, "the cure of the
sick, the raising of the dead to life, if other miracles be taken into
account, are small things before God." To this Augustine answers
thus: "We own that the prophets did as much . . . But even Moses
himself and the other prophets made Christ the Lord the object of
their prophecy, and gave Him great glory . . . He, therefore, chose to
do similar things to avoid the inconsistency of failing to do what He
had done through others. Yet still He was bound to do something
which no other had done: to be born of a virgin, to rise from the
dead, and to ascend into heaven. If anyone deem this a slight thing
for God to do, I know not what more he can expect. Having become
man, ought He to have made another world, that we might believe
Him to be Him by whom the world was made? But in this world
neither a greater world could be made nor one equal to it: and if He
had made a lesser world in comparison with this, that too would
have been deemed a small thing."
As to the miracles worked by others, Christ did greater still. Hence
on Jn. 15:24: "If I had not done in them the works that no other men
hath done," etc., Augustine says: "None of the works of Christ seem
to be greater than the raising of the dead: which thing we know the
ancient prophets also did . . . Yet Christ did some works 'which no
other man hath done.' But we are told in answer that others did
works which He did not, and which none other did . . . But to heal