and giving suck, and silence for so long a space, and He awaits the age proper to
manhood; that by all means acceptance might be won for the mystery of His
Economy.
"But wherefore then," one may say, "were even these signs wrought at the
beginning?" For His mother's sake; for the sake of Joseph and of Simeon, who
was presently to depart; for the sake of the shepherds and of the wise men; for
the sake of the Jews. Since they, had they been willing to mind diligently what
was taking place, would from this event also have reaped no small advantage in
regard of what was to come.
But if the prophets do not mention what relates to the wise men, be not
troubled; for they neither foretold all things, nor were they silent touching all.
For as without any warning to see those things coming to pass, would naturally
occasion much astonishment and trouble; so also to have been informed of all
would dispose the hearer to sleep, and would have left nothing for the
evangelists to add.
5. And if the Jews should raise a question touching the prophecy, and say,
that the words, "Out of Egypt have I called my Son," were uttered concerning
themselves; we would tell them, This is a law of prophecy, that in many cases
much that is spoken of one set of persons is fulfilled in another; of which kind is
that which is said touching Simeon and Levi, "I will divide them," says He, "in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel." [Genesis 49:7] And yet not in themselves did
this come to pass, but in their descendants; and Noah's saying again about
Canaan, came to pass in the Gibeonites, Canaan's descendants. And that
concerning Jacob one may see to have so come to pass; for those blessings
which say, "Be lord over your brother, and let your father's sons worship you,"
[Genesis 27:19] had no accomplishment in himself (how could they, he being in
fear and trembling, and worshipping his brother over and over again?
[Genesis 33:3]), but in his offspring they had. The very same may be said in this
case also. For which may be called the truer son of God, he that worships a calf,
and is joined to Baalpeor and sacrifices his sons to devils? Or He that is a Son by

nature, and honors Him that begot Him? So that, except this man had come, the
prophecy would not have received, its due fulfillment. It is worth observing, too,
that the evangelist intimates the same by the phrase, "that it might be fulfilled;"
implying that it would not have been fulfilled, unless He had come.
And this makes the Virgin also in no common degree glorious and
distinguished; that the very thing which was the whole people's special
endowment in the way of praise, she also might thenceforth have for her own. I
mean, that whereas they were proud of their coming up from Egypt, and used to
boast of it (which indeed the prophet also was hinting at, when he said, "Have I
not brought up the strangers from Cappadocia, and the Assyrians from the pit" ),
He makes this pre-eminence belong to the Virgin likewise.
Rather, however, both the people and the patriarch, going down there, and
coming up thence, were together completing the type of this His return. Thus, as
they went down to avoid death by famine, so He death by conspiracy. But
whereas they on their arrival were for the time delivered from the famine, this
man, when He had gone down, sanctified the whole land, by setting His foot
thereon.
At least it is observable how, in the midst of His humiliations, the tokens of
His Godhead are disclosed. Thus, first of all, the angel saying, "Flee into Egypt,"
did not promise to journey with them, either in their descent or return; intimating
that they have a great fellow-traveller, the Child that had been born; such an one
as actually changed all things immediately on His appearing, and wrought so
that His enemies should minister in many ways to this Economy. Thus magi and
barbarians, leaving the superstition of their fathers, have come to worship: thus
Augustus ministers to the birth at Bethlehem by the decree for the taxing; Egypt
receives and preserves Him, driven from His home, and plotted against, and
obtains a sort of first impulse towards her union unto Him; so that when in aftertime she should hear Him preached by the apostles, she might have this at least
to glory of, as having received Him first. And yet this privilege did belong unto
Palestine alone; but the second proved more fervent than the first.