not so he. Wherefore also he every where assumes a high tone, as doing nothing
with a view to men's opinion nor concealing anything about himself. As he also
said before, "by the manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every
man's conscience," [2 Corinthians 4:2] so now again he says "in every thing we
have made it manifest to you." But what does this mean? 'We are rude,' he said,
'and do not conceal it: we receive from some persons and we do not keep it
secret. We receive then from you, and we pretend not that we do not receive, as
they do when they receive, but we make every thing that we do manifest unto
you;' which was the conduct of one that both had exceeding confidence in them,
and told them every thing truly. Wherefore he also calls them witnesses, saying
now, "among all men to youward," and also before, "For we write none other
things unto you, than what ye read or even acknowledge." [2 Corinthians 1:13]
4. Then after he had defended his own conduct he goes on next to say with
severity,

2 Corinthians 11:7
"Or did I commit a sin in abasing myself that you might be exalted?"
And in explanation of this, he adds,

2 Corinthians 11:8
"I robbed other churches, taking wages of them that I might minister unto
you."
What he says is this; 'I lived in straitness;' for this is the force of "abasing
myself." 'Can you then lay this to my charge? And do ye therefore lift up
yourselves against me, because I abased myself by begging, by enduring straits,
by suffering, by hungering, that you might be exalted?' And how were they
exalted by his being in straits? They were more edified and were not offended;
which also might [well] be a very great accusation of them and a reproach of
their weakness; that it was not possible in any other way to lead them on than by
first abasing himself. 'Do ye then lay it to my charge that I abased myself? But
thereby you were exalted.' For since he said even above that they accused him,
for that when present he was lowly, and when absent bold, in defending himself
he here strikes them again, saying, 'this too was for your sakes.'
"I robbed other churches." Here finally he speaks reproachfully, but his
former words prevent these from seeming offensive; for he said, "Bear with me
in a little foolishness:" and before all his other achievements makes this his first
boast. For this worldly men look to especially, and on this also those his
adversaries greatly prided themselves. Therefore it is that he does not first enter
on the subject of his perils, nor yet of his miracles, but on this of his contempt of
money, because they prided themselves on this; and at the same time he also
hints that they were wealthy. But what is to be admired in him is this, that when
he was able to say that he was even supported by his own hands, he did not say
this; but says that which especially shamed them and yet was no encomium on
himself, namely, 'I took from others.' And he did not say "took," but "robbed,"
that is, 'I stripped them, and made them poor.' And what surely is greater, that it
was not for superfluities, but for his necessities, for when he says 'wages,' he