midst, this also happened unto him. For Christ came not forth again by the
mouth of death, but having burst asunder and ripped up in the very midst, the
belly of the dragon, thus from His secret chambers [Psalm 19:5] right gloriously
He issued forth and flung abroad His beams not to this heaven alone, but to the
very throne most high. For even there did He carry it up.
This Body has He given to us both to hold and to eat; a thing appropriate to
intense love. For those whom we kiss vehemently, we oft-times even bite with
our teeth. Wherefore also Job, indicating the love of his servants towards him,
said, that they ofttimes, out of their great affection towards him, said, "Oh! That
we were filled with his flesh!" [Job 31:31] Even so Christ has given to us to be
filled with His flesh, drawing us on to greater love.
8. Let us draw near to Him then with fervency and with inflamed love, that
we may not have to endure punishment. For in proportion to the greatness of the
benefits bestowed on us, so much the more exceedingly are we chastised when
we show ourselves unworthy of the bountifulness. This Body, even lying in a
manger, Magi reverenced. Yea, men profane and barbarous, leaving their country
and their home, both set out on a long journey, and when they came, with fear
and great trembling worshipped Him. Let us, then, at least imitate those
Barbarians, we who are citizens of heaven. For they indeed when they saw Him
but in a manger, and in a hut, and no such thing was in sight as you behold now,
drew near with great awe; but you behold Him not in the manger but on the altar,
not a woman holding Him in her arms, but the priest standing by, and the Spirit
with exceeding bounty hovering over the gifts set before us. You do not see
merely this Body itself as they did, but you know also Its power, and the whole
economy, and art ignorant of none of the holy things which are brought to pass
by It, having been exactly initiated into all.
Let us therefore rouse ourselves up and be filled with horror, and let us
show forth a reverence far beyond that of those Barbarians; that we may not by
random and careless approaches heap fire upon our own heads. But these things
I say, not to keep us from approaching, but to keep us from approaching without

consideration. For as the approaching at random is dangerous, so the not
communicating in those mystical suppers is famine and death. For this Table is
the sinews of our soul, the bond of our mind, the foundation of our confidence,
our hope, our salvation, our light, our life. When with this sacrifice we depart
into the outer world, with much confidence we shall tread the sacred threshold,
fenced round on every side as with a kind of golden armor.
And why speak I of the world to come? Since here this mystery makes earth
become to you a heaven. Open only for once the gates of heaven and look in;
nay, rather not of heaven, but of the heaven of heavens; and then you will behold
what I have been speaking of. For what is there most precious of all, this will I
show you lying upon the earth. For as in royal palaces, what is most glorious of
all is not walls, nor golden roofs, but the person of the king sitting on the throne;
so likewise in heaven the Body of the King. But this, you are now permitted to
see upon earth. For it is not angels, nor archangels, nor heavens and heavens of
heavens, that I show you, but the very Lord and Owner of these. Perceivest thou
how that which is more precious than all things is seen by you on earth; and not
seen only, but also touched; and not only touched, but likewise eaten; and after
receiving It you go home?
Make your soul clean then, prepare your mind for the reception of these
mysteries. For if you were entrusted to carry a king's child with the robes, the
purple, and the diadem, you would cast away all things which are upon the earth.
But now that it is no child of man how royal soever, but the only-begotten Son of
God Himself, Whom you received, do you not thrill with awe, tell me, and cast
away all the love of all worldly things, and have no bravery but that wherewith
to adorn yourself? Or do you still look towards earth, and love money, and pant
after gold? What pardon then can you have? What excuse? Do you not know that
all this worldly luxury is loathsome to your Lord? Was it not for this that on His
birth He was laid in a manger, and took to Himself a mother of low estate? Did
He not for this say to him that was looking after gain, "But the Son of Man has
not where to lay His head?" [Matthew 8:20]