perplexity neither lasts long (when it did occur), nor (did it occur) before this,
but just at the moment when they "asked whether he were lodging there. While
Peter thought on the vision, the Spirit said unto him, Behold, three men seek you.
Arise therefore, and get you down, and go with them, doubting nothing: for I
have sent them." (supra, p. 142, and 145, note 7; v. 19, 20.) And this again is a
plea for Peter in answer to the disciples, that he did doubt, and was instructed to
doubt nothing. "For I," says He, "have sent them." Great is the authority of the
Spirit! What God does, this the Spirit is said to do. Not so the Angel, but having
first said, "Your prayers and your alms have ascended, for a memorial before
God," to show that he is sent from thence, then he adds, "And now send men,"
etc.: the Spirit not so, but, "For I have sent them. Then Peter went down to the
men which were sent unto him from Cornelius; and said, Behold, I am he whom
you seek: what is the cause wherefore you have come? And they said, Cornelius
the centurion, a just man, and one that fears God and of good report among all
the nation of the Jews, was warned from God by an holy angel to send for you
into his house, and to hear words of you." (v. 21, 22.) They speak his praises, so
as to persuade him that an Angel has in fact appeared unto him. "Then called he
them in," (b) that they may suffer no harm, "and lodged them:" thenceforth he
without scruple takes his meals with them. "And on the morrow Peter went away
with them, and certain brethren from Cæsarea accompanied him. And the
morrow after, they entered into Cæsarea." (v. 23, 24.) The man was a person of
note, and it was in a city of note that he then was.
(a) But let us look over again what has been said. "There was a certain man
in Cæsarea," etc. (Recapitulation, v. 1, 2.) Observe with whom the beginning of
the Gentiles is made— with "a devout man," and one proved to be worthy by his
works. For if, though the case be so, they are still offended, if this had not been
the case, what would not have been the consequence! But mark the greatness of
the assurance. (c) To this end all is done (in the way it is done), and the affair
takes its beginning from Judea. (d) "He saw in a vision, evidently," etc. [Acts
10:3]. It was not in his sleep that the Angel appeared to him, but while he was

awake, in the daytime, "about the ninth hour. He saw an Angel of God coming in
unto him, and saying unto him, Cornelius. And when he looked on him, he was
afraid." So occupied was he with himself. Implying, that it was in consequence
of the Angel's calling him by a voice that he saw him; as, had he not called him,
he would not have seen him: so taken up was he with the act in which he was
engaged. But the Angel says to him, "Your prayers and your alms have come up
for a memorial before God, and now send men to Joppa, and call for one Simon,
who is called Peter." [Acts 10:5] So far, he signified that the sending for him
would be for good consequences, but in what way good, he did not intimate. So,
neither does Peter relate the whole matter, but everywhere, the narratives are in
part only, for the purpose of making the hearers apply their minds to what is said.
"Send and call for Simon:" in like manner the Angel only calls Philip. "And as
they went on their journey, and drew near to the city" [Acts 10:9]: in order that
Peter should not be in perplexity too long. "Peter went up upon the housetop,"
etc. Observe, that not even his hunger forced him to have recourse to the sheet.
"Rise, Peter," says the Voice, "kill and eat." [Acts 10:13] Probably he was on his
knees when he saw the vision.— To me it seems that this also denotes the
Gospel (or, "the Preaching"). That the thing taking place was of God (the
circumstances made evident, namely), both that he sees it (descending) from
above, and that he is in a trance; and, that the voice comes from thence, and the
thrice confessing that the creatures there were unclean, and its coming from
thence, and being drawn back there (all this), is a mighty token of the cleanness
(imparted to them).— But why is this done? For the sake of those thereafter, to
whom he is about to relate it. For to himself it had been said, "Go not into the
way of the Gentiles." [Matthew 10:5] * * For if Paul needed both (to give)
circumcision, and (to offer) sacrifice, much more (was some assurance needed)
then, in the beginning of the Preaching, while they were as yet weaker. [Acts
16:3; 21:16]— Observe too how he did not at once receive them. For, it says,
they "called, and asked, whether Simon, which was surnamed Peter, were
lodging there." [Acts 10:18] As it was a mean looking house, they asked below,