upon the glorified countenance of Moses, who partook of the same nature with
us, if that just man needed a veil which might shade over the purity of his glory,
and show to them the face of their prophet mild and gentle; how could we
creatures of clay and earth have endured the unveiled Godhead, which is
unapproachable even by the powers above? Wherefore He tabernacled among
us, that we might be able with much fearlessness to approach Him, speak to, and
converse with Him.
But what means "the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father"? Since
many of the Prophets too were glorified, as this Moses himself, Elijah, and
Elisha, the one encircled by the fiery chariot [2 Kings 6:17], the other taken up
by it; and after them, Daniel and the Three Children, and the many others who
showed forth wonders ; and angels who have appeared among men, and partly
disclosed to beholders the flashing light of their proper nature; and since not
angels only, but even the Cherubim were seen by the Prophet in great glory, and
the Seraphim also: the Evangelist leading us away from all these, and removing
our thoughts from created things, and from the brightness of our fellow-servants,
sets us at the very summit of good. For, "not of prophet," says he, "nor angel,
nor archangel, nor of the higher power, nor of any other created nature," if other
there be, but of the Master Himself, the King Himself, the true Only-Begotten
Son Himself, of the Very Lord of all, did we "behold the glory."
For the expression "as," does not in this place belong to similarity or
comparison, but to confirmation and unquestionable definition; as though he
said, "We beheld glory, such as it was becoming, and likely that He should
possess, who is the Only-Begotten and true Son of God, the King of all." The
habit (of so speaking) is general, for I shall not refuse to strengthen my argument
even from common custom, since it is not now my object to speak with any
reference to beauty of words, or elegance of composition, but only for your
advantage; and therefore there is nothing to prevent my establishing my
argument by the instance of a common practice. What then is the habit of most
persons? Often when any have seen a king richly decked, and glittering on all

sides with precious stones, and are afterwards describing to others the beauty, the
ornaments, the splendor, they enumerate as much as they can, the glowing tint of
the purple robe, the size of the jewels, the whiteness of the mules, the gold about
the yoke, the soft and shining couch. But when after enumerating these things,
and other things besides these, they cannot, say what they will, give a full idea of
the splendor, they immediately bring in: "But why say much about it; once for
all, he was like a king;" not desiring by the expression "like," to show that he, of
whom they say this, resembles a king, but that he is a real king. Just so now the
Evangelist has put the word as, desiring to represent the transcendent nature and
incomparable excellence of His glory.
For indeed all others, both angels and archangels and prophets, did
everything as under command; but He with the authority which becomes a King
and Master; at which even the multitudes wondered, that He taught as "one
having authority." [Matthew 7:29] Even angels, as I said, have appeared with
great glory upon the earth; as in the case of Daniel, of David, of Moses, but they
did all as servants who have a Master. But He as Lord and Ruler of all, and this
when He appeared in poor and humble form; but even so creation recognized her
Lord. Now the star from heaven which called the wise men to worship Him, the
vast throng pouring everywhere of angels attending the Lord, and hymning His
praise, and besides them, many other heralds sprang up on a sudden, and all, as
they met, declared to one another the glad tidings of this ineffable mystery; the
angels to the shepherds; the shepherds to those of the city; Gabriel to Mary and
Elisabeth; Anna and Simeon to those who came to the Temple. Nor were men
and women only lifted up with pleasure, but the very infant who had not yet
come forth to light, I mean the citizen of the wilderness, the namesake of this
Evangelist, leaped while yet in his mother's womb, and all were soaring with
hopes for the future. This too immediately after the Birth. But when He had
manifested Himself still farther, other wonders, yet greater than the first, were
seen. For it was no more star, or sky, no more angels, or archangels, not Gabriel,
or Michael, but the Father Himself from heaven above, who proclaimed Him,