94. This worldliness can be fuelled in two deeply interrelated ways. One is the attraction of
gnosticism, a purely subjective faith whose only interest is a certain experience or a set of ideas
and bits of information which are meant to console and enlighten, but which ultimately keep one
imprisoned in his or her own thoughts and feelings. The other is the self-absorbed promethean
neopelagianism of those who ultimately trust only in their own powers and feel superior to others
because they observe certain rules or remain intransigently faithful to a particular Catholic style
from the past. A supposed soundness of doctrine or discipline leads instead to a narcissistic and
authoritarian elitism, whereby instead of evangelizing, one analyzes and classifies others, and
instead of opening the door to grace, one exhausts his or her energies in inspecting and verifying.
In neither case is one really concerned about Jesus Christ or others. These are manifestations of
an anthropocentric immanentism. It is impossible to think that a genuine evangelizing thrust could
emerge from these adulterated forms of Christianity.

95. This insidious worldliness is evident in a number of attitudes which appear opposed, yet all
have the same pretence of “taking over the space of the Church”. In some people we see an
ostentatious preoccupation for the liturgy, for doctrine and for the Church’s prestige, but without
any concern that the Gospel have a real impact on God’s faithful people and the concrete needs of
the present time. In this way, the life of the Church turns into a museum piece or something which
is the property of a select few. In others, this spiritual worldliness lurks behind a fascination with
social and political gain, or pride in their ability to manage practical affairs, or an obsession with
programmes of self-help and self-realization. It can also translate into a concern to be seen, into a
social life full of appearances, meetings, dinners and receptions. It can also lead to a business

mentality, caught up with management, statistics, plans and evaluations whose principal
beneficiary is not God’s people but the Church as an institution. The mark of Christ, incarnate,
crucified and risen, is not present; closed and elite groups are formed, and no effort is made to go
forth and seek out those who are distant or the immense multitudes who thirst for Christ.
Evangelical fervour is replaced by the empty pleasure of complacency and self-indulgence.

96. This way of thinking also feeds the vainglory of those who are content to have a modicum of
power and would rather be the general of a defeated army than a mere private in a unit which
continues to fight. How often we dream up vast apostolic projects, meticulously planned, just like
defeated generals! But this is to deny our history as a Church, which is glorious precisely because
it is a history of sacrifice, of hopes and daily struggles, of lives spent in service and fidelity to work,
tiring as it may be, for all work is “the sweat of our brow”. Instead, we waste time talking about
“what needs to be done” – in Spanish we call this the sin of “habriaqueísmo” – like spiritual
masters and pastoral experts who give instructions from on high. We indulge in endless fantasies
and we lose contact with the real lives and difficulties of our people.