SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.122, C.11.

e. for a due end; "this is true fortitude."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.122, C.12.

### ARTICLE 11. Whether fortitude is a cardinal virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that fortitude is not a cardinal virtue. For, as
stated above (Article 10), anger is closely allied with fortitude. Now
anger is not accounted a principal passion; nor is daring which
belongs to fortitude. Therefore neither should fortitude be reckoned
a cardinal virtue.
Objection 2: Further, the object of virtue is good. But the direct
object of fortitude is not good, but evil, for it is endurance of evil and
toil, as Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii). Therefore fortitude is not a
cardinal virtue.
Objection 3: Further, the cardinal virtues are about those things
upon which human life is chiefly occupied, just as a door turns upon
a hinge [cardine]. But fortitude is about dangers of death which are
of rare occurrence in human life. Therefore fortitude should not be
reckoned a cardinal or principal virtue.
On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxii), Ambrose in his commentary
on Lk. 6:20, and Augustine (De Moribus Eccl. xv), number fortitude
among the four cardinal or principal virtues.
I answer that, As stated above (FS, Question 61, Articles 3,4), those
virtues are said to be cardinal or principal which have a foremost
claim to that which belongs to the virtues in common. And among
other conditions of virtue in general one is that it is stated to "act
steadfastly," according to Ethic. ii, 4. Now fortitude above all lays
claim to praise for steadfastness. Because he that stands firm is so
much the more praised, as he is more strongly impelled to fall or
recede. Now man is impelled to recede from that which is in
accordance with reason, both by the pleasing good and the
displeasing evil. But bodily pain impels him more strongly than
pleasure. For Augustine says (Questions 83, qu. 36): "There is none
that does not shun pain more than he desires pleasure. For we
perceive that even the most untamed beasts are deterred from the
greatest pleasures by the fear of pain." And among the pains of the
mind and dangers those are mostly feared which lead to death, and it
is against them that the brave man stands firm. Therefore fortitude is
a cardinal virtue.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.122, C.12.

Reply to Objection 1: Daring and anger do not cooperate with
fortitude in its act of endurance, wherein its steadfastness is chiefly
commended: for it is by that act that the brave man curbs fear, which
is a principal passion, as stated above (FS, Question 25, Article 4).
Reply to Objection 2: Virtue is directed to the good of reason which it
behooves to safeguard against the onslaught of evils. And fortitude
is directed to evils of the body, as contraries which it withstands,
and to the good of reason, as the end, which it intends to safeguard.
Reply to Objection 3: Though dangers of death are of rare
occurrence, yet the occasions of those dangers occur frequently,
since on account of justice which he pursues, and also on account
of other good deeds, man encounters mortal adversaries.