blessings; which, God grant, we may all be found worthy of, through the grace
and loving kindness of Jesus Christ our Lord, with Whom be glory to the Father
and the Holy Spirit forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 4 on the Statues
An exhortation to the people respecting fortitude and patience, from
the examples of Job and the Three Children in Babylon. The Homily
concludes with an address on the subject of abstaining from oaths.
1. Blessed be God! Who has comforted your sorrowing souls, and stayed
your agitated spirits! For that you have received no small consolation is evident
by the desire and readiness to listen which you are now showing. For it is
impossible that a soul in anguish, and oppressed with the cloud of despondency,
should have power to hear with readiness anything that is spoken. But I see you
are attending to us with much good will, and with an intense earnestness; and
that you have shaken off gloomy thoughts, and put aside the sense of present
distress, in your affectionate desire of listening. For this cause, I thank God
heartily together with you, that the calamity has not overmatched your
philosophy; nor fear relaxed your vigour; nor tribulation quenched your alacrity;
nor danger dried up your zeal: nor the fear of men overcome the desire for God;
nor the difficulty of the times overthrown your earnestness; nay, so far from
overthrowing, it has strengthened it; so far from slackening, it has given it more
intensity; so far from quenching, has kindled it the more. The forum is indeed
empty, but the church is filled; the former supplies material for melancholy, the
latter is an occasion of joy and spiritual gladness! When therefore, beloved, you
betake yourself to the forum, and the sight of the solitude calls forth a groan, fly
back to your Mother, and straightway she will console you with the multitude of
her offspring and will show you the chorus of the Brethren complete, and will
drive away all your despondency! For in the city we are as earnestly longing to
see human beings, as those who inhabit the deserts; but when we take refuge in
the church, we are straitened for room by the multitude. And as when the sea is
in uproar, and rendered furious by the violent tempest, fear compels all to fly for

refuge from without into the harbour; so also now, the waves of the forum, and
the tempest of the city, drives together every one from all sides into the church,
and by the bond of love knits the members close to one another.
2. Let us then give thanks to God even for these things, that we have reaped
so much fruit from the tribulation; that we have received so great an advantage
from the trial. If there were no trial, there would be no crown; if there were no
wrestlings, there would be no prize; if there were no lists marked out, there
would be no honours; if there were no tribulation, there would be no rest; if there
were no winter, there would be no summer. And this may be observed, not only
among men, but even with the very seeds; for if, in that case, we expect the ear
of grain to spring and flourish, there must be much rain, much gathering of the
clouds, and much frost; and the time of sowing is also a rainy season. Since
therefore the winter, a winter not of the elements, but of souls, has now set in, let
us too sow in this winter that we may reap in the summer; let us sow tears, that
we may reap gladness. This is not my word, it is a prophetic promise, "They who
sow in tears, shall reap in joy." The rain which comes down, does not so make
the seeds to sprout and grow, as the shower of falling tears makes the seed of
godliness to spring up and flourish. This it is that cleanses the soul; waters the
mind, and causes the growing germ of doctrine to push rapidly forwards. For this
reason also, it is needful to plough up a deep furrow. This the Prophet signified
when he spoke thus, "Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns."
[Jeremiah 4:3] Therefore, as when he who has set the plough on the field, turns
up the earth from below, preparing beforehand a safe lodgment for the seeds, in
order that they may not lie dispersed over the surface, but may be hidden in the
very womb of the earth, and deposit their roots in safety: so also it is our
business to act; and making use of the plough of tribulation to break up the depth
of the heart. For another Prophet admonishes of this, when he says, "Rend your
hearts and not your garments." [Joel 2:13] Let us then rend our hearts, that if
any evil plant, any treacherous thought be present in us, we may tear it up by the
roots, and provide a pure soil for the seeds of godliness. For if we do not now