according as one or the other preponderates the mixed (bodies)
differ in their respective complexions, and this must apply to the
bodies of those who rise again, for they will contain flesh and bones
and like parts, all of which demand different complexions. Moreover,
according to this, impassibility could not be one of their gifts,
because it would not imply a disposition in the impassible
substance, but merely an external preventive to passion, namely the
power of God, which might produce the same effect in a human body
even in this state of life. Consequently others say that in the body
itself there will be something preventing the passion of a glorified
body, namely the nature of a fifth: or heavenly body, which they
maintain enters into the composition of a human body, to the effect
of blending the elements together in harmony so as to be fitting
matter for the rational soul; but that in this state of life, on account of
the preponderance of the elemental nature, the human body is
passible like other elements, whereas in the resurrection the nature
of the fifth body will predominate, so that the human body will be
made impassible in likeness to the heavenly body. But this cannot
stand, because the fifth body does not enter materially into the
composition of a human body, as was proved above (Sent. ii, D, 12,
Q. 1, Article 1). Moreover it is absurd to say that a natural power,
such as the power of a heavenly body, should endow the human
body with a property of glory, such as the impassibility of a glorified
body, since the Apostle ascribes to Christ's power the
transformation of the human body, because "such as is the
heavenly, such also are they that are heavenly" (1 Cor. 15:48), and
"He will reform the body of our lowness, made like to the body of His
glory, according to the operation whereby also He is able to subdue
all things unto Himself" (Phil. 3:21). And again, a heavenly nature
cannot exercise such power over the human body as to take from it
its elemental nature which is passible by reason of its essential
constituents. Consequently we must say otherwise that all passion
results from the agent overcoming the patient, else it would not draw
it to its own bounds. Now it is impossible for agent to overcome
patient except through the weakening of the hold which the form of
the patient has over its matter, if we speak of the passion which is
against nature, for it is of passion in this sense that we are speaking
now: for matter is not subject to one of two contraries, except
through the cessation or at least the diminution of the hold which the
other contrary has on it. Now the human body and all that it contains
will be perfectly subject to the rational soul, even as the soul will be
perfectly subject to God. Wherefore it will be impossible for the
glorified body to be subject to any change contrary to the