corresponding to that power which sends down its influence upon it, they maintain that this is a
most evident type of the Duodecad and its offspring.
2. In addition to these things, they declare that the Demiurge, desiring to imitate the infinitude,
and eternity, and immensity, and freedom from all measurement by time of the Ogdoad above, but,
as he was the fruit of defect, being unable to express its permanence and eternity, had recourse to
the expedient of spreading out its eternity into times, and seasons, and vast numbers of years,
imagining, that by the multitude of such times he might imitate its immensity. They declare further,
that the truth having escaped him, he followed that which was false, and that, for this reason, when
the times are fulfilled, his work shall perish.

### Chapter XVIII.—Passages from Moses, which the heretics pervert to the support of their
hypothesis.
1. And while they affirm such things as these concerning the creation, every one of them
generates something new, day by day, according to his ability; for no one is deemed "perfect," who
does not develop among them some mighty fictions. It is thus necessary, first, to indicate what
things they metamorphose [to their own use] out of the prophetical writings, and next, to refute
them. Moses, then, they declare, by his mode of beginning the account of the creation, has at the
commencement pointed out the mother of all things when he says, "In the beginning God created
the heaven and the earth;" for, as they maintain, by naming these four,—God, beginning, heaven,
and earth,—he set forth their Tetrad. Indicating also its invisible and hidden nature, he said, "Now
the earth was invisible and unformed." They will have it, moreover, that he spoke of the second
Tetrad, the offspring of the first, in this way—by naming an abyss and darkness, in which were
also water, and the Spirit moving upon the water. Then, proceeding to mention the Decad, he names
light, day, night, the firmament, the evening, the morning, dry land, sea, plants, and, in the tenth
place, trees. Thus, by means of these ten names, he indicated the ten Æons. The power of the
Duodecad, again, was shadowed forth by him thus:—He names the sun, moon, stars, seasons, years,
whales, fishes, reptiles, birds, quadrupeds, wild beasts, and after all these, in the twelfth place, man.
Thus they teach that the Triacontad was spoken of through Moses by the Spirit. Moreover, man
also, being formed after the image of the power above, had in himself that ability which flows from
the one source. This ability was seated in the region of the brain, from which four faculties proceed,
after the image of the Tetrad above, and these are called: the first, sight, the second, hearing, the
third, smell, and the fourth, taste. And they say that the Ogdoad is indicated by man in this way:
that he possesses two ears, the like number of eyes, also two nostrils, and a twofold taste, namely,