be so, there will also be another confusion.

1 Corinthians 14:16
"Else," says he, "if you bless with the spirit, how shall he that fills the place
of the unlearned say the Amen at your giving of thanks, seeing he knows not
what you say."

1 Corinthians 14:17
"For thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not edified."
Observe how again here he brings his stone to the plumb-line, every where
seeking the edification of the Church. Now by the "unlearned" he means the
laymen, and signifies that he also suffers no little loss when he is unable to say
the Amen. And what he says is this: "if you shall bless in a barbarian tongue,
not knowing what you say, nor able to interpret, the layman cannot respond the
Amen. For not hearing the words, 'forever and ever,' which are at the end , he
does not say the Amen." Then again, comforting him concerning this, that he
might not seem to hold the gift too cheap; the same kind of remark as he made
above, that "he speaks mysteries," and "speaks unto God," and "edifies himself,"
and "prays with the spirit," intending no little comfort from these things, this
also he utters here, saying, "for thou indeed givest thanks well," since you speak
being moved by the Spirit: but the other hearing nothing nor knowing what is
said, stands there, receiving no great advantage by it.
7. Further, because he had run down the possessors of this gift, as though
they had no such great thing; that he might not seem to hold them cheap, as
being himself destitute of it, see what he says:

1 Corinthians 14:18
"I thank God, speaking with tongues more than ye all."
And this he does also in another place intending, namely, to take away the
advantages of Judaism and to show that henceforth they are nothing, he begins
by declaring that himself had been endowed with them, yea, and that in very
great excess; and then he calls them "loss," thus saying, "If any man thinks to
have confidence in the flesh, I more: circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of
Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; as touching the law, a
Pharisee; as touching zeal, persecuting the Church; as touching the
righteousness which is the law, found blameless." [Philippians 3:4-7] And then,
having signified himself to have the advantage of all, he says, "Howbeit what
things were gain to me, those have I counted loss for Christ." So also he does
here, saying, "I speak with tongues more than ye all." Do not ye therefore glory
as though ye only had the gift. For I also possess it, yea more than ye.

1 Corinthians 14:19
"Howbeit in the Church I had rather speak five words with my
understanding, that I might instruct others also."
What is that, "speak with my understanding, that I might instruct others
also?" "Understanding what I say," and "words which I can both interpret to
others, and speak intelligently, and teach the hearers." "Than ten thousand
words in a tongue." Wherefore? "That I may instruct others," says he. For the
one has but display only; the other, great utility: this being what he everywhere
seeks, I mean the common profit. And yet the gift of tongues was strange, but
that of prophecy familiar and ancient and heretofore given to many; this on the
contrary then first given: howbeit it was not much cared for by him. Wherefore
neither did he employ it; not because he had it not, but because he always sought
the more profitable things: being as he was free from all vain-glory, and
considering one thing only, how he might render the hearers better.
8. And here is the reason of the faculty he had of looking to the expedient
both to himself and to others: viz. because he was free from vain-glory. Since he
assuredly that is enslaved by it, so far from discerning what is good to others,
will not even know his own.
Such was Simon, who, because he looked to vain-glory, did not even see his
own advantage. Such also were the Jews, who because of this sacrificed their
own salvation to the devil. Hence also did idols spring, and by this madness did
the heathen philosophers excite themselves, and make shipwreck in their false
doctrines. And observe the perverseness of this passion: how because of it some
of them also made themselves poor, others were eager for wealth. So potent is its
tyranny that it prevails even in direct contraries. Thus one man is vain of
chastity, and contrariwise another of adultery; and this man of justice, and
another of injustice; so of luxury and fasting, modesty and rashness, riches and