"He therefore, being wearied with His journey, sat
thus at the well"
Do you see that His sitting was because of weariness? Because of the heat?
Because of his waiting for His disciples? He knew, indeed, what should take
place among the Samaritans, but it was not for this that He came principally; yet,
though He came not for this, it behooved not to reject the woman who came to
Him, when she manifested such a desire to learn. The Jews, when He was even
coming to them, drove Him away; they of the Gentiles, when He was proceeding
in another direction, drew Him to them. They envied, these believed on Him.
They were angry with, these revered and worshipped Him. What then? Was He
to overlook the salvation of so many, to send away such noble zeal? This would
have been unworthy of His lovingkindness. Therefore He ordered all the matter
in hand with the Wisdom which became Him. He sat resting His body and

cooling It by the fountain; for it was the very middle of the day, as the Evangelist
has declared, when he says, "It was about the sixth hour."
He sat "thus." What means "thus"? Not upon a throne, not upon a cushion,
but simply, and as He was, upon the ground.

"There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water"
4. Observe how he declares that the woman came forth for another purpose,
in every way silencing the shameless gainsaying of the Jews, that none might say
that He acted in opposition to His own command, bidding (His disciples) not to
enter into any city of the Samaritans, yet conversing with Samaritans. [Matthew
10:5] And therefore the Evangelist has put,

"For His disciples had gone away into the city to buy
meat"
Bringing in many reasons for His conversation with her. What does the
woman? When she heard, "Give Me to drink," she very wisely makes the speech
of Christ an occasion for a question, and says,

John 4:9
"How is it that thou, being a Jew, ask drink of me, which am a Samaritan? For
the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans."
And whence did she suppose Him to be a Jew? From His dress, perhaps,
and from His dialect. Observe, I pray you, how considerate the woman was. If
there was need of caution, Jesus needed it, not she. For she does not say, "The
Samaritans have no dealings with the Jews," but, "The Jews do not admit the
Samaritans." Yet still, although free herself from blame, when she supposed that
another was falling into it she would not even so hold her peace, but corrected,
as she thought, what was done unlawfully. Perhaps some one may ask how it
was that Jesus asked drink of her, when the law did not permit it. If it be
answered that it was because He knew beforehand that she would not give it,
then for this very reason He ought not to have asked. What then can we say?
That the rejecting such observances as these was now a matter of indifference to
Him; for He who induced others to do them away, would much more Himself
pass them by. "Not that which goes in," says He, "defiles a man, but that which
goes out." [Matthew 15:11] And this conversation with the woman would be no
slight charge against the Jews. For often did He draw them to Himself, both by
words and deeds, but they would not attend; while observe how she is detained
by a simple request. For He did not as yet enter on the prosecution of this
business, nor the way, yet if any came to Him He did not prevent them. And to
the disciples also He said thus, "Into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not." He
did not say, "And when they come to you, reject them"; that would have been
very unworthy of His lovingkindness. And therefore He answered the woman,
and said,