your own matters, do not those of others." And be thou continually urging her to
this anxious trial. Then, if she have nothing to say, but shrink back, wear her out
with the scourge, like some restless and unchaste handmaid. And this tribunal do
thou cause to sit every day, and picture the river of fire, the venomous worm, the
rest of the torments.
And permit her not to be with the devil any more, nor bear with her
shameless sayings, "he comes to me, he plots against me, he tempts me;" but tell
her, "If you were not willing, all that would be to no purpose." And if she say
again, "I am entangled with a body, I am clothed with flesh, I dwell in the world,
I abide on earth;" tell her, "All these are excuses and pretexts. For such an one
too was encompassed with flesh, and such another dwelling in the world, and
abiding on earth, is approved; and you yourself too, when you do well, doest it
encompassed with flesh." And if she be pained at hearing this, take not off your
hand; for she will not die, if you smite her, but you will save her from death. And
if she say again, "Such an one provoked me," tell her, "But it is in your power not
to be provoked; often at least you have restrained your anger." And if she say,
"The beauty of such a woman moved me;" tell her, "Yet were you able to have
mastered yourself." Bring forward those that have got the better, bring forward
the first woman, who said, "The serpent beguiled me," [Genesis 3:13] and yet
was not acquitted of the blame.
And when you are searching out these things, let no man be present, let no
man disturb you; but as the judges sit under curtains to judge, so do thou too,
instead of curtains, seek a time and place of quiet. And when after your supper
you are risen up, and art about to lie down, then hold this your judgment; this is
the time convenient for you, and the place, your bed, and your chamber. This the
prophet likewise commanded, saying, "For the things which you say in your
hearts, be ye moved to compunction upon your beds." And for small offenses
require great satisfaction, that unto the great you may never even approach. If
you do this every day, you will with confidence stand at that fearful judgmentseat.

In this way Paul became clean; therefore also he said, "For if we judged
ourselves, we should not be judged." [1 Corinthians 11:31] Thus did Job cleanse
his sons. [Job 1:5] For he that offered sacrifices for secret sins, much more did
he require an account of such as were manifest.
4. But we do not so, but altogether the contrary. For as soon as we are laid
down to rest, we rather think over all our worldly matters; and some introduce
unclean thoughts, some usuries, and contracts, and temporal cares.
And if we have a daughter, a virgin, we watch her strictly; but that which is
more precious to us than a daughter, our soul, her we suffer to play the harlot and
defile herself, introducing to her innumerable wicked thoughts. And whether it
be the love of covetousness, or that of luxury, or that of fair persons, or that of
wrath, or be it what you will else that is minded to come in, we throw open the
doors, and attract and invite it, and help it to defile our soul at its leisure. And
what can be more barbarous than this, to overlook our soul that is more precious
than all, abused by so many adulterers, and so long companying with them, even
until they are sated? Which will never be. So it is, therefore, that when sleep
overtakes us, then only do they depart from her; or rather not even then, for our
dreams and imaginations furnish her with the same images. Whence also, when
day has come, the soul stored with such images often falls away to the actual
performance of those fancies.
And thou, while into the apple of your eye you suffer not so much as a grain
of dust to enter, do you pass unnoticed your soul, gathering to itself a heap of so
great evils? When shall we then be able to clear out this filth, which we are daily
laying up within us? When to cut up the thorns? When to sow the seed? Do you
not know that henceforth the time of harvest is at hand? But we have not yet so
much as ploughed our fields. If then the husbandman should come and find fault,
what shall we say? And what answer shall we make? That no man gave us the
seed? Nay, this is sown daily. That no man, then, has cut up the thorns? Nay,
every day we are sharpening the sickle. But do the necessary engagements of life
distract you? And why have you not crucified yourself to the world? For if he