THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.45, C.5.

conscious of that perfect generation.
Reply to Objection 1: The words quoted are to be understood of
God's eternal speaking, by which God the Father uttered the onlybegotten and co-eternal Word. Nevertheless, it can be said that God
uttered the same thing twice in a bodily voice, yet not for the same
purpose, but in order to show the divers modes in which men can be
partakers of the likeness of the eternal Sonship.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as in the Baptism, where the mystery of
the first regeneration was proclaimed, the operation of the whole
Trinity was made manifest, because the Son Incarnate was there, the
Holy Ghost appeared under the form of a dove, and the Father made
Himself known in the voice; so also in the transfiguration, which is
the mystery of the second regeneration, the whole Trinity appears--the Father in the voice, the Son in the man, the Holy Ghost in the
bright cloud; for just as in baptism He confers innocence, signified
by the simplicity of the dove, so in the resurrection will He give His
elect the clarity of glory and refreshment from all sorts of evil, which
are signified by the bright cloud.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ came to give grace actually, and to
promise glory by His words. Therefore it was fitting at the time of His
transfiguration, and not at the time of His baptism, that men should
be commanded to hear Him.
Reply to Objection 4: It was fitting that the disciples should be afraid
and fall down on hearing the voice of the Father, to show that the
glory which was then being revealed surpasses in excellence the
sense and faculty of all mortal beings; according to Ex. 33:20: "Man
shall not see Me and live." This is what Jerome says on Mt. 17:6:
"Such is human frailty that it cannot bear to gaze on such great
glory." But men are healed of this frailty by Christ when He brings
them into glory. And this is signified by what He says to them:
"Arise, and fear not."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.1.

## QUESTION 46 — THE PASSION OF CHRIST

Prologue
In proper sequence we have now to consider all that relates to
Christ's leaving the world. In the first place, His Passion; secondly,
His death; thirdly, His burial; and, fourthly, His descent into hell.
With regard to the Passion, there arises a threefold consideration: (1)
The Passion itself; (2) the efficient cause of the Passion; (3) the fruits
of the Passion.
Under the first heading there are twelve points of inquiry:
(1) Whether it was necessary for Christ to suffer for men's
deliverance?
(2) Whether there was any other possible means of delivering men?
(3) Whether this was the more suitable means?
(4) Whether it was fitting for Christ to suffer on the cross?
(5) The extent of His sufferings;
(6) Whether the pain which He endured was the greatest?
(7) Whether His entire soul suffered?
(8) Whether His Passion hindered the joy of fruition?
(9) The time of the Passion;
(10) The place;
(11) Whether it was fitting for Him to be crucified with robbers?