Homily 14 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts V. 34
"Then stood there up one in the council, a Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a
doctor of the law, had in reputation among all the people, and commanded the
men to be put forth a little space."
This Gamaliel was Paul's teacher. And one may well wonder, how, being so
right-minded in his judgment, and withal learned in the law, he did not yet
believe. But it cannot be that he should have continued in unbelief to the end.
Indeed it appears plainly from the words he here speaks. He "commanded," it
says, "to put the men forth a little space [and said unto them.]" Observe how
judiciously he frames his speech, and how he immediately at the very outset puts
them in fear. And that he may not be suspected of taking their part, he addresses
them as if he and they were of the same opinion, and does not use much
vehemence, but as speaking to men intoxicated through passion, he thus
expresses himself: "You men of Israel, take heed to yourselves what ye intend to
do as touching these men." [Acts 5:35] Do not, he would say, go to work rashly
and in a hurry. "For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be
somebody: to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves:
who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered, and brought to
naught." [Acts 5:36] By examples he teaches them prudence; and, by way of
encouragement, mentions last the man who seduced the greatest number. Now
before he gives the examples, he says, "Take heed to yourselves;" but when he
has cited them, then he declares his opinion, and says, "Refrain from these men."
For, says he, "there rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the taxing, and drew
away much people after him: he also perished; and all, even as many as obeyed
him, were dispersed. And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let
them alone: for if this council or this work be of men, it will come to naught. But

if it be of God, you cannot overthrow them." (al. it) [Acts 5:37-39] Then what is
there, he would say, to hinder you to be overthrown? For, says he (take heed),
"lest haply ye be found even to fight against God." He would dissuade them both
by the consideration that the thing is impossible, and because it is not for their
good. And he does not say by whom these people were destroyed, but that there
they "were scattered," and their confederacy fell away to nothing. For if, says he,
it be of man, what needs any ado on your part? But if it be of God, for all your
ado you will not be able to overcome it. The argument is unanswerable. "And
they were persuaded by him." [Acts 5:40] How were they persuaded? So as not
to slay them, but merely to scourge. For, it says, "And when they had called the
Apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the
name of Jesus, and let them go." See after what great works they are scourged!
And again their teaching became more extended: for they taught at home and in
the temple, "And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His name. And daily in the temple,
and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. (v. 41, 42.)
And in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplied, there arose
a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because their widows were
neglected in the daily ministration." [Acts 6:1] Not absolutely in those
immediate days; for it is the custom of Scripture to speak of things next about to
happen, as taking place in immediate succession. But by "Hellenists" I suppose
he means those who spoke Greek ["against the Hebrews"]: for they did not use
the Greek language. Behold another trial! Observe how from within and from
without there are warrings, from the very first! "Then," it says, "the twelve called
the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason that we should
leave the word of God, and serve tables." [Acts 6:2] Well said: for the needful
must give precedence to the more needful. But see, how straightway they both
take thought for these (inferior matters), and yet do not neglect the preaching.
"Because their widows were overlooked:" for those (the Hebrews) were treated
as the persons of greater consequence ([αἰδεσιμώτεροι]). "Wherefore, brethren,