I have mentioned, if he had passed his whole life without dread and care— why
say I his whole life? Rather that one moment (for it is a moment, our whole life
is but one moment, compared with that eternity which has no end)— if all things
had turned out according to his desire; must he not be pitied for these words,
yea, rather, for this state of things? Was not your table once deluged with wine?
Now you are not master even of a drop of water, and that, too, in your greatest
need. Did not you neglect that poor man full of sores? But now you ask a sight
of him, and no one gives leave. He lay at your gate; but now in Abraham's
bosom. You then lay under your lofty ceiling; but now in the fire of hell.
These things let the rich men hear. Yea, rather not the rich, but the pitiless.
For not in that he was rich was he punished, but because he showed no pity; for
it is possible that a man who is at the same time rich and pitiful, should meet
with every good. And for this cause the rich man's eyes were fixed on no one
else, but on him alone, who then begged his alms; that he might learn from
memory of his former actions, that his punishment was just. Were there not ten
thousand poor men who were righteous? But he, who then lay at his gate, alone
is seen by him, to instruct him and us, how great a good it is to put no trust in
riches. His poverty hindered not the one in obtaining the kingdom; his riches
helped not the other to avoid hell. Where is the point at which a man is poor?
Where is the point at which he is reduced to beggary? He is not, he is not poor,
who has nought, but he who desires many things! He is not rich who has large
possessions, but he who stands in need of nothing. For what profit is there to
possess the whole world, and yet live in greater despondency than he who has
nothing? Their dispositions make men rich and poor, not the abundance or the
want of money. Would you, who are a poor man, become rich? You may have
your will, and no one can hinder you. Despise the world's wealth, think it
nought, as it is nought. Cast out the desire of wealth, and you are straightway
rich. He is rich who does not desire to become rich; he who is unwilling to be
poor, is the poor man. As he is the diseased man, who even in health bemoans
his case, and not the man who bears his disease more lightly than perfect health,

so also he is poor who cannot endure poverty, but in the midst of wealth thinks
himself poorer than the poor; not he who bears his poverty more lightly than
they their riches, for he is a richer man.
For tell me, wherefore do you fear poverty? Wherefore do you tremble? Is
it not by reason of hunger? Is it not for thirst? Is it not for cold? Is it not indeed
for these things? There is not, there is not any one who is ever destitute in these
things! "For look at the generations of old, and see, did ever any one trust in the
Lord, and was forsaken? Or did any one hope in Him, and was made ashamed?"
[Sirach 2:11]
And again, "Behold the birds of the heaven, that they sow not, neither do
they reap, nor gather into barns; and your heavenly Father feeds them."
[Matthew 6:26] No one can readily point us out any one who has perished by
hunger and cold. Wherefore then do you tremble at poverty? You can not say.
For if you have necessaries enough, wherefore do you tremble at it? Because you
have not a multitude of servants? This truly is to be quit of masters; this is
continual happiness, this is freedom from care. Is it because your vessels, your
couches, your furniture are not formed of silver? And what greater enjoyment
than yours has he who possesses these things? None at all. The use is the same,
whether they are of this or that material. Is it because you are not an object of
fear to the many? May you never become so! For what pleasure is it that any
should stand in dread and fear of you? Is it because you are afraid of others? But
you can not be alarmed. For "would you have no fear of the power? Do that
which is good, and you shall have praise from the same." [Romans 13:3] Does
any say, It is because we are subject to contempt, and apt to suffer ill? It is not
poverty but wickedness which causes this; for many poor men have quietly
passed through life, while rulers, and the rich, and powerful, have ended their
days more wretchedly than all evil doers, than bandits, than grave-robbers. For
what poverty brings in your case, that does wealth in theirs. For that which they
who would ill-treat you do through your contemptible estate, they do to him
from envy and the evil eye they cast upon him, and the latter still more than the