wonders, nor works, when they saw a man who had been saved from shipwreck,
who had never associated with them before, but appeared then for the first time,
enter their city and say "yet three days and Nineveh shall be overthrown,"
[Jonah 3:4] were so converted and reformed by the mere sound of these words,
and putting away their former wickedness, advanced in the direction of virtue by
the path of repentance, that they caused the sentence of God to be revoked, and
arrested the threatened disturbance of their city, and averted the heaven-sent
wrath, and were delivered from every kind of evil. "For," we read, "God saw
that every man turned from his evil way, and was converted to the Lord."
[Jonah 3:10] How turned? I ask. Although their wickedness was great, their
iniquity unspeakable, their moral sores difficult to heal, which was plainly
shown by the prophet when he said "their wickedness ascended even unto the
heaven:" [Jonah 1:2] indicating by the distance of the place the magnitude of
their wickedness; nevertheless such great iniquity which was piled up to such a
height as to reach even to the heaven, all this in the course of three days in a
brief moment of time through the effect of a few words which they heard from
the mouth of one man and he an unknown shipwrecked stranger they so
thoroughly abolished, removed out of sight, and put away, as to have the
happiness of hearing the declaration "God saw that every one turned from his
evil way, and He repented of the evil which God said He would do them." Do
you see that he who is temperate and watchful not only suffers no injury at the
hands of man, but even turns back Heaven-sent wrath? Whereas he who betrays
himself and harms himself by his own doing, even if he receives countess
benefits, reaps no great advantage. So, at least, the Jews were not profited by
those great miracles, nor on the other hand were the Ninevites harmed by having
no share in them; but inasmuch as they were inwardly well-disposed, having laid
hold of a slight opportunity they became better, barbarians and foreigners though
they were, ignorant of all divine revelation, and dwelling at a distance from
Palestine.
15. Again, I ask, was the virtue of the "three children" corrupted by the

troubles which beset them? Whilst they were still young, mere youths, of
immature age, did they not undergo that grievous affliction of captivity? Had
they not to make a long journey from home, and when they had arrived in the
foreign country were they not cut off from fatherland and home and temple, and
altar and sacrifices, and offerings, and drink offerings, and even the singing of
psalms? For not only were they debarred from their home, but as a consequence
from many forms of worship also. Were they not given up into the hands of
barbarians, wolves rather than men? And, most painful calamity of all, when
they had been banished into so distant and barbarous a country, and were
suffering such a grievous captivity were they not without teacher, without
prophets, without ruler? "for," it is written, "there is no ruler, nor prophet, nor
governor, nor place for offering before You and finding mercy." Yea moreover
they were cast into the royal palace, as upon some cliff and crag, and a sea full of
rocks and reefs, being compelled to sail over that angry sea without a pilot or
signal man, or crew, or sails; and they were cooped up in the royal court as in a
prison. For inasmuch as they knew spiritual wisdom, and were superior to
worldly things, and despised all human pride and made the wings of their soul
soar upwards, they counted their sojourn there as an aggravation of their trouble.
For had they been outside the court, and dwelling in a private house they would
have enjoyed more independence: but having been cast into that prison (for they
deemed the splendour of the palace no better than a prison, no safer than a place
of rocks and crags) they were straightway subjected to cruel embarrassment. For
the king commanded them to be partakers of his own table, a luxurious, unclean
and profane table, a thing which was forbidden them, and seemed more terrible
than death; and they were lonely men hemmed in like lambs among so many
wolves. And they were constrained to choose between being consumed by
famine or rather led off to execution, and tasting of forbidden meats. What then
did these youths do, forlorn as they were, captives, strangers, slaves of those
who commanded these things. They did not consider that this strait or the
absolute power of him who possessed the state sufficed to justify their