harm they suffer. I weep, he says, that they ever treated me thus.
This man let us also imitate. Let us mourn and weep for those who have
injured us. Let us not be angry with them. For truly they are worthy of tears, for
the punishment and condemnation to which they make themselves liable. I know,
how you now weep, how you rejoice, both admiring Paul, and amazed at Joseph,
and pronouncing them blessed. But if any one has an enemy, let him now take
him into recollection, let him bring him to his mind, that while his heart is yet
warm with the remembrance of the Saints, he may be enabled to dissolve the
stubbornness of wrath, and to soften what is harsh and callous. I know, that after
your departure hence, after that I have ceased speaking, if anything of warmth
and fervor should remain, it will not be so great, as it now is while you are
hearing me. If therefore any one, if any one has become cold, let him dissolve
the frost. For the remembrance of injuries is truly frost and ice. But let us invoke
the Sun of Righteousness, let us entreat Him to send His beams upon us, and
there will no longer be thick ice, but water to drink.
If the fire of the Sun of Righteousness has touched our souls, it will leave
nothing frozen, nothing hard, nothing burning, nothing unfruitful. It will bring
out all things ripe, all things sweet, all things abounding with much pleasure. If
we love one another, that beam also will come. Allow me, I beseech you, to say
these things with earnestness. Cause me to hear, that by these words we have
produced some effect; that some one has gone and thrown both his arms about
his enemy, has embraced him, has twined himself around him, has warmly
kissed him, has wept. And though the other be a wild beast, a stone, or whatever
he be, he will be made gentle by such affectionate kindness. For on what account
is he your enemy? Hath he insulted you? Yet he has not injured you at all. But do
you for the sake of money suffer your brother to be at enmity with you? Do not
so, I beseech you. Let us do away all. It is our season. Let us use it to good
purpose. Let us cut asunder the cords of our sins. Before we go away to
judgment, let us not ourselves judge one another. "Let not the sun" (it is said) "go
down upon your wrath." [Ephesians 4:26] Let no one put it off. These puttings

off produce delays. If you have deferred it today, you blush the more, and if you
add tomorrow, the shame is greater, and if a third day, yet worse. Let us not then
put ourselves to shame, but let us forgive, that we may be forgiven. And if we be
forgiven, we shall obtain all blessings, through Jesus Christ our Lord, with
whom, etc.

## Homily 5 on First Thessalonians

[1 Thessalonians 4:1-3]
"Finally then, brethren, we beseech and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that,
as you received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye abound
more and more. For you know what charge we gave you through the Lord Jesus
Christ. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification."
When he has met what was pressing, and what was upon his hands, and is
about henceforth to enter upon things that are perpetual, and which they ought
continually to hear, he adds this expression, "finally," that is, always and forever.
"We beseech and exhort you in the Lord." Strange! He does not even speak of
himself as of sufficient credit to exhort. And yet who was so worthy of credit?
But he takes Christ along with him. We exhort you, he says, by God. Which also
he said to the Corinthians, "God entreats (exhorts) you through us." [2
Corinthians 5:20] "That as you received of us." This "received" is not of words
only, but of actions also, viz. "how ye ought to walk," and he means thereby the
whole conduct of life. "And to please God, that you abound more and more."
That is, that by more abounding ye do not stop at the limit of the
commandments, but that you even go beyond them. For this it is, that "ye
abound more and more." In what preceded he accepts the marvel of their firm
faith, but here he regulates their life. For this is proficiency, even to go beyond
the commandments and the statutes. For no longer from the constraint of a
teacher, but from their own voluntary choice, is all this performed. For as the
earth ought not to bear only what is thrown upon it, so too ought the soul not to
stop at those things which have been inculcated, but to go beyond them. Do you
see that he has properly said "to go beyond"? For virtue is divided into these two
things, to decline from evil, and to do good. For the withdrawal from evil is not
sufficient for the arrival at virtue, but it is a kind of path, and a beginning leading