## Homily 12 on Ephesians

Ephesians 4:17
"This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that you no longer walk as the
Gentiles also walk, in the vanity of their mind, being darkened in their
understanding."
It is the duty of the teacher to build up and restore the souls of his disciples,
not only by counseling and instructing them, but also by alarming them, and
delivering them up to God. For when the words spoken by men as coming from
fellow-servants are not sufficient to kindle the soul, it then becomes necessary to
make over the case to God. This accordingly Paul does also; for having
discoursed concerning lowliness, and concerning unity, and concerning our duty
not to rise up one against another, hear what he says. "This I say therefore, and
testify in the Lord, that you no longer walk as the Gentiles also walk." He does
not say, "That ye henceforth walk not as you are now walking," for that
expression would have struck too hard. But he plainly indicates the same thing,
only he brings his example from others. And so in writing to the Thessalonians,
he does this very same thing, where he says, "Not in the passion of lust, even as
the Gentiles which know not God." [1 Thessalonians 4:5] You differ from them,
he means to say, in doctrine, but that is wholly God's work: what I require on
your path is the life and the course of behavior that is after God. This is your
own. And I call the Lord to witness what I have said, that I have not shrunk, but
have told you how ye ought to walk.
"In the vanity," says he, "of their mind."
What is vanity of mind? It is the being busied about vain things. And what
are those vain things, but all things in the present life? Of which the Preacher
says, "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." [Ecclesiastes 1:2] But a man will say, If
they be vain and vanity, wherefore were they made? If they are God's works,

how are they vain? And great is the dispute concerning these things. But
hearken, beloved: it is not the works of God which he calls vain; God forbid!
The Heaven is not vain, the earth is not vain—God forbid!— nor the sun, nor the
moon and stars, nor our own body. No, all these are "very good." [Genesis 1:31]
But what is vain? Let us hear the Preacher himself, what he says; "I planted me
vineyards, I gat me men singers and women singers, I made me pools of water, I
had great possession of herds and flocks, I gathered me also silver and gold, and
I saw that these are vanity." [Ecclesiastes 2:4-8] And again, "Vanity of vanities,
all things are vanity." [Ecclesiastes 12:8] Hear also what the Prophet says, "He
heaps up riches, and knows not who shall gather them." [Psalm 39:6] Such is
"vanity of vanities," your splendid buildings, your vast and overflowing riches,
the herds of slaves that bustle along the public square, your pomp and vainglory,
your high thoughts, and your ostentation. For all these are vain; they came not
from the hand of God, but are of our own creating. But why then are they vain?
Because they have no useful end. Riches are vain when they are spent upon
luxury; but they cease to be vain when they are "dispersed and given to the
needy." [Psalm 112:9] But when you have spent them upon luxury, let us look at
the end of them, what it is—grossness of body, flatulence, pantings, fullness of
belly, heaviness of head, softness of flesh, feverishness, enervation; for as a man
who shall draw into a leaking vessel labors in vain, so also does the one who
lives in luxury and self-indulgence draw into a leaking vessel. But again, that is
called "vain," which is expected indeed to contain something, but contains it not
—that which men call empty, as when they speak of "empty hopes." And
generally that is called "vain," which is bare and purposeless, which is of no use.
Let us see then whether all human things are not of this sort. "Let us eat and
drink, for tomorrow we die." [1 Corinthians 15:32] What then, tell me, is the
end? Corruption. Let us put on clothing and raiment. And what is the result?
Nothing. Such are the lives of the Greeks. They philosophized, but in vain. They
made a show of a life of hardship, but of mere hardship, not looking to any
beneficial end, but to vainglory, and to honor from the many. But what is the