3. If each of them was produced, after the manner of men, actually and according to its own
generation, then either those thus generated by the Father will be of the same substance with Him,
and similar to their Author; or if they appear dissimilar, then it must of necessity be acknowledged
that they are [formed] of some different substance. Now, if the beings generated by the Father be
similar to their Author, then those who have been produced must remain for ever impassible, even
as is He who produced them; but if, on the other hand, they are of a different substance, which is
capable of passion, then whence came this dissimilar substance to find a place within the incorruptible
Pleroma? Further, too, according to this principle, each one of them must be understood as being
completely separated from every other, even as men are not mixed with nor united the one to the
other, but each having a distinct shape of his own, and a definite sphere of action, while each one
of them, too, is formed of a particular size, —qualities characteristic of a body, and not of a spirit.
Let them therefore no longer speak of the Pleroma as being spiritual, or of themselves as "spiritual,"
if indeed their Æons sit feasting with the Father, just as if they were men, and He Himself is of
such a configuration as those reveal Him to be who were produced by Him.
4. If, again, the Æons were derived from Logos, Logos from Nous, and Nous from Bythus, just
as lights are kindled from a light—as, for example, torches are from a torch—then they may no
doubt differ in generation and size from one another; but since they are of the same substance with
the Author of their production, they must either all remain for ever impassible, or their Father
Himself must participate in passion. For the torch which has been kindled subsequently cannot be
possessed of a different kind of light from that which preceded it. Wherefore also their lights, when
blended in one, return to the original identity, since that one light is then formed which has existed
even from the beginning. But we cannot speak, with respect to light itself, of some part being more
recent in its origin, and another being more ancient (for the whole is but one light); nor can we so
speak even in regard to those torches which have received the light (for these are all contemporary
as respects their material substance, for the substance of torches is one and the same), but simply
as to [the time of] its being kindled, since one was lighted a little while ago, and another has just
now been kindled.
5. The defect, therefore, of that passion which has regard to ignorance, will either attach alike
to their whole Pleroma, since [all its members] are of the same substance; and the Propator will
share in this defect of ignorance—that is, will be ignorant of Himself; or, on the other hand, all
those lights which are within the Pleroma will alike remain for ever impassible. Whence, then,
comes the passion of the youngest Æon, if the light of the Father is that from which all other lights
have been formed, and which is by nature impassible? And how can one Æon be spoken of as either
younger or older among themselves, since there is but one light in the entire Pleroma? And if any
one calls them stars, they will all nevertheless appear to participate in the same nature. For if "one
indispensable.