6. All honor ought to be given to God: but divine mysteries are honored by silence; wherefore
Dionysius says at the close of Coel. hier.: "Honoring by silence the hidden truth which is above
us"; and with this there agrees what is said in Psalm 64, according to the text of Jerome: "Praise
grows silent before You, O God," that is, silence itself is Your praise, O God; therefore we
ought to refrain ourselves in silence from searching into divine truths.

7. No one is moved to infinity, as the Philosopher says in I De Coelo et mundo, because all
motion is on account of the attaining of an end [terminus], which is not to be found in infinity;
but God is infinitely distant from us. Since, therefore, investigation is a kind of motion of reason
toward that which is being searched out, it appears that divine truths ought not to be investigated.

#### Sed contra

On the other hand, it is said (1 Pet. 3:15): "Being ready always to satisfy everyone that asketh
you a reason of that (faith and) hope which is in you"; but this could not be done unless we
inquired reasonably into those things which are matters of faith; therefore investigation according
to methods of reason into the truths of faith is necessary.

Again as is said in Titus 1:9, it pertains to a bishop that he be capable of exhorting in sound
doctrine and of overcoming those contradicting it: but he cannot do this without use of
argumentation; therefore one ought to employ the arguments of reason in matters of faith.

Again Augustine says in I De Trinitate: "With the help of God our Lord, we shall begin to
discuss according to reason that for which they [our adversaries] seek explanation: that the
Trinity is one God." Therefore man can inquire about the Trinity according to methods of reason.

Also Augustine says in his argument against Felician: "Since without too much disagreement
you recognize these two thingsÑsince you do not disregard the foregoing argument and the
word of authorityÑI present the matter to follow in spch a way that you yourself may accept it
as proof"; that is, I shall make use of arguments from reason and authority; and thus the
conclusion is like the previous one.

Response. I answer that it must be said that, since the perfection of man consists in his union
with God, it is right that man, by all the means which are in his power and in so far as he is able,
mount up to and strive to attain to divine truths, so that his intellect may take delight in
contemplation and his reason in the investigation of things of God, according to the saying of Ps.
72:28, "It is good for me to adhere to my God." Hence also the Philosopher in X Ethic. opposes
the saying of those who maintained that man ought not concern himself about divine things, but
only about such as are human, saying: "One ought to be wise in regard to man, however, not
according to those treating of human affairs alone, as a mortal knowing only mortal things; but,
inasmuch as it is fitting for a mortal man to do so, he ought to do all things according to the best