the material gives some aid to the artist, but in the latter, there is a naked display
of his art. Would you learn then, how great the wisdom of the Creator is,
consider what it is that is made out of clay? What else is there but brick and tile?
Nevertheless, God, the Supreme Artist, from the same material of which only the
brick and tile is formed, has been able to make an eye so beautiful, as to astonish
all who behold it, and to implant in it such power, that it can at once survey the
high aerial expanse, and by the aid of a small pupil embrace the mountains,
forests, hills, the ocean, yea, the heaven, by so small a thing! Tell me not then of
tears and rheums, for these things are the fruit of your sin; but consider its
beauty, and visual power; and how it is that while it ranges over such an expanse
of air, it experiences no weariness or distress! The feet indeed become tired and
weakened even after going but a small distance; but the eye, in traversing a
space so lofty and so wide, is not sensible of any infirmity. For since this is the
most necessary to us of all our members, He has not suffered it to be oppressed
with fatigue; in order that the service it renders us might be free and unfettered.
7. But rather, I should say, what language is fully adequate to set forth the
whole excellency of this member? And why do I speak of the pupil and the
visual faculty? For if you were to investigate that which seems the meanest of all
the members, I mean the eyelashes, you would behold even in these the manifold
wisdom of God the Creator! For as it is with respect to the ears of grain; the
beards, standing forth as a sort of spears, repel the birds, and do not suffer them
to settle upon the fruits, and to break the stalk, which is too tender to bear them;
so also is it with regard to the eyes. The hairs of the eyelids are ranged in front,
and answer the purpose of beards and spears; keeping dust and light substances
at a distance from the eyes, and any thing that might incommode the sight; and
not permitting the eyelids to be annoyed. Another instance of wisdom, no less
remarkable, is to be observed in eyebrows. Who can help being struck by their
position? For they do not project to an immoderate degree, so as to obscure the
sight; nor do they retire farther back than is fitting; but in the same manner as the
eaves of a house, they stand out above, receiving the perspiration as it descends

from the forehead, and not permitting it to annoy the eyes. For this purpose too
there is a growth of hair upon them, which serves by its roughness to stay what
descends from above, and affords the exact protection that is needed, and
contributes also much appearance of beauty to the eyes. Nor is this the only
matter of wonder! There is another thing also which is equally so. How is it, I
ask, that the hairs of the head increase, and are cut off; but those of the
eyebrows, not so? For not even this has happened undesignedly, or by chance,
but in order that they might not darken the sight too much by becoming very
long; an inconvenience from which those suffer who have arrived at extreme old
age.
8. And who could possibly trace out all the wisdom which is manifested by
means of the brain! For, in the first place, He made it soft, since it serves as a
fountain to all the senses. Next, in order that it might not suffer injury owing to
its peculiar nature, He fortified it on every side with bones. Further; that it might
not suffer from friction, by the hardness of the bones, He interposed a middle
membrane: and not only a single one, but also a second; the former being spread
out on the under side of the skull, but the latter enveloping the upper substance
of the brain, and the first being the harder of the two. And this was done, both
for the cause that has been mentioned, and in order that the brain might not be
the first to receive the blows inflicted upon the head; but that these membranes
first encountering them, might free it from all injury, and preserve it unwounded.
Moreover, that the bone which covers the brain is not a single and continuous
one, but has many sutures on every side, is a circumstance which contributes
much to its security. For a ventilation of the vapours that surround it may easily
take place outward through these sutures, so as to prevent it from being
suffocated; and if a blow should be inflicted upon it, on any particular point, the
damage does not extend to the whole. For if the bone had been one and
continuous, the stroke even when it fell upon one part, only, would have injured
the whole; but now, by its being divided into many parts, this can never happen.
For if one part should chance to be wounded, only the bone that is situated near