THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.85, C.3.

special virtue. Accordingly, if in the act of the penitent we consider
the mere displeasure in the past sin, it belongs to charity
immediately, in the same way as joy for past good acts; but the
intention to aim at the destruction of past sin requires a special
virtue subordinate to charity.
Reply to Objection 2: In point of fact, penance has indeed a general
matter, inasmuch as it regards all sins; but it does so under a special
aspect, inasmuch as they can be remedied by an act of man in cooperating with God for his justification.
Reply to Objection 3: Every special virtue removes formally the habit
of the opposite vice, just as whiteness removes blackness from the
same subject: but penance removes every sin effectively, inasmuch
as it works for the destruction of sins, according as they are
pardonable through the grace of God if man co-operate therewith.
Wherefore it does not follow that it is a general virtue.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.85, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the virtue of penance is a species of

justice?
Objection 1: It would seem that the virtue of penance is not a species
of justice. For justice is not a theological but a moral virtue, as was
shown in the SS, Question 62, Article 3. But penance seems to be a
theological virtue, since God is its object, for it makes satisfaction to
God, to Whom, moreover, it reconciles the sinner. Therefore it seems
that penance is not a species of justice.
Objection 2: Further, since justice is a moral virtue it observes the
mean. Now penance does not observe the mean, but rather goes to
the extreme, according to Jer. 6:26: "Make thee mourning as for an
only son, a bitter lamentation." Therefore penance is not a species of
justice.
Objection 3: Further, there are two species of justice, as stated in
Ethic. v, 4, viz. "distributive" and "commutative." But penance does
not seem to be contained under either of them. Therefore it seems
that penance is not a species of justice.
Objection 4: Further, a gloss on Lk. 6:21, "Blessed are ye that weep
now," says: "It is prudence that teaches us the unhappiness of
earthly things and the happiness of heavenly things." But weeping is
an act of penance. Therefore penance is a species of prudence
rather than of justice.
On the contrary, Augustine says in De Poenitentia [De vera et falsa
Poenitentia]: "Penance is the vengeance of the sorrowful, ever
punishing in them what they are sorry for having done." But to take
vengeance is an act of justice, wherefore Tully says (De Inv. Rhet. ii)
that one kind of justice is called vindictive. Therefore it seems that
penance is a species of justice.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 2) penance is a special
virtue not merely because it sorrows for evil done (since charity
would suffice for that), but also because the penitent grieves for the
sin he has committed, inasmuch as it is an offense against God, and
purposes to amend. Now amendment for an offense committed
against anyone is not made by merely ceasing to offend, but it is
necessary to make some kind of compensation, which obtains in