THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.2.

Christ was born, His birth had been made known to all by evident
signs, the very nature of faith would have been destroyed, since it is
"the evidence of things that appear not," as stated, Heb. 11:1.
Thirdly, because thus the reality of His human nature would have
come into doubt. Whence Augustine says (Ep. ad Volusianum
cxxxvii): "If He had not passed through the different stages of age
from babyhood to youth, had neither eaten nor slept, would He not
have strengthened an erroneous opinion, and made it impossible for
us to believe that He had become true man? And while He is doing
all things wondrously, would He have taken away that which He
accomplished in mercy?"
Reply to Objection 1: According to the gloss, the words quoted must
be understood of Christ's coming as judge.
Reply to Objection 2: All men were to be instructed unto salvation,
concerning the grace of God our Saviour, not at the very time of His
birth, but afterwards, in due time, after He had "wrought salvation in
the midst of the earth" (Ps. 73:12). Wherefore after His Passion and
Resurrection, He said to His disciples (Mt. 28:19): "Going . . . teach
ye all nations."
Reply to Objection 3: For judgment to be passed, the authority of the
judge needs to be known: and for this reason it behooves that the
coming of Christ unto judgment should be manifest. But His first
coming was unto the salvation of all, which is by faith that is of
things not seen. And therefore it was fitting that His first coming
should be hidden.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ's birth should have been made

known to some?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's birth should not have been
made known to anyone. For, as stated above (Article 1, ad 3), it
befitted the salvation of mankind that Christ's first coming should be
hidden. But Christ came to save all; according to 1 Tim. 4:10: "Who
is the Saviour of all men, especially of the faithful." Therefore
Christ's birth should not have been made known to anyone.
Objection 2: Further, before Christ was born, His future birth was
made known to the Blessed Virgin and Joseph. Therefore it was not
necessary that it should be made known to others after His birth.
Objection 3: Further, no wise man makes known that from which
arise disturbance and harm to others. But, when Christ's birth was
made known, disturbance arose: for it is written (Mt. 2:3) that "King
Herod, hearing" of Christ's birth, "was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him." Moreover, this brought harm to others; because it was the
occasion of Herod's killing "all the male children that were in
Bethlehem . . . from two years old and under." Therefore it seems
unfitting for Christ's birth to have been made known to anyone.
On the contrary, Christ's birth would have been profitable to none if
it had been hidden from all. But it behooved Christ's birth to be
profitable: else He were born in vain. Therefore it seems that Christ's
birth should have been made known to some.
I answer that, As the Apostle says (Rm. 13:1) "what is of God is well
ordered." Now it belongs to the order of Divine wisdom that God's
gifts and the secrets of His wisdom are not bestowed on all equally,
but to some immediately, through whom they are made known to
others. Wherefore, with regard to the mystery of the Resurrection it
is written (Acts 10:40,41): "God . . . gave" Christ rising again "to be
made manifest, not to all the people, but to witnesses pre-ordained
by God." Consequently, that His birth might be consistent with this,
it should have been made known, not to all, but to some, through
whom it could be made known to others.
Reply to Objection 1: As it would have been prejudicial to the
salvation of mankind if God's birth had been made known to all men,