FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.2.

apprehension of the subject of that appetite, but to the apprehension
of another, as stated in the FP, Question 103, Articles 1,3. Since then
pleasure and pain presuppose some sense or apprehension in the
same subject, it is evident that pain, like pleasure, is in the
intellective or sensitive appetite.
Again every movement of the sensitive appetite is called a passion,
as stated above (Question 22, Articles 1,3): and especially those
which tend to some defect. Consequently pain, according as it is in
the sensitive appetite, is most properly called a passion of the soul:
just as bodily ailments are properly called passions of the body.
Hence Augustine (De Civ. Dei xiv, 7,8) reckons pain especially as
being a kind of ailment.
Reply to Objection 1: We speak of the body, because the cause of
pain is in the body: as when we suffer something hurtful to the body.
But the movement of pain is always in the soul; since "the body
cannot feel pain unless the soul feel it," as Augustine says (Super
Psalm 87:4).
Reply to Objection 2: We speak of pain of the senses, not as though
it were an act of the sensitive power; but because the senses are
required for bodily pain, in the same way as for bodily pleasure.
Reply to Objection 3: Pain at the loss of good proves the goodness
of the nature, not because pain is an act of the natural appetite, but
because nature desires something as good, the removal of which
being perceived, there results the passion of pain in the sensitive
appetite.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether sorrow is the same as pain?

Objection 1: It would seem that sorrow is not pain. For Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 7) that "pain is used to express bodily
suffering." But sorrow is used more in reference to the soul.
Therefore sorrow is not pain.
Objection 2: Further, pain is only in respect of present evil. But
sorrow can refer to both past and future evil: thus repentance is
sorrow for the past, and anxiety for the future. Therefore sorrow is
quite different from pain.
Objection 3: Further, pain seems not to follow save from the sense of
touch. But sorrow can arise from all the senses. Therefore sorrow is
not pain, and extends to more objects.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 9:2): "I have great sorrow
and continual pain in my heart," thus denoting the same thing by
sorrow and pain.
I answer that, Pleasure and pain can arise from a twofold
apprehension, namely, from the apprehension of an exterior sense;
and from the interior apprehension of the intellect or of the
imagination. Now the interior apprehension extends to more objects
than the exterior apprehension: because whatever things come
under the exterior apprehension, come under the interior, but not
conversely. Consequently that pleasure alone which is caused by an
interior apprehension is called joy, as stated above (Question 31,
Article 3): and in like manner that pain alone which is caused by an
interior apprehension, is called sorrow. And just as that pleasure
which is caused by an exterior apprehension, is called pleasure but
not joy; so too that pain which is caused by an exterior
apprehension, is called pain indeed but not sorrow. Accordingly
sorrow is a species of pain, as joy is a species of pleasure.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking there of the use of the
word: because "pain" is more generally used in reference to bodily
pains, which are better known, than in reference to spiritual pains.
Reply to Objection 2: External sense perceives only what is present;
but the interior cognitive power can perceive the present, past and