was no little proof of the power of grace. And listen how he delivered them:
"When you are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to deliver such an one unto Satan." [1 Corinthians 5:4] He was
then immediately expelled from the common assembly, he was separated from
the fold, he became deserted and destitute; he was delivered to the wolf. For as
the cloud designated the camp of the Hebrews, so the Spirit distinguished the
Church. If any one therefore was without, he was consumed, and it was by the
judgment of the Apostles that he was cast out of the pale. So also the Lord
delivered Judas to Satan. For immediately "after the sop Satan entered into him."
[John 13:27] Or this may be said; that those whom they wished to amend, they
did not themselves punish, but reserved their punishments for those who were
incorrigible. Or otherwise, that they were the more dreaded for delivering them
up to others. Job also was delivered to Satan, but not for his sins, but for fuller
proof of his worth.
Many such instances still occur. For since the Priests cannot know who are
sinners, and unworthy partakers of the holy Mysteries, God often in this way
delivers them to Satan. For when diseases, and attacks, and sorrows, and
calamities, and the like occur, it is on this account that they are inflicted. This is
shown by Paul. "For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many
sleep." [1 Corinthians 11:30] But how? Says one, when we approach but once a
year! But this is indeed the evil, that you determine the worthiness of your
approach, not by the purity of your minds, but by the interval of time. You think
it a proper caution not to communicate often; not considering that you are seared
by partaking unworthily, though only once, but to receive worthily, though often,
is salutary. It is not presumptuous to receive often, but to receive unworthily,
though but once in a whole life. But we are so miserably foolish, that, though we
commit numberless offenses in the course of a year, we are not anxious to be
absolved from them, but are satisfied, that we do not often make bold
impudently to insult the Body of Christ, not remembering that those who
crucified Christ, crucified Him but once. Is the offense then the less, because

committed but once? Judas betrayed his Master but once. What then, did that
exempt him from punishment? Why indeed is time to be considered in this
matter? Let our time of coming be when our conscience is pure. The Mystery at
Easter is not of more efficacy than that which is now celebrated. It is one and the
same. There is the same grace of the Spirit, it is always a Passover. You who are
initiated know this. On the Preparation, on the Sabbath, on the Lord's day, and on
the day of Martyrs, it is the same Sacrifice that is performed. "For as often," he
says, "as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you do show the Lord's death." [1
Corinthians 11:26] No time is limited for the performance of this Sacrifice, why
then is it then called the Paschal feast? Because Christ suffered for us then. Let
not the time, therefore, make any difference in your approach. There is at all
times the same power, the same dignity, the same grace, one and the same body;
nor is one celebration of it more or less holy than another. And this you know,
who see upon these occasions nothing new, save these worldly veils, and a more
splendid attendance. The only thing that these days have more is that from them
commenced the day of our salvation when Christ was sacrificed. But with
respect to these mysteries, those days have no further preëminence.
When you approach to take bodily food, you wash your hands and your
mouth, but when you draw near to this spiritual food, you do not cleanse your
soul, but approach full of uncleanness. But you say, Are not the forty days'
fastings sufficient to cleanse the huge heap of our sins? But of what use is it, tell
me? If wishing to store up some precious ointment, you should make clean a
place to receive it, and a little after having laid it up, should throw dung upon it,
would not the fine odor vanish? This takes place with us too. We make ourselves
to the best of our power worthy to approach; then we defile ourselves again!
What then is the good of it? This we say even of those who are able in those
forty days to wash themselves clean.
Let us then, I beseech you, not neglect our salvation, that our labor may not
be in vain. For he who turns from his sins, and goes and commits the same
again, is "like a dog that returns to his vomit." [Proverbs 26:11] But if we act as