1. As it has been clearly demonstrated that the Word, who existed in the beginning with
God, by whom all things were made, who was also always present with mankind, was in these last
days, according to the time appointed by the Father, united to His own workmanship, inasmuch as
He became a man liable to suffering, [it follows] that every objection is set aside of those who say,
"If our Lord was born at that time, Christ had therefore no previous existence." For I have shown
that the Son of God did not then begin to exist, being with the Father from the beginning; but when
He became incarnate, and was made man, He commenced afresh the long line of human beings,
and furnished us, in a brief, comprehensive manner, with salvation; so that what we had lost in
Adam—namely, to be according to the image and likeness of God—that we might recover in Christ
Jesus.
2. For as it was not possible that the man who had once for all been conquered, and who had
been destroyed through disobedience, could reform himself, and obtain the prize of victory; and
as it was also impossible that he could attain to salvation who had fallen under the power of sin,—the
Son effected both these things, being the Word of God, descending from the Father, becoming
incarnate, stooping low, even to death, and consummating the arranged plan of our salvation, upon
whom [Paul], exhorting us unhesitatingly to believe, again says, "Who shall ascend into heaven?
that is, to bring down Christ; or who shall descend into the deep? that is, to liberate Christ again
from the dead." Then he continues, "If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shall be saved." And
he renders the reason why the Son of God did these things, saying, "For to this end Christ both
lived, and died, and revived, that He might rule over the living and the dead." And again, writing
to the Corinthians, he declares, "But we preach Christ Jesus crucified;" and adds, "The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?"
3. But who is it that has had fellowship with us in the matter of food? Whether is it he who is
conceived of by them as the Christ above, who extended himself through Horos, and imparted a

So the Syriac. The Latin has, "in seipso recapitulavit," He summed up in Himself. [As the Second Adam, 1 Cor. xv. 47.]

form to their mother; or is it He who is from the Virgin, Emmanuel, who did eat butter and honey,
of whom the prophet declared, "He is also a man, and who shall know him?" He was likewise
preached by Paul: "For I delivered," he says, "unto you first of all, that Christ died for our sins,
according to the Scriptures; and that He was buried, and rose again the third day, according to the
Scriptures." It is plain, then, that Paul knew no other Christ besides Him alone, who both suffered,
and was buried, and rose gain, who was also born, and whom he speaks of as man. For after
remarking, "But if Christ be preached, that He rose from the dead," he continues, rendering the
reason of His incarnation, "For since by man came death, by man [came] also the resurrection of
the dead." And everywhere, when [referring to] the passion of our Lord, and to His human nature,
and His subjection to death, he employs the name of Christ, as in that passage: "Destroy not him
with thy meat for whom Christ died." And again: "But now, in Christ, ye who sometimes were
far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ." And again: "Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth upon a
tree." And again: "And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ
died;" indicating that the impassible Christ did not descend upon Jesus, but that He Himself,
because He was Jesus Christ, suffered for us; He, who lay in the tomb, and rose again, who descended
and ascended,—the Son of God having been made the Son of man, as the very name itself doth
declare. For in the name of Christ is implied, He that anoints, He that is anointed, and the unction
itself with which He is anointed. And it is the Father who anoints, but the Son who is anointed by
the Spirit, who is the unction, as the Word declares by Isaiah, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because He hath anointed me,"—pointing out both the anointing Father, the anointed Son, and
the unction, which is the Spirit.
4. The Lord Himself, too, makes it evident who it was that suffered; for when He asked the
disciples, "Who do men say that I, the Son of man, am?" and when Peter had replied, "Thou art
the Christ, the Son of the living God;" and when he had been commended by Him [in these words],
"That flesh and blood had not revealed it to him, but the Father who is in heaven," He made it clear
that He, the Son of man, is Christ the Son of the living God. "For from that time forth," it is said,