people: for this at its coming put down the law.
5. Do you see that it was not for few nor small causes that he brought to our
remembrance the whole history concerning Judah? For this end he has
mentioned Ruth also and Rahab, the one an alien, the other an harlot, that you
may learn that He came to do away with all our ills. For He has come as a
Physician, not as a Judge. Therefore in like manner as those of old took harlots
for wives, even so God too espoused unto Himself the nature which had played
the harlot: and this also prophets from the beginning declare to have taken place
with respect to the Synagogue. But that spouse was ungrateful towards Him who
had been an husband to her, whereas, the Church, when once delivered from the
evils received from our fathers, continued to embrace the Bridegroom.
See, for instance, what befell Ruth, how like it is to the things which belong
to us. For she was both of a strange race, and reduced to the utmost poverty, yet
Boaz when he saw her neither despised her poverty nor abhorred her mean birth,
as Christ having received the Church, being both an alien and in much poverty,
took her to be partaker of the great blessings. But even as Ruth, if she had not
before left her father, and renounced household and race, country and kindred,
would not have attained unto this alliance; so the Church too, having forsaken
the customs which men had received from their fathers, then, and not before,
became lovely to the Bridegroom. Of this therefore the prophet discourses unto
her, and says, "Forget your people, and your father's house, so shall the king
have pleasure in your beauty." This Ruth did too, and because of this she became
a mother of kings, even as the Church did likewise. For of her David himself
sprung. So then to shame them by all these things, and to prevail on them not to
be high-minded, he has both composed the genealogy, and brought forward these
women. Yes, for this last, through those who intervened, was parent to the great
king, and of these David is not ashamed. For it cannot, nay, it cannot be that a
man should be good or bad, obscure or glorious, either by the virtue or by the
vice of his forefathers; but if one must say somewhat even paradoxical, he shines
forth the more, who not being of worthy ancestors, has yet become excellent.

6. Let no one therefore be high-minded on account of these matters, but let
him consider the forefathers of the Lord, and put away all his haughtiness, and
let good actions be his pride; or rather, not even these. For thus it was that the
Pharisee came to be inferior to the Publican. Thus, if you would show the good
work to be great, have no high thought, and you have proved it so much the
greater. Make account that you have done nothing, and then you have done all.
For if, being sinners, when we account ourselves to be what we are, we become
righteous, as indeed the Publican did; how much more, when being righteous we
account ourselves to be sinners. Since if out of sinners men are made righteous
by a lowly mind (although this were not to be lowly-minded but to be rightminded); if then to be right-minded avails so much in the case of sinners,
consider what will not lowliness of mind do with respect to righteous men.
Do not then mar your labors, nor cast away from you the fruits of your toils,
neither run thou in vain, making frustrate all your labor after the many courses
you have run. Nay, for your Lord knows your good works better than you do.
Though thou give but a cup of cold water, not even this does He overlook;
though thou contribute but a farthing, though you should utter a sigh only, He
receives it all with great favor and is mindful thereof, and assigns for it great
rewards.
But wherefore do you search out your own doings, and bring them out
before us continually? Do you not know, that if you praise yourself, God will no
more praise you? Even as if you bewail yourself, He will not cease proclaiming
you before all. For it is not at all His will that your labors should be disparaged.
Why do I say, disparaged? Nay, He is doing and contriving all things, so that
even for little He may crown you; and He goes about seeking excuses, whereby
you may be delivered from hell. For this cause, though you should work but the
eleventh hour of the day, He gives your wages entire; and though thou afford no
ground of salvation, He says, "I do it for my own sake, that my name be not
profaned:" [Ezekiel 36:22] though you should sigh only, though you should only
weep, all these things He quickly catches hold of, for an occasion of saving you.