Matt. vi. 19.
daughters of men, were the apostate angels. The LXX. translation of that passage accords with this view. See the articles "Enoch,"
"Enoch, Book of," in Smith's Dictionary of the Bible. [See Paradise Lost, b. i. 323—431.]

to their neighbour. There was therefore no occasion that they should be cautioned by prohibitory
mandates (correptoriis literis), because they had the righteousness of the law in themselves. But
when this righteousness and love to God had passed into oblivion, and became extinct in Egypt,
God did necessarily, because of His great goodwill to men, reveal Himself by a voice, and led the
people with power out of Egypt, in order that man might again become the disciple and follower
of God; and He afflicted those who were disobedient, that they should not contemn their Creator;
and He fed them with manna, that they might receive food for their souls (uti rationalem acciperent
escam); as also Moses says in Deuteronomy: "And fed thee with manna, which thy fathers did not
know, that thou mightest know that man doth not live by bread alone; but by every word of God
proceeding out of His mouth doth man live." And it enjoined love to God, and taught just dealing
towards our neighbour, that we should neither be unjust nor unworthy of God, who prepares man
for His friendship through the medium of the Decalogue, and likewise for agreement with his
neighbour,—matters which did certainly profit man himself; God, however, standing in no need
of anything from man.
4. And therefore does the Scripture say, "These words the Lord spake to all the assembly of
the children of Israel in the mount, and He added no more;" for, as I have already observed, He
stood in need of nothing from them. And again Moses says: "And now Israel, what doth the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all His ways, and to love Him, and
to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul?" Now these things did indeed
make man glorious, by supplying what was wanting to him, namely, the friendship of God; but
they profited God nothing, for God did not at all stand in need of man's love. For the glory of God
was wanting to man, which he could obtain in no other way than by serving God. And therefore
Moses says to them again: "Choose life, that thou mayest live, and thy seed, to love the Lord thy
God, to hear His voice, to cleave unto Him; for this is thy life, and the length of thy days."
Preparing man for this life, the Lord Himself did speak in His own person to all alike the words of
the Decalogue; and therefore, in like manner, do they remain permanently with us, receiving by
means of His advent in the flesh, extension and increase, but not abrogation.
5. The laws of bondage, however, were one by one promulgated to the people by Moses, suited
for their instruction or for their punishment, as Moses himself declared: "And the Lord commanded
me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments." These things, therefore, which were given