## Homily 3 on Romans

Rom. I. 18
"For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold down the truth in unrighteousness."
Observe the discretion of Paul, how after encouraging by the gentler things,
he turns his discourse to the more fearful. For after saying that the Gospel is the
cause of salvation and of life, that it is the power of God, that it genders
salvation and righteousness, he mentions what might well make them fear that
were heedless of it. For since in general most men are not drawn so much by the
promise of what is good as by the fear of what is painful, he draws them on both
sides. For this cause too did God not only promise a kingdom, but also threaten
hell. And the Prophets spoke thus with the Jews, ever intermingling the evil with
the good. For this cause too Paul thus varies his discourse, yet not any how, but
he sets first the good things, and after the evil, to show that the former came of
the guiding purpose of God, but the latter of the wickedness of the backsliding.
And in this way the prophet puts the good first, saying, "If you be willing and
will obey me, you shall eat the good of the land: but if you be not willing and
will not obey me, the sword shall devour you." [Isaiah 1:19-20] So here too does
Paul conduct his discourse. But observe him; Christ, he means, came to bring
forgiveness, righteousness, life, yet not in any way, but by the Cross, which is
greatest too and wonderful, that He not only gave such things, but that He also
suffered such things. If then ye insolently scorn the gifts, then will the penalties
await you. And see how he raises his language, "For the wrath of God," he says,
"is revealed from heaven." Whence does this appear? If it be a believer who says
this, we will tell him of the declarations of Christ, but if the unbeliever and the
Grecian, him Paul silences, by what he says presently of the judgment of God,
bringing an uncontrovertible demonstration from the things which were done by

them. And this too is by far the most striking point in him, how he exhibits those
who speak against the truth, as themselves bearing witness by the things which
they do daily, and say, to the doctrines of the truth. But of this in the sequel: but
for the present, let us keep to what is set before us. "For the wrath of God is
revealed from heaven." And indeed even here this often takes place in famines
and pestilences and wars: for each individually and all in common are punished.
What will be the new thing then? That the chastisement will be greater, and
common to all, and not by the same rules. For now what takes place is for
correction; but then for vengeance. And this also St. Paul showed, when he said,
"We are chastened now, that we should not be condemned with the world." [1
Corinthians 11:32] And now indeed to many such things usually seem to come
not of the wrath from above, but of the malice of man. But then the punishment
from God shall be manifest, when the Judge, sitting upon the fearful tribunal,
shall command some to be dragged to the furnaces, and some to the outer
darkness, and some to other inexorable and intolerable punishments. And why is
it that he does not speak as plainly as this, the Son of God is coming with ten
thousand angels, and will call each man to account, but says, that "the wrath of
God is revealed?" His hearers were as yet novices, and therefore he draws them
first by things quite allowed by them. And besides what is here mentioned, he
also seems to me to be aiming against the Greeks. And this is why he makes his
beginning from this, but afterwards he introduces the subject of Christ's
judgment.
"Against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who hold the truth in
unrighteousness." Here he shows that the ways of ungodliness are many, and
that of truth, one. For error is a thing various and multiform and compound, but
the truth is one. And after speaking of doctrines he speaks of life, mentioning the
unrighteousness of men. For there be various kinds of unrighteousness also. One
is in money affairs, as when any one deals unrighteously by his neighbor in
these; and another in regard to women, when a man leaves his own wife, and
breaks in upon the marriage of another. For St. Paul calls this also defrauding,