Hebrews 11:11
5. "By faith also Sarah herself," he says. Here he began [speaking] in a way
to put them to shame, in case, that is, they should show themselves more fainthearted than a woman. But possibly some one might say, How "by faith," when
she laughed? Nay, while her laughter indeed was from unbelief, her fear [was]
from Faith, for to say, "I laughed not" [Genesis 18:15], arose from Faith. From
this then it appears that when unbelief had been cleared out, Faith came in its
place.
"By faith also Sarah received strength to conceive seed even when she was
past age." What is, "to conceive seed"? She who was become dead, who was
barren, received power for the retaining of seed, for conception. For her
imperfection was two-fold; first from her time of life for she was really old;
secondly from nature, for she was barren.

Hebrews 11:12
"Wherefore even from one they" all "sprang, as the stars of the sky, and as
the sand which is by the sea-shore." "Wherefore" (he says) "even from one they"
all "sprang." Here he not only says that she bare [a child], but that she also
became mother of so many as not even fruitful wombs [are mothers of]. "As the
stars," He says. How then is it that He often numbers them, although He said,
"As the stars of the heaven shall not be numbered, so neither shall your seed"?
[Genesis 15:5] He either means the excess, or else [speaks of] those who are
continually being born. For is it possible, tell me, to number their forefathers of
one family as, such an one son of such an one, and such an one son of such an
one? But here such are the promises of God, so skillfully arranged are His
undertakings.
6. But if the things which He promised as additional, are so admirable, so
beyond expectation, so magnificent, what will those be, to which these are an
addition, to which these are somewhat over and above? What then can be more
blessed than they who attain them? What more wretched than those who miss
them? For if a man when driven out from his native country, is pitied by all; and
when he has lost an inheritance is considered by all as an object of compassion,
with what tears ought he to be bewailed, who fails of Heaven, and of the good
things there stored up? Or rather, he is not even to be wept for: for one is wept
for, when he suffers something of which he is not himself the cause; but when of
his own choice he has entangled himself in evil, he is not worthy of tears, but of
wailings; or rather then of mourning; since even our Lord Jesus Christ mourned
and wept for Jerusalem, impious as it was. Truly we are worthy of weepings
innumerable, of wailings innumerable. If the whole world should receive a
voice, both stones, and wood, and trees, and wild beasts, and birds, and fishes,
and in a word, the whole world, if receiving a voice it should bewail us who