THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.30, C.3.

by God," etc.
I answer that, It was fitting for the mystery of the Incarnation to be
announced to the Mother of God by an angel, for three reasons.
First, that in this also might be maintained the order established by
God, by which Divine things are brought to men by means of the
angels. Wherefore Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv) that "the angels
were the first to be taught the Divine mystery of the loving kindness
of Jesus: afterwards the grace of knowledge was imparted to us
through them. Thus, then, the most god-like Gabriel made known to
Zachary that a prophet son would be born to him; and, to Mary, how
the Divine mystery of the ineffable conception of God would be
realized in her."
Secondly, this was becoming to the restoration of human nature
which was to be effected by Christ. Wherefore Bede says in a homily
(in Annunt.): "It was an apt beginning of man's restoration that an
angel should be sent by God to the Virgin who was to be hallowed by
the Divine Birth: since the first cause of man's ruin was through the
serpent being sent by the devil to cajole the woman by the spirit of
pride."
Thirdly, because this was becoming to the virginity of the Mother of
God. Wherefore Jerome says in a sermon on the Assumption: "It is
well that an angel be sent to the Virgin; because virginity is ever akin
to the angelic nature. Surely to live in the flesh and not according to
the flesh is not an earthly but a heavenly life."
Reply to Objection 1: The Mother of God was above the angels as
regards the dignity to which she was chosen by God. But as regards
the present state of life, she was beneath the angels. For even Christ
Himself, by reason of His passible life, "was made a little lower than
the angels," according to Heb. 2:9. But because Christ was both
wayfarer and comprehensor, He did not need to be instructed by
angels, as regards knowledge of Divine things. The Mother of God,
however, was not yet in the state of comprehension: and therefore
she had to be instructed by angels concerning the Divine
Conception.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says in a sermon on the
Assumption (De Assump. B.V.M.) a true estimation of the Blessed
Virgin excludes her from certain general rules. For "neither did she

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.30, C.3.

'multiply her conceptions' nor was she 'under man's, i.e. her
husband's,' power (Gn. 3:16), who in her spotless womb conceived
Christ of the Holy Ghost." Therefore it was fitting that she should be
informed of the mystery of the Incarnation by means not of a man,
but of an angel. For this reason it was made known to her before
Joseph: since the message was brought to her before she
conceived, but to Joseph after she had conceived.
Reply to Objection 3: As may be gathered from the passage quoted
from Dionysius, the angels were acquainted with the mystery of the
Incarnation: and yet they put this question, being desirous that
Christ should give them more perfect knowledge of the details of this
mystery, which are incomprehensible to any created intellect. Thus
Maximus [Maximus of Constantinople] says that "there can be no
question that the angels knew that the Incarnation was to take place.
But it was not given to them to trace the manner of our Lord's
conception, nor how it was that He remained whole in the Father,
whole throughout the universe, and was whole in the narrow abode
of the Virgin."
Reply to Objection 4: Some say that Gabriel was of the highest
order; because Gregory says (Hom. de Centum Ovibus [34 in
Evang.]): "It was right that one of the highest angels should come,
since his message was most sublime." But this does nat imply that
he was of the highest order of all, but in regard to the angels: since
he was an archangel. Thus the Church calls him an archangel, and
Gregory himself in a homily (De Centum Ovibus 34) says that "those
are called archangels who announce sublime things." It is therefore
sufficiently credible that he was the highest of the archangels. And,
as Gregory says (De Centum Ovibus 34), this name agrees with his
office: for "Gabriel means 'Power of God.' This message therefore
was fittingly brought by the 'Power of God,' because the Lord of
hosts and mighty in battle was coming to overcome the powers of
the air."