SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.3.

to another. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 3,4) that the mean
in the latter case follows "geometrical proportion," wherein equality
depends not on quantity but on proportion. For example we say that
6 is to 4 as 3 is to 2, because in either case the proportion equals 11/2; since the greater number is the sum of the lesser plus its half:
whereas the equality of excess is not one of quantity, because 6
exceeds 4 by 2, while 3 exceeds 2 by 1.
On the other hand in commutations something is paid to an
individual on account of something of his that has been received, as
may be seen chiefly in selling and buying, where the notion of
commutation is found primarily. Hence it is necessary to equalize
thing with thing, so that the one person should pay back to the other
just so much as he has become richer out of that which belonged to
the other. The result of this will be equality according to the
"arithmetical mean" which is gauged according to equal excess in
quantity. Thus 5 is the mean between 6 and 4, since it exceeds the
latter and is exceeded by the former, by 1. Accordingly if, at the start,
both persons have 5, and one of them receives 1 out of the other's
belongings, the one that is the receiver, will have 6, and the other will
be left with 4: and so there will be justice if both be brought back to
the mean, 1 being taken from him that has 6, and given to him that
has 4, for then both will have 5 which is the mean.
Reply to Objection 1: In the other moral virtues the rational, not the
real mean, is to be followed: but justice follows the real mean;
wherefore the mean, in justice, depends on the diversity of things.
Reply to Objection 2: Equality is the general form of justice, wherein
distributive and commutative justice agree: but in one we find
equality of geometrical proportion, whereas in the other we find
equality of arithmetical proportion.
Reply to Objection 3: In actions and passions a person's station
affects the quantity of a thing: for it is a greater injury to strike a
prince than a private person. Hence in distributive justice a person's
station is considered in itself, whereas in commutative justice it is
considered in so far as it causes a diversity of things.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether there is a different matter for both kinds

of justice?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is not a different matter for both
kinds of justice. Diversity of matter causes diversity of virtue, as in
the case of fortitude and temperance. Therefore, if distributive and
commutative justice have different matters, it would seem that they
are not comprised under the same virtue, viz. justice.
Objection 2: Further, the distribution that has to do with distributive
justice is one of "wealth or of honors, or of whatever can be
distributed among the members of the community" (Ethic. v, 2),
which very things are the subject matter of commutations between
one person and another, and this belongs to commutative justice.
Therefore the matters of distributive and commutative justice are not
distinct.
Objection 3: Further, if the matter of distributive justice differs from
that of commutative justice, for the reason that they differ
specifically, where there is no specific difference, there ought to be
no diversity of matter. Now the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 2) reckons
commutative justice as one species, and yet this has many kinds of
matter. Therefore the matter of these species of justice is, seemingly,
not of many kinds.
On the contrary, It is stated in Ethic. v, 2 that "one kind of justice
directs distributions, and another commutations."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 51, Articles 8,10), justice is
about certain external operations, namely distribution and
commutation. These consist in the use of certain externals, whether
things, persons or even works: of things, as when one man takes
from or restores to another that which is his; of persons, as when a
man does an injury to the very person of another, for instance by
striking or insulting him, or even by showing respect for him; and of
works, as when a man justly exacts a work of another, or does a
work for him. Accordingly, if we take for the matter of each kind of
justice the things themselves of which the operations are the use,
the matter of distributive and commutative justice is the same, since
things can be distributed out of the common property to individuals,
and be the subject of commutation between one person and another;