the natural will, which is nature's inclination to some particular good.
And yet this natural inclination is corrupted by their wickedness, in
so far as this good which they desire naturally is desired by them
under certain evil circumstances [FP, Question 64, Article 2, ad 5].
Reply to Objection 2: Evil, as evil, does not move the will, but in so
far as it is thought to be good. Yet it comes of their wickedness that
they esteem that which is evil as though it were good. Hence their
will is evil.
Reply to Objection 3: The habits of civic virtue do not remain in the
separated soul, because those virtues perfect us only in the civic life
which will not remain after this life. Even though they remained, they
would never come into action, being enchained, as it were, by the
obstinacy of the mind.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the damned repent of the evil they have

done?
Objection 1: It would seem that the damned never repent of the evil
they have done. For Bernard says on the Canticle [De
Consideratione v, 12; De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio ix] that "the
damned ever consent to the evil they have done." Therefore they
never repent of the sins they have committed.
Objection 2: Further, to wish one had not sinned is a good will. But
the damned will never have a good will. Therefore the damned will
never wish they had not sinned: and thus the same conclusion
follows as above.
Objection 3: Further, according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii),
"death is to man what their fall was to the angels." But the angel's
will is irrevocable after his fall, so that he cannot withdraw from the
choice whereby he previously sinned [FP, Question 64, Article 2].
Therefore the damned also cannot repent of the sins committed by
them.
Objection 4: Further, the wickedness of the damned in hell will be
greater than that of sinners in the world. Now in this world some
sinners repent not of the sins they have committed, either through
blindness of mind, as heretics, or through obstinacy, as those "who
are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in most wicked
things" (Prov. 2:14). Therefore, etc.
On the contrary, It is said of the damned (Wis. 5:3): "Repenting
within themselves."
Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 4) that "the wicked are full of
repentance; for afterwards they are sorry for that in which previously
they took pleasure." Therefore the damned, being most wicked,
repent all the more.
I answer that, A person may repent of sin in two ways: in one way
directly, in another way indirectly. He repents of a sin directly who
hates sin as such: and he repents indirectly who hates it on account
of something connected with it, for instance punishment or
something of that kind. Accordingly the wicked will not repent of

their sins directly, because consent in the malice of sin will remain in
them; but they will repent indirectly, inasmuch as they will suffer
from the punishment inflicted on them for sin.
Reply to Objection 1: The damned will wickedness, but shun
punishment: and thus indirectly they repent of wickedness
committed.
Reply to Objection 2: To wish one had not sinned on account of the
shamefulness of vice is a good will: but this will not be in the wicked.
Reply to Objection 3: It will be possible for the damned to repent of
their sins without turning their will away from sin, because in their
sins they will shun, not what they heretofore desired, but something
else, namely the punishment.
Reply to Objection 4: However obstinate men may be in this world,
they repent of the sins indirectly, if they be punished for them. Thus
Augustine says (Questions 83, qu. 36): "We see the most savage
beasts are deterred from the greatest pleasures by fear of pain."