one way, formally, as when we say that whiteness makes white; and
in that sense evil considered even as a privation is said to corrupt
good, forasmuch as it is itself a corruption or privation of good. In
another sense a thing is said to act effectively, as when a painter
makes a wall white. Thirdly, it is said in the sense of the final cause,
as the end is said to effect by moving the efficient cause. But in
these two ways evil does not effect anything of itself, that is, as a
privation, but by virtue of the good annexed to it. For every action
comes from some form; and everything which is desired as an end,
is a perfection. And therefore, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv): "Evil
does not act, nor is it desired, except by virtue of some good joined
to it: while of itself it is nothing definite, and beside the scope of our
will and intention."
Reply to Objection 5: As was said above, the parts of the universe
are ordered to each other, according as one acts on the other, and
according as one is the end and exemplar of the other. But, as was
said above, this can only happen to evil as joined to some good.
Hence evil neither belongs to the perfection of the universe, nor
does it come under the order of the same, except accidentally, that
is, by reason of some good joined to it.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether evil is found in things?

Objection 1: It would seem that evil is not found in things. For
whatever is found in things, is either something, or a privation of
something, that is a "not-being." But Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv)
that "evil is distant from existence, and even more distant from nonexistence." Therefore evil is not at all found in things.
Objection 2: Further, "being" and "thing" are convertible. If therefore
evil is a being in things, it follows that evil is a thing, which is
contrary to what has been said (Article 1).
Objection 3: Further, "the white unmixed with black is the most
white," as the Philosopher says (Topic. iii, 4). Therefore also the
good unmixed with evil is the greater good. But God makes always
what is best, much more than nature does. Therefore in things made
by God there is no evil.
On the contrary, On the above assumptions, all prohibitions and
penalties would cease, for they exist only for evils.
I answer that, As was said above (Question 47, Articles 1,2), the
perfection of the universe requires that there should be inequality in
things, so that every grade of goodness may be realized. Now, one
grade of goodness is that of the good which cannot fail. Another
grade of goodness is that of the good which can fail in goodness,
and this grade is to be found in existence itself; for some things
there are which cannot lose their existence as incorruptible things,
while some there are which can lose it, as things corruptible.
As, therefore, the perfection of the universe requires that there
should be not only beings incorruptible, but also corruptible beings;
so the perfection of the universe requires that there should be some
which can fail in goodness, and thence it follows that sometimes
they do fail. Now it is in this that evil consists, namely, in the fact
that a thing fails in goodness. Hence it is clear that evil is found in
things, as corruption also is found; for corruption is itself an evil.
Reply to Objection 1: Evil is distant both from simple being and from
simple "not-being," because it is neither a habit nor a pure negation,
but a privation.