Ps. cxvi. 2.

them but once, and then for the first time. But since He who chose the patriarchs and those [who
lived under the first covenant], is the same Word of God who did both visit them through the
prophetic Spirit, and us also who have been called together from all quarters by His advent; in
addition to what has been already said, He truly declared, "Many shall come from the east and from
the west, and shall recline with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. But the
children of the kingdom shall go into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth." If, then, those who do believe in Him through the preaching of His apostles throughout
the east and west shall recline with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven, partaking
with them of the [heavenly] banquet, one and the same God is set forth as He who did indeed choose
the patriarchs, visited also the people, and called the Gentiles.

### Chapter XXXVII.—Men are possessed of free will, and endowed with the faculty of making
a choice. It is not true, therefore, that some are by nature good, and others bad.

1. This expression [of our Lord], "How often would I have gathered thy children together, and
thou wouldest not," set forth the ancient law of human liberty, because God made man a free
[agent] from the beginning, possessing his own power, even as he does his own soul, to obey the
behests (ad utendum sententia) of God voluntarily, and not by compulsion of God. For there is no
coercion with God, but a good will [towards us] is present with Him continually. And therefore
does He give good counsel to all. And in man, as well as in angels, He has placed the power of
choice (for angels are rational beings), so that those who had yielded obedience might justly possess
what is good, given indeed by God, but preserved by themselves. On the other hand, they who have
not obeyed shall, with justice, be not found in possession of the good, and shall receive condign
punishment: for God did kindly bestow on them what was good; but they themselves did not
diligently keep it, nor deem it something precious, but poured contempt upon His super-eminent
goodness. Rejecting therefore the good, and as it were spuing it out, they shall all deservedly incur
the just judgment of God, which also the Apostle Paul testifies in his Epistle to the Romans, where
he says, "But dost thou despise the riches of His goodness, and patience, and long-suffering, being
ignorant that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance? But according to thy hardness and
impenitent heart, thou treasurest to thyself wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
righteous judgment of God." "But glory and honour," he says, "to every one that doeth good."
God therefore has given that which is good, as the apostle tells us in this Epistle, and they who
work it shall receive glory and honour, because they have done that which is good when they had