means, "not after being in life's temptations, neither after our evils have come
upon us;" nay, it is quite beforehand with them. For as in our fruits, we call that
early, which has shown itself before its season; so also here again, declaring its
rapidity, he has spoken in this way, much as above He said, "Whilst you are yet
speaking, I will say, Lo! Here I am."
But of what manner of light is He speaking, and what can this light be? Not
this, that is sensible; but another far better, which shows us Heaven, the angels,
the archangels, the cherubim, the seraphim, the thrones, the dominions, the
principalities, the powers, the whole host, the royal palaces, the tabernacles. For
should you be counted worthy of this light, you shall both see these, and be
delivered from hell, and from the venomous worm, and from the gnashing of
teeth, and from the bonds that cannot be broken, and from the anguish and the
affliction, from the darkness that has no light, and from being cut asunder, and
from the river of fire, and from the curse, and from the abodes of sorrow; and
you shall depart, "where sorrow and woe are fled away," [Isaiah 35:10] where
great is the joy, and the peace, and the love, and the pleasure, and the mirth;
where is life eternal, and unspeakable glory, and inexpressible beauty; where are
eternal tabernacles, and the untold glory of the King, and those good things,
"which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man;" [1 Corinthians 2:9] where is the spiritual bridechamber, and the
apartments of the heavens, and the virgins that bear the bright lamps, and they
who have the marriage garment; where many are the possessions of our Lord,
and the storehouses of the King.
Do you see how great the rewards, and how many He has set forth by one
expression, and how He brought all together?
So also by unfolding each of the expressions that follow, we shall find our
abundance great, and the ocean immense. Shall we then still delay, I beg you;
and be backward to show mercy on them that are in need? Nay, I entreat, but
though we must throw away all, be cast into the fire, venture against the sword,
leap upon daggers, suffer what you will; let us bear all easily, that we may obtain

the garment of the kingdom of Heaven, and that untold glory; which may we all
attain, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 55 on Matthew

Matt. XVI. 24.
" Then said Jesus unto His disciples, If any man will come after me, let him
renounce himself, and take up his cross and follow me."
Then; when? When Peter said, "Be it far from You, this shall not be unto
You;" and was told, "Get behind me, Satan." [Matthew 16:22-23] For He was by
no means satisfied with the mere rebuke, but, willing also more abundantly to
show both the extravagance of what Peter had said, and the benefit of His
passion, He says, Your word to me is, "Be it far from You, this shall not be unto
You:" but my word to you is, "Not only is it hurtful to you, and destructive, to
hinder me and to be displeased at my Passion, but it will be impossible for you
even to be saved, unless you yourself too be continually prepared for death."
Thus, lest they should think His suffering unworthy of Him, not by the
former things only, but also by the events that were coming on, He teaches them
the gain thereof. Thus in John first, He says, "Except the grain of wheat fall into
the ground and die, it abides alone; but if it die, it brings forth much fruit;"
[John 12:24] but here more abundantly working it out, not concerning Himself
only does He bring forward the statement that it is meet to die, but concerning
them also. "For so great is the profit thereof, that in your case also unwillingness
to die is grievous, but to be ready for it, good."
This however He makes clear by what follows, but for the present He works
it out on one side only. And see how He also makes His discourse
unexceptionable: not saying at all, "whether you will, or no, you must suffer
this," but how? "If any man will come after me." "I force not, I compel not, but
each one I make lord of his own choice; wherefore also I say, 'If any man will.'
For to good things do I call you, not to things evil, or burdensome; not to
punishment and vengeance, that I should have to compel. Nay, the nature of the