like as of fire, which appeared with a sound from heaven on the day of
Pentecost, after the ascension of the Lord,2 it was not the Word of God
Himself by His own substance, in which He is equal and co-eternal with
the Father, nor the Spirit of the Father and of the Son by His own
substance, in which He Himself also is equal and co-eternal with both,
but assuredly a creature, such as could be formed and exist in these
fashions, which appeared to corporeal and mortal senses,—it remains, I
say, to consider what difference there is between these manifestations
and those which were proper to the Son of God and to the Holy Spirit,
although wrought by the visible creature; which subject we shall more
conveniently begin in another book.

## BOOK IV. Augustin explains for what the Son of God was sent; but, however, that the Son

PREFACE.—THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD IS TO BE SOUGHT FROM
GOD.
1. The knowledge of things terrestrial and celestial is commonly thought
much of by men. Yet those doubtless judge better who prefer to that
knowledge, the knowledge of themselves; and that mind is more
praiseworthy which knows even its own weakness, than that which,
without regard to this, searches out, and even comes to know, the ways of
the stars, or which holds fast such knowledge already acquired, while
ignorant of the way by which itself to enter into its own proper health and
strength. But if any one has already become awake towards God, kindled
by the warmth of the Holy Spirit, and in the love of God has become vile
in his own eyes; and through wishing, yet not having strength to come in
unto Him, and through the light He gives, has given heed to himself, and
has found himself, and has learned that his own filthiness cannot mingle
with His purity; and feels it sweet to weep and to entreat Him, that again
and again He will have compassion, until he have put off all his
wretchedness; and to pray confidently, as having already received of free
gift the pledge of salvation through his only Saviour and Enlightener of
man:—such an one, so acting, and so lamenting, knowledge does not puff
up, because charity edifieth; for he has preferred knowledge to
knowledge, he has preferred to know his own weakness, rather than to
know the walls of the world, the foundations of the earth, and the
pinnacles of heaven. And by obtaining this knowledge, he has obtained

also sorrow;2 but sorrow for straying away from the desire of reaching his
own proper country, and the Creator of it, his own blessed God. And if
among men such as these, in the family of Thy Christ, O Lord my God, I
groan among Thy poor, give me out of Thy bread to answer men who do
not hunger and thirst after righteousness, but are sated and abound. But
it is the vain image of those things that has sated them, not Thy truth,
which they have repelled and shrunk from, and so fall into their own
vanity. I certainly know how many figments the human heart gives birth
to. And what is my own heart but a human heart? But I pray the God of
my heart, that I may not vomit forth (eructuem) into these writings any of
these figments for solid truths, but that there may pass into them only
what the breath of His truth has breathed into me; cast out though I am
from the sight of His eyes, and striving from afar to return by the way
which the divinity of His only-begotten Son has made by His humanity.
And this truth, changeable though I am, I so far drink in, as far as in it I
see nothing changeable: neither in place and time, as is the case with
bodies; nor in time alone, and in a certain sense place, as with the
thoughts of our own spirits; nor in time alone, and not even in any
semblance of place, as with some of the reasonings of our own minds.
(For the essence of God, whereby He is, has altogether nothing
changeable, neither in eternity, nor in truth, nor in will; since there truth
is eternal, love eternal; and there love is true, eternity true; and there
eternity is loved, and truth is loved.)