FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

doves are commanded to be offered, because nothing should be
offered to God but what is best.
Reply to Objection 5. The animals which were offered in sacrifice
were slain, because it is by being killed that they become useful to
man, forasmuch as God gave them to man for food. Wherefore also
they were burnt with fire: because it is by being cooked that they are
made fit for human consumption. Moreover the slaying of the
animals signified the destruction of sins: and also that man deserved
death on account of his sins; as though those animals were slain in
man's stead, in order to betoken the expiation of sins. Again the
slaying of these animals signified the slaying of Christ.
Reply to Objection 6. The Law fixed the special manner of slaying the
sacrificial animals in order to exclude other ways of killing, whereby
idolaters sacrificed animals to idols. Or again, as Rabbi Moses says
(Doct. Perplex. iii), "the Law chose that manner of slaying which was
least painful to the slain animal." This excluded cruelty on the part of
the offerers, and any mangling of the animals slain.
Reply to Objection 7. It is because unclean animals are wont to be
held in contempt among men, that it was forbidden to offer them in
sacrifice to God: and for this reason too they were forbidden (Dt.
23:18) to offer "the hire of a strumpet or the price of a dog in the
house of . . . God." For the same reason they did not offer animals
before the seventh day, because such were abortive as it were, the
flesh being not yet firm on account of its exceeding softness.
Reply to Objection 8. There were three kinds of sacrifices. There was
one in which the victim was entirely consumed by fire: this was
called "a holocaust, i.e. all burnt." For this kind of sacrifice was
offered to God specially to show reverence to His majesty, and love
of His goodness: and typified the state of perfection as regards the
fulfilment of the counsels. Wherefore the whole was burnt up: so that
as the whole animal by being dissolved into vapor soared aloft, so it
might denote that the whole man, and whatever belongs to him, are
subject to the authority of God, and should be offered to Him.
Another sacrifice was the "sin-offering," which was offered to God
on account of man's need for the forgiveness of sin: and this typifies
the state of penitents in satisfying for sins. It was divided into two
parts: for one part was burnt; while the other was granted to the use

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

of the priests to signify that remission of sins is granted by God
through the ministry of His priests. When, however, this sacrifice
was offered for the sins of the whole people, or specially for the sin
of the priest, the whole victim was burnt up. For it was not fitting that
the priests should have the use of that which was offered for their
own sins, to signify that nothing sinful should remain in them.
Moreover, this would not be satisfaction for sin: for if the offering
were granted to the use of those for whose sins it was offered, it
would seem to be the same as if it had not been offered.
The third kind of sacrifice was called the "peace-offering," which was
offered to God, either in thanksgiving, or for the welfare and
prosperity of the offerers, in acknowledgment of benefits already
received or yet to be received: and this typifies the state of those
who are proficient in the observance of the commandments. These
sacrifices were divided into three parts: for one part was burnt in
honor of God; another part was allotted to the use of the priests; and
the third part to the use of the offerers; in order to signify that man's
salvation is from God, by the direction of God's ministers, and
through the cooperation of those who are saved.
But it was the universal rule that the blood and fat were not allotted
to the use either of the priests or of the offerers: the blood being
poured out at the foot of the altar, in honor of God, while the fat was
burnt upon the altar (Lev. 9:9,10). The reason for this was, first, in
order to prevent idolatry: because idolaters used to drink the blood
and eat the fat of the victims, according to Dt. 32:38: "Of whose
victims they eat the fat, and drank the wine of their drink-offerings."
Secondly, in order to form them to a right way of living. For they
were forbidden the use of the blood that they might abhor the
shedding of human blood; wherefore it is written (Gn. 9:4,5): "Flesh
with blood you shall not eat: for I will require the blood of your
lives": and they were forbidden to eat the fat, in order to withdraw
them from lasciviousness; hence it is written (Ezech. 34:3): "You
have killed that which was fat." Thirdly, on account of the reverence
due to God: because blood is most necessary for life, for which
reason "life" is said to be "in the blood" (Lev. 17:11,14): while fat is a
sign of abundant nourishment. Wherefore, in order to show that to
God we owe both life and a sufficiency of all good things, the blood
was poured out, and the fat burnt up in His honor. Fourthly, in order
to foreshadow the shedding of Christ's blood, and the abundance of
His charity, whereby He offered Himself to God for us.