SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.16.

this matter of action is either an end or the means to an end. Now the
right ends of human life are fixed; wherefore there can be a natural
inclination in respect of these ends; thus it has been stated above
(FS, Question 51, Article 1; FS, Question 63, Article 1) that some,
from a natural inclination, have certain virtues whereby they are
inclined to right ends; and consequently they also have naturally a
right judgment about such like ends.
But the means to the end, in human concerns, far from being fixed,
are of manifold variety according to the variety of persons and
affairs. Wherefore since the inclination of nature is ever to
something fixed, the knowledge of those means cannot be in man
naturally, although, by reason of his natural disposition, one man
has a greater aptitude than another in discerning them, just as it
happens with regard to the conclusions of speculative sciences.
Since then prudence is not about the ends, but about the means, as
stated above (Article 6; FS, Question 57, Article 5), it follows that
prudence is not from nature.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher is speaking there of things
relating to prudence, in so far as they are directed to ends.
Wherefore he had said before (Ethic. vi, 5,11) that "they are the
principles of the ou heneka", namely, the end; and so he does not
mention euboulia among them, because it takes counsel about the
means.
Reply to Objection 2: Prudence is rather in the old, not only because
their natural disposition calms the movement of the sensitive
passions, but also because of their long experience.
Reply to Objection 3: Even in dumb animals there are fixed ways of
obtaining an end, wherefore we observe that all the animals of a
same species act in like manner. But this is impossible in man, on
account of his reason, which takes cognizance of universals, and
consequently extends to an infinity of singulars.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.17.

### ARTICLE 16. Whether prudence can be lost through

forgetfulness?
Objection 1: It would seem that prudence can be lost through
forgetfulness. For since science is about necessary things, it is more
certain than prudence which is about contingent matters of action.
But science is lost by forgetfulness. Much more therefore is
prudence.
Objection 2: Further, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3) "the same
things, but by a contrary process, engender and corrupt virtue." Now
the engendering of prudence requires experience which is made up
"of many memories," as he states at the beginning of his
Metaphysics (i, 1). Therefore since forgetfulness is contrary to
memory, it seems that prudence can be lost through forgetfulness.
Objection 3: Further, there is no prudence without knowledge of
universals. But knowledge of universals can be lost through
forgetfulness. Therefore prudence can also.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that
"forgetfulness is possible to art but not to prudence."
I answer that, Forgetfulness regards knowledge only, wherefore one
can forget art and science, so as to lose them altogether, because
they belong to the reason. But prudence consists not in knowledge
alone, but also in an act of the appetite, because as stated above
(Article 8), its principal act is one of command, whereby a man
applies the knowledge he has, to the purpose of appetition and
operation. Hence prudence is not taken away directly by
forgetfulness, but rather is corrupted by the passions. For the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "pleasure and sorrow pervert the
estimate of prudence": wherefore it is written (Dan. 13:56): "Beauty
hath deceived thee, and lust hath subverted thy heart," and (Ex.
23:8): "Neither shalt thou take bribes which blind even the prudent."
Nevertheless forgetfulness may hinder prudence, in so far as the
latter's command depends on knowledge which may be forgotten.
Reply to Objection 1: Science is in the reason only: hence the
comparison fails, as stated above [FS, Question 53, Article 1].