Hebrews 4:6-8
"Seeing therefore it remains" (he says) "that some must enter therein, and
they to whom it was first preached entered not in because of unbelief: again he
limits a certain day, saying in David, Today, after so long a time; as it has been
said before." But what is it that he means? "Seeing then" (he means) that "some
must" certainly "enter in," and "they did not enter in." And that an entrance is
proclaimed, and that "some must enter in," let us hear from what this is clear.
Because after so many years (he says) David again says: "Today if you will hear
His voice, harden not your hearts" [Hebrews 4:8], "For if Joshua had given them
rest he would not afterward have spoken of another day." It is evident, that he
says these things, as of persons who are to attain some recompense.

Hebrews 4:9
7. "There remains therefore a rest for the people of God." Whence [does
this appear]? From the exhortation, "Harden not your hearts": for if there were
no rest, these exhortations would not have been given. Neither would they have
been exhorted not to do the same things [with the Jews] lest they should suffer
the same things, unless they were about to suffer the same. But how were they
who were in possession of Palestine about to suffer the same things [i.e.
exclusion from the rest] unless there were some other rest?
And well did he conclude the argument. For he said not rest but "Sabbathkeeping"; calling the kingdom "Sabbath-keeping," by the appropriate name, and
that which they rejoiced in and were attracted by. For as, on the Sabbath He
commands to abstain from all evil things; and that those things only which relate
to the Service of God should be done, which things the Priests were wont to
accomplish, and whatsoever profits the soul, and nothing else; so also [will it be]
then.

Hebrews 4:10
However it is not he who spoke thus, but what? [Hebrews 4:10], "For he
that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own works, as God [did]
from His." As God ceased from His works, he says, so he that has entered into
His rest [has ceased]. For since his discourse to them was concerning rest, and
they were desirous to hear when this would be, he concluded the argument with
this.
8. And [he said] "Today," that they might never be without hope. "Exhort
one another daily," he says, ["while it is called today,"] that is, even if a man
have sinned, as long as it is "Today," he has hope: let no man then despair so
long as he lives. Above all things indeed, he says, "let there not be an evil heart
of unbelief." [Hebrews 3:12] But even suppose there should be, let no man
despair, but let him recover himself; for as long as we are in this world, the
"Today" is in season. But here he means not unbelief only, but also murmurings:
"whose carcasses," he says, "fell' in the wilderness."
Then, lest any think that they will simply be deprived of rest only, he adds
also the punishment, saying [Hebrews 4:12], "For the Word of God is quick, and
powerful; and sharper than any two-edged sword, and pierces even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow: and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart." Here he is speaking of Hell
and of punishment. "It pierces" (he says) into the secrets of our heart, and cuts
asunder the soul. Here it is not the falling of carcasses nor, as there, the being
deprived of a country, but of a heavenly kingdom; and being delivered to an
everlasting hell, and to undying punishment and vengeance.
[Hebrews 3:13] "But exhort one another." Observe the gentleness and
mildness [of the expression]: he said not "Rebuke," but "Exhort." Thus we are
required to bear ourselves towards those who are straightened by affliction. This