some of them, as it is written: The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Neither
let us commit fornication, as some of them also did, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents. Neither
murmur ye, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. But all these things
happened to them in a figure, and were written for our admonition, upon whom the end of the world
(sæculorum) is come. Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall."
4. Since therefore, beyond all doubt and contradiction, the apostle shows that there is one and
the same God, who did both enter into judgment with these former things, and who does inquire
into those of the present time, and points out why these things have been committed to writing; all
these men are found to be unlearned and presumptuous, nay, even destitute of common sense, who,
because of the transgressions of them of old time, and because of the disobedience of a vast number
of them, do allege that there was indeed one God of these men, and that He was the maker of the
world, and existed in a state of degeneracy; but that there was another Father declared by Christ,
and that this Being is He who has been conceived by the mind of each of them; not understanding
that as, in the former case, God showed Himself not well pleased in many instances towards those
who sinned, so also in the latter, "many are called, but few are chosen." As then the unrighteous,
the idolaters, and fornicators perished, so also is it now: for both the Lord declares, that such persons
are sent into eternal fire; and the apostle says, "Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit
the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, not
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God." And as it was not to those who are
without that he said these things, but to us, lest we should be cast forth from the kingdom of God,
by doing any such thing, he proceeds to say, "And such indeed were ye; but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God." And just as then,
those who led vicious lives, and put other people astray, were condemned and cast out, so also even
now the offending eye is plucked out, and the foot and the hand, lest the rest of the body perish in
like manner. And we have the precept: "If any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one go not to
eat." And again does the apostle say, "Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of
these things cometh the wrath of God upon the sons of mistrust. Be not ye therefore partakers with