2 Corinthians 10:8
For though I should glory somewhat abundantly concerning our authority
which the Lord gave for building you up, and not for casting you down, I shall
not be put to shame.
For since he was going to say somewhat great, observe how he softens it.
For nothing does so offend the majority of hearers as for any one to praise
himself. Wherefore to cut at the root of this offensiveness, he says, "For though I
should glory somewhat abundantly." And he did not say, 'if any man trust that he
is Christ's let him think that he is far short of us. For I possess much authority
from Him, so as to punish and to kill whomsoever I choose;' but what? "For
though I should glory even somewhat abundantly." And yet he possessed more
than can be told, but nevertheless he lowers it in his way of speaking. And he
said not, 'I glory,' but, "if I should glory," if I should choose to do so: at once
both showing modesty, and declaring his superiority. If therefore he says, "I
should glory concerning the authority which the Lord gave me." Again, he
ascribes the whole to Him, and makes the gift common. "For building up, and
not for casting down." Do you see how again he allays the envy his praises
might give rise to, and draws the hearer over to himself by mentioning the use
for which he received it? Then why does he say, "Casting down imaginations?"
Because this is itself a special form of building up, the removing of hindrances,
and detecting the unsound, and laying the true together in the building. For this
end therefore we received it, that we might build up. But if any should spar and
battle with us, and be incurable, we will use that other power also, destroying
and overthrowing him. Wherefore also he says, "I shall not be put to shame,"
that is, I shall not be proved a liar or a boaster.

2 Corinthians 10:9-11
2. "But that I may not seem as if I would terrify you: for his letters, say they,
are weighty and strong: but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech of no
account. Let such a one reckon this, that what we are in word by letters when we
are absent, such are we also in deed when we are present."
What he says is this: 'I could boast indeed, but that they may not say the
same things again, to wit, that I boast in my letters, and am contemptible when
present, I will say nothing great.' And yet afterwards he did say something great,
but not about this power by which he was formidable, but about revelations and
at greater lengths about trials. 'Therefore, that I may not seem to be terrifying
you, "let such an one reckon this, that what we are by letters when we are
absent, such are we also in deed when we are present.'" For since they said, 'he
writes great things of himself, but when he is present he is worthy of no
consideration,' therefore he says these things, and those again in a moderated
form. For he did not say, 'as we write great things, so when we are present we
also do great things,' but in more subdued phrase. For when he addressed himself
to the others indeed, he stated it with vehemency, saying, "I beseech you that I
may not when present show courage with the confidence wherewith I think to be
bold against some:" but when to these, he is more subdued. And therefore he
says, 'what we are when present, such too when absent, that is, lowly, modest, no
where boasting. And it is plain from what follows,