FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.2.

differ in aspect only. For since good is what all seek, the notion of
good is that which calms the desire; while the notion of the beautiful
is that which calms the desire, by being seen or known.
Consequently those senses chiefly regard the beautiful, which are
the most cognitive, viz. sight and hearing, as ministering to reason;
for we speak of beautiful sights and beautiful sounds. But in
reference to the other objects of the other senses, we do not use the
expression "beautiful," for we do not speak of beautiful tastes, and
beautiful odors. Thus it is evident that beauty adds to goodness a
relation to the cognitive faculty: so that "good" means that which
simply pleases the appetite; while the "beautiful" is something
pleasant to apprehend.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether knowledge is a cause of love?

Objection 1: It would seem that knowledge is not a cause of love. For
it is due to love that a thing is sought. But some things are sought
without being known, for instance, the sciences; for since "to have
them is the same as to know them," as Augustine says (Questions
83, qu. 35), if we knew them we should have them, and should not
seek them. Therefore knowledge is not the cause of love.
Objection 2: Further, to love what we know not seems like loving
something more than we know it. But some things are loved more
than they are known: thus in this life God can be loved in Himself,
but cannot be known in Himself. Therefore knowledge is not the
cause of love.
Objection 3: Further, if knowledge were the cause of love, there
would be no love, where there is no knowledge. But in all things
there is love, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv); whereas there is not
knowledge in all things. Therefore knowledge is not the cause of
love.
On the contrary, Augustine proves (De Trin. x, 1,2) that "none can
love what he does not know."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), good is the cause of love,
as being its object. But good is not the object of the appetite, except
as apprehended. And therefore love demands some apprehension of
the good that is loved. For this reason the Philosopher (Ethic. ix,
5,12) says that bodily sight is the beginning of sensitive love: and in
like manner the contemplation of spiritual beauty or goodness is the
beginning of spiritual love. Accordingly knowledge is the cause of
love for the same reason as good is, which can be loved only if
known.
Reply to Objection 1: He who seeks science, is not entirely without
knowledge thereof: but knows something about it already in some
respect, either in a general way, or in some one of its effects, or from
having heard it commended, as Augustine says (De Trin. x, 1,2). But
to have it is not to know it thus, but to know it perfectly.
Reply to Objection 2: Something is required for the perfection of