The semi-vowels are 5, +, ,, 6, $, 7, 8, 9.

partaking of the nature of both. The vowels, again, are representative of Anthropos and Ecclesia,
inasmuch as a voice proceeding from Anthropos gave being to them all; for the sound of the voice
imparted to them form. Thus, then, Logos and Zoe possess eight [of these letters]; Anthropos and
Ecclesia seven; and Pater and Aletheia nine. But since the number allotted to each was unequal,
He who existed in the Father came down, having been specially sent by Him from whom He was
separated, for the rectification of what had taken place, that the unity of the Pleromas, being endowed
with equality, might develop in all that one power which flows from all. Thus that division which
had only seven letters, received the power of eight, and the three sets were rendered alike in
point of number, all becoming Ogdoads; which three, when brought together, constitute the number
four-and-twenty. The three elements, too (which he declares to exist in conjunction with three
powers, and thus form the six from which have flowed the twenty-four letters), being quadrupled
by the word of the ineffable Tetrad, give rise to the same number with them; and these elements
he maintains to belong to Him who cannot be named. These, again, were endowed by the three
powers with a resemblance to Him who is invisible. And he says that those letters which we call
double are the images of the images of these elements; and if these be added to the
four-and-twenty letters, by the force of analogy they form the number thirty.
6. He asserts that the fruit of this arrangement and analogy has been manifested in the likeness
of an image, namely, Him who, after six days, ascended into the mountain along with three
others, and then became one of six (the sixth), in which character He descended and was contained
in the Hebdomad, since He was the illustrious Ogdoad, and contained in Himself the entire
number of the elements, which the descent of the dove (who is Alpha and Omega) made clearly
manifest, when He came to be baptized; for the number of the dove is eight hundred and one.
And for this reason did Moses declare that man was formed on the sixth day; and then, again,
according to arrangement, it was on the sixth day, which is the preparation, that the last man
appeared, for the regeneration of the first. Of this arrangement, both the beginning and the end were
they receive the outflow of those above, but the turning back again of those below."
secured.

Viz., !, ", # = $%, &%, '%.
('*)+,-*)0, dove), being, like that of 1 and 2, 801.

formed at that sixth hour, at which He was nailed to the tree. For that perfect being Nous, knowing
that the number six had the power both of formation and regeneration, declared to the children of
light, that regeneration which has been wrought out by Him who appeared as the Episemon in
regard to that number. Whence also he declares it is that the double letters contain the Episemon
number; for this Episemon, when joined to the twenty-four elements, completed the name of thirty
letters.
7. He employed as his instrument, as the Sige of Marcus declares, the power of seven letters,
in order that the fruit of the independent will [of Achamoth] might be revealed. "Consider this
present Episemon," she says—"Him who was formed after the [original] Episemon, as being, as it
were, divided or cut into two parts, and remaining outside; who, by His own power and wisdom,
through means of that which had been produced by Himself, gave life to this world, consisting of
seven powers, after the likeness of the power of the Hebdomad, and so formed it, that it is the
soul of everything visible. And He indeed uses this work Himself as if it had been formed by His
own free will; but the rest, as being images of what cannot be [fully] imitated, are subservient to
the Enthymesis of the mother. And the first heaven indeed pronounces Alpha, the next to this
Epsilon, the third Eta, the fourth, which is also in the midst of the seven, utters the sound of Iota,
the fifth Omicron, the sixth Upsilon, the seventh, which is also the fourth from the middle, utters
the elegant Omega,"— as the Sige of Marcus, talking a deal of nonsense, but uttering no word of
truth, confidently asserts. "And these powers," she adds, "being all simultaneously clasped in each
other's embrace, do sound out the glory of Him by whom they were produced; and the glory of
that sound is transmitted upwards to the Propator." She asserts, moreover, that "the sound of this
uttering of praise, having been wafted to the earth, has become the Framer and the Parent of those
things which are on the earth."
8. He instances, in proof of this, the case of infants who have just been born, the cry of whom,
as soon as they have issued from the womb, is in accordance with the sound of every one of these
elements. As, then, he says, the seven powers glorify the Word, so also does the complaining soul
of infants. For this reason, too, David said: "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings Thou hast
perfected praise;" and again: "The heavens declare the glory of God." Hence also it comes
to pass, that when the soul is involved in difficulties and distresses, for its own relief it calls out,