SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.7.

states (Ethic. i, 8). Augustine too says the same to Proba (ad
Probam, de orando Deum, Ep. cxxx, 6,7) when he states that "it is not
unbecoming for anyone to desire enough for a livelihood, and no
more; for this sufficiency is desired, not for its own sake, but for the
welfare of the body, or that we should desire to be clothed in a way
befitting one's station, so as not to be out of keeping with those
among whom we have to live. Accordingly we ought to pray that we
may keep these things if we have them, and if we have them not, that
we may gain possession of them."
Reply to Objection 1: We should seek temporal things not in the first
but in the second place. Hence Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte ii, 16): "When He says that this" (i.e. the kingdom of God) "is
to be sought first, He implies that the other" (i.e. temporal goods) "is
to be sought afterwards, not in time but in importance, this as being
our good, the other as our need."
Reply to Objection 2: Not all solicitude about temporal things is
forbidden, but that which is superfluous and inordinate, as stated
above (Question 55, Article 6).
Reply to Objection 3: When our mind is intent on temporal things in
order that it may rest in them, it remains immersed therein; but when
it is intent on them in relation to the acquisition of beatitude, it is not
lowered by them, but raises them to a higher level.
Reply to Objection 4: From the very fact that we ask for temporal
things not as the principal object of our petition, but as subordinate
to something else, we ask God for them in the sense that they may
be granted to us in so far as they are expedient for salvation.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.82, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether we ought to pray for others?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to pray for others. In
praying we ought to conform to the pattern given by our Lord. Now
in the Lord's Prayer we make petitions for ourselves, not for others;
thus we say: "Give us this day our daily bread," etc. Therefore we
should not pray for others.
Objection 2: Further, prayer is offered that it may be heard. Now one
of the conditions required for prayer that it may be heard is that one
pray for oneself, wherefore Augustine in commenting on Jn. 16:23,
"If you ask the Father anything in My name He will give it you," says
(Tract. cii): "Everyone is heard when he prays for himself, not when
he prays for all; wherefore He does not say simply 'He will give it,'
but 'He will give it you. '" Therefore it would seem that we ought not
to pray for others, but only for ourselves.
Objection 3: Further, we are forbidden to pray for others, if they are
wicked, according to Jer. 7:16, "Therefore do not then pray for this
people . . . and do not withstand Me, for I will not hear thee." On the
other hand we are not bound to pray for the good, since they are
heard when they pray for themselves. Therefore it would seem that
we ought not to pray for others.
On the contrary, It is written (James 5:16): "Pray one for another, that
you may be saved."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 6), when we pray we ought to
ask for what we ought to desire. Now we ought to desire good things
not only for ourselves, but also for others: for this is essential to the
love which we owe to our neighbor, as stated above (Question 25,
Articles 1,12; Question 27, Article 2; Question 31, Article 1).
Therefore charity requires us to pray for others. Hence Chrysostom
says (Hom. xiv in Matth.) [Opus Imperfectum, falsely ascribed to St.
John Chrysostom]: "Necessity binds us to pray for ourselves,
fraternal charity urges us to pray for others: and the prayer that
fraternal charity proffers is sweeter to God than that which is the
outcome of necessity."
Reply to Objection 1: As Cyprian says (De orat. Dom.), "We say 'Our
Father' and not 'My Father,' 'Give us' and not 'Give me,' because the