there is nothing so powerful as it, since it is stronger even than a rock and harder
than adamant, and places us in a safety greater than that of towers and cities and
walls, being too high for any of the artillery of the devil. As then recklessness
makes men an easy prey even to ordinary occurrences, being, as I was saying,
easier broken than a bubble, and rent more speedily than a spider's web, and
more quickly dissolved than a smoke; that we then may be walking upon the
strong rock, let us leave that and take to this. For thus in this life present we shall
find rest, and shall in the world to come have every blessing, by the grace and
love toward man, etc.

## Homily 21 on Romans

Romans XII. 4, 5
"For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the
same office; so we, being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members
one of another."
Again he uses the same ensample as he does to the Corinthians, and that to
allay the same passion. For great is the power of the medicine, and the force of
this illustration for the correcting of this disease of haughtiness. Why (he means)
do you think highly of yourself? Or why again does another utterly despise
himself? Are we not all one body, both great and small? When then we are in the
total number but one, and members one of another, why do you by your
haughtiness separate yourself? Why do you put your brother to shame? For as he
is a member of you, so are you also of him. And it is on this score that your
claims to honor are so equal. For he has stated two things that might take down
their haughty spirit: one that we are members one of another, not the small of the
great only, but also the great of the small; and another, that we are all one body.
Or rather there are three points, since he shows that the gift was one of grace.
"Therefore be not high-minded." For it was given you of God; thou did not take
it, nor find it even. Hence too, when he touches upon the gifts, he does not say
that one received more, and another less, but what? different. For his words are,
"having then gifts," not less and greater, but, "differing." And what if you are not
appointed to the same office, still the body is the same. And beginning with gifts,
he ends with a good deed (4 manuscripts pl.); and so after mentioning prophecy,
and ministry, and the like, he concludes with mercy, diligence, and succor. Since
then it was likely that some would be virtuous, yet not have prophecy, he shows
how that this too is a gift, and a much greater one than the other (as he shows in
the Epistle to the Corinthians), and so much the greater, as that one has a reward,

the other is devoid of a recompense. For the whole is matter of gift and grace.
Wherefore he says,
Ver. 6. "Having then gifts differing according to the grace of God that is
given unto us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of
faith."
Since then he had sufficiently comforted them, he wishes also to make them
vie with each other, and labor more in earnest, by showing that it is themselves
that give the grounds for their receiving more or less. For he says indeed that it is
given by God (as when he says, "according as God has dealt to every man the
measure of faith;" and again, "according to the grace given unto us") [Romans
12:3], that he may subdue the haughty. But he says also that the beginnings lie
with themselves, to rouse the listless. And this he does in the Epistle to the
Corinthians also, to produce both these emotions. For when he says, "covet
earnestly the gifts," [1 Corinthians 12:31], he shows that they were themselves
the cause of the differences in what was given. But when he says, "Now all these
things works one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he
will" [1 Corinthians 12:11], he is proving that those who have received it ought
not to be elated, so using every way open to him to allay their disorder. And this
he does here also. And again, to rouse those who have fallen drowsy, he says,
"Whether prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith." For
though it is a grace, yet it is not poured forth at random, but framing its measure
according to the recipients, it lets as much flow as it may find the vessel of faith
that is brought to be capable of.
Ver. 7. "Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering."
Here he names a comprehensive thing. For the Apostleship even is called a
ministry, and every spiritual work is a ministry. This is indeed a name of a
peculiar office (viz. the diaconate); however, it is used in a general sense. "Or he
that teaches, on teaching." See with what indifference he places them, the little
first and the great afterwards, again giving us the same lesson, not to be puffed
up or elated.