tribunal and require the account, we have no exceeding fear, yet tremble at those
who stand and are judged with us.
4. Whence then is this disease? Whence has it broken out in our souls?
From not meditating continually on the things of that world, but being rivetted to
present things. Hence we both easily fall into wicked doings, and even if we do
any good thing we do it for display, so that thence also loss comes to us. For
instance, one has looked on a person often with unbridled eyes, unseen of her or
of those who walk with her , yet of the Eye that never sleeps was not unseen. For
even before the commission of the sin, It saw the unbridled soul, and that
madness within, and the thoughts that were whirled about in storm and surge; for
no need has He of witnesses and proofs Who knows all things. Look not then to
your fellow-servants: for though man praise, it avails not if God accept not; and
though man condemn, it harms not if God do not condemn. Oh! provoke not so
your Judge; of your fellow-servants making great account, yet when Himself is
angry, not in fear and trembling at Him. Let us then despise the praise that comes
of men. How long shall we be low-minded and grovelling? How long, when God
lifts us to heaven, take we pains to be trailed along the ground? The brethren of
Joseph, had they had the fear of God before their eyes, as men ought to have,
would not have taken their brother in a lonely place and killed him. [Genesis 37]
Cain again, had he feared that sentence as he should have feared, would not have
said, "Come, and let us go into the field:" [Genesis 4:8, Septuagint] for to what
end, O miserable and wretched! Do you take him apart from him that begot him,
and leadest him out into a lonely place? For does not God see the daring deed
even in the field? Have you not been taught by what befell your father that He
knows all things, and is present at all things that are done? And why, when he
denied, said not God this unto him: 'Hidest thou from Me Who am present every
where, and know the things that are secret?' Because as yet he knew not aright to
comprehend these high truths. But what says he? "The voice of your brother's
blood cries unto Me." Not as though blood had a voice; but like as we say when
things are plain and clear, "the matter speaks for itself. "

Wherefore surely it behooves to have before our eyes the sentence of God,
and all terrors are extinguished. So too in prayers we can keep awake, if we bear
in mind with whom we are conversing, if we reflect that we are offering sacrifice
and have in our hands a knife and fire and wood; if in thought we throw wide the
gates of heaven, if we transport ourselves there and taking the sword of the Spirit
infix it in the throat of the victim: make watchfulness the sacrifice and tears the
libation to Him. For such is the blood of this victim. Such the slaughter that
crimsons that altar. Suffer not then anything of worldly thoughts to occupy your
soul then. Bethink you that Abraham also, when offering sacrifice, suffered nor
wife nor servant nor any other to be present. Neither then do thou suffer any of
the slavish and ignoble passions to be present unto you, but go up alone into the
mountain where he went up, where no second person is permitted to go up. And
should any such thoughts attempt to go up with you, command them with
authority, and say, "Sit there, and I and the lad will worship and return to you;"
[Genesis 22:5. Septuagint] and leaving the ass and the servants below, and
whatever is void of reason and sense, go up, taking with you whatever is
reasonable, as he took Isaac. And build your altar so as he, as having nothing
human, but having outstepped nature. For he too, had he not outstepped nature,
would not have slain his child. And let nothing disturb you then, but be lift up
above the very heavens. Groan bitterly, sacrifice confession, [for, says he,
"Declare first your transgressions that you may be justified," Isaiah 43:26,
Septuagint], sacrifice contrition of heart. These victims turn not to ashes nor
dissolve into smoke nor melt into air; neither need they wood and fire, but only a
deep-pricked heart. This is wood, this is fire to burn, yet not consume them. For
he that prays with warmth is burnt, yet not consumed; but like gold that is tried
by fire becomes brighter.
5. And withal observe heedfully one thing more, in praying to say none of
those things that provoke your Master; neither draw near [to pray] against
enemies. For if to have enemies be a reproach, consider how great the evil to
pray against them. For need is that thou defend yourself and show why you have