me, if a man when he had made us lie down on tapestry and a soft couch and
linen interwoven with gold, in a great and splendid house, and had set by us a
great multitude of attendants, and had prepared a tray of silver and gold, and
filled it with many dainties of great cost and of all sorts, then urged us to eat,
provided we would only endure his besmearing his hands with mire or with
human ordure, and so sitting down to meat with us— would any man endure this
infliction? Would he not rather have considered it an insult? Indeed I think he
would, and would have gone straightway off. But now in fact, you see not hands
filled with what is indeed filth, but even the very food, and yet thou dost not go
off, nor flee, nor find fault. Nay, if he be a person in authority, thou even
accountest it a grand affair, and destroyest your own soul, in eating such things.
For covetousness is worse than any mire; for it pollutes, not the body but the
soul, and makes it hard to be washed. Thou therefore, though you see him that
sits at meat defiled with this filth both on his hands and his face, and his house
filled with it, nay and his table also full of it (for dung, or if there be anything
more unclean than that, it is not so unclean and polluted as those viands), do you
feel as if forsooth thou were highly honored, and as if you were going to enjoy
yourself?
And do you not fear Paul who allows us to go without restraint to the Tables
of the heathen if we wish, but not even if we wish to those of the covetous? For,
"if any man who is called a Brother" [1 Corinthians 5:11], he says, meaning here
by Brother every one who is a believer simply, not him who leads a solitary life.
For what is it which makes brotherhood? The Washing of regeneration; the being
enabled to call God our Father. So that he that is a Monk, if he be a Catechumen,
is not a Brother, but the believer though he be in the world, is a Brother. "If any
man," says he, "that is called a Brother." [1 Corinthians 5:11] For at that time
there was not even a trace of any one leading a Monastic life, but this blessed
[Apostle] addressed all his discourse to persons in the world. "If any man," he
says, "that is called a Brother, be a fornicator, or covetous or a drunkard, with
such an one, no not to eat." But not so with respect to the heathen: but "If any of

them that believe not," meaning the heathen, "bid you and you be disposed to go,
whatsoever is set before you eat." [1 Corinthians 10:27]
8. "If any man that is called Brother be" (he says) "a drunkard." Oh! What
strictness! Yet we not only do not avoid drunkards, but even go to their houses,
partaking of what they set before us.
Therefore all things are upside down, all things are in confusion, and
overthrown, and ruined. For tell me, if any such person should invite you to a
banquet, you who art accounted poor and mean, and then should hear you say,
"Inasmuch as the things set before me are [the fruit] of overreaching, I will not
endure to defile my own soul," would he not be mortified? Would he not be
confounded? Would he not be ashamed? This alone were sufficient to correct
him, and to make him call himself wretched for his wealth, and admire you for
your poverty, if he saw himself with so great earnestness despised by you.
But we "are become" (I know not why) "servants of men" [1 Corinthians
7:23], though Paul cries aloud throughout, "Be not ye the servants of men."
Whence then have we become "servants of men"? Because we first became
servants of the belly, and of money, and of glory, and of all the rest; we gave up
the liberty which Christ bestowed on us.
What then awaits him who has become a servant (tell me)? Hear Christ
saying, "The servant abides not in the house for ever." [John 8:35] You have a
declaration complete in itself, that he never enters into the Kingdom; for this is
what "the House" means. For, He says, "in My Father's House are many
mansions." [John 14:2] "The servant" then "abides not in the House for ever."
By a servant He means him who is "the servant of sin." But he that "abides not
in the House for ever," abides in Hell for ever, having no consolation from any
quarter.
Nay, to this point of wickedness are matters come, that they even give alms
out of these [ill-gotten gains], and many receive [them]. Therefore our boldness
has broken down, and we are not able to rebuke any one. But however,
henceforward at least, let us flee the mischief arising from this; and you who