the grave" [Psalm 49:15]: and, "Though I walk through the valley of the shadow
of death, I will fear no evil, for You are with me" [Psalm 23:4]: and, "I will not be
afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day, nor for the
pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wasts at noonday"
[Psalm 91:5-6]: and, "We are counted as sheep for the slaughter" [Psalm 43:22]:
he expresses their ardent love to God. And again, when they sing with the
Angels, (for Angels too are singing then,) "Praise the Lord from the Heavens."
[Psalm 148:1] And we meanwhile are snoring, or scratching our heads, or lying
supine meditating endless deceits. Think what it was for them to spend the whole
night in this employment.
And when the day is coming on, they take rest again; for when we begin
our works, they have a season of rest. But each of us, when it is day, calls upon
his neighbor, takes account of his outgoings, then goes into the forum; trembling
he appears before the magistrate, and dreads a reckoning. Another visits the
stage, another goes about his own business. But these holy men, having
performed their morning prayers and hymns, proceed to the reading of the
Scriptures. There are some too that have learned to write out books, each having
his own apartment assigned to him, where he lives in perpetual quiet; no one is
trifling, not one speaks a word. Then at the third, sixth, and ninth hours, and in
the evening, they perform their devotions, having divided the day into four parts,
and at the conclusion of each they honor God with psalms and hymns, and while
others are dining, laughing, and sporting, and bursting with gluttony, they are
occupied with their hymns. For they have no time for the table nor for these
things of sense. After their meal they again pursue the same course, having
previously given themselves a while to sleep. The men of the world sleep during
the day: but these watch during the night. Truly children of light are they! And
while the former, having slept away the greater part of the day, go forth
oppressed with heaviness, these are still collected, remaining without food till
the evening, and occupied in hymns. Other men, when evening overtakes them,
hasten to the baths, and different recreations, but these, being relieved from their

labors, then betake themselves to their table, not calling up a multitude of
servants, nor throwing the house into bustle and confusion, nor setting before
them high-seasoned dishes, and rich-steaming viands, but some only partaking
of bread and salt, to which others add oil, while the weakly have also herbs and
pulse. Then after sitting a short time, or rather after concluding all with hymns,
they each go to rest upon a bed made for repose only and not for luxury. There is
no dread of magistrates, no lordly arrogance, no terror of slaves, no disturbance
of women or children, no multitudes of chests, or superfluous laying by of
garments, no gold or silver, no guards and sentinels, no storehouse. Nothing of
all these, but all there is full of prayer, of hymns, and of a spiritual savor.
Nothing carnal is there. They fear no attacks of robbers, having nothing of which
they can be deprived, no wealth, but a soul and body, of which if they are
robbed, it is not a loss but a gain. For it is said, "To me to live is Christ, and to
die is gain." [Philippians 1:21] They have freed themselves from all bonds.
Truly, "The voice of gladness is in the tabernacles of the righteous." [Psalm
118:15]
There is no such thing to be heard there as wailing and lamentation. Their
roof is free from that melancholy and those cries. Deaths happen there indeed,
for their bodies are not immortal, but they know not death, as death. The
departed are accompanied to the grave with hymns. This they call a procession,
not a burial; and when it is reported that any one is dead, great is their
cheerfulness, great their pleasure; or rather not one of them can bear to say that
one is dead, but that he is perfected. Then there is thanksgiving, and great glory,
and joy, every one praying that such may be his own end, that so his own combat
may terminate, and he may rest from his labor and struggles, and may see Christ.
And if any is sick, instead of tears and lamentations they have recourse to
prayers. Often not the care of physicians, but faith alone relieves the sick. And if
a physician be necessary, then too there is the greatest firmness and philosophy.
There is no wife tearing her hair, nor children bewailing their orphan state before
the time, nor slaves entreating the dying man to give them an assurance that they