them who receive their money, have together with the interest lost also all their
capital. Others again falling into dangers, and not willing to give up a little have
together with the substance lost their life too.
Again, when it has been in men's power to purchase either gainful offices,
or some other such thing, by some trifling meanness they have lost all. For
because they know not how to sow, but have ever practised reaping, they of
course continually fail of their harvest. For no man can be always reaping, as
neither can he be always gaining. Therefore since they are not willing to spend,
neither do they know how to gain. And should they have to take a wife, the same
thing again befalls them; for either they are deceived into taking a poor wife for
a rich one, or when they have brought home one that is rich, but full of faults
without number, here too they have incurred more loss than gain. For it is not
superfluity but virtue, that causes wealth. For what profit is there of her wealth,
when she is expensive and dissolute, and scatters all abroad more vehemently
than any wind? What if she be unchaste, and bring in numberless lovers? What if
she be drunken? Will she not quickly make her husband the poorest of men? But
they do not only marry, but also buy at great risk, from their great covetousness,
laboring to find not good slaves, but cheap ones.
Consider then all these things (for the words concerning hell and the
kingdom you are not yet able to hear), and bearing in mind the losses which you
have often undergone from your love of money, in loans, and in purchases, and
in marriages, and in offices of power, and in all the rest; withdraw yourselves
from doating on money.
For so shall you be able to live the present life in security, and after a little
advance to hear also the words that treat on self-government, and see through
and look upon the very Sun of Righteousness, and to attain unto the good things
promised by Him; unto which God grant we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and
ever. Amen.

## Homily 29 on Matthew

Matthew 9:1-2.
"And He entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into His own city.
And, behold, they brought to Him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed: and
Jesus seeing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of good cheer;
your sins be forgiven you."
By His own city here he means Capernaum. For that which gave Him birth
was Bethlehem; that which brought Him up, Nazareth; that which had Him
continually inhabiting it, Capernaum.
This paralytic, however, was different from that one who is set forth in
John. [John 5:1] For he lay at the pool, but this at Capernaum; and that man had
his infirmity thirty and eight years, but concerning this, no such thing is
mentioned; and the other was in a state destitute of protectors, but this had some
to take care of him, who also took him up, and carried him. And to this He says,
"Son, your sins be forgiven you," but to that He says, "Will you be made whole?"
[John 5:6] And the other He healed on a sabbath day, but this not on a sabbath,
for else the Jews would have laid this also to His charge; and in the case of this
man they were silent, but in that of the other they were instant in persecuting
him.
And this I have said, not without purpose, lest any one should think there is
a discrepancy from suspecting it to be one and the same paralytic.
But do thou, I pray you, mark the humility and meekness of our Lord. For
He had also before this put away the multitudes from Him, and moreover when
sent away by them at Gadara, He withstood not, but retired, not however to any
great distance.
And again He entered into the ship and passed over, when He might have
gone over afoot. For it was His will not to be always doing miracles, that He