exterior help as the physician who heals: but just as the interior
nature is the principal cause of the healing, so the interior light of the
intellect is the principal cause of knowledge. But both of these are
from God. Therefore as of God is it written: "Who healeth all thy
diseases" (Ps. 102:3); so of Him is it written: "He that teacheth man
knowledge" (Ps. 93:10), inasmuch as "the light of His countenance is
signed upon us" (Ps. 4:7), through which light all things are shown
to us.
Reply to Objection 2: As Averroes argues, the teacher does not
cause knowledge in the disciple after the manner of a natural active
cause. Wherefore knowledge need not be an active quality: but is the
principle by which one is directed in teaching, just as art is the
principle by which one is directed in working.
Reply to Objection 3: The master does not cause the intellectual light
in the disciple, nor does he cause the intelligible species directly:
but he moves the disciple by teaching, so that the latter, by the
power of his intellect, forms intelligible concepts, the signs of which
are proposed to him from without.
Reply to Objection 4: The signs proposed by the master to the
disciple are of things known in a general and confused manner; but
not known in detail and distinctly. Therefore when anyone acquires
knowledge by himself, he cannot be called self-taught, or be said to
have his own master because perfect knowledge did not precede in
him, such as is required in a master.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether man can teach the angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that men teach angels. For the Apostle
says (Eph. 3:10): "That the manifold wisdom of God may be made
known to the principalities and powers in the heavenly places
through the Church." But the Church is the union of all the faithful.
Therefore some things are made known to angels through men.
Objection 2: Further, the superior angels, who are enlightened
immediately concerning Divine things by God, can instruct the
inferior angels, as stated above (Question 116, Article 1; Question
112, Article 3). But some men are instructed immediately concerning
Divine things by the Word of God; as appears principally of the
apostles from Heb. 1:1,2: "Last of all, in these days (God) hath
spoken to us by His Son." Therefore some men have been able to
teach the angels.
Objection 3: Further, the inferior angels are instructed by the
superior. But some men are higher than some angels; since some
men are taken up to the highest angelic orders, as Gregory says in a
homily (Hom. xxxiv in Evang.). Therefore some of the inferior angels
can be instructed by men concerning Divine things.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that every Divine
enlightenment to the superior angels, by making their thoughts
known to them; but concerning Divine things superior angels are
never enlightened by inferior angels. Now it is manifest that in the
same way as inferior angels are subject to the superior, the highest
men are subject even to the lowest angels. This is clear from Our
Lord's words (Mt. 11:11): "There hath not risen among them that are
born of woman a greater than John the Baptist; yet he that is lesser
in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he." Therefore angels are
never enlightened by men concerning Divine things. But men can by
means of speech make known to angels the thoughts of their hearts:
because it belongs to God alone to know the heart's secrets.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine (Gen. ad lit. v, 19) thus explains this
passage of the Apostle, who in the preceding verses says: "To me,
the least of all the saints, is given this grace . . . to enlighten all men,
that they may see what is the dispensation of the mystery which hath
been hidden from eternity in God. Hidden, yet so that the multiform