much more in these wars, when there are such hopes of resurrection besides, will
he who exposes his own life unto death, find it; in one sense, because he will not
be quickly taken; in a second, because even though he fall, God will lead his life
on to a higher life.
4. Then, because he had said, "He who will save shall lose it, but whosoever
shall lose shall save it," and on that side had set salvation and destruction, and
on this salvation and destruction; to prevent any one's imagining the one
destruction and salvation to be all the same with the other, and to teach you
plainly that the difference between this salvation and that is as great as between
destruction and salvation; from the contraries also He makes an inference once
for all to establish these points. "For what is a man profited," says He, "if he
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?"
Do you see how the wrongful preservation of it is destruction, and worse
than all destruction, as being even past remedy, from the want of anything more
to redeem it? For "tell me not this," says He, "that he that has escaped such
dangers has saved his life; but together with his life put also the whole world, yet
what profit has he thereby, if the soul perish?"
For tell me, should you see your servants in luxury, and yourself in extreme
calamity, will you indeed profit anything by being master? By no means. Make
this reckoning then with regard to your soul also, when the flesh is in luxury and
wealth, and she awaiting the destruction to come.
"What shall a man give in exchange for his soul?"
Again, He dwells upon the same point. What? Have you another soul to
give for this soul? Says He. Why, should you lose money, you will be able to
give money; or be it house, or slaves, or any other kind of possession, but for
your soul, if you lose it, you will have no other soul to give: yea, though you had
the world, though you were king of the whole earth, you would not be able, by
paying down all earthly goods, with the earth itself, to redeem but one soul.
And what marvel, if it be so with the soul? Since even in the body one may
see that so it turns out. Though thou wear ten thousand diadems, but have a body

sickly by nature, and incurable, you will not be able, not by giving all your
kingdom, to recover this body, not though thou add innumerable persons, and
cities, and goods.
Now thus I bid you reason with regard to your soul also; or rather even
much more with regard to the soul; and do thou, forsaking all besides, spend all
your care upon it. Do not then while taking thought about the things of others,
neglect yourself and your own things; which now all men do, resembling them
that work in the mines. For neither do these receive any profit from this labor,
nor from the wealth; but rather great harm, both because they incur fruitless
peril, and incur it for other men, reaping no benefit from such their toils and
deaths. These even now are objects of imitation to many, who are digging up
wealth for others; or rather we are more wretched even than this, inasmuch as
hell itself awaits us after these our labors. For they indeed are staid from those
toils by death, but to us death proves a beginning of innumerable evils.
But if you say, you have in your wealth the fruit of your toils: show me
your soul gladdened, and then I am persuaded. For of all things in us the soul is
chief. And if the body be fattened, while she is pining away, this prosperity is
nothing to you (even as when the handmaiden is glad, the happiness of the
maidservant is nothing to her mistress perishing, nor is the fair robe anything
compared with the weak flesh); but Christ will say unto you again, "What shall a
man give in exchange for his soul?" on every hand commanding you to be
busied about that, and to take account of it only.
5. Having alarmed them therefore hereby, He comforts them also by His
good things.
"For the Son of Man shall come," says He, "in the glory of His Father with
His holy angels, and then He shall reward every man according to his works."
Do you see how the glory of the Father and of the Son is all one? But if the
glory be one, it is quite evident that the substance also is one. For if in one
substance there be a difference of glory ("for there is one glory of the sun, and
another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differs