which it may join, by seeing, to the body without it, and so fix its look
thereupon and see it, yet by the very effort shows that, although the
bodily sense be taken away, itself can neither perish nor be diminished.
For there remains unimpaired a desire  of seeing, whether it
can be carried into effect or not. These three, then, the body that is seen,
and vision itself, and the attention of mind which joins both together, are
manifestly distinguishable, not only on account of the properties of each,
but also on account of the difference of their natures.
3. And since, in this case, the sensation does not proceed from that body
which is seen, but from the body of the living being that perceives, with
which the soul is tempered together in some wonderful way of its own;
yet vision is produced, that is, the sense itself is informed, by the body
which is seen; so that now, not only is there the power of sense, which can
exist also unimpaired even in darkness, provided the eyes are sound, but
also a sense actually informed, which is called vision. Vision, then, is
produced from a thing that is visible; but not from that alone, unless
there be present also one who sees. Therefore vision is produced from a
thing that is visible, together with one who sees; in such way that, on the
part of him who sees, there is the sense of seeing and the intention of
looking and gazing at the object; while yet that information of the sense,
which is called vision, is imprinted only by the body which is seen, that is,
by some visible thing; which being taken away, that form remains no
more which was in the sense so long as that which was seen was present:
yet the sense itself remains, which existed also before anything was
perceived; just as the trace of a thing in water remains so long as the body
itself, which is impressed on it, is in the water; but if this has been taken
away, there will no longer be any such trace, although the water remains,
which existed also before it took the form of that body. And therefore we
cannot, indeed, say that a visible thing produces the sense; yet it produces
the form, which is, as it were, its own likeness, which comes to be in the
sense, when we perceive anything by seeing. But we do not distinguish,
through the same sense, the form of the body which we see, from the
form which is produced by it in the sense of him who sees; since the
union of the two is so close that there is no room for distinguishing them.
But we rationally infer that we could not have sensation at all, unless
some similitude of the body seen was wrought in our own sense. For

when a ring is imprinted on wax, it does not follow that no image is
produced, because we cannot discern it unless when it has been
separated. But since, after the wax is separated, what was made remains,
so that it can be seen; we are on that account easily persuaded that there
was already also in the wax a form impressed from the ring before it was
separated from it. But if the ring were imprinted upon a fluid, no image at
all would appear when it was withdrawn; and yet none the less for this
ought the reason to discern that there was in that fluid before the ring
was withdrawn a form of the ring produced from the ring, which is to be
distinguished from that form which is in the ring, whence that form was
produced which ceases to be when the ring is withdrawn, although that in
the ring remains, whence the other was produced. And so the
perception of the eyes may not be supposed to contain no image of the
body, which is seen as long as it is seen,  because when that is
withdrawn the image does not remain. And hence it is very difficult to
persuade men of duller mind that an image of the visible thing is formed
in our sense, when we see it, and that this same form is vision.
4. But if any perhaps attend to what I am about to mention, they will find
no such trouble in this inquiry. Commonly, when we have looked for
some little time at a light, and then shut our eyes, there seem to play
before our eyes certain bright colors variously changing themselves, and
shining less and less until they wholly cease; and these we must
understand to be the remains of that form which was wrought in the
sense, while the shining body was seen, and that these variations take
place in them as they slowly and step by step fade away. For the lattices,
too, of windows, should we happen to be gazing at them, appear often in
these colors; so that it is evident that our sense is affected by such
impressions from that thing which is seen. That form therefore existed
also while we were seeing, and at that time it was more clear and express.
But it was then closely joined with the species of that thing which was
being perceived, so that it could not be at all distinguished from it; and
this was vision itself. Why, even when the little flame of a lamp is in some
way, as it were, doubled by the divergent rays of the eyes, a twofold vision
comes to pass, although the thing which is seen is one. For the same rays,
as they shoot forth each from its own eye, are affected severally, in that
they are not allowed to meet evenly and conjointly, in regarding that