Rev. xiii. 11, etc.

"And he will cause a mark [to be put] in the forehead and in the right hand, that no one may be
able to buy or sell, unless he who has the mark of the name of the beast or the number of his name;
and the number is six hundred and sixty-six," that is, six times a hundred, six times ten, and six
units. [He gives this] as a summing up of the whole of that apostasy which has taken place during
six thousand years.
3. For in as many days as this world was made, in so many thousand years shall it be concluded.
And for this reason the Scripture says: "Thus the heaven and the earth were finished, and all their
adornment. And God brought to a conclusion upon the sixth day the works that He had made; and
God rested upon the seventh day from all His works." This is an account of the things formerly
created, as also it is a prophecy of what is to come. For the day of the Lord is as a thousand years;
and in six days created things were completed: it is evident, therefore, that they will come to an
end at the sixth thousand year.
4. And therefore throughout all time, man, having been moulded at the beginning by the hands
of God, that is, of the Son and of the Spirit, is made after the image and likeness of God: the chaff,
indeed, which is the apostasy, being cast away; but the wheat, that is, those who bring forth fruit
to God in faith, being gathered into the barn. And for this cause tribulation is necessary for those
who are saved, that having been after a manner broken up, and rendered fine, and sprinkled over
by the patience of the Word of God, and set on fire [for purification], they may be fitted for the
royal banquet. As a certain man of ours said, when he was condemned to the wild beasts because
of his testimony with respect to God: "I am the wheat of Christ, and am ground by the teeth of the
wild beasts, that I may be found the pure bread of God."

### Chapter XXIX.—All things have been created for the service of man. The deceits, wickedness,
and apostate power of Antichrist. This was prefigured at the deluge, as afterwards by the
persecution of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
1. In the previous books I have set forth the causes for which God permitted these things to be
made, and have pointed out that all such have been created for the benefit of that human nature
which is saved, ripening for immortality that which is [possessed] of its own free will and its own
power, and preparing and rendering it more adapted for eternal subjection to God. And therefore
the creation is suited to [the wants of] man; for man was not made for its sake, but creation for the

Gen. ii. 2.
give "the wheat of God," and omits "of God" towards the end, as quoted by Eusebius.

sake of man. Those nations however, who did not of themselves raise up their eyes unto heaven,
nor returned thanks to their Maker, nor wished to behold the light of truth, but who were like blind
mice concealed in the depths of ignorance, the word justly reckons "as waste water from a sink,
and as the turning-weight of a balance—in fact, as nothing;" so far useful and serviceable to the
just, as stubble conduces towards the growth of the wheat, and its straw, by means of combustion,
serves for working gold. And therefore, when in the end the Church shall be suddenly caught up
from this, it is said, "There shall be tribulation such as has not been since the beginning, neither
shall be." For this is the last contest of the righteous, in which, when they overcome they are
crowned with incorruption.
2. And there is therefore in this beast, when he comes, a recapitulation made of all sorts of
iniquity and of every deceit, in order that all apostate power, flowing into and being shut up in him,
may be sent into the furnace of fire. Fittingly, therefore, shall his name possess the number six
hundred and sixty-six, since he sums up in his own person all the commixture of wickedness which
took place previous to the deluge, due to the apostasy of the angels. For Noah was six hundred
years old when the deluge came upon the earth, sweeping away the rebellious world, for the sake
of that most infamous generation which lived in the times of Noah. And [Antichrist] also sums up
every error of devised idols since the flood, together with the slaying of the prophets and the cutting
off of the just. For that image which was set up by Nebuchadnezzar had indeed a height of sixty
cubits, while the breadth was six cubits; on account of which Ananias, Azarias, and Misa‘l, when
they did not worship it, were cast into a furnace of fire, pointing out prophetically, by what happened
to them, the wrath against the righteous which shall arise towards the [time of the] end. For that
image, taken as a whole, was a prefiguring of this man's coming, decreeing that he should
undoubtedly himself alone be worshipped by all men. Thus, then, the six hundred years of Noah,
in whose time the deluge occurred because of the apostasy, and the number of the cubits of the
image for which these just men were sent into the fiery furnace, do indicate the number of the name
of that man in whom is concentrated the whole apostasy of six thousand years, and unrighteousness,
and wickedness, and false prophecy, and deception; for which things' sake a cataclysm of fire shall
also come [upon the earth].