enter into us? For he who so rejoices in suffering evil, as to requite even with
benefits him that has done him evil, whence can he afterwards suffer grief? And
how, you say, is this possible? It is possible, if we will. Then also he shows the
way.
Ver. 17, 18. "Pray without ceasing; In every thing giving thanks: for this is
the will of God."
Always to give thanks, this is a mark of a philosophic soul. Have you
suffered any evil? But if you will, it is no evil. Give thanks to God, and the evil
is changed into good. Say thou also as Job said, "Blessed be the name of the Lord
for ever." [Job 1:21] For tell me, what such great thing have you suffered? Has
disease befallen you? Yet it is nothing strange. For our body is mortal, and liable
to suffer. Has a want of possessions overtaken you? But these also are things to
be acquired, and again to be lost, and that abide here. But is it plots and false
accusations of enemies? But it is not we that are injured by these, but they who
are the authors of them. "For the soul," he says, "that sins, itself shall also die."
[Ezekiel 18:4] And he has not sinned who suffers the evil, but he who has done
the evil.
Upon him therefore that is dead you ought not to take revenge, but to pray
for him that you may deliver him from death. Do you not see how the bee dies
upon the sting? By that animal God instructs us not to grieve our neighbors. For
we ourselves receive death first. For by striking them perhaps we have pained
them for a little time, but we ourselves shall not live any longer, even as that
animal will not. And yet the Scripture commends it, saying that it is a worker,
whose work kings and private men make use of for their health. [Sirach 11:3]
But this does not preserve it from dying, but it must needs perish. And if its other
excellence does not deliver it when it does injury, much less will it us.
For indeed it is the part of the fiercest beasts, when no one has injured you,
to begin the injury, or rather not even of beasts. For they, if you permit them to
feed in the wilderness, and dost not by straitening them reduce them to necessity,
will never harm you, nor come near you, nor bite you, but will go their own way.

But you being a rational man, honored with so much rule and honor and
glory, do not even imitate the beasts in your conduct to your fellow-creature, but
you injure your brother, and devour him. And how will you be able to excuse
yourself? Do you not hear Paul saying, "Why not rather take wrong? Why not
rather be defrauded? Nay, but you yourselves do wrong, and defraud, and that
your brethren." [1 Corinthians 6:7-8] Do you see that suffering wrong consists in
doing wrong, but that to suffer wrongfully is to receive a benefit? For tell me, if
any one were to revile his rulers, if he were to insult those in power, whom does
he injure? Himself, or them? Clearly himself. Then he who insults a ruler insults
not him, but himself— and he that insults a Christian does he not through him
insult Christ? By no means, you say. What do you say? He that casts a stone at
the images of the king (Emperor), at whom does he cast a stone? Is it not at
himself? Then does he who casts a stone at the image of an earthly king, cast a
stone at himself, and does not he who insults the image of God (for man is the
image of God) injure himself?
How long shall we love riches? For I shall not cease exclaiming against
them: for they are the cause of everything. How long do we not get our fill of
this insatiable desire? What is the good of gold? I am astonished at the thing!
There is some enchantment in the business, that gold and silver should be so
highly valued among us. For our own souls indeed we have no regard, but those
lifeless images engross much attention. Whence is it that this disease has
invaded the world? Who shall be able to effect its destruction? What reason can
cut off this evil beast, and destroy it with utter destruction? The desire is deep
sown in the minds of men, even of those who seem to be religious. Let us be put
to shame by the commands of the Gospel. Words only lie there in Scripture, they
are nowhere shown by works.
And what is the specious plea of the many? I have children, one says, and I
am afraid lest I myself be reduced to the extremity of hunger and want, lest I
should stand in need of others. I am ashamed to beg. For that reason therefore do
you cause others to beg? I cannot, you say, endure hunger. For that reason do