SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.2.

of restraining sin. Hence just as by public authority a person is
lawfully deprived of life altogether on account of certain more
heinous sins, so is he deprived of a member on account of certain
lesser sins. But this is not lawful for a private individual, even with
the consent of the owner of the member, because this would involve
an injury to the community, to whom the man and all his parts
belong. If, however, the member be decayed and therefore a source
of corruption to the whole body, then it is lawful with the consent of
the owner of the member, to cut away the member for the welfare of
the whole body, since each one is entrusted with the care of his own
welfare. The same applies if it be done with the consent of the
person whose business it is to care for the welfare of the person who
has a decayed member: otherwise it is altogether unlawful to maim
anyone.
Reply to Objection 1: Nothing prevents that which is contrary to a
particular nature from being in harmony with universal nature: thus
death and corruption, in the physical order, are contrary to the
particular nature of the thing corrupted, although they are in keeping
with universal nature. In like manner to maim anyone, though
contrary to the particular nature of the body of the person maimed, is
nevertheless in keeping with natural reason in relation to the
common good.
Reply to Objection 2: The life of the entire man is not directed to
something belonging to man; on the contrary whatever belongs to
man is directed to his life. Hence in no case does it pertain to a
person to take anyone's life, except to the public authority to whom
is entrusted the procuring of the common good. But the removal of a
member can be directed to the good of one man, and consequently
in certain cases can pertain to him.
Reply to Objection 3: A member should not be removed for the sake
of the bodily health of the whole, unless otherwise nothing can be
done to further the good of the whole. Now it is always possible to
further one's spiritual welfare otherwise than by cutting off a
member, because sin is always subject to the will: and consequently
in no case is it allowable to maim oneself, even to avoid any sin
whatever. Hence Chrysostom, in his exposition on Mt. 19:12 (Hom.
lxii in Matth.), "There are eunuchs who have made themselves
eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven," says: "Not by maiming
themselves, but by destroying evil thoughts, for a man is accursed
who maims himself, since they are murderers who do such things."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.64, C.2.

And further on he says: "Nor is lust tamed thereby, on the contrary it
becomes more importunate, for the seed springs in us from other
sources, and chiefly from an incontinent purpose and a careless
mind: and temptation is curbed not so much by cutting off a member
as by curbing one's thoughts."