swelling pride; training their thoughts in every way for heaven? He calls it, too,
the Church "of God;" showing that it ought to be united. For if it be "of God," it
is united, and it is one, not in Corinth only, but also in all the world: for the
Church's name ([ἐκκλησία]: properly an assembly) is not a name of separation,
but of unity and concord.
"To the sanctified in Christ Jesus." Again the name of Jesus; the names of
men he finds no place for. But what is Sanctification? The Laver, the
Purification. For he reminds them of their own uncleanness, from which he had
freed them; and so persuades them to lowliness of mind; for not by their own
good deeds, but by the loving-kindness of God, had they been sanctified.
"Called to be Saints." For even this, to be saved by faith, is not says he, of
yourselves; for you did not first draw near, but were called; so that not even this
small matter is yours altogether. However, though you had drawn near,
accountable as you are for innumerable wickednesses, not even so would the
grace be yours, but God's. Hence also, writing to the Ephesians, he said,
[Ephesians 2:8] "By grace have you been saved through faith, and this not of
yourselves;" not even the faith is yours altogether; for you were not first with
your belief, but obeyed a call.
"With all who call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ." Not "of this or
that man," but "the Name of the Lord."
2. "In every place, both theirs and ours." For although the letter be written
to the Corinthians only, yet he makes mention of all the faithful that are in all the
earth; showing that the Church throughout the world must be one, however
separate in various places; and much more, that in Corinth. And though the place
separate, the Lord binds them together, being common to all. Wherefore also
uniting them he adds, "both theirs and ours." And this is far more powerful [to
unite], than the other [to separate]. For as men in one place, having many and
contrary masters, become distracted, and their one place helps them not to be of
one mind, their masters giving orders at variance with each other, and drawing
each their own way, according to what Christ says, [Matthew 6:24] "You cannot

serve God and Mammon;" so those in different places, if they have not different
lords but one only, are not by the places injured in respect of unanimity, the One
Lord binding them together. "I say not then, (so he speaks,) that with
Corinthians only, you being Corinthians ought to be of one mind, but with all
that are in the whole world, inasmuch as you have a common Master." This is
also why he has a second time added "our;" for since he had said, "the Name of
Jesus Christ our Lord," lest he should appear to the inconsiderate to be making a
distinction, he subjoins again, "both our Lord and theirs."
3. That my meaning may be clearer, I will read it according to its sense
thus: "Paul and Sosthenes to the Church of God which is in Corinth and to all
who call upon the Name of Him who is both our Lord and theirs in every place,
whether in Rome or wheresoever else they may be: grace unto you and peace
from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ."
Or again thus; which I also believe to be rather more correct: "Paul and
Sosthenes to those that are at Corinth, who have been sanctified, called to be
Saints, together with all who call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ in
place, both theirs and ours;" that is to say, "grace unto you, and peace unto you,
who are at Corinth, who have been sanctified and called;" not to you alone, but
"with all who in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ, our Lord and
theirs."
Now if our peace be of grace, why have you high thoughts? Why are You
so puffed up, being saved by grace? And if you have peace with God, why wish
to assign yourself to others? Since this is what separation comes to. For what if
you be at "peace" with this man, and with the other even find "grace?" My
prayer is that both these may be yours from God; both from Him I say, and
towards Him. For neither do they abide ([μένει], Savile in marg.) secure except
they enjoy the influence from above; nor unless God be their object will they
anything avail you: for it profits us nothing, though we be peaceful towards all
men, if we be at war with God; even as it is no harm to us, although by all men
we are held as enemies, if with God we are at peace. And again it is no gain to