But Peter makes no reply to these words; as yet he knew nothing clearly,
but still was learning. And observe, that not even the prediction is fully set forth;
for Jesus did not say, "I will change your name to Peter, and upon this rock I will
build My Church," but, "You shall be called Cephas." The former speech would
have expressed too great authority and power; for Christ does not immediately
nor at first declare all His power, but speaks for a while in a humbler tone; and
so, when He had given the proof of His Divinity, He puts it more authoritatively,
saying, "Blessed are you, Simon, because My Father has revealed it to you"; and
again, "You are Peter, and upon this rock I will build My Church." [Matthew
16:17-18] Him therefore He so named, and James and his brother He called
"sons of thunder." [Mark 3:17] Why then does He this? To show that it was He
who gave the old covenant, that it was He who altered names, who called Abram
"Abraham," and Sarai "Sarah," and Jacob "Israel." To many he assigned names
even from their birth, as to Isaac, and Samson, and to those in Isaiah and Hosea
[Isaiah 8:3; Hosea 1:4-9]; but to others He gave them after they had been named
by their parents, as to those we have mentioned, and to Joshua the son of Nun. It
was also a custom of the Ancients to give names from things, which in fact Leah
also has done; and this takes place not without cause, but in order that men may
have the appellation to remind them of the goodness of God, that a perpetual
memory of the prophecy conveyed by the names may sound in the ears of those
who receive it. Thus too He named John early, because they whose virtue was to
shine forth from their early youth, from that time received their names; while to
those who were to become great at a later period, the title also was given later.
3. But then they received each a different name, we now have all one name,
that which is greater than any, being called "Christians," and "sons of God," and
(His) "friends," and (His) "Body." For the very term itself is able more than all
those others to rouse us, and make us more zealous for the practice of virtue. Let
us not then act unworthily of the honor belonging to the title, considering the
excess of our dignity, we who are called Christ's; for so Paul has named us. Let
us bear in mind and respect the grandeur of the appellation. [1 Corinthians 3:23]

For if one who is said to be descended from some famous general, or one
otherwise distinguished, is proud to be called this or that man's son, and deems
the name a great honor, and strives in every way so as not to affix, by remissness
of his own, reproach to him after whom he is called; shall not we who are called
after the name, not of a general, nor any of the princes upon earth, nor Angel,
nor Archangel, nor Seraphim, but of the King of these Himself, shall not we
freely give even our very life, so as not to insult Him who has honored us? Do
you not know what honor the royal bands of shield-bearers and spearmen that
are about the king enjoy? So let us who have been deemed worthy to be near
Him, and much closer, and as much nearer than those just named, as the body is
closer to the head than they, let us, I say, use every means to be imitators of
Christ.
What then says Christ? "The foxes have holes, and birds of the air have
nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay His head." [Luke 9:58] Now if I
demand this of you, it will seem perhaps to most of you grievous and
burdensome; because therefore of your infirmity I speak not of such perfection,
but desire you not to be nailed to riches; and as I, because of the infirmity of the
many, retire somewhat from (demanding) the excess of virtue, I desire that you
do so and much more on the side of vice. I blame not those who have houses,
and lands, and wealth, and servants, but wish them to possess these things in a
safe and becoming way. And what is "a becoming way"? As masters, not as
slaves; so that they rule them, be not ruled by them; that they use, not abuse
them. This is why they are called, "things to be used," that we may employ them
on necessary services, not hoard them up; this is a domestic's office, that a
master's; it is for the slave to keep them, but for the lord and one who has great
authority to expend. You did not receive your wealth to bury, but to distribute.
Had God desired riches to be hoarded, He would not have given them to men,
but would have let them remain as they were in the earth; but because He wishes
them to be spent, therefore He has permitted us to have them, that we may
impart them to each other. And if we keep them to ourselves, we are no longer