SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.25, C.7.

which is the inclination of nature, for both inclinations flow from
Divine wisdom. Now we observe in the physical order that the
natural inclination in each thing is proportionate to the act or
movement that is becoming to the nature of that thing: thus in earth
the inclination of gravity is greater than in water, because it is
becoming to earth to be beneath water. Consequently the inclination
also of grace which is the effect of charity, must needs be
proportionate to those actions which have to be performed
outwardly, so that, to wit, the affection of our charity be more intense
towards those to whom we ought to behave with greater kindness.
We must, therefore, say that, even as regards the affection we ought
to love one neighbor more than another. The reason is that, since the
principle of love is God, and the person who loves, it must needs be
that the affection of love increases in proportion to the nearness to
one or the other of those principles. For as we stated above (Article
1), wherever we find a principle, order depends on relation to that
principle.
Reply to Objection 1: Love can be unequal in two ways: first on the
part of the good we wish our friend. In this respect we love all men
equally out of charity: because we wish them all one same generic
good, namely everlasting happiness. Secondly love is said to be
greater through its action being more intense: and in this way we
ought not to love all equally.
Or we may reply that we have unequal love for certain persons in two
ways: first, through our loving some and not loving others. As
regards beneficence we are bound to observe this inequality,
because we cannot do good to all: but as regards benevolence, love
ought not to be thus unequal. The other inequality arises from our
loving some more than others: and Augustine does not mean to
exclude the latter inequality, but the former, as is evident from what
he says of beneficence.
Reply to Objection 2: Our neighbors are not all equally related to
God; some are nearer to Him, by reason of their greater goodness,
and those we ought, out of charity, to love more than those who are
not so near to Him.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument considers the quantity of love
on the part of the good which we wish our friends.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.25, C.7.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.25, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether we ought to love those who are better

more those who are more closely united us?
Objection 1: It would seem that we ought to love those who are
better more than those who are more closely united to us. For that
which is in no way hateful seems more lovable than that which is
hateful for some reason: just as a thing is all the whiter for having
less black mixed with it. Now those who are connected with us are
hateful for some reason, according to Lk. 14:26: "If any man come to
Me, and hate not his father," etc. On the other hand good men are
not hateful for any reason. Therefore it seems that we ought to love
those who are better more than those who are more closely
connected with us.
Objection 2: Further, by charity above all, man is likened to God. But
God loves more the better man. Therefore man also, out of charity,
ought to love the better man more than one who is more closely
united to him.
Objection 3: Further, in every friendship that ought to be loved most
which has most to do with the foundation of that friendship: for, by
natural friendship we love most those who are connected with us by
nature, our parents for instance, or our children. Now the friendship
of charity is founded upon the fellowship of happiness, which has
more to do with better men than with those who are more closely
united to us. Therefore, out of charity, we ought to love better men
more than those who are more closely connected with us.
On the contrary, It is written (1 Tim. 5:8): "If any man have not care of
his own and especially of those of his house, he hath denied the
faith, and is worse than an infidel." Now the inward affection of
charity ought to correspond to the outward effect. Therefore charity
regards those who are nearer to us before those who are better.
I answer that, Every act should be proportionate both to its object
and to the agent. But from its object it takes its species, while, from
the power of the agent it takes the mode of its intensity: thus
movement has its species from the term to which it tends, while the
intensity of its speed arises from the disposition of the thing moved
and the power of the mover. Accordingly love takes its species from
its object, but its intensity is due to the lover.