of daily food; and so too has the soul, or rather that much more; and if it give
not, it becomes weaker and more vile. Let us then not neglect it when it is
perishing, choking. Many wounds it receives each day, by being lustful, angry,
slothful, reviling, revengeful, envious. It is therefore necessary to prepare also
remedies for it, and no small remedy is that of almsgiving, which can be placed
on every wound. For, "Give alms," it says, "of such things as you have, and
behold all things are clean unto you." [Luke 11:41] "Alms," not covetousness,
for that which proceeds from covetousness endures not, though thou give to
those who need. For almsgiving is that which is free from all injustice, "this"
makes all things clean. This is a thing better even than fasting, or lying on the
ground; they may be more painful and laborious, but this more profitable. It
enlightens the soul, makes it sleek, beautiful, and vigorous. Not so does the fruit
of the olive hold up the athletes, as this oil recovers the combatants of piety. Let
us then anoint our hands, that we may lift them up well against our adversary. He
that practices showing mercy to him that needs, will soon cease from
covetousness, he who continues in giving to the poor, will soon cease from
anger, and will never even be high-minded. For as the physician continually
tending wounded persons is easily sobered, beholding human nature in the
calamities of others; so we, if we enter upon the work of aiding the poor, shall
easily become truly wise, and shall not admire riches, nor deem present things
any great matter, but despise them all, and soaring aloft to heaven, shall easily
obtain the eternal blessings, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ; to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

Homily 82 on the Gospel of John
John 17:14
"I have given them Your word; and the world has hated them, because they are
not of the world, even as I am not of the world."
1. When having become virtuous we are persecuted by the wicked, or when
being desirous of virtue we are mocked at by them, let us not be distracted or
angry. For this is the natural course of things, and everywhere virtue is wont to
engender hatred from wicked men. For envying those who desire to live
properly, and thinking to prepare an excuse for themselves if they can overthrow
the credit of others, they hate them as having pursuits opposite to their own, and
use every means to shame their way of life. But let not us grieve, for this is a
mark of virtue. Wherefore Christ also says, "If you were of the world, the world
would love its own." [John 15:19] And in another place again, "Woe unto you
when all men shall speak well of you." [Luke 6:26] Wherefore also He says here,
"I have given them Your word, and the world has hated them." Again He tells the
reason for which they were worthy to obtain much care from the Father; "For
Your sake," He says, "they have been hated, and for Your word's sake"; so that
they would be entitled to all providential care.