THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.30, C.2.

manner than in her flesh."
Secondly, that she might be a more certain witness of this mystery,
being instructed therein by God.
Thirdly, that she might offer to God the free gift of her obedience:
which she proved herself right ready to do, saying: "Behold the
handmaid of the Lord."
Fourthly, in order to show that there is a certain spiritual wedlock
between the Son of God and human nature. Wherefore in the
Annunciation the Virgin's consent was besought in lieu of that of the
entire human nature.
Reply to Objection 1: The prophecy of predestination is fulfilled
without the causality of our will; not without its consent.
Reply to Objection 2: The Blessed Virgin did indeed believe explicitly
in the future Incarnation; but, being humble, she did not think such
high things of herself. Consequently she required instruction in this
matter.
Reply to Objection 3: The spiritual conception of Christ through faith
is preceded by the preaching of the faith, for as much as "faith is by
hearing" (Rm. 10:17). Yet man does not know for certain thereby that
he has grace; but he does know that the faith, which he has received,
is true.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.30, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the annunciation should have been made

by an angel to the Blessed Virgin?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Annunciation should not have
been made by an angel to our Blessed Lady. For revelations to the
highest angels are made immediately by God, as Dionysius says
(Coel. Hier. vii). But the Mother of God is exalted above all the
angels. Therefore it seems that the mystery of the Incarnation should
have been announced to her by God immediately, and not by an
angel.
Objection 2: Further, if in this matter it behooved the common order
to be observed, by which Divine things are announced to men by
angels; in like manner Divine things are announced to a woman by a
man: wherefore the Apostle says (1 Cor. 14:34,35): "Let women keep
silence in the churches . . . but if they would learn anything, let them
ask their husbands at home." Therefore it seems that the mystery of
the Incarnation should have been announced to the Blessed Virgin
by some man: especially seeing that Joseph, her husband, was
instructed thereupon by an angel, as is related (Mt. 1:20,21)
Objection 3: Further, none can becomingly announce what he knows
not. But the highest angels did not fully know the mystery of the
Incarnation: wherefore Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. vii) that the
question, "Who is this that cometh from Edom?" (Is. 63:1) is to be
understood as made by them. Therefore it seems that the
announcement of the Incarnation could not be made becomingly by
any angel.
Objection 4: Further, greater things should be announced by
messengers of greater dignity. But the mystery of the Incarnation is
the greatest of all things announced by angels to men. It seems,
therefore, if it behooved to be announced by an angel at all, that this
should have been done by an angel of the highest order. But Gabriel
is not of the highest order, but of the order of archangels, which is
the last but one: wherefore the Church sings: "We know that the
archangel Gabriel brought thee a message from God" [Feast of
Purification B.V.M. ix Resp. Brev. O.P.]. Therefore this
announcement was not becomingly made by the archangel Gabriel.
On the contrary, It is written (Lk. 1:26): "The angel Gabriel was sent