If, however, a thing is called mutable by a power in itself, thus also in
some manner every creature is mutable. For every creature has a
twofold power, active and passive; and I call that power passive
which enables anything to attain its perfection either in being, or in
attaining to its end. Now if the mutability of a thing be considered
according to its power for being, in that way all creatures are not
mutable, but those only in which what is potential in them is
consistent with non-being. Hence, in the inferior bodies there is
mutability both as regards substantial being, inasmuch as their
matter can exist with privation of their substantial form, and also as
regards their accidental being, supposing the subject to coexist with
privation of accident; as, for example, this subject "man" can exist
with "not-whiteness" and can therefore be changed from white to notwhite. But supposing the accident to be such as to follow on the
essential principles of the subject, then the privation of such an
accident cannot coexist with the subject. Hence the subject cannot
be changed as regards that kind of accident; as, for example, snow
cannot be made black. Now in the celestial bodies matter is not
consistent with privation of form, because the form perfects the
whole potentiality of the matter; therefore these bodies are not
mutable as to substantial being, but only as to locality, because the
subject is consistent with privation of this or that place. On the other
hand incorporeal substances, being subsistent forms which,
although with respect to their own existence are as potentiality to
act, are not consistent with the privation of this act; forasmuch as
existence is consequent upon form, and nothing corrupts except it
lose its form. Hence in the form itself there is no power to nonexistence; and so these kinds of substances are immutable and
invariable as regards their existence. Wherefore Dionysius says (Div.
Nom. iv) that "intellectual created substances are pure from
generation and from every variation, as also are incorporeal and
immaterial substances." Still, there remains in them a twofold
mutability: one as regards their potentiality to their end; and in that
way there is in them a mutability according to choice from good to
evil, as Damascene says (De Fide ii, 3,4); the other as regards place,
inasmuch as by their finite power they attain to certain fresh places--which cannot be said of God, who by His infinity fills all places, as
was shown above (Question 8, Article 2).
Thus in every creature there is a potentiality to change either as
regards substantial being as in the case of things corruptible; or as
regards locality only, as in the case of the celestial bodies; or as
regards the order to their end, and the application of their powers to