things. And one may see Apollo and Bacchus worshipped along with these
creeping things. And some of the philosophers even lifted up to Heaven bulls,
and scorpions, and dragons, and all the rest of that vanity. For in all parts did the
devil zealously strive to bring men down before the images of creeping things,
and to range beneath the most senseless of all things, him whom God has willed
to lift up above the heavens. And it is not from this only, but also from other
grounds, that you will see their chief man to come under the remarks now made.
For having made a collection of the poets, and having said that we should
believe them upon matters relating to God, as having accurate knowledge, he has
nothing else to bring forward but the "linked sweetness" of these absurdities, and
then says, that this utterly ludicrous trifling is to be held for true.
Ver. 24. "Wherefore also God gave them up to uncleanness, through the
lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves."
Hence he shows, that even of the perversion of the laws it was ungodliness
which was the cause, but He "gave them up," here is, let them alone. For as he
that has the command in an army, if upon the battle lying heavy upon him he
retreat and go away, gives up his soldiers to the enemies not by thrusting them
himself, but by stripping them of his own assistance; thus too did God leave
those that were not minded to receive what comes from Him, but were the first
to bound off from Him, though Himself having wholly fulfilled His own part.
But consider; He set before them, for a form of doctrine, the world; He gave
them reason, and an understanding capable of perceiving what was needful.
None of these things did the men of that day use unto salvation, but they
perverted to the opposite what they had received. What was to be done then? To
drag them by compulsion and force? But this were not to make them virtuous. It
remained then, after that, for Him to leave them alone, and this He did too, that
in this way, if by no other, having by trial come to know the things they lusted
after, they might flee from what was so shameful (3 manuscripts add [εἰκότως],
and with reason). For if any that was a king's son, dishonoring his father, should
choose to be with robbers and murderers, and them that break up tombs, and

prefer their doings to his father's house; the father leaves him, say, so that by
actual trial, he may learn the extravagance of his own madness. But how comes
he to mention no other sin, as murder, for instance, or covetousness, or other
such besides, but only unchasteness? He seems to me to hint at his audience at
the time, and those who were to receive the Epistle. "To uncleanness, to dishonor
their own bodies between themselves."
Note the emphasis here, as it is most severe. For they stood not in need of
any others, it means, to do insolent violence to them, but the very treatment the
enemies would have shown them, this they did to themselves. And then, taking
up the charge again, he says,
Ver. 25. "Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and
served the creature more than the Creator."
Things which were matter for utter scorn, he puts down specially, but what
seemed of a graver cast than the rest, in general terms; and by all he shows, that
serving the creature is Grecian. And see how strong he makes his assertion, for
he does not say, barely, "they served the creature," but "more than the Creator:"
thus everywhere giving fresh force to the charge, and, by the comparison, taking
from them all ground of mitigation. "Who is blessed forever. Amen." But by this,
he means, He was not any whit injured. For Himself abides "blessed for ever."
Here he shows, that it was not in self-defence that He left them alone, inasmuch
as He suffered nothing Himself. For even if these treated Him insolently, yet He
was not insolently treated, neither was any scathe done to the bearings of His
glory, but He abides continually blessed. For if it often happen, that man through
philosophy would not feel the insults men offered him, much less would God,
the imperishable and unalterable Nature, the unchangeable and immovable
Glory.
For men are in this respect made like God, when they do not feel what is
inflicted by them who would do them despite, and are neither insulted of others
who insult them, nor beaten of them when beating them, nor made scorn of when
they make scorn of them. And how in the nature of things can this be? It may be