ii). But if a statue is remade from the same brass, it will not be the
same identically. Therefore much less will it be identically the same
man if he be reformed from the same ashes.
On the contrary, It is written (Job 19:27): "Whom I myself shall
see . . . and not another," and he is speaking of the vision after the
resurrection. Therefore the same identical man will rise again.
Further, Augustine says (De Trin. viii, 5) that "to rise again is naught
else but to live again." Now unless the same identical man that died
return to life, he would not be said to live again. Therefore he would
not rise again, which is contrary to faith.
I answer that, The necessity of holding the resurrection arises from
this---that man may obtain the last end for which he was made; for
this cannot be accomplished in this life, nor in the life of the
separated soul, as stated above (Question 75, Articles 1,2):
otherwise man would have been made in vain, if he were unable to
obtain the end for which he was made. And since it behooves the
end to be obtained by the selfsame thing that was made for that end,
lest it appear to be made without purpose, it is necessary for the
selfsame man to rise again; and this is effected by the selfsame soul
being united to the selfsame body. For otherwise there would be no
resurrection properly speaking, if the same man were not reformed.
Hence to maintain that he who rises again is not the selfsame man is
heretical, since it is contrary to the truth of Scripture which
proclaims the resurrection.
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher is speaking of repetition by
movement or natural change. For he shows the difference between
the recurrence that occurs in generation and corruption and that
which is observed in the movement of the heavens. Because the
selfsame heaven by local movement returns to the beginning of its
movement, since it has a moved incorruptible substance. On the
other hand, things subject to generation and corruption return by
generation to specific but not numerical identity, because from man
blood is engendered, from blood seed, and so on until a man is
begotten, not the selfsame man, but the man specifically. In like
manner from fire comes air, from air water, from water earth, whence
fire is produced, not the selfsame fire, but the same in species.
Hence it is clear that the argument, so far as the meaning of the
Philosopher is concerned, is not to the point.

We may also reply that the form of other things subject to generation
and corruption is not subsistent of itself, so as to be able to remain
after the corruption of the composite, as it is with the rational soul.
For the soul, even after separation from the body, retains the being
which accrues to it when in the body, and the body is made to share
that being by the resurrection, since the being of the body and the
being of the soul in the body are not distinct from one another,
otherwise the union of soul and body would be accidental.
Consequently there has been no interruption in the substantial being
of man, as would make it impossible for the self-same man to return
on account of an interruption in his being, as is the case with other
things that are corrupted, the being of which is interrupted
altogether, since their form remains not, and their matter remains
under another being.
Nevertheless neither does the self-same man recur by natural
generation, because the body of the man begotten is not composed
of the whole body of his begetter: hence his body is numerically
distinct, and consequently his soul and the whole man.
Reply to Objection 2: There are two opinions about humanity and
about any form of a whole. For some say that the form of the whole
and the form of the part are really one and the same: but that it is
called the form of the part inasmuch as it perfects the matter, and the
form of the whole inasmuch as the whole specific nature results
therefrom. According to this opinion humanity is really nothing else
than the rational soul: and so, since the selfsame rational soul is
resumed, there will be the same identical humanity, which will
remain even after death, albeit not under the aspect of humanity,
because the composite does not derive the specific nature from a
separated humanity.
The other opinion, which seems nearer the truth, is Avicenna's,
according to whom the form of the whole is not the form of a part
only, nor some other form besides the form of the part, but is the
whole resulting from the composition of form and matter, embracing
both within itself. This form of the whole is called the essence or
quiddity. Since then at the resurrection there will be the selfsame
body, and the selfsame rational soul, there will be, of necessity, the
same humanity.
The first argument proving that there will be a distinction of