FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: The same power regards opposites, but it is
not referred to them in the same way. Accordingly, the will is referred
both to good and evil: but to good by desiring it: to evil, by shunning
it. Wherefore the actual desire of good is called "volition", meaning
thereby the act of the will; for it is in this sense that we are now
speaking of the will. On the other hand, the shunning of evil is better
described as "nolition": wherefore, just as volition is of good, so
nolition is of evil.
Reply to Objection 2: A rational power is not to be directed to all
opposite purposes, but to those which are contained under its
proper object; for no power seeks other than its proper object. Now,
the object of the will is good. Wherefore the will can be directed to
such opposite purposes as are contained under good, such as to be
moved or to be at rest, to speak or to be silent, and such like: for the
will can be directed to either under the aspect of good.
Reply to Objection 3: That which is not a being in nature, is
considered as a being in the reason, wherefore negations and
privations are said to be "beings of reason." In this way, too, future
things, in so far as they are apprehended, are beings. Accordingly, in
so far as such like are beings, they are apprehended under the
aspect of good; and it is thus that the will is directed to them.
Wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that "to lack evil is
considered as a good."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.8, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether volition is of the end only, or also of the

means?
Objection 1: It would seem that volition is not of the means, but of
the end only. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 2) that "volition is
of the end, while choice is of the means."
Objection 2: Further, "For objects differing in genus there are
corresponding different powers of the soul" (Ethic. vi, 1). Now, the
end and the means are in different genera of good: because the end,
which is a good either of rectitude or of pleasure, is in the genus
"quality," or "action," or "passion"; whereas the good which is
useful, and is directed to and end, is in the genus "relation" (Ethic. i,
6). Therefore, if volition is of the end, it is not of the means.
Objection 3: Further, habits are proportionate to powers, since they
are perfections thereof. But in those habits which are called practical
arts, the end belongs to one, and the means to another art; thus the
use of a ship, which is its end, belongs to the (art of the) helmsman;
whereas the building of the ship, which is directed to the end,
belongs to the art of the shipwright. Therefore, since volition is of
the end, it is not of the means.
On the contrary, In natural things, it is by the same power that a
thing passes through the middle space, and arrives at the terminus.
But the means are a kind of middle space, through which one arrives
at the end or terminus. Therefore, if volition is of the end, it is also of
the means.
I answer that, The word "voluntas" sometimes designates the power
of the will, sometimes its act. Accordingly, if we speak of the will as a
power, thus it extends both to the end and to the means. For every
power extends to those things in which may be considered the
aspect of the object of that power in any way whatever: thus the
sight extends to all things whatsoever that are in any way colored.
Now the aspect of good, which is the object of the power of the will,
may be found not only in the end, but also in the means.
If, however, we speak of the will in regard to its act, then, properly
speaking, volition is of the end only. Because every act denominated
from a power, designates the simple act of that power: thus "to