dust; today a burning fire, tomorrow smouldering ashes. But spiritual things are
not so, they ever remain shining and blooming, and becoming brighter every
day. That wealth never perishes, never departs, never ceases, never brings with it
care or envy or blame, destroys not the body, corrupts not the soul, is without ill
will, heaps not up malice; all which things attend on the other kind of wealth.
That honor lifts not men into folly, does not make them puffed up, never ceases
nor is dimmed. Again, the rest and delight of heaven endures continually, ever
being immovable and immortal, one cannot find its end or limit. This life then let
us desire, for if we do so we shall make no account of present things, but shall
despise and mock at them all, and though one should bid us enter into kingly
halls, we shall not while we have this hope choose to do so; yet nothing (earthly)
seems more near to happiness than such a permission; but to those who are
possessed by love of heaven, even this seems little and mean, and worthy of no
account. Nothing which comes to an end is to be much desired; whatever ceases,
and today is and tomorrow is not, even though it be very great, yet seems to be
very little and contemptible. Then let us not cling to fleeting things which slip
away and depart, but to those which are enduring and immovable. To which may
we all attain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever
and world without end. Amen.

Homily 45 on the Gospel of John
John 6:28-30
"Then said they unto Him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of
God? Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that you
believe in Him whom He has sent. They said therefore unto Him, What sign do
you show then, that we may see and believe you? What do you work?"
1. There is nothing worse, nothing more shameful, than gluttony; it makes
the mind gross, and the soul carnal; it blinds, and permits not to see clearly.
Observe, for instance, how this is the case with the Jews; for because they were
intent upon gluttony, entirely occupied with worldly things, and without any
spiritual thoughts, though Christ leads them on by ten thousand sayings, sharp
and at the same time forbearing, even thus they arise not, but continue groveling
below. For consider; He said to them, "You seek Me, not because ye saw the
miracles, but because ye did eat of the bread, and were filled"; He touched them
by the reproof, He showed them what food they ought to seek, saying, "Labor
not for the meat that perishes"; He set before them the prize, saying, "but that
which endures unto everlasting life"; then provided a remedy for what might
have been an objection, by declaring that He was sent from the Father.
What then did they? As though they had heard nothing, they said, "What
shall we do, that we might work the works of God?" This they said, not that they
might learn and do them, (as the sequel shows,) but to induce Him again to
supply them with food, and desiring to persuade Him to satisfy them. What then
says Christ? "This is the work of God, that you believe in Him whom He has
sent." On this they asked, "What sign do you show, that we may see and
believe?"