"The first shall be last, and the last first;" He shows that justly do these things
come to pass; which more than anything stung the Jews, and goaded them far
more grievously than their overthrow, to see those from the Gentiles brought into
their privileges, and into far greater than theirs.
Then in order that not even these should put confidence in their faith alone,
He discourses unto them also concerning the judgment to be passed upon wicked
actions; to them that have not yet believed, of coming unto Him by faith, and to
them that have believed, of care with respect to their life. For the garment is life
and practice.
And yet the calling was of grace; wherefore then does He take a strict
account? Because although to be called and to be cleansed was of grace, yet,
when called and clothed in clean garments, to continue keeping them so, this is
of the diligence of them that are called.
The being called was not of merit, but of grace. It was fit therefore to make
a return for the grace, and not to show forth such great wickedness after the
honor. "But I have not enjoyed," one may say, "so much advantage as the Jews."
Nay, but you have enjoyed far greater benefits. For what things were being
prepared for them throughout all their time, these you have received at once, not
being worthy. Wherefore Paul also says, "And that the Gentiles might glorify
God for His mercy." [Romans 15:9] For what things were due to them, these you
have received.
Wherefore also great is the punishment appointed for them that have been
remiss. For as they did despite by not coming, so also thou by thus sitting down
with a corrupt life. For to come in with filthy garments is this namely, to depart
hence having one's life impure; wherefore also he was speechless.
Do you see how, although the fact was so manifest, He does not punish at
once, until he himself, who has sinned, has passed the sentence? For by having
nothing to reply he condemned himself, and so is taken away to the unutterable
torments.
For do not now, on hearing of darkness, suppose he is punished by this, by

sending into a place where there is no light only, but where "there is" also
"weeping and gnashing of teeth." [Matthew 22:13] And this He says, indicating
the intolerable pains.
Hear ye, as many as having partaken of the mysteries, and having been
present at the marriage, clothe your souls with filthy deeds. Hear whence you
were called.
From the highway. Being what? Lame and halt in soul, which is a much
more grievous thing than the mutilation of the body. Reverence the love of Him,
who called you, and let no one continue to have filthy garments, but let each of
you busy himself about the clothing of your soul.
Hear, you women; hear, you men; we need not these garments that are
bespangled with gold, that adorn our outward parts, but those others, that adorn
the inward. Whilst we have these former, it is difficult to put on those latter. It is
not possible at the same time to deck both soul and body. It is not possible at the
same time both to serve mammon, and to obey Christ as we ought.
Let us put off us therefore this grievous tyranny. For neither if any one were
to adorn your house by hanging it with golden curtains, and were to make you sit
there in rags, naked, would you endure it with meekness. But lo, now you do this
to yourself, decking the house of your soul, I mean the body, with curtains
beyond number, but leaving the soul itself to sit in rags. Do you not know that
the king ought to be adorned more than the city? So therefore while for the city
hangings are prepared of linen, for the king there is a purple robe and a diadem.
Even so do thou wrap the body with a much meaner dress, but the mind do thou
clothe in purple, and put a crown on it, and set it on a high and conspicuous
chariot. For now you are doing the opposite, decking the city in various ways,
but suffering the king, the mind, to be dragged bound after the brute passions.
Rememberest thou not, that you are bidden to a marriage, and to God's
marriage? Considerest thou not how the soul that is bidden ought to enter into
those chambers, clad, and decked with fringes of gold.
3. Will you that I show you them that are clad thus, them that have on a