overshot the injunctions of Christ; and are you afraid of that which is just their
measure? What plea then will you have, when others are leaping beyond the
bounds, and you yourself too slothful for what is enacted?
Thus, you we admonish to give alms of such things as you have, but
another has even stripped himself of all his possessions: you we require to live
chastely with your wife, but another has not so much as entered into marriage:
and you we entreat not to be envious, but another we find giving up even his
own life for charity: you again we entreat to be lenient in judgments, and not
severe to them that sin, but another, even when smitten, has turned the other
cheek also.
What then shall we say, I pray you? What excuse shall we make, not doing
even these things, when others go so far beyond us? And they would not have
gone beyond us, had not the thing been very easy. For which pines away, he who
envies other men's blessings, or he who takes pleasure with them, and rejoices?
Which eyes all things with suspicion and continual trembling, the chaste man, or
the adulterer? Which is cheered by good hopes, he that spoils by violence, or he
that shows mercy, and imparts of his own to the needy?
Let us then bear in mind these things, and not be torpid in our career for
virtue's sake; but having stripped ourselves with all readiness for these glorious
wrestlings, let us labor for a little while, that we may win the perpetual and
imperishable crowns; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and
ever. Amen.

## Homily 40 on Matthew

Matthew 12:9-10.
"And when He was departed thence, He went into their synagogue: and,
behold, a man which had his hand withered."
Again He heals on a Sabbath day, vindicating what had been done by His
disciples. And the other evangelists indeed say, that He "set" the man "in the
midst," and asked them, "If it was lawful to do good on the Sabbath days."
See the tender bowels of the Lord. "He set him in the midst," that by the
sight He might subdue them; that overcome by the spectacle they might cast
away their wickedness, and out of a kind of shame towards the man, cease from
their savage ways. But they, ungentle and inhuman, choose rather to hurt the
fame of Christ, than to see this person made whole: in both ways betraying their
wickedness; by their warring against Christ, and by their doing so with such
contentiousness, as even to treat with despite His mercies to other men.
And while the other evangelists say, He asked the question, this one says, it
was asked of Him. "And they asked Him," so it stands, "saying, Is it lawful to
heal on the Sabbath days? That they might accuse Him." [Matthew 12:10] And it
is likely that both took place. For being unholy wretches, and well assured that
He would doubtless proceed to the healing, they hastened to take Him
beforehand with their question, thinking in this way to hinder Him. And this is
why they asked, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath days?" not for information,
but that "they might accuse Him." Yet surely the work was enough, if it were
really their wish to accuse Him; but they desired to find a handle in His words
too, preparing for themselves beforehand an abundance of arguments.
But He in His love towards man does this also: He answers them, teaching
His own meekness, and turning it all back upon them; and points out their
inhumanity. And He "sets" the man "in the midst;" not in fear of them, but