FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.4.

has no coercive power, such as the law should have, in order to
prove an efficacious inducement to virtue, as the Philosopher says
(Ethic. x, 9). But this coercive power is vested in the whole people or
in some public personage, to whom it belongs to inflict penalties, as
we shall state further on (Question 92, Article 2, ad 3; SS, Question
64, Article 3). Wherefore the framing of laws belongs to him alone.
Reply to Objection 3: As one man is a part of the household, so a
household is a part of the state: and the state is a perfect
community, according to Polit. i, 1. And therefore, as the good of one
man is not the last end, but is ordained to the common good; so too
the good of one household is ordained to the good of a single state,
which is a perfect community. Consequently he that governs a
family, can indeed make certain commands or ordinances, but not
such as to have properly the force of law.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.90, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether promulgation is essential to a law?

Objection 1: It would seem that promulgation is not essential to a
law. For the natural law above all has the character of law. But the
natural law needs no promulgation. Therefore it is not essential to a
law that it be promulgated.
Objection 2: Further, it belongs properly to a law to bind one to do or
not to do something. But the obligation of fulfilling a law touches not
only those in whose presence it is promulgated, but also others.
Therefore promulgation is not essential to a law.
Objection 3: Further, the binding force of a law extends even to the
future, since "laws are binding in matters of the future," as the jurists
say (Cod. 1, tit. De lege et constit. leg. vii). But promulgation
concerns those who are present. Therefore it is not essential to a
law.
On the contrary, It is laid down in the Decretals, dist. 4, that "laws are
established when they are promulgated."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), a law is imposed on others
by way of a rule and measure. Now a rule or measure is imposed by
being applied to those who are to be ruled and measured by it.
Wherefore, in order that a law obtain the binding force which is
proper to a law, it must needs be applied to the men who have to be
ruled by it. Such application is made by its being notified to them by
promulgation. Wherefore promulgation is necessary for the law to
obtain its force.
Thus from the four preceding articles, the definition of law may be
gathered; and it is nothing else than an ordinance of reason for the
common good, made by him who has care of the community, and
promulgated.
Reply to Objection 1: The natural law is promulgated by the very fact
that God instilled it into man's mind so as to be known by him
naturally.
Reply to Objection 2: Those who are not present when a law is
promulgated, are bound to observe the law, in so far as it is notified