occasion of being at peace? Wherefore are we all one body? And now are we
one body? Because of peace we are one body, and because we are one body, we
are at peace. But why said he not, "Let the peace of God be victorious," but "be
umpire"? He made her the more honorable. He would not have the evil thought
to come to wrestle with her, but to stand below. And the very name "prize"
cheered the hearer. For if she have given the prize to the good thought, however
impudently the other behave, it is thereafter of no use. And besides, the other
being aware that, perform what feats he might, he should not receive the prize;
however he might puff, and attempt still more vehement onsets, would desist as
laboring without profit. And he well added, "And be thankful." For this is to be
thankful, and very effectively, to deal with his fellow-servants as God does with
himself, to submit himself to the Master, to obey; to express his gratitude for all
things, even though one insult him, or beat him.
For in truth he that confesses thanks due to God for what he suffers, will not
revenge himself on him that has done him wrong, since he at least that takes
revenge, acknowledges no gratitude. But let not us follow him (that exacted) the
hundred pence, lest we hear, "Thou wicked servant," for nothing is worse than
this ingratitude. So that they who revenge are ungrateful.
But why did he begin his list with fornication? For having said, "Mortify
your members which are upon the earth" [Colossians 3:5], he immediately says,
"fornication"; and so he does almost everywhere. Because this passion has the
greatest sway. For even when writing his Epistle to the Thessalonians he did the
same. [1 Thessalonians 4:3] And what wonder? Since to Timothy even he says,
"Keep yourself pure" [1 Timothy 5:22]; and again elsewhere, "Follow after
peace with all men, and the sanctification," without which "no man shall see the
Lord." [Hebrews 12:14] "Put to death," he says, "your members." You know of
what sort that is which is dead, namely, hated, loathed, dropping to decay. If you
put anything to death, it does not when dead continue dead, but presently is
corrupted, like the body. Extinguish then the heat; and nothing that is dead will
continue. He shows one having the same thing in hand, which Christ wrought in

the Laver; therefore also he calls them "members," as though introducing some
champion, thus advancing his discourse to greater emphasis. And he well said,
"Which are upon the earth," for here they continue, and here they are corrupted,
far rather than these our members. So that not so truly is the body of the earth, as
sin is earthly, for the former indeed appears even beautiful at times, but those
members never. And those members lust after all things that are upon the earth.
If the eye be such, it sees not the things in the heavens; if the ear, if the hand, if
you mention any other member whatsoever. The eye sees bodies, and beauties,
and riches; these are the things of earth, with these it is delighted: the ear with
soft strains, and harp, and pipe, and filthy talking; these are things which are
concerned with earth.
When therefore he has placed his hearers above, near the throne, he then
says, "Mortify your members which are upon the earth." For it is not possible to
stand above with these members; for there is nothing there for them to work
upon. And this clay is worse than that, for that clay indeed becomes gold, "for
this corruptible," he says, "must put on incorruption" [1 Corinthians 15:53], but
this clay can never be retempered more. So that these members are rather "upon
the earth" than those. Therefore he said not, "of the earth," but, "which are upon
the earth," for it is possible that these should not be upon the earth. For it is
necessary that these should be "upon the earth," but that those should, is not
necessary. For when the ear hears nothing of what is here uttered, but only in the
heavens, when the eye sees nothing of what is here, but only what is above, it is
not "upon the earth"; when the mouth speaks nothing of the things here, it is not
"upon the earth"; when the hand does no evil thing— these are not of things
"upon the earth," but of those in the heavens.
So Christ also says, "If your right eye causes you to stumble," that is, if you
look unchastely, "cut it out" [Matthew 5:29], that is, your evil thought. And he
(Paul) seems to me to speak of "fornication, uncleanness, passion, desire" as the
same, namely fornication: by means of all these expressions drawing us away
from that thing. For in truth this is "a passion"; and like as the body is subject to