Paul requires of us such a conversation. But we go back to our former vomit,
thus after the youth of grace building up the old age of sins. For either the love
of money, or the slavery to desires not convenient, or any other sin whatsoever,
uses to make the worker thereof old. "Now that which decays and waxes old is
ready to vanish away." [Hebrews 8:13] For there is no body, there surely is none,
to be seen as palsied by length of time, as a soul is decayed and tottering with
many sins. Such an one gets carried on to the last degree of doting, yielding
indistinct sounds, like men that are very old and crazed, being surcharged with
rheum, and great distortion of mind, and forgetfulness, and with scales upon its
eyes, and disgustful to men, and an easy prey to the devil. Such then are the
souls of sinners; not so those of the righteous, for they are youthful and wellfavored, and are in the very prime of life throughout, ever ready for any fight or
struggle. But those of sinners, if they receive even a small shock, straightway fall
and are undone. And it was this the Prophet made appear, when he said, that like
as the chaff which the wind scatters from the face of the earth [Psalm 1:4], thus
are they that live in sin whirled to and fro, and exposed to every sort of harm.
For they neither see like a healthy person, nor hear with simplicity, they speak
not articulately, but are oppressed with great shortness of breath. They have their
mouth overflowing with spittle. And would it were but spittle, and nothing
offensive! But now they send forth words more fetid than any mire, and what is
worst, they have not power even to spit this saliva of words away from them, but
taking it in their hand with much lewdness, they smear it on again, so as to be
coagulating, and hard to perspire through. Perhaps you are sickened with this
description. Ought ye not, then to be more so at the reality? For if these things
when happening in the body are disgustful, much more when in the soul. Such
was that son who wasted out all his share, and was reduced to the greatest
wretchedness, and was in a feebler state than any imbecile or disordered person.
But when he was willing, he became suddenly young by his decision alone and
his change. For as soon as he had said, "I will return to my Father," this one
word conveyed to him all blessings; or rather not the bare word, but the deed

which he added to the word. For he did not say, "Let me go back," and then stay
there; but said, Let me go back, and went back, and returned the whole of that
way. Thus let us also do; and even if we have gotten carried beyond the
boundary, let us go up to our Father's house, and not stay lingering over the
length of the journey. For if we be willing, the way back again is easy and very
speedy. Only let us leave the strange and foreign land; for this is what sin is,
drawing us far away from our Father's house; let us leave her then, that we may
speedily return to the house of our Father. For our Father has a natural yearning
towards us, and will honor us if we be changed, no less than those that are
unattainted, if we change, but even more, just as the father showed that son the
greater honor. For he had greater pleasure himself at receiving back his son. And
how am I to go back again? One may say. Do but put a beginning upon the
business, and the whole is done. Stay from vice, and go no farther into it, and
you have laid hold of the whole already. For as in the case of the sick, being no
worse may be a beginning of getting better, so is the case with vice also. Go no
further, and then your deeds of wickedness will have an end. And if you do so
for two days, you will keep off on the third day more easily; and after three days
you will add ten, then twenty, then an hundred, then your whole life. (Cf. Hom.
xvii. on St. Matt. p. 267, O.T.) For the further you go on, the easier will you see
the way to be, and you will stand on the summit itself, and wilt at once enjoy
many goods. For so it was when the prodigal came back, there were flutes, and
harps, and dancings, and feasts, and assemblings: and he who might have called
his son to account for his ill-timed extravagance, and flight to such a distance,
did nothing of the sort, but looked upon him as unattainted, and could not find it
in him even to use the language of reproach, or rather, even to mention barely to
him the former things, but threw himself upon him, and kissed him, and killed
the calf, and put a robe upon him, and placed on him abundant honors. Let us
then, as we have such examples before us, be of good cheer and keep from
despair. For He is not so well pleased with being called Master, as Father, nor
with having a slave as with having a son. And this is what He likes rather than