SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.3.

supernatural fellowship, so the comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as God is supremely knowable in Himself
yet not to us, on account of a defect in our knowledge which
depends on sensible things, so too, God is supremely lovable in
Himself, in as much as He is the object of happiness. But He is not
supremely lovable to us in this way, on account of the inclination of
our appetite towards visible goods. Hence it is evident that for us to
love God above all things in this way, it is necessary that charity be
infused into our hearts.
Reply to Objection 3: When it is said that in us charity proceeds from
"a pure heart, and a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith," this
must be referred to the act of charity which is aroused by these
things. Or again, this is said because the aforesaid acts dispose man
to receive the infusion of charity. The same remark applies to the
saying of Augustine (Tract. ix in prim. canon. Joan.): "Fear leads to
charity," and of a gloss on Mt. 1:2: "Faith begets hope, and hope
charity."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether charity is infused according to the

capacity of our natural gifts?
Objection 1: It would seem that charity is infused according to the
capacity of our natural gifts. For it is written (Mt. 25:15) that "He gave
to every one according to his own virtue." Now, in man, none but
natural virtue precedes charity, since there is no virtue without
charity, as stated above (Question 23, Article 7). Therefore God
infuses charity into man according to the measure of his natural
virtue.
Objection 2: Further, among things ordained towards one another,
the second is proportionate to the first: thus we find in natural things
that the form is proportionate to the matter, and in gratuitous gifts,
that glory is proportionate to grace. Now, since charity is a
perfection of nature, it is compared to the capacity of nature as
second to first. Therefore it seems that charity is infused according
to the capacity of nature.
Objection 3: Further, men and angels partake of happiness
according to the same measure, since happiness is alike in both,
according to Mt. 22:30 and Lk. 20:36. Now charity and other
gratuitous gifts are bestowed on the angels, according to their
natural capacity, as the Master teaches (Sent. ii, D, 3). Therefore the
same apparently applies to man.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 3:8): "The Spirit breatheth where He
will," and (1 Cor. 12:11): "All these things one and the same Spirit
worketh, dividing to every one according as He will." Therefore
charity is given, not according to our natural capacity, but according
as the Spirit wills to distribute His gifts.
I answer that, The quantity of a thing depends on the proper cause of
that thing, since the more universal cause produces a greater effect.
Now, since charity surpasses the proportion of human nature, as
stated above (Article 2) it depends, not on any natural virtue, but on
the sole grace of the Holy Ghost Who infuses charity. Wherefore the
quantity of charity depends neither on the condition of nature nor on
the capacity of natural virtue, but only on the will of the Holy Ghost
Who "divides" His gifts "according as He will." Hence the Apostle
says (Eph. 4:7): "To every one of us is given grace according to the