John 17:25
"O righteous Father, the world has not known You."
What means this? What connection has it? He here shows that no man
knows God, save those only who have come to know the Son. And what He says
is of this kind: "I wished all to be so, yet they have not known You, although they
had no complaint against You." For this is the meaning of, "O righteous Father."
And here He seems to me to speak these words, as vexed that they would not
know One so just and good. For since the Jews had said that they knew God, but
that He knew Him not, at this He aims, saying, "For You loved Me before the
foundation of the world"; thus putting together a defense against the accusations
of the Jews. For how could He who had received glory, who was loved before
the foundation of the world, who desired to have them as witnesses of that glory,
how could He be opposed to the Father? "This then is not true which the Jews
say, that they know You, and that I know You not; on the contrary, I know You,
and they have not known You."
"And these have known that You have sent Me."
Do you see that He alludes to those, who said that He was not from God,
and all is finally summed up to meet this argument?

John 17:26
"And I have declared unto them Your Name, and will declare it."
"Yet you say that perfect knowledge is from the Spirit." "But the things of
the Spirit are Mine."
"That the love wherewith You have loved Me may remain in them, and I in
them."
"For if they learn who You are, then they shall know that I am not separated
from You, but one of the greatly beloved, and a true Son, and closely knit to You.
And those who are rightly persuaded of this, will keep both the faith which is on
Me and perfect love; and while they love as they ought, I remain in them." Do
you see how He has arrived at a good end, finishing off the discourse with love,
the mother of all blessings?
4. Let us then believe and love God, that it may not be said of us, "They
profess that they know God, but in their works they deny Him." [Titus 1:16] And
again, "He has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel." [1 Timothy 5:8]
For when he helps his domestics and kinsmen and strangers, while thou dost not
even succor those who are related to you by family, what will henceforth be your
excuse, when God is blasphemed and insulted by reason of you? Consider what
opportunities of doing good God has given to us. "Have mercy on one," He says,
"as a kinsman, on another as a friend, on another as a neighbor, on another as a
citizen, on another as a man." And if none of these things hold you, but you
break through all bonds, hear from Paul, that you are "worse than an infidel"; for
he having heard nothing of almsgiving, or of heavenly things, has overshot you
in love for man; but thou who art bidden to love your very enemies, lookest upon
your friends as enemies, and art more careful of your money than of their bodies.
Yet the money by being spent will sustain no injury, but your brother if neglected
will perish. What madness then to be careful of money, and careless about one's
kindred? Whence has this craving for riches burst in upon us? Whence this