seen by the prophet whether asleep or awake, under the appearance
of God, according to Is. 6:1, "I saw the Lord sitting."
But above all these degrees there is a third kind of prophecy,
wherein an intelligible and supernatural truth is shown without any
imaginary vision. However, this goes beyond the bounds of
prophecy properly so called, as stated above (Article 2, ad 3); and
consequently the degrees of prophecy are properly distinguished
according to imaginary vision.
Reply to Objection 1: We are unable to know how to distinguish the
intellectual light, except by means of imaginary or sensible signs.
Hence the difference in the intellectual light is gathered from the
difference in the things presented to the imagination.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 171, Article 2),
prophecy is by way, not of an abiding habit, but of a transitory
passion; wherefore there is nothing inconsistent if one and the same
prophet, at different times, receive various degrees of prophetic
revelation.
Reply to Objection 3: The words and deeds mentioned there do not
pertain to the prophetic revelation, but to the announcement, which
is made according to the disposition of those to whom that which is
revealed to the prophet is announced; and this is done sometimes
by words, sometimes by deeds. Now this announcement, and the
working of miracles, are something consequent upon prophecy, as
stated above (Question 171, Article 1).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.173, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Moses was the greatest of the prophets?

Objection 1: It would seem that Moses was not the greatest of the
prophets. For a gloss at the beginning of the Psalter says that "David
is called the prophet by way of excellence." Therefore Moses was not
the greatest of all.
Objection 2: Further, greater miracles were wrought by Josue, who
made the sun and moon to stand still (Josue 10:12-14), and by Isaias,
who made the sun to turn back (Is. 38:8), than by Moses, who divided
the Red Sea (Ex. 14:21). In like manner greater miracles were
wrought by Elias, of whom it is written (Ecclus. 48:4,5): "Who can
glory like to thee? Who raisedst up a dead man from below."
Therefore Moses was not the greatest of the prophets.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Mt. 11:11) that "there hath not
risen, among them that are born of women, a greater than John the
Baptist." Therefore Moses was not greater than all the prophets.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 34:10): "There arose no more a
prophet in Israel like unto Moses."
I answer that, Although in some respect one or other of the prophets
was greater than Moses, yet Moses was simply the greatest of all.
For, as stated above (Article 3; Question 171, Article 1), in prophecy
we may consider not only the knowledge, whether by intellectual or
by imaginary vision, but also the announcement and the
confirmation by miracles. Accordingly Moses was greater than the
other prophets. First, as regards the intellectual vision, since he saw
God's very essence, even as Paul in his rapture did, according to
Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii, 27). Hence it is written (Num. 12:8) that he
saw God "plainly and not by riddles." Secondly, as regards the
imaginary vision, which he had at his call, as it were, for not only did
he hear words, but also saw one speaking to him under the form of
God, and this not only while asleep, but even when he was awake.
Hence it is written (Ex. 33:11) that "the Lord spoke to Moses face to
face, as a man is wont to speak to his friend." Thirdly, as regards the
working of miracles which he wrought on a whole nation of
unbelievers. Wherefore it is written (Dt. 34:10,11): "There arose no
more a prophet in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face
to face: in all the signs and wonders, which He sent by him, to do in