this light comes by faith, and when it has come, it lights abundantly him that has
received it; and if you display a pure life (meet) for it, remains indwelling within
continually. "For," He says, "He that loves Me, will keep My commandments;
and I and My Father will come unto him, and make Our abode with him." [John
14:23; slightly varied] As then one cannot rightly enjoy the sunlight, unless he
opens his eyes; so neither can one largely share this splendor, unless he have
expanded the eye of the soul, and rendered it in every way keen of sight.
But how is this effected? Then when we have cleansed the soul from all the
passions. For sin is darkness, and a deep darkness; as is clear, because men do it
unconsciously and secretly. For, "every one that does evil hates the light, neither
comes to the light." [John 3:20] And, "It is a shame even to speak of those things
which are done of them in secret." [Ephesians 5:12] For, as in darkness a man
knows neither friend nor foe, but cannot perceive any of the properties of
objects; so too is it in sin. For he who desires to get more gain, makes no
difference between friend and enemy; and the envious regards with hostile eyes
the man with whom he is very intimate; and the plotter is at mortal quarrel with
all alike. In short, as to distinguishing the nature of objects, he who commits sin
is no better than men who are drunk or mad. And as in the night, wood, lead,
iron, silver, gold, precious stones, seem to us all alike on account of the absence
of the light which shows their distinctions; so he who leads an impure life knows
neither the excellence of temperance nor the beauty of philosophy. For in
darkness, as I said before, even precious stones if they be displayed do not show
their luster, not by reason of their own nature, but because of the want of
discernment in the beholders. Nor is this the only evil which happens to us who
are in sin, but this also, that we live in constant fear: and as men walking in a
moonless night tremble, though none be by to frighten them; so those who work
iniquity cannot have confidence, though there be none to accuse them; but they
are afraid of everything, and are suspicious, being pricked by their conscience:
all to them is full of fear and distress, they look about them at everything, are
terrified at everything. Let us then flee a life so painful, especially since after this

painfulness shall follow death; a deathless death, for of the punishment in that
place there will be no end; and in this life they (who sin) are no better than
madmen, in that they are dreaming of things that have no existence. They think
they are rich when they are not rich, that they enjoy when they are not enjoying,
nor do they properly perceive the cheat until they are freed from the madness
and have shaken off the sleep. Wherefore Paul exhorts all to be sober, and to
watch; and Christ also commands the same. For he who is sober and awake,
although he be captured by sin, quickly beats it off; while he who sleeps and is
beside himself, perceives not how he is held prisoner of it.
Let us then not sleep. This is not the season of night, but of day. Let us
therefore "walk honestly as in the day" [Romans 13:13]; and nothing is more
indecent than sin . In point of indecency it is not so bad to go about naked as in
sin and wrong doing. That is not so great matter of blame, since it might even be
caused by poverty; but nothing has more shame and less honor than the sinner.
Let us think of those who come to the justice-hall on some account of extortion,
or overreaching; how base and ridiculous they appear to all by their utter
shamelessness, their lies, and audacity. But we are such pitiable and wretched
beings, that we cannot bear ourselves to put on a garment awkwardly or awry;
nay, if we see another person in this state, we set him right; and yet though we
and all our neighbors are walking on our heads, we do not even perceive it. For
what, say, can be more shameful than a man who goes in to a harlot? What more
contemptible than an insolent, a foul-tongued or an envious man? Whence then
is it that these things do not seem so disgraceful as to walk naked? Merely from
habit. To go naked no one has ever willingly endured; but all men are continually
venturing on the others without any fear. Yet if one came into an assembly of
angels, among whom nothing of the sort has ever taken place, there he would
clearly see the great ridicule (of such conduct). And why do I say an assembly of
angels? Even in the very palaces among us, should one introduce a harlot and
enjoy her, or be oppressed by excess of wine, or commit any other like
indecency, he would suffer extreme punishment. But if it be intolerable that men