itself. It was not directed against any individual antagonist, or occasioned
by any particular controversial emergency. In fact, his labors upon it
were, he says, continually interrupted by the distraction of such
controversies. Certain ingenious and subtle theories respecting types or
resemblances of the Holy Trinity, traceable in human nature as being the
image of God, seemed to him to supply, not indeed a logical proof, but a
strong rational presumption, of the truth of the doctrine itself; and thus
to make it incumbent upon him to expound and unfold them in order to
meet rationalizing objectors upon (so to say) their own ground. He is
careful not to deal with these analogies or images as if they either
constituted a purely argumentative proof or exhausted the full meaning
of the doctrine, upon both which assumptions such speculations have at
all times been the fruitful parent both of presumptious theorizing and of
grievous heresy. But he nevertheless employs them more affirmatively
than would perhaps have been the case. While modern theologians would
argue negatively, from the triplicity of independent faculties,—united,
nevertheless, in the unity of a single human person,—that any
presumption of reason against the Trinity of persons in the Godhead is
thereby, if not removed, at least materially and enormously lessened, St.
Augustin seems to argue positively from analogous grounds, as though
they constituted a direct intimation of the doctrine itself. But he takes
especial pains, at the same time, to dwell upon the incapacity of human
thought to fathom the depths of the nature of God; and he carefully
prefaces his reasonings by a statement of the Scripture evidence of the
catholic doctrine as a matter of faith and not of reason, and by an
explanation of difficult texts upon the subject. One of the most valuable
portions, indeed, of the treatise is the eloquent and profound exposition
given in this part of it of the rule of interpretation to be applied to
Scripture language respecting the person of our Lord. It should be
noticed, however, that a large proportion of St. Augustin's scriptural
exegesis is founded upon a close verbal exposition of the old Latin
version, and is frequently not borne out by the original text. And the rule
followed in rendering Scripture texts in the present translation has been,
accordingly, wherever the argument in the context rests upon the
variations of the old Latin, there to translate the words as St. Augustin
gives them, while adhering otherwise to the language of the authorized
English version. The reader's attention may allowably be drawn to the

language of Book V. c.x., and to its close resemblance to some of the most
remarkable phrases of the Athanasian Creed, and again to the striking
passage respecting miracles in Book III. c.v., and to that upon the nature
of God at the beginning of Book V.; the last named of which seems to
have suggested one of the profoundest passages in the profoundest of Dr.
Newman's University Sermons (p. 353, ed. 1843). It may be added, that
the writings of the Greek Fathers on the subject were, if not wholly
unknown, yet unfamiliar to Augustin, who quotes directly only the Latin
work of Hilary of Poictiers.
It remains to say, that the translation here printed was made about four
years since by a friend of the writer of this preface, and that the latter's
share in the work has been that of thoroughly revising and correcting it,
and of seeing it through the press. He is therefore answerable for the
work as now published.
A. W. HADDAN.
Nov. 5, 1872.
In the Retractations (ii. 15) Augustin speaks of this work in the following
terms:—
"I spent some years in writing fifteen books concerning the Trinity, which
is God. When, however, I had not yet finished the thirteenth Book, and
some who were exceedingly anxious to have the work were kept waiting
longer than they could bear, it was stolen from me in a less correct state
than it either could or would have been had it appeared when I intended.
And as soon as I discovered this, having other copies of it, I had
determined at first not to publish it myself, but to mention what had
happened in the matter in some other work; but at the urgent request of
brethren, whom I could not refuse, I corrected it as much as I thought fit,
and finished and published it, with the addition, at the beginning, of a
letter that I had written to the venerable Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage, in
which I set forth, in the way of prologue, what had happened, what I had
intended to do of myself, and what love of my brethren had forced me to
do."