## Homily 1 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 1:1-4
Paul, an Apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Timothy our
brother, unto the Church of God, which is at Corinth, with all the saints which
are in the whole of Achaia: grace to you and peace from God our Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of mercies and God of all comfort; Who comfort us in all our affliction,
that we may be able to comfort them that are in any affliction through the
comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God.
It is meet to enquire, first, why to the former Epistle he adds a second: and
what can be his reason for thus beginning with the mercies and consolation of
God.
Why then does he add a second Epistle? Whereas in the first he had said, "I
will come to you, and will know not the word of them which are puffed up, but
the power;" [1 Corinthians 4:19] and again towards the end had promised the
same in milder terms, thus, "I will come unto you when I shall have passed
through Macedonia; for I do pass through Macedonia; and it may be that I shall
abide, or even winter with you;" [1 Corinthians 16:5-6] yet now after along
interval, he came not; but was still lingering and delaying even though the time
appointed had passed away; the Spirit detaining him in other matters of far
greater necessity than these. For this reason he had need to write a second
Epistle, which he had not needed had he but a little out-tarried his time.

2 Corinthians 1:5
But not for this reason only, but also because they were amended by the
former; for him that had committed fornication whom before they applauded and
were puffed up about, they had cut off and separated altogether. And this he
shows where he says, "But if any has caused sorrow, he has caused sorrow not
to me, but in part (that I press not too heavily) to you all. Sufficient to such a one
is this punishment which was inflicted by the many." [2 Corinthians 2:5-6] And
as he proceeds, he alludes again to the same thing when he says, "For behold
that you were made sorry after a godly sort, what earnest care it wrought in you,
yea, what clearing of yourselves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea,
what longing, yea, what zeal, yea, what avenging! In every thing ye approved
yourselves to be pure in this matter." [2 Corinthians 7:11] Moreover, the
collection which he enjoined, they gathered with much forwardness. Wherefore
also he says, "For I know your readiness of which I glory on your behalf to them
of Macedonia, that Achaia has been prepared for a year past." [2 Corinthians
9:2] And Titus too, whom he sent, they received with all kindness, as he shows
when he says again, "His inward affection is more abundantly toward you, while
he remembers the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling ye received
him." [2 Corinthians 7:15] For all these reasons he writes the second Epistle. For
it was right that, as when they were in fault he rebuked them, so upon their
amendment he should approve and commend them. On which account the
Epistle is not very severe throughout, but only in a few parts towards the end.
For there were even among them Jews who thought highly of themselves, and
accused Paul as being a boaster and worthy of no regard; whence also that
speech of theirs; "His letters are weighty, but his bodily presence is weak, and
his speech of no account:" [2 Corinthians 10:10] meaning thereby, when he is
present he appears of no account, (for this is the meaning of, "his bodily