wicked lusts I mean, which are more unclean than worms.
3. But that "they" should be such persons is not "so" dreadful a thing
(although it be dreadful), but that "you," that have been counted worthy to
become temples of God, should of a sudden have become sepulchers, having as
much ill savor, this is extreme wretchedness. He in whom Christ dwells, and the
Holy Spirit has worked, and such great mysteries, that this man should be a
sepulchre, what wretchedness is this? What mournings and lamentations does
this call for, when the members of Christ have become a tomb of uncleanness?
Consider how you were born, of what things you have been counted worthy,
what manner of garment you have received, how you were built a temple
without a breach! How fair! not adorned with gold, neither with pearls, but with
the spirit that is more precious than these.
Consider that no sepulchre is made in a city, so then neither shall you be
able to appear in the city above. For if here this is forbidden, much more there.
Or rather even here you are an object of scorn to all, bearing about a dead soul,
and not to be scorned only, but also to be shunned. For tell me, if any one were
to go round, bearing about a dead body, would not all have rushed away? Would
not all have fled? Think this now likewise. For you go about, bearing a spectacle
far more grievous than this, a soul deadened by sins, a soul paralyzed.
Who now will pity such a one? For when thou dost not pity your own soul,
how shall another pity him that is so cruel, such an enemy to himself? If any one,
where you slept and eat, had buried a dead body, what would you not have done?
But you are burying a dead soul, not where you dine, nor where you sleep, but in
the members of Christ: and are you not afraid lest a thousand lightnings and
thunderbolts be hurled from above upon your head?
And how do you even dare to set foot in the churches of God, and in holy
temples, having within you the savor of so much abomination? For if one
bearing a dead body into the king's courts and burying it would have suffered the
utmost punishment, thou setting your foot in the sacred courts, and filling the
house with so much ill savor, consider what a punishment you will undergo.

Imitate that harlot who anointed with ointment the feet of Christ, and filled
the whole house with the odor, the opposite to which you do to His house! For
what though thou be not sensible of the ill savor? For this most of all is the
grievous part of the disease; wherefore also you are incurably diseased, and
more grievously than they that are maimed in their bodies, and become fetid. For
that disease indeed is both felt by the sick and is without any blame, nay even is
deserving of pity; but this of hatred and punishment.
Since then both in this respect it is more grievous, and from the sick not
being sensible of it as he ought to be; come, give yourself to my words, that I
may teach you plainly the mischief of it.
But first listen to what you say in the Psalm, "Let my prayer be set forth in
Your sight as incense." When then not incense, but a stinking smoke arises from
you, and from your deeds, what punishment do you not deserve to undergo?
What then is the stinking smoke? Many come in gazing about at the beauty
of women; others curious about the blooming youth of boys. After this, do you
not marvel, how bolts are not launched, and all things are not plucked up from
their foundations? For worthy both of thunderbolts and hell are the things that
are done; but God, who is long-suffering, and of great mercy, forbears awhile
His wrath, calling you to repentance and amendment.
What doest thou, O man? Are you curiously looking after women's beauty,
and do you not shudder at thus doing despite unto the temple of God? Does the
church seem to you a brothel, and less honorable than the market-place. For in a
market-place indeed you are afraid and ashamed to appear to be looking after
any woman, but in God's temple, when God Himself is discoursing unto you,
and threatening about these things, you are committing whoredom and adultery
at the very time in which you are being told not to do this. And do you not
shudder, nor stand amazed?
These things do the spectacles of wantonness teach you, the pest that is so
hard to put down, the deleterious sorceries, the grievous snares of the
thoughtless, the pleasurable destruction of the unchaste.