SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.4.

Secondly, there may be excess in play, through lack of due
circumstances: for instance when people make use of fun at undue
times or places, or out of keeping with the matter in hand, or
persons. This may be sometimes a mortal sin on account of the
strong attachment to play, when a man prefers the pleasure he
derives therefrom to the love of God, so as to be willing to disobey a
commandment of God or of the Church rather than forego, such like
amusements. Sometimes, however, it is a venial sin, for instance
where a man is not so attached to amusement as to be willing for its
sake to do anything in disobedience to God.
Reply to Objection 1: Certain things are sinful on account of the
intention alone, because they are done in order to injure someone.
Such an intention is excluded by their being done in fun, the
intention of which is to please, not to injure: in these cases fun
excuses from sin, or diminishes it. Other things, however, are sins
according to their species, such as murder, fornication, and the like:
and fun is no excuse for these; in fact they make fun scandalous and
obscene.
Reply to Objection 2: Excessive play pertains to senseless mirth,
which Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 17) calls a daughter of gluttony.
Wherefore it is written (Ex. 32:6): "The people sat down to eat and
drink, and they rose up to play."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated (Article 2), play is necessary for the
intercourse of human life. Now whatever is useful to human
intercourse may have a lawful employment ascribed to it. Wherefore
the occupation of play-actors, the object of which is to cheer the
heart of man, is not unlawful in itself; nor are they in a state of sin
provided that their playing be moderated, namely that they use no
unlawful words or deeds in order to amuse, and that they do not
introduce play into undue matters and seasons. And although in
human affairs, they have no other occupation in reference to other
men, nevertheless in reference to themselves, and to God, they
perform other actions both serious and virtuous, such as prayer and
the moderation of their own passions and operations, while
sometimes they give alms to the poor. Wherefore those who
maintain them in moderation do not sin but act justly, by rewarding
them for their services. on the other hand, if a man spends too much
on such persons, or maintains those comedians who practice
unlawful mirth, he sins as encouraging them in their sin. Hence

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.167, C.4.

Augustine says (Tract. c. in Joan.) that "to give one's property to
comedians is a great sin, not a virtue"; unless by chance some playactor were in extreme need, in which case one would have to assist
him, for Ambrose says (De Offic. [Canon Pasce, dist. 86]): "Feed him
that dies of hunger; for whenever thou canst save a man by feeding
him, if thou hast not fed him, thou hast slain him."