is but for a time. This proceeded from pure faith. And in both ways are they
admirable; because they believed, and because they did so without signs, (whom
Christ also calls "blessed," saying, "Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet
have believed,") [John 20:29,] and because they did so sincerely. Though they
had heard the woman say doubtfully, "Is not this the Christ?" they did not also
say, "we too suspect," or, "we think," but, "we know," and not merely, "we know,"
but, "we know that this is of a truth the Saviour of the world." They
acknowledged Christ not as one of the many, but as the "Saviour" indeed. Yet
whom had they seen saved? They had but heard His words, and yet they spoke
as they would have spoken had they beheld many and great marvels. And why
do not the Evangelists tell us these words, and that He discoursed admirably?
That you may learn that they pass by many important matters, and yet have
declared the whole to us by the event. For He persuaded an entire people and a
whole city by His words. When His hearers are not persuaded, then the writers
are constrained to mention what was said, lest any one from the insensibility of
the hearers should give a judgment against Him who addressed them.
"Now after two days He departed thence and went into Galilee."

John 4:44
"For Jesus Himself testified that a Prophet has no honor in his own country."
Wherefore is this added? Because He departed not unto Capernaum, but
into Galilee, and thence to Cana. For that you may not enquire why He tarried
not with His own people, but tarried with the Samaritans, the Evangelist puts the
cause, saying that they gave no heed unto Him; on this account He went not
there, that their condemnation might not be the greater. For I suppose that in this
place He speaks of Capernaum as "His country." Now, to show that there He
received no honor, hear Him say, "And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto
heaven, shall be brought down to hell." [Matthew 11:23] He calls it "His own
country," because there He set forth the Word of the Dispensation, and more
especially dwelt upon it. "What then," says some one, "do we not see many
admired among their kindred?" In the first place such judgments must not be
formed from rare instances; and again, if some have been honored in their own,
they would have been much more honored in a strange country, for familiarity is
wont to make men easily despised.

John 4:45
"Then when He had come into Galilee, the Galilæans received Him, having seen
all the things that He did at Jerusalem at the feast, for they also came unto the
feast."
Do you see that these men so ill spoken of are found most to come to Him?
For one said, "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" [John 1:46],
and another, "Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no prophet." [John 7:52]
These things they said insulting Him, because He was supposed by the many to
be of Nazareth, and they also reproached Him with being a Samaritan; "You are
a Samaritan," said one, "and hast a devil." [John 8:48] Yet behold, both
Samaritans and Galilæans believe, to the shame of the Jews, and Samaritans are
found better than Galilæans, for the first received Him through the words of the
woman, the second when they had seen the miracles which He did.