SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.3.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether obedience is the greatest of the virtues?

Objection 1: It seems that obedience is the greatest of the virtues.
For it is written (1 Kgs. 15:22): "Obedience is better than sacrifices."
Now the offering of sacrifices belongs to religion, which is the
greatest of all moral virtues, as shown above (Question 81, Article 6).
Therefore obedience is the greatest of all virtues.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "obedience is
the only virtue that ingrafts virtues in the soul and protects them
when ingrafted." Now the cause is greater than the effect. Therefore
obedience is greater than all the virtues.
Objection 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "evil should
never be done out of obedience: yet sometimes for the sake of
obedience we should lay aside the good we are doing." Now one
does not lay aside a thing except for something better. Therefore
obedience, for whose sake the good of other virtues is set aside, is
better than other virtues.
On the contrary, obedience deserves praise because it proceeds
from charity: for Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "obedience should
be practiced, not out of servile fear, but from a sense of charity, not
through fear of punishment, but through love of justice." Therefore
charity is a greater virtue than obedience.
I answer that, Just as sin consists in man contemning God and
adhering to mutable things, so the merit of a virtuous act consists in
man contemning created goods and adhering to God as his end.
Now the end is greater than that which is directed to the end.
Therefore if a man contemns created goods in order that he may
adhere to God, his virtue derives greater praise from his adhering to
God than from his contemning earthly things. And so those, namely
the theological, virtues whereby he adheres to God in Himself, are
greater than the moral virtues, whereby he holds in contempt some
earthly thing in order to adhere to God.
Among the moral virtues, the greater the thing which a man
contemns that he may adhere to God, the greater the virtue. Now
there are three kinds of human goods that man may contemn for
God's sake. The lowest of these are external goods, the goods of the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.4.

body take the middle place, and the highest are the goods of the
soul; and among these the chief, in a way, is the will, in so far as, by
his will, man makes use of all other goods. Therefore, properly
speaking, the virtue of obedience, whereby we contemn our own will
for God's sake, is more praiseworthy than the other moral virtues,
which contemn other goods for the sake of God.
Hence Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "obedience is rightly
preferred to sacrifices, because by sacrifices another's body is slain
whereas by obedience we slay our own will." Wherefore even any
other acts of virtue are meritorious before God through being
performed out of obedience to God's will. For were one to suffer
even martyrdom, or to give all one's goods to the poor, unless one
directed these things to the fulfilment of the divine will, which
pertains directly to obedience, they could not be meritorious: as
neither would they be if they were done without charity, which
cannot exist apart from obedience. For it is written (1 Jn. 2:4,5): "He
who saith that he knoweth God, and keepeth not His
commandments, is a liar . . . but he that keepeth His word, in him in
very deed the charity of God is perfected": and this because friends
have the same likes and dislikes.
Reply to Objection 1: Obedience proceeds from reverence, which
pays worship and honor to a superior, and in this respect it is
contained under different virtues, although considered in itself, as
regarding the aspect of precept, it is one special virtue. Accordingly,
in so far as it proceeds from reverence for a superior, it is contained,
in a way, under observance; while in so far as it proceeds from
reverence for one's parents, it is contained under piety; and in so far
as it proceeds from reverence for God, it comes under religion, and
pertains to devotion, which is the principal act of religion. Wherefore
from this point of view it is more praiseworthy to obey God than to
offer sacrifice, as well as because, "in a sacrifice we slay another's
body, whereas by obedience we slay our own will," as Gregory says
(Moral. xxxv). As to the special case in which Samuel spoke, it would
have been better for Saul to obey God than to offer in sacrifice the
fat animals of the Amalekites against the commandment of God.
Reply to Objection 2: All acts of virtue, in so far as they come under
a precept, belong to obedience. Wherefore according as acts of
virtue act causally or dispositively towards their generation and
preservation, obedience is said to ingraft and protect all virtues. And
yet it does not follow that obedience takes precedence of all virtues