suffers on his account he reckons as his own punishment; and thus punishment is not
wanting to him in that he has compassion for the sufferings of his friend, and that all the
more for his being the cause of his friend's suffering. And again the affection of charity
in him who suffers for his friend makes his satisfaction more acceptable to God than it
would be if he were suffering for his own doings: for the one is an effort of spontaneous
charity, the other an acquiescence in necessity. Hence we learn that one man may
make satisfaction for another, provided both of them be in charity. Hence the saying of
the Apostle: Bear ye one another's burdens, and so ye shall fulfil the law of Christ (Gal.
vi, 2).

## CHAPTER CLX--That it is reasonably reckoned a Man's own Fault if he be not
converted to God, although he cannot be converted without Grace
SINCE no one can be set on the way to his last end without the aid of divine grace, or
without it have the necessary means of reaching that end, as are faith, hope, love and
perseverance, some might think that man is not to blame for being destitute of these
gifts, especially seeing that he cannot merit the assistance of divine grace, nor be
converted to God unless God convert him: for none is responsible for that which
depends on another. But allow this, and many absurdities follow. It follows that the man
who has neither faith nor hope nor love of God, nor perseverance in good, still does not
deserve punishment: whereas it is expressly said: He that believeth not the Son shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him (John iii, 36). And since none reaches
the end of happiness without the aforesaid endowments, it would follow further that
there are some who neither attain to happiness nor yet suffer punishment of God: the
contrary whereof is shown from what will be said to all present at the judgement of God:
Come . . . . possess ye the kingdom prepared for you, or, Depart . . . . into everlasting
fire (Matt. xxv, 34-41).
To solve this doubt, we must observe that though one can neither merit divine grace
beforehand, nor acquire it by movement of his free will, still he can hinder himself from
receiving it: for it is said of some: They have said unto God, `Depart from us, we will not
have the knowledge of thy ways' (Job xxi, 14). And since it is in the power of free will to
hinder the reception of divine grace or not to hinder it, not undeservedly may it be
reckoned a man's own fault, if he puts an obstacle in the way of the reception of grace.
For God on His part is ready to give grace to all men: He wills all men to be saved and
to come to the knowledge of the truth (1 Tim. ii, 4). But they alone are deprived of grace,
who in themselves raise an obstacle to grace. So when the sun lights up the world, any
evil that comes to a man who shuts his eyes is counted his own fault, although he could
not see unless the sunlight first came in upon him.