went away and fell on David's neck. For love knows not what sort of thing
shame may be. Therefore it glories in those things for which another hides his
face. Since the shame is, not to know how to love; not, when you love, to incur
danger and endure all for the beloved.
But when I say, "all," do not suppose I mean things injurious also; for
example, assisting a youth in a love affair, or whatsoever hurtful thing any one
may beseech another to do for him. For such a person does not love, and this I
showed you lately from the Egyptian woman: since in truth he only is the lover
who seeks what is profitable to the beloved: so that if any pursue not this, even
what is right and good, though he make ten thousand professions of love, he is
more hostile than any enemies.
So also Rebecca aforetime, because she exceedingly clung to her son, both
perpetrated a theft, and was not ashamed of detection, neither was she afraid,
though the risk was no common one; but even when her son raised scruples to
her, "upon me be your curse, my son," she said. Do you see even in a woman the
soul of the Apostle how, even as Paul chose, (if one may compare a small thing
with a great,) to be anathema for the Jews' sake, [Romans 9:3] so also she, that
her son might be blessed, chose to be no less than accursed. And the good things
she gave up to him, for she was not, it seems, to be blessed with him, but the
evils she was prepared to endure herself alone: nevertheless, she rejoiced, and
hasted, and this where so great a danger lay before her, and she was grieved at
the delay of the business: for she feared lest Esau might anticipate them and
render her wisdom vain. Wherefore also she cuts short the conversation and
urges on the young man, and just permitting him to answer what had been said,
states a reason sufficient to persuade him. For she said not, "you say these things
without reason, and in vain you fear, your father having grown old and being
deprived of clearness of sight:" but what? "upon me be your curse, my son. Only
do thou not mar the plot, nor lose the object of our chase, nor give up the
treasure."
And this very Jacob, served he not for wages with his kinsmen twice seven

years? Was he not together with the bondage subject to mockery in respect of
that trick? What then? Did he feel the mockery? Did he count it behaving
himself unseemly, that being a freeman, and free born, and well brought up, he
endured slaves' treatment among his own kinsmen: a thing which is wont to be
most vexing, when one receives opprobrious treatment from one's friends? In no
wise. And the cause was his love, which made the time, though long, appear
short. "For they were," says he, [Genesis 29:20] "in his sight as a few days." So
far was he from being galled and blushing for this his bondage. Justly then said
the blessed Paul, "Love does not behave itself unseemly."
3. 1. "Seeks not its own, is not provoked."
Thus having said, "does not behave itself unseemly," he shows also the
temper of mind, on account of which she does not behave herself unseemly.
And what is that temper? That she "seeks not her own." For the beloved she
esteems to be all, and then only "behaves herself unseemly," when she cannot
free him from such unseemliness; so that if it be possible by her own
unseemliness to benefit her beloved, she does not so much as count the thing
unseemliness; for the other party thereafter is yourself, when you love : since
this is friendship, that the lover and the beloved should no longer be two persons
divided, but in a manner one single person; a thing which no how takes place
except from love. Seek not therefore your own, that you may find your own. For
he that seeks his own, finds not his own. Wherefore also Paul said, "Let no man
seek his own, but each his neighbor's good." [1 Corinthians 10:24] For your own
profit lies in the profit of your neighbor, and his in yours. As therefore one that
had his own gold buried in the house of his neighbor, should he refuse to go and
there seek and dig it up, will never seek it; so likewise here, he that will not seek
his own profit in the advantage of his neighbor, will not attain unto the crowns
due to this: God Himself having therefore so disposed of it, in order that we
should be mutually bound together: and even as one awakening a slumbering
child to follow his brother, when he is of himself unwilling, places in the
brother's hand that which he desires and longs for, that through desire of