of the second objection.
Reply to Objection 3: The separated soul does not understand by
way of innate species, nor by species abstracted then, nor only by
species retained, and this the objection proves; but the soul in that
state understands by means of participated species arising from the
influence of the Divine light, shared by the soul as by other separate
substances; though in a lesser degree. Hence as soon as it ceases
to act by turning to corporeal (phantasms), the soul turns at once to
the superior things; nor is this way of knowledge unnatural, for God
is the author of the influx of both of the light of grace and of the light
of nature.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the separated soul understands separate

substances?
Objection 1: It would seem that the separated soul does not
understand separate substances. For the soul is more perfect when
joined to the body than when existing apart from it, being an
essential part of human nature; and every part of a whole is more
perfect when it exists in that whole. But the soul in the body does
not understand separate substances as shown above (Question 88,
Article 1). Therefore much less is it able to do so when apart from the
body.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is known is known either by its
presence or by its species. But separate substances cannot be
known to the soul by their presence, for God alone can enter into the
soul; nor by means of species abstracted by the soul from an angel,
for an angel is more simple than a soul. Therefore the separated soul
cannot at all understand separate substances.
Objection 3: Further, some philosophers said that the ultimate
happiness of man consists in the knowledge of separate substances.
If, therefore, the separated soul can understand separate
substances, its happiness would be secured by its separation alone;
which cannot be reasonably be said.
On the contrary, Souls apart from the body know other separated
souls; as we see in the case of the rich man in hell, who saw Lazarus
and Abraham (Lk. 16:23). Therefore separated souls see the devils
and the angels.
I answer that, Augustine says (De Trin. ix, 3), "our mind acquires the
knowledge of incorporeal things by itself"---i.e. by knowing itself
(Question 88, Article 1, ad 1). Therefore from the knowledge which
the separated soul has of itself, we can judge how it knows other
separate things. Now it was said above (Article 1), that as long as it
is united to the body the soul understands by turning to phantasms,
and therefore it does not understand itself save through becoming
actually intelligent by means of ideas abstracted from phantasms;
for thus it understands itself through its own act, as shown above
(Question 87, Article 1). When, however, it is separated from the
body, it understands no longer by turning to phantasms, but by