sake." And doubly, he says, he takes delight in it, both as being in jeopardy for
their sakes and as beholding their proficiency. Then doing what is usual with
him, because he had uttered great things, he refers both to Christ.
But how does he "die daily?" by his readiness and preparation for that
event. And wherefore says he these words? Again by these also to establish the
doctrine of the resurrection. "For who would choose," says he, "to undergo so
many deaths, if there be no resurrection nor life after this? Yea, if they who
believe in the resurrection would scarcely put themselves in jeopardy for it
except they were very noble of heart: much more would not the unbeliever (so he
speaks) choose to undergo so many deaths and so terrible." Thus, see by degrees
how very high he mounts up. He had said, "we stand in jeopardy," he added,
"every hour," then, "daily," then, "I not only 'stand in jeopardy,'" says he, but "I
even 'die:'" he concludes accordingly by pointing out also what kind of deaths
they were; thus saying,

1 Corinthians 15:32
"If after the manner of men I fought with beasts at Ephesus, what does it
profit me?"
What is, "if after the manner of men?" "As far as pertains to men I fought
with beasts: for what if God snatched me out of those dangers? So that I am he
who ought most to be in care about these things; I, who endure so great dangers
and have not yet received any return. For if no time of recompense is at hand,
but our reward is shut up in this present world, ours is the greater loss. For you
have believed without jeopardy, but we are slaughtered every day."
But all these things he said, not because he had no advantage even in the
very suffering, but on account of the weakness of the many, and to establish
them in the doctrine of the resurrection: not because he himself was running for
hire; for it was a sufficient recompense to him to do that which was pleasing to
God. So that when he adds, "If in this life only we have hoped in Christ, we are
of all men most pitiable," it is there again for their sakes, that he might by the
fear of this misery overthrow their unbelief of the resurrection. And in
condescension to their weakness, he thus speaks. Since in truth, the great reward
is to please Christ at all times: and apart from the recompense, it is a very great
requital to be in jeopardy for His sake.
4. "If the dead are not raised, let us eat and drink for tomorrow we die."
This word, be sure, is spoken in mockery: wherefore neither did he bring it
forward of himself, but summoned the prophet of loftiest sound, Isaiah, who
discoursing of certain insensible and reprobate persons made use of these words,
"Who slay oxen and kill sheep to eat flesh and drink wine; who say, Let us eat
and drink, for tomorrow we die. These things are revealed to the ears of the Lord
of Hosts, and this iniquity shall not be forgiven you, till ye die." [Isaiah 22:13-14,
Septuagint] Now if then they were deprived of pardon who spoke thus, much