no great matter, neither the good nor the painful; nor the scoffings nor the praises
which come from men: but remember, I pray, that day of fear and shuddering in
the which all things are revealed. For then both we shall glory in you, and you in
us; when you shall be seen to have such teachers, who teach no doctrine of men
nor live in wickedness nor give [men] any handle; and we to have such disciples,
neither affected after the manner of men nor shaken, but taking all things with
readiness of mind, and unseduced by sophistries from what side soever. For this
is plain even now to those that have understanding, but then to all. So that even
if we are afflicted now, we have this, and that no light, consolation which the
conscience affords now, and the manifestation itself then. For now indeed our
conscience knows that we do all things by the grace of God, as you also know
and shall know: but then, all men as well will learn both our doings and yours:
and shall behold us glorified through each other. For that he may not appear
himself alone to derive lustre from this glorying, he gives to them also a cause of
boasting, and leads them away from their present distresses. And as he did in
respect to the consolation when he said, "We are comforted for your sakes," [2
Corinthians 1:6] so he does here also, saying, 'we glory on your account, as you
also on ours,' every where making them partakers of every thing, of his comfort,
his sufferings, his preservation. For this his preservation he ascribes to their
prayers. "For God delivered us," he says, "ye helping together by prayer." In like
manner also he makes the gloryings common. For as in that place he says,
"Knowing that as you are partakers of the sufferings, so also of the consolation:"
so here too, "we are your glorying, as you also are ours."

2 Corinthians 1:15
"And in this confidence I was minded to come before unto you."
What confidence? 'In relying exceedingly on you, glorying over you, being
your glorying, loving you exceedingly, being conscious to myself of nothing
evil, being confident that all is spiritual with us, and having you as witnesses of
this.'
"I was minded to come unto you, and by you to pass into Macedonia."
And yet he promised the contrary in his former Epistle, saying thus: "Now I
will come unto you when I shall have passed through Macedonia: for I do pass
through Macedonia." [1 Corinthians 16:5] How is it then that he here says the
contrary? He does not say the contrary: away with the thought. For it is contrary
indeed to what he wrote, but not contrary to what he wished.
Wherefore also here he said not, 'I wrote that I would pass by you into
Macedonia; but, 'I was minded.' 'For though I did not write on that wise,' he says,
'nevertheless I was greatly desirous, and 'was minded,' even before, to have come
unto you: so far was I from wishing to be later than my promise that I would
gladly have come before it.' "That you might have a second benefit. " What is, a
second benefit? 'That you might have a double benefit, both that from my
writings, and that from my presence.' By "benefit" he here means pleasure.