otherwise any simple priest who has jurisdiction can absolve from
any sin. Now there are five cases in which a simple priest must refer
his penitent to his superior. The first is when a public penance has to
be imposed, because in that case the bishop is the proper minister
of the sacrament. The second is the case of those who are
excommunicated when the inferior priest cannot absolve a penitent
through the latter being excommunicated by his superior. The third
case is when he finds that an irregularity has been contracted, for
the dispensation of which he has to have recourse to his superior.
The fourth is the case of arson. The fifth is when it is the custom in a
diocese for the more heinous crimes to be reserved to the bishop, in
order to inspire fear, because custom in these cases either gives the
power or takes it away.
Reply to Objection 1: In this case the priest should not hear the
confession of his accomplice, with regard to that particular sin, but
must refer her to another: nor should she confess to him but should
ask permission to go to another, or should have recourse to his
superior if he refused, both on account of the danger, and for the
sake of less shame. If, however, he were to absolve her it would be
valid: because when Augustine says that they should not be guilty of
the same sin, he is speaking of what is congruous, not of what is
essential to the sacrament.
Reply to Objection 2: Penance delivers man from all defects of guilt,
but not from all defects of punishment, since even after doing
penance for murder, a man remains irregular. Hence a priest can
absolve from a crime, but for the remission of the punishment he
must refer the penitent to the superior, except in the case of
excommunication, absolution from which should precede absolution
from sin, for as long as a man is excommunicated, he cannot receive
any sacrament of the Church.
Reply to Objection 3: This objection considers those cases in which
superiors reserve the power of jurisdiction to themselves.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a man can use the keys with regard to

his superior?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man cannot use the keys in respect
of a superior. For every sacramental act requires its proper matter.
Now the proper matter for the use of the keys, is a person who is
subject, as stated above (Question 19, Article 6). Therefore a priest
cannot use the keys in respect of one who is not his subject.
Objection 2: Further, the Church Militant is an image of the Church
Triumphant. Now in the heavenly Church an inferior angel never
cleanses, enlightens or perfects a higher angel. Therefore neither
can an inferior priest exercise on a superior a hierarchical action
such as absolution.
Objection 3: Further, the judgment of Penance should be better
regulated than the judgment of an external court. Now in the external
court an inferior cannot excommunicate or absolve his superior.
Therefore, seemingly, neither can he do so in the penitential court.
On the contrary, The higher prelate is also "compassed with
infirmity," and may happen to sin. Now the power of the keys is the
remedy for sin. Therefore, since he cannot use the key on himself,
for he cannot be both judge and accused at the same time, it seems
that an inferior can use the power of the keys on him.
Further, absolution which is given through the power of the keys, is
ordained to the reception of the Eucharist. But an inferior can give
Communion to his superior, if the latter asks him to. Therefore he
can use the power of the keys on him if he submit to him.
I answer that, The power of the keys, considered in itself, is
applicable to all, as stated above (Article 2): and that a priest is
unable to use the keys on some particular person is due to his power
being limited to certain individuals. Therefore he who limited his
power can extend it to whom he wills, so that he can give him power
over himself, although he cannot use the power of the keys on
himself, because this power requires to be exercised on a subject,
and therefore on someone else, for no man can be subject to
himself.