Rom. vi. 3, 4.

you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies." This he does
not utter to those alone who wish to hear: Do not err, [he says to all:] Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
is one and the same, who did by suffering reconcile us to God, and rose from the dead; who is at
the right hand of the Father, and perfect in all things; "who, when He was buffeted, struck not in
return; who, when He suffered, threatened not;" and when He underwent tyranny, He prayed
His Father that He would forgive those who had crucified Him. For He did Himself truly bring in
salvation: since He is Himself the Word of God, Himself the Only-begotten of the Father, Christ
Jesus our Lord.

### Chapter XVII.—The apostles teach that it was neither Christ nor the Saviour, but the Holy
Spirit, who did descend upon Jesus. The reason for this descent.
1. It certainly was in the power of the apostles to declare that Christ descended upon Jesus, or
that the so-called superior Saviour [came down] upon the dispensational one, or he who is from
the invisible places upon him from the Demiurge; but they neither knew nor said anything of the
kind: for, had they known it, they would have also certainly stated it. But what really was the case,
that did they record, [namely,] that the Spirit of God as a dove descended upon Him; this Spirit, of
whom it was declared by Isaiah, "And the Spirit of God shall rest upon Him," as I have already
said. And again: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He hath anointed Me." That is the
Spirit of whom the Lord declares, "For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which
speaketh in you." And again, giving to the disciples the power of regeneration into God, He
said to them, "Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost." For [God] promised, that in the last times He would pour Him [the
Spirit] upon [His] servants and handmaids, that they might prophesy; wherefore He did also descend
upon the Son of God, made the Son of man, becoming accustomed in fellowship with Him to dwell
in the human race, to rest with human beings, and to dwell in the workmanship of God, working
the will of the Father in them, and renewing them from their old habits into the newness of Christ.

Isa. lxi. 1.

2. This Spirit did David ask for the human race, saying, "And stablish me with Thine
all-governing Spirit;" who also, as Luke says, descended at the day of Pentecost upon the disciples
after the Lord's ascension, having power to admit all nations to the entrance of life, and to the
opening of the new covenant; from whence also, with one accord in all languages, they uttered
praise to God, the Spirit bringing distant tribes to unity, and offering to the Father the first-fruits
of all nations. Wherefore also the Lord promised to send the Comforter, who should join us to
God. For as a compacted lump of dough cannot be formed of dry wheat without fluid matter, nor
can a loaf possess unity, so, in like manner, neither could we, being many, be made one in Christ
Jesus without the water from heaven. And as dry earth does not bring forth unless it receive moisture,
in like manner we also, being originally a dry tree, could never have brought forth fruit unto life
without the voluntary rain from above. For our bodies have received unity among themselves by
means of that laver which leads to incorruption; but our souls, by means of the Spirit. Wherefore
both are necessary, since both contribute towards the life of God, our Lord compassionating that
erring Samaritan woman—who did not remain with one husband, but committed fornication by
[contracting] many marriages—by pointing out, and promising to her living water, so that she
should thirst no more, nor occupy herself in acquiring the refreshing water obtained by labour,
having in herself water springing up to eternal life. The Lord, receiving this as a gift from His
Father, does Himself also confer it upon those who are partakers of Himself, sending the Holy
Spirit upon all the earth.
3. Gideon, that Israelite whom God chose, that he might save the people of Israel from the
power of foreigners, foreseeing this gracious gift, changed his request, and prophesied that there
would be dryness upon the fleece of wool (a type of the people), on which alone at first there had
been dew; thus indicating that they should no longer have the Holy Spirit from God, as saith Esaias,
"I will also command the clouds, that they rain no rain upon it," but that the dew, which is the
Spirit of God, who descended upon the Lord, should be diffused throughout all the earth, "the spirit
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and piety,
the spirit of the fear of God." This Spirit, again, He did confer upon the Church, sending
throughout all the world the Comforter from heaven, from whence also the Lord tells us that the
devil, like lightning, was cast down. Wherefore we have need of the dew of God, that we be not