But not this only is the point to be admired in him that thus he prosecuted
his comparison, but that he imagined another thing also still greater and more
astounding; in the first place, prosecuting his speech in the form of interrogation,
which is proper to things that are clear and admitted, and then dilating it by the
quick succession and multitude of his terms. For he employs not one or two or
three only, but several. Add to this that instead of the persons he employs the
names of the things, and he delineates here high virtue and there extreme vice;
and shows the difference between them to be great and infinite so as not even to
need demonstration. "For what fellowship," says he, "have righteousness and
iniquity?"
"And what communion has light with darkness?" (v. 15, 16.) "And what
concord has Christ with Beliar ? Or what portion has a believer with an
unbeliever? Or what agreement has a temple of God with idols?"
Do you see how he uses the bare names, and how adequately to his purpose
of dissuasion. For he did not say, 'neglect of righteousness ,' [but] what was
stronger [iniquity ]; nor did he say those who are of the light, and those who are
of the darkness; but he uses opposites themselves which can not admit of their
opposites, 'light and darkness.' Nor said he those who are of Christ, with those
who are of the devil; but, which was far wider apart, Christ and Beliar, so calling
that apostate one, in the Hebrew tongue. "Or what portion has a believer with an
unbeliever?" Here, at length, that he may not seem simply to be going through a
censure of vice and an encomium of virtue, he mentions persons also without
particularizing. And he said not, 'communion,' but spoke of the rewards, using
the term "portion. What agreement has a temple of God with idols?"
"For you are a temple of the living God." Now what he says is this. Neither
has your King anything in common with him, "for what concord has Christ with
Beliar?" nor have the things [anything in common], "for what communion has
light with darkness?" Therefore neither should ye. And first he mentions their
king and then themselves; by this separating them most effectually. Then having
said, "a temple of God with idols," and having declared, "For you are a temple of

the living God," he is necessitated to subjoin also the testimony of this to show
that the thing is no flattery. For he that praises except he also exhibit proof, even
appears to flatter. What then is his testimony? For,
"I will dwell in them," says he, "and walk in them. I will dwell in," as in
temples, "and walk in them," signifying the more abundant attachment to them.
"And they shall be my people and I will be their God. " 'What?' says he, 'Do
you bear God within you, and runnest unto them? God That has nothing in
common with them? And in what can this deserve forgiveness? Bear in mind
Who walks, Who dwells in you.'