instance, this soul, this body, this nail, this bone, etc. These indeed are parts of the essence of
Socrates and Plato, but not of man precisely as man; and therefore the intellect can abstract man
from these parts. And this is the abstraction of the universal from the particular.

So there are two abstractions of the intellect. One corresponds to the union of form and matter or
accident and subject. This is the abstraction of form from sensible matter. The other corresponds
to the union of whole and part; and to this corresponds the abstraction of the universal from the
particular. This is the abstraction of a whole, in which we consider a nature absolutely, according
to its essential character, in independence of all parts that do not belong to the species but are
accidental parts. But we do not find abstractions opposed to these, by which a part is abstracted
from a whole by the intellect if it is one of the parts of matter in whose definition the whole is
included, or it can even exist without the whole if it is one of the parts of the species, for
instance, a line without a triangle, a letter without a syllable, or an element without a mixed body.
But in the case of things that can exist separately, separation rather than abstraction obtains.
Similarly, when we say from is abstracted from matter, we do not mean substantial form,
because substantial form and the matter correlative to it are interdependent, so that one is not
intelligible without the other, because the appropriate act is in its appropriate matter. Rather, we
mean the accidental forms of quantity and figure, from which indeed sensible matter cannot be
abstracted by the intellect, because sensible qualities cannot be understood unless quantity is
presupposed, as is clear in the case of surface and color. And neither can we understand
something to be the subject of motion unless we understand it to possess quantity. Substance,
however, which is the intelligible matter of quantity, can exist without quantity. Consequently,
the consideration of substance without quantity belongs to the order of separation rather than to
that of abstraction.

We conclude that there are three kinds of distinction in the operation of the intellect. There is one
through the operation of the intellect joining and dividing which is properly called separation and
this belongs to divine science or metaphysics. There is another through the operation by which
the quiddities of things are conceived which is the abstraction of form from sensible matter, and
this belongs to mathematics. And there is a third through the same operation which is the
abstraction of a universal from a particular, and this belongs to physics and to all the sciences in
general, because science disregards accidental features and treats of necessary matters. And
because certain men (for example, the Pythagoreans and the Platonists) did not understand the
difference between the last two kinds of distinction and the first, they fell into error, asserting that
the objects of mathematics and universals exist separate from sensible things.