season, that you may give yourselves unto prayer." It is prayer with unusual
earnestness which he here means. For if he is forbidding those who have
intercourse with one another to pray, how could "pray without ceasing" have any
place? It is possible then to live with a wife and yet give heed unto prayer. But
by continence prayer is made more perfect. For he did not say merely, "That ye
may pray;" but, "That ye may give yourselves unto it;" as though what he speaks
of might cause not uncleanness but much occupation.
"And may be together again, that Satan tempt you not." Thus lest it should
seem to be a matter of express enactment, he adds the reason. And what is it?
"That Satan tempt you not." And that you may understand that it is not the devil
only who causes this crime, I mean adultery, he adds, "because of your
incontinency."
"But this I say by way of permission, not of commandment. For I would that
all men were even as I myself; in a state of continence." This he does in many
places when he is advising about difficult matters; he brings forward himself,
and says, "Be imitators of me."
"Howbeit each man has his own gift from God, one after this manner, and
another after that." Thus since he had heavily charged them saying, "for your
incontinence," he again comforts them by the words, "each one has his own gift
of God;" not declaring that towards that virtue there is no need of zeal on our
part, but, as I was saying before, to comfort them. For if it be a "gift," and man
contributes nothing thereunto, how do you say, "But [1 Corinthians 7:8] I say to
the unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they abide even as I: [1
Corinthians 7:9] but if they have not continency let them marry?" Do you see
the strong sense of Paul how he both signifies that continence is better, and yet
puts no force on the person who cannot attain to it; fearing lest some offense
arise?
"For it is better to marry than to burn." He indicates how great is the
tyranny of concupiscence. What he means is something like this: "If you have to
endure much violence and burning desire, withdraw yourself from your pains

and toils, lest haply you be subverted."

1 Corinthians 7:10-11
4. "But to the married I give charge, yet not I, but the Lord."
Because it is a law expressly appointed by Christ which he is about to read
to them about the not putting away a wife without fornication; [Matthew 5:32,
19:9; Mark 10:11; Luke 16:18] therefore he says, "Not I." True it is what was
before spoken though it were not expressly stated, yet it also is His decree. But
this, you see, He had delivered in express words. So that the words "I and not I"
have this difference of meaning. For that you might not imagine even his own
words to be human, therefore he added, "For I think that I also have the Spirit of
God."
Now what is that which "to the married the Lord commanded? That the
wife depart not from her husband: [1 Corinthians 7:11] but if she depart, let her
remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband." Here, seeing that both on
the score of continence and other pretexts, and because of infirmities of temper,
([μικροψυχίας].) it fell out that separations took place: it were better, he says,
that such things should not be at all; but however if they take place, let the wife
remain with her husband, if not to cohabit with him, yet so as not to introduce
any other to be her husband.