2 Corinthians 11:21
"I speak by way of disparagement," for you suffer no whit less than men
smitten on the face. What now can be stronger than this? What oppression more
bitter than this? When having taken from you both your money and your
freedom and your honor, they even so are not gentle towards you nor suffer you
to abide in the rank of servants, but have used you more insultingly than any
bought slave.
"As though we had been weak." The expression is obscure. For since it was
a disagreeable subject he therefore so expressed it as to steal away the
offensiveness by the obscurity. For what he wishes to say is this. 'For cannot we
also do these things? Yes, but we do them not. Wherefore then do ye bear with
these men, as though we could not do these things? Surely it were something to
impute to you that you even bear with men who play the fool; but that you do
this, even when they so despise you, plunder you, exalt themselves, smite you,
can admit neither of excuse nor any reason at all. For this is a new fashion of
deceiving. For men that deceive both give and flatter; but these both deceive,
and take and insult you. Whence ye cannot have a shadow of allowance, seeing
that you spit on those that humble themselves for your sakes that you may be
exalted, but admire those who exalt themselves that you may be humbled. For
could not we too do these things? Yes, but we do not wish it, looking to your
advantage. For they indeed sacrificing your interests seek their own, but we
sacrificing our own interests seek for yours.' Do you see how in every instance,
while speaking plainly to them, he also alarms them by what he says. 'For,' he
says, 'if it be on this account that you honor them, because they smite and insult
you, we also can do this, enslave, smite, exalt ourselves against you.'
3. Do you see how he lays upon them the whole blame, both of their
senseless pride and of what seems to be folly in himself. 'For not that I may

show myself more conspicuous, but that I may set you free from this bitter
slavery, am I compelled to glory some little. But it is meet to examine not simply
things that are said, but, in addition, the reason also. For Samuel also put
together a high panegyric upon himself, when he anointed Saul, saying, "Whose
ass have I taken, or calf, or shoes? Or have I oppressed any of you?" [1 Samuel
12:3, Septuagint] And yet no one finds fault with him. And the reason is because
he did not say it by way of setting off himself; but because he was going to
appoint a king, he wishes under the form of a defence [of himself] to instruct
him to be meek and gentle. And observe the wisdom of the prophet, or rather the
loving kindness of God. For because he wished to turn them from [their design,]
bringing together a number of grievous things he asserted them of their future
king, as, for instance, that he would make their wives grind at the mill, [1
Samuel 8:11-18] the men shepherds and muleteers; for he went through all the
service appertaining to the kingdom with minuteness. But when he saw that they
would not be hindered by any of these things, but were incurably distempered;
he thus both spares them and composes their king to gentleness. [1 Samuel 12:5]
Therefore he also takes him to witness. For indeed no one was then bringing suit
or charge against him that he needed to defend himself, but he said those things
in order to make him better. And therefore also he added, to take down his pride,
"If you will hearken, you and your king," [1 Samuel 12:14] such and such good
things shall be yours; "but if you will not hearken, then the reverse of all." Amos
also said, "I was no prophet, nor the son of a prophet, but only a herdsman, a
gatherer of sycamore fruit. And God took me." [Amos 7:14-15] But he did not
say this to exalt himself, but to stop their mouths that suspected him as no
prophet, and to show that he is no deceiver, nor says of his own mind the things
which he says. Again, another also, to show the very same thing, said, "But truly
I am full of power by the spirit and might of the Lord." [Micah 3:8] And David
also when he related the matter of the lion and of the bear, [1 Samuel 17:34, etc.]
spoke not to glorify himself, but to bring about a great and admirable end. For
since it was not believed possible he could conquer the barbarian unarmed, he