Reply to Objection 1: Matrimony is the bond by which they are tied
formally, not effectively, and so it need not be distinct from the
joining.
Reply to Objection 2: Although relation is not itself a sensible
accident, its causes may be sensible. Nor is it necessary in a
sacrament for that which is both reality and sacrament [TP, Question
66, Article 1] to be sensible (for such is the relation of the aforesaid
joining to this sacrament), whereas the words expressive of consent,
which are sacrament only and are the cause of that same joining, are
sensible.
Reply to Objection 3: A relation is founded on something as its
cause---for instance likeness is founded on quality---and on
something as its subject---for instance in the things themselves that
are like; and on either hand we may find unity and diversity of
relation. Since then it is not the same identical quality that conduces
to likeness, but the same specific quality in each of the like subjects,
and since, moreover, the subjects of likeness are two in number, and
the same applies to equality, it follows that both equality and
likeness are in every way numerically distinct in either of the like or
equal subjects. But the relations of matrimony, on the one hand,
have unity in both extremes, namely on the part of the cause, since it
is directed to the one identical begetting; whereas on the part of the
subject there is numerical diversity. The fact of this relation having a
diversity of subjects is signified by the terms "husband" and "wife,"
while its unity is denoted by its being called matrimony.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether matrimony is fittingly named?

Objection 1: It would seem that matrimony is unfittingly named.
Because a thing should be named after that which ranks higher. But
the father ranks above the mother. Therefore the union of father and
mother should rather be named after the father.
Objection 2: Further, a thing should be named from that which is
essential to it, since a "definition expresses the nature signified by a
name" (Metaph. iv, 28). Now nuptials are not essential to matrimony.
Therefore matrimony should not be called nuptials.
Objection 3: Further, a species cannot take its proper name from that
which belongs to the genus. Now a joining [conjunctio] is the genus
of matrimony. Therefore it should not be called a conjugal union.
On the contrary, stands the common use of speech.
I answer that, Three things may be considered in matrimony. First,
its essence, which is a joining together, and in reference to this it is
called the "conjugal union"; secondly, its cause, which is the
wedding, and in reference to this it is called the "nuptial union" from
"nubo" ['to veil'], because at the wedding ceremony, whereby the
marriage is completed, the heads of those who are wedded are
covered with a veil; thirdly, the effect, which is the offspring, and in
reference to this it is called "matrimony," as Augustine says (Contra
Faust. xix, 26), because "a woman's sole purpose in marrying should
be motherhood." Matrimony may also be resolved into "matris
munium", i.e. a mother's duty, since the duty of bringing up the
children chiefly devolves on the women; or into "matrem muniens,"
because it provides the mother with a protector and support in the
person of her husband; or into "matrem monens," as admonishing
her not to leave her husband and take up with another man; or into
"materia unius," because it is a joining together for the purpose of
providing the matter of one offspring as though it were derived from
monos and "materia"; or into "matre" and "nato," as Isidore says
(Etym. ix), because it makes a woman the mother of a child.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the father ranks above the mother,
the mother has more to do with the offspring than the father has. or
we may say that woman was made chiefly in order to be man's