unreformed in evil practices. For it is probable, that he who omits fasting may
obtain pardon, having infirmity of body to plead; but it is impossible that he can
have an excuse who has not amended his faults. You have not fasted, it may be,
on account of bodily weakness. Tell me for what reason you are not reconciled to
your enemies? Have you, indeed, here to allege bodily infirmity? Again; if you
retain envy and hatred, what apology have you then I ask? For no one in offenses
of this kind is able to take refuge in the plea of bodily infirmity. And this was a
work of Christ's love toward man, viz. that the chief of the precepts, and those
which maintain our life, should not be impaired in any degree through the
weakness of the body.
2. But since we need to practise all the divine laws alike, and more
especially that which bids us consider no man as an enemy, nor retain resentment
long, but immediately to be reconciled; suffer us today to discourse to you
concerning this commandment. For as it is not to be imagined that the fornicator
and the blasphemer can partake of the sacred Table, so it is impossible that he
who has an enemy, and bears malice, can enjoy the holy Communion. And this
with good reason. For a man when he has committed fornication, or adultery, at
the same time that he has accomplished his lust, has also completed the sin; and
should he be willing by watchful living to recover from that fall, he may
afterwards, by manifesting great penitence, obtain some relief. But he who is
resentful works the same iniquity every day, and never brings it to an end. In the
former case the deed is over, and the sin completed; but here the sin is
perpetrated every day. What excuse can we then have, I ask, for delivering
ourselves willingly to such an evil monster? How can you ask your Lord to be
mild and merciful to you, when you have been so hard and unforgiving to your
fellow-servant?
3. But your fellow-servant has treated you with contempt perhaps? Yes!
And you have treated God with contempt oftentimes. And what comparison is
there between a fellow-servant and the Lord? As to the former, when he was
perchance in some way injured, he insulted you, and thou were exasperated. But

you insult the Lord, when you are neither treated with injustice nor ill-will by
Him, but receiving blessing of Him day by day. Consider, then, that if God chose
to search out rigourously what is done against Him, we should not live a single
day. For the prophet says, "If You will be extreme to mark iniquity, O Lord, O
Lord, who shall stand?" And, to pass by all those other things, of which the
conscience of every sinner is aware, and of which he no has no human witness,
but God only; were we to be called to account for those which are open and
admitted, what allowance could we expect for such sins? What if He were to
scrutinize our listlessness and negligence in our prayers; and how, while standing
before God and supplicating Him, we do not exhibit even so much fear and
reverence for Him as servants do toward their masters, as soldiers do toward
their officers, as friends do toward friends? When you discourse with a friend,
you give heed to what you are doing, but when waiting on God on account of
your sins, and asking pardon for so many offenses, and thinking that you shall
obtain forgiveness, you are often listless; and while your knees are lying on the
ground, you suffer your mind to wander every where, in the market, or in the
house, babbling the while with your mouth vainly and to no purpose! And this
we experience, not once or twice, but frequently! Did God then choose to
scrutinize this alone, do you think that we could obtain pardon, or be able to find
any excuse? Truly, I think not!
4. But what if the evil-speakings which we unkindly utter every day one
against another, were brought forward against us; as well as the rash judgments
with which we condemn our neighbour; and that for no reason, but because we
are fond of blaming, and given to find fault; what, I say, should we be able to
allege in defence? Again, should He scrutinize those roving glances of ours, and
those evil desires which we carry in the mind, so frequently admitting
disgraceful and impure thoughts from the unlicensed wandering of the eyes,
what punishment must we not sustain? And should He demand a reason for our
revilings, (for He says, "Whosoever shall say to his brother, You fool, shall be in
danger of hell fire,") how could we, forsooth, open our mouths, or move our lips