SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.3.

danger of committing perjury, because man easily offends in words,
according to James 3:2, "If any man offend not in word, the same is a
perfect man." Wherefore it is written (Ecclus. 23:9): "Let not thy
mouth be accustomed to swearing, for in it there are many falls."
Reply to Objection 1: Jerome, commenting on Mt. 5:34, says:
"Observe that our Saviour forbade us to swear, not by God, but by
heaven and earth. For it is known that the Jews have this most evil
custom of swearing by the elements." Yet this answer does not
suffice, because James adds, "nor by any other oath." Wherefore we
must reply that, as Augustine states (De Mendacio xv), "when the
Apostle employs an oath in his epistles, he shows how we are to
understand the saying, 'I say to you, not to swear at all'; lest, to wit,
swearing lead us to swear easily and from swearing easily, we
contract the habit, and, from swearing habitually, we fall into perjury.
Hence we find that he swore only when writing, because thought
brings caution and avoids hasty words."
Reply to Objection 2: According to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte i. 17): "If you have to swear, note that the necessity arises
from the infirmity of those whom you convince, which infirmity is
indeed an evil. Accordingly He did not say: 'That which is over and
above is evil,' but 'is of evil.' For you do no evil; since you make
good use of swearing, by persuading another to a useful purpose:
yet it 'comes of the evil' of the person by whose infirmity you are
forced to swear."
Reply to Objection 3: He who swears tempts not God, because it is
not without usefulness and necessity that he implores the Divine
assistance. Moreover, he does not expose himself to danger, if God
be unwilling to bear witness there and then: for He certainly will bear
witness at some future time, when He "will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of hearts" (1
Cor. 4:5). And this witness will be lacking to none who swears,
neither for nor against him.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether three accompanying conditions of an

oath are suitably assigned, namely, justice, judgment, and
truth?
Objection 1: It would seem that justice, judgment and truth are
unsuitably assigned as the conditions accompanying an oath.
Things should not be enumerated as diverse, if one of them includes
the other. Now of these three, one includes another, since truth is a
part of justice, according to Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 53): and
judgment is an act of justice, as stated above (Question 60, Article
1). Therefore the three accompanying conditions of an oath are
unsuitably assigned.
Objection 2: Further, many other things are required for an oath,
namely, devotion, and faith whereby we believe that God knows all
things and cannot lie. Therefore the accompanying conditions of an
oath are insufficiently enumerated.
Objection 3: Further, these three are requisite in man's every deed:
since he ought to do nothing contrary to justice and truth, or without
judgment, according to 1 Tim. 5:21, "Do nothing without prejudice," i.
e. without previous judgment. Therefore these three should not be
associated with an oath any more than with other human actions.
On the contrary, It is written (Jer. 4:2): "Thou shalt swear: As the
Lord liveth, in truth, and in judgment, and in justice": which words
Jerome expounds, saying: "Observe that an oath must be
accompanied by these conditions, truth, judgment and justice."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), an oath is not good except
for one who makes good use of it. Now two conditions are required
for the good use of an oath. First, that one swear, not for frivolous,
but for urgent reasons, and with discretion; and this requires
judgment or discretion on the part of the person who swears.
Secondly, as regards the point to be confirmed by oath, that it be
neither false, nor unlawful, and this requires both truth, so that one
employ an oath in order to confirm what is true, and justice, so that
one confirm what is lawful. A rash oath lacks judgment, a false oath
lacks truth, and a wicked or unlawful oath lacks justice.
Reply to Objection 1: Judgment does not signify here the execution