the Gentiles are in dread not of God only, but even of the servants of God.
8. Consider, moreover, how the crown of this victory was woven by the
adversaries, and the enemies themselves were made witnesses of this trophy. For
"Nebuchadnezzar," it says, "sent to gather together the princes, the governors,
and the captains, the judges, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to
come to the dedication of the image, and they were all gathered together."
[Daniel 3:2] The enemy prepares the theatre, and he himself collects together the
spectators, and prepares the lists; a theatre too, not of chance persons, or of some
private individuals, but of all those who were honourable and in authority, to the
end that their testimony may be worthy of credit with the multitude. They had
come summoned for one thing; but they all departed having beheld another
thing. They came in order to worship the image; and they departed, having
derided the image, and struck with wonder at the power of God, through the
signs which had taken place with respect to these young men. And observe,
where the field for this display was spread out. No city, nor select enclosure
furnished room for this theatre of the whole world, but smooth and naked plains.
For in the plain of Dura, outside the city, he set up the image, and the herald
came and cried, "To you it is commanded, O people, nations, and languages, that
at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery,
dulcimer, and all kinds of music, you fall down and worship the golden image;"
(for a fall indeed it was to worship the idol) "and whoso falls not down, and
worships, shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace."
[Daniel 3:4, 6] Do you see how difficult these struggles are made; how
irresistible the snare; and how deep the gulph, and a precipice on either hand?
But be not afraid. In whatever degree the enemy increases his machinations, so
much the more does he display the courage of the young men. For this reason is
there this symphony of so many musicians; for this reason the burning furnace;
in order that both pleasure, and fear, may besiege the souls of those present. Is
there any one of harsh and unyielding character among them? "Let the melody of
every kind of music," says he, "enchant and soften him." But is he superior to

this artifice, "let the sight of the flame affright and astound him." Thus was fear
as well as pleasure present; the one entering to assault the soul by the ears, the
other by the eyes. But the noble character of these youths was not by any such
means to be conquered; but even as, when they fell into the fire, they mastered
the flames, even so they derided all desire and all fear. For it was for them the
devil had prepared all these things beforehand. For he had no doubts of his own
subjects, but was exceedingly confident that no one would resist the royal
mandate. But when all fell down, and were subdued, then the youths alone are
led into the midst; in order that from this too the conquest may become the more
illustrious, they alone conquering and being proclaimed victors among so vast a
multitude. For this would not have been so surprising if they had acted
courageously at the first, when as yet no one had been overthrown. But the
greatest, and most astonishing fact was, that the multitude of those who fell
down, neither affrighted, nor enfeebled them. They did not say to themselves any
such things as many are ofttimes wont to say; "If we were the first, and the only
persons to worship the image, this would have been a sin: but if we do this with
so many myriads, who will not make allowance? Who will not think us worthy of
defence?" nothing of that sort did they say or think, when they beheld the
prostrate forms of so many tyrants. Consider thou also with me the wickedness
of those who were their accusers, and how maliciously and bitterly they brought
the accusation! "There are," say they, "certain Jews whom you have set up over
the works of the province of Babylon." They did not merely make mention of the
nation, but they also bring to mind their honourable condition, that they may
inflame the wrath of the king; almost as if they had said, "These slaves, these
captives, who are without a city, you have made rulers over us. But they show
contempt for such honour, and treat insolently him who has given them this
honour!" Therefore they say this; "The Jews whom you have set over the works
of the province of Babylon, obey not your decree, nor serve your gods."
[Daniel 3:12] The accusation becomes their greatest praise; and the crimes
imputed, their encomium; a testimony indeed that is indubitable, since their