FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the cardinal virtues are fittingly divided

into social virtues, perfecting, perfect, and exemplar virtues?
Objection 1: It would seem that these four virtues are unfittingly
divided into exemplar virtues, perfecting virtues, perfect virtues, and
social virtues. For as Macrobius says (Super Somn. Scip. 1), the
"exemplar virtues are such as exist in the mind of God." Now the
Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 8) that "it is absurd to ascribe justice,
fortitude, temperance, and prudence to God." Therefore these virtues
cannot be exemplar.
Objection 2: Further, the "perfect" virtues are those which are
without any passion: for Macrobius says (Super Somn. Scip. 1) that
"in a soul that is cleansed, temperance has not to check worldly
desires, for it has forgotten all about them: fortitude knows nothing
about the passions; it does not have to conquer them." Now it was
stated above (Question 59, Article 5) that the aforesaid virtues
cannot be without passions. Therefore there is no such thing as
"perfect" virtue.
Objection 3: Further, he says (Macrobius: Super Somn. Scip. 1) that
the "perfecting" virtues are those of the man "who flies from human
affairs and devotes himself exclusively to the things of God." But it
seems wrong to do this, for Cicero says (De Offic. i): "I reckon that it
is not only unworthy of praise, but wicked for a man to say that he
despises what most men admire, viz. power and office." Therefore
there are no "perfecting" virtues.
Objection 4: Further, he says (Macrobius: Super Somn. Scip. 1) that
the "social" virtues are those "whereby good men work for the good
of their country and for the safety of the city." But it is only legal
justice that is directed to the common weal, as the Philosopher
states (Ethic. v, 1). Therefore other virtues should not be called
"social."
On the contrary, Macrobius says (Super Somn. Scip. 1): "Plotinus,
together with Plato foremost among teachers of philosophy, says:
'The four kinds of virtue are fourfold: In the first place there are
social virtues; secondly, there are perfecting virtues [virtutes
purgatoriae]; thirdly, there are perfect [virtutes purgati animi] virtues;
and fourthly, there are exemplar virtues'".

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.6.

I answer that, As Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. vi), "the soul
needs to follow something in order to give birth to virtue: this
something is God: if we follow Him we shall live aright."
Consequently the exemplar of human virtue must needs pre-exist in
God, just as in Him pre-exist the types of all things. Accordingly
virtue may be considered as existing originally in God, and thus we
speak of "exemplar" virtues: so that in God the Divine Mind itself
may be called prudence; while temperance is the turning of God's
gaze on Himself, even as in us it is that which conforms the appetite
to reason. God's fortitude is His unchangeableness; His justice is the
observance of the Eternal Law in His works, as Plotinus states (Cf.
Macrobius, Super Somn. Scip. 1).
Again, since man by his nature is a social animal, these virtues, in so
far as they are in him according to the condition of his nature, are
called "social" virtues; since it is by reason of them that man
behaves himself well in the conduct of human affairs. It is in this
sense that we have been speaking of these virtues until now.
But since it behooves a man to do his utmost to strive onward even
to Divine things, as even the Philosopher declares in Ethic. x, 7, and
as Scripture often admonishes us---for instance: "Be ye . . . perfect,
as your heavenly Father is perfect" (Mt. 5:48), we must needs place
some virtues between the social or human virtues, and the exemplar
virtues which are Divine. Now these virtues differ by reason of a
difference of movement and term: so that some are virtues of men
who are on their way and tending towards the Divine similitude; and
these are called "perfecting" virtues. Thus prudence, by
contemplating the things of God, counts as nothing all things of the
world, and directs all the thoughts of the soul to God alone:
temperance, so far as nature allows, neglects the needs of the body;
fortitude prevents the soul from being afraid of neglecting the body
and rising to heavenly things; and justice consists in the soul giving
a whole-hearted consent to follow the way thus proposed. Besides
these there are the virtues of those who have already attained to the
Divine similitude: these are called the "perfect virtues." Thus
prudence sees nought else but the things of God; temperance knows
no earthly desires; fortitude has no knowledge of passion; and
justice, by imitating the Divine Mind, is united thereto by an
everlasting covenant. Such as the virtues attributed to the Blessed,
or, in this life, to some who are at the summit of perfection.