FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.3.

life when once the body is corrupted.
But this opinion is contrary to the mind of Aristotle, who states (De
Anima iii, text. 8) that "the possible intellect is in act when it is
identified with each thing as knowing it; and yet, even then, it is in
potentiality to consider it actually." It is also contrary to reason,
because intelligible species are contained by the "possible" intellect
immovably, according to the mode of their container. Hence the
"possible" intellect is called "the abode of the species" (De Anima iii)
because it preserves the intelligible species.
And yet the phantasms, by turning to which man understands in this
life, by applying the intelligible species to them as stated in the FP,
Question 84, Article 7; FP, Question 85, Article 1, ad 5, cease as soon
as the body is corrupted. Hence, so far as the phantasms are
concerned, which are the quasi-material element in the intellectual
virtues, these latter cease when the body is destroyed: but as
regards the intelligible species, which are in the "possible" intellect,
the intellectual virtues remain. Now the species are the quasi-formal
element of the intellectual virtues. Therefore these remain after this
life, as regards their formal element, just as we have stated
concerning the moral virtues (Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: The saying of the Apostle is to be understood
as referring to the material element in science, and to the mode of
understanding; because, to it, neither do the phantasms remain,
when the body is destroyed; nor will science be applied by turning to
the phantasms.
Reply to Objection 2: Sickness destroys the habit of science as to its
material element, viz. the phantasms, but not as to the intelligible
species, which are in the "possible" intellect.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated in the FP, Question 89, Article 1, the
separated soul has a mode of understanding, other than by turning
to the phantasms. Consequently science remains, yet not as to the
same mode of operation; as we have stated concerning the moral
virtues (Article 1).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.3.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.67, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether faith remains after this life?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith remains after this life. Because
faith is more excellent than science. Now science remains after this
life, as stated above (Article 2). Therefore faith remains also.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (1 Cor. 3:11): "Other foundation no
man can lay, but that which is laid; which is Christ Jesus," i.e. faith
in Jesus Christ. Now if the foundation is removed, that which is built
upon it remains no more. Therefore, if faith remains not after this life,
no other virtue remains.
Objection 3: Further, the knowledge of faith and the knowledge of
glory differ as perfect from imperfect. Now imperfect knowledge is
compatible with perfect knowledge: thus in an angel there can be
"evening" and "morning" knowledge [FP, Question 58, Article 6]; and
a man can have science through a demonstrative syllogism, together
with opinion through a probable syllogism, about one same
conclusion. Therefore after this life faith also is compatible with the
knowledge of glory.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (2 Cor. 5:6,7): "While we are in the
body, we are absent from the Lord: for we walk by faith and not by
sight." But those who are in glory are not absent from the Lord, but
present to Him. Therefore after this life faith does not remain in the
life of glory.
I answer that, Opposition is of itself the proper cause of one thing
being excluded from another, in so far, to wit, as wherever two
things are opposite to one another, we find opposition of affirmation
and negation. Now in some things we find opposition in respect of
contrary forms; thus in colors we find white and black. In others we
find opposition in respect of perfection and imperfection: wherefore
in alterations, more and less are considered to be contraries, as
when a thing from being less hot is made more hot (Phys. v, text. 19).
And since perfect and imperfect are opposite to one another, it is
impossible for perfection and imperfection to affect the same thing
at the same time.
Now we must take note that sometimes imperfection belongs to a
thing's very nature, and belongs to its species: even as lack of