by always walking in the narrow and strait path, you have trained yourself in all
these things. Wherefore having practised this most beautiful art in the course of
your training, you now shine forth the more gloriously in the contest itself, not
only being in no wise disturbed by the things which are happening, but rather
elated, and leaping and dancing for joy. For the contests which you have
anticipated in your training you now undertake with much ease, although it be in
a woman's body, feebler than a cobweb, treading under foot with derisive scorn
the fury of lusty men gnashing their teeth upon you; being ready to suffer even
worse things than they prepare for you. Happy and thrice happy are you by
reason of the crowns of victory to be won, but even more by reason of the
contest itself. For such is the nature of these struggles, even before the prizes are
given even in the midst of strife they have their recompense and reward—the
pleasure which you are now enjoying, the cheerfulness, the courage, the
endurance, the patience, the power which is proof against capture and conquest
and rises superior to all things; the perfect training which renders you insensible
to any terror at the hands of any one, the power of standing on a rock in the
midst of mighty billows of tribulation, and sailing in a calm with a favourable
breeze when the sea is raging around you. These are the prizes of affliction even
in this world before the kingdom of heaven is won. For I know very well that,
even at this present time, being elated with joy, thou dost not consider yourself
clothed with a body, but if an opportunity should summon you to do it, you
would divest yourself of it more readily than others do of the raiment which they
wear. Rejoice therefore and be glad both for yourself, and for those who have
died a blessed death, not in a bed, nor in a house, but in prison, and chains, and
torment; and bewail those only who do these things, and grieve for them. But
since you also wish to be informed concerning my bodily health, let me tell you
that I have been relieved for the present from the infirmity which was lately
oppressing me, and am now in a more comfortable condition: the only fear is lest
the winter on its return should again make havoc of my feeble digestion; and as
far as the Isaurians are concerned we now enjoy great security.

## Letter to Some Priests of Antioch

The following letter is added as a specimen, out of a very large number, of
the natural, almost playful style, and tone of warm affection, in which
Chrysostom wrote to his intimate friends. All his extant letters were written
during his exile, and therefore there is much repetition in their contents, and
great general similarity of character.
To Castus, Valerius, Diophantus, Cyriacus — Presybters of Antioch
I am not surprised that you call my long letter a short one. For this is just
the way with lovers; they do not recognize such a thing as satiety, they will not
admit such a thing as satisfaction, but the more they receive from the objects of
their love the more they seek. Therefore, even if the letter which you have
received had been ten times as large as the former one, it would not have
escaped the epithet of "brief;" in fact it would have been called a small letter,
and not only would it have been so called, but it would have actually seemed
such in your eyes. Hence I also in my turn am never satisfied with the measure
of affection for me which you have attained, but am always seeking to make
additions to your love-draught, and daily demanding the discharge of your love
debt which is always being paid, and yet is always owing (for it is written, "owe
no man anything but to love one another" [Romans 13:8]). I am indeed
continually receiving what I ask in great abundance, yet never think that I have
received the whole. Do not cease then to pay down this goodly debt, which has a
twofold pleasure. For those who pay, and those who receive, derive equal
enjoyment, inasmuch as they are both alike enriched by the payment; which in
the case of money is an impossibility, for there the one who pays becomes
poorer, and only the man who has received is richer. But this is not what
commonly happens in the covenant of love. For he who pays it is not less bereft
of it, as in the case of money when it is transferred to the receiver; but payment