but because they knew, that this is the greatest principality and honour? And they
showed in very deed that he only is blessed who lays hold of the wisdom which
is from above, that he undergoes no change and sustains no adversity, but enjoys
a continued tranquillity, and laughs to scorn all things which seem to be
sorrowful. At the present time at least, those who were once in power are
oppressed by much sadness, inhabiting the prison, and loaded with chains, and
daily expecting to be put to death. But these men on the contrary enjoy the purest
pleasure; and if it be their lot to suffer anything terrible, this, and the very things
which seem formidable to others, are welcome to them, for they know well
towards what point they are running, and what lot will await them when they
depart hence. But while they live with so much exactness, and smile at death,
they nevertheless grieve for others, and reap therefrom, in turn, the greatest
advantage. Let us then be in earnest to take care of our souls, and nothing which
may come unlooked for can make us sad. And on behalf of those who are in
prison, let us beseech God that He will deliver them from their present calamity.
For it was in God's power at once to release us from this dire evil, and not to
suffer even the smallest part of it to remain; but in order that we may not again
go back to our former negligence, He has provided that the torrent of these evils
should subside gently and little by little, holding us fast to the same pious
resolutions.
13. And that this is true, and that many would have gone back to their
former supineness, if we had been released from the whole difficulty at once, is
manifest from this circumstance; that while yet the remnants of the calamity are
left, while the sentence of the Emperor is yet doubtful, and those who conducted
the affairs of the city are all in prison, many of our fellow inhabitants, through
their inordinate desire of bathing, run to the river, there making endless
merriment, behaving wantonly, leaping, dancing, and dragging women after
them. What pardon can such be worthy of? What kind of excuse can they offer?
Or rather, what kind of punishment and vengeance do they not deserve? The
head of the city is in the public prison; our members are in exile; the sentence

concerning them is doubtful; and do you, I ask, dance, sport, and laugh? "Why,
we could not endure," says some one, "to remain without the bath?" O shameless
disposition, sordid and perverted! How many months, I ask, how many years,
have past? You have not been as yet shut out from the bath for twenty days; and
you are as much distressed and discontented, as if you had continued without
washing for a whole year! Tell me, was this your state, when thou were
expecting an attack from the military, when thou were daily anticipating bring
put to death, when you fled to the deserts, and wast hurrying to the mountain
tops? If any one had then proposed to you to remain "a year" without the bath,
so that you might be rescued from the impending distress, would you not readily
have accepted the proposal, and submitted to it? When, therefore, it were
becoming that you should give thanks to God, Who has freed you from all these
things without any loss, do you again grow wanton and contemptuous; and when
the fear has passed away, turn back afresh to a worse state of negligence? Have
these dire events really touched you, and yet are you so desirous of the baths?
Why, if the bath had been permitted, would not the calamity of those who are yet
in confinement have been sufficient to persuade those who are not in the same
grievous condition to be forgetful of every luxury? Life itself is at stake, and do
you remember the baths, and desire to be luxurious? Do you despise the danger
because you have now escaped it? Take heed lest you entangle yourself in the
necessity of a greater punishment, and call back in larger measure the wrath
which is removed, and experience the very thing which Christ declared
concerning the devils. For He says, that "when the unclean spirit is gone out, and
afterwards finds the house void and swept, he takes seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and enters into the soul, and the last state of that man is
worse than the first." Therefore let us also fear, lest now we are liberated from
our former evils, we afterwards by our listlessness draw upon us those which are
greater! I know that you yourselves are free from this folly; but you should
restrain, punish, and sober those who walk disorderly, that you may always
rejoice even as Paul commanded, that both for our own good works, and for our