hurt. For nothing is worse than being taken up with these things, and delighting
in them, and being riveted to them. For more bitter is this grievous slavery, when
any one finds delight even in being a slave. For in what spiritual matter will she
ever be diligent as she ought; when will she laugh to scorn, as she should, the
things of this world, who thinks it a worthy matter for joy, that she has been
chained in gold? For he that continues in prison, and is pleased, will never desire
to be set free; as indeed neither will this woman; but as having become a kind of
captive to this wicked desire, she will not endure so much as to hear spiritual
language with becoming desire and diligence, much less to engage in such work.
What then is the profit of these ornaments and this luxury? I pray you. "I
am pleased with them," you say. Again you have told of the hurt and the ruin.
"But I enjoy also," you say, "much honor from the beholders." And what is this?
This is the occasion of another destruction, when you are lifted up to
haughtiness, to arrogance. Come now, since you have not told me of the profit,
bear with me while I tell you of the mischiefs. What then are the mischiefs
resulting therefrom? Anxiety, which is greater than the pleasure. Wherefore
many of the beholders, these I mean of the grosser sort, derive more pleasure
from it than she who wears the gold. For thou indeed deckest yourself with
anxiety, but they, without this, feast their eyes.
Moreover, there are other things again, the debasing of the soul, the being
looked upon with envy on all sides. For the neighboring women stung by it, arm
themselves against their own husbands, and stir up against you grievous wars.
Together with these things, the fact that all one's leisure and anxiety are spent on
this object, that one does not apply one's self earnestly to spiritual achievements;
that one is filled with haughtiness, arrogance, and vainglory; that one is riveted
to the earth, and loses one's wings, and instead of an eagle, becomes a dog or a
swine. For having given up looking up into Heaven, and flying there, you bend
down to the earth like the swine, being curious about mines and caverns, and
having an unmanly and base soul. But do you, when you appear, turn towards
you the eyes of them at the market-place? Well then; for this very reason, you

should not wear gold, that you may not become a common gazing stock, and
open the mouths of many accusers. For none of those whose eyes are toward you
admires you, but they jeer at you, as fond of dress, as boastful, as a carnal
woman. And should you enter into a church, you go forth, without getting
anything but countless leers, and revilings, and curses, not from the beholders
only, but also from the prophet. For straightway Isaiah, that has the fullest voice
of all, as soon as he has seen you, will cry out, "These things says the Lord
against the princely daughters of Sion; because they walked with a lofty neck,
and with winkings of the eyes, and in their walking, trailing their garments, and
mincing at the same time with their feet; the Lord shall take off their bravery,
and instead of a sweet smell there shall be dust, and instead of a stomacher, you
shall gird yourself with a cord." [1 Timothy 2:9]
These things for your gorgeous array. For not to them only are these words
addressed, but to every woman that does like them. And Paul again with him
stands as an accuser, telling Timothy to charge the women, "not to adorn
themselves with braided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array." So that
everywhere the wearing of gold is hurtful, but especially when you are entering
into a church, when you pass through the poor. For if you were exceedingly
anxious to bring an accusation against yourself, you could not put on any other
array than this visage of cruelty and inhumanity.
4. Consider at any rate how many hungry bellies you pass by with this
array, how many naked bodies with this satanical display. How much better to
feed hungry souls, than to bore through the lobes of your ears, and to hang from
them the food of countless poor for no purpose or profit. What? Is to be rich a
commendation? What? Is to wear gold a praise? Though it be from honest
earnings that these things are put on you, even so what you have done is a very
heavy charge against you; but when it is moreover from dishonesty, consider the
exceeding greatness of it.
But do you love praises and honor? Strip yourself therefore of this
ridiculous clothing, and then all will admire you; then shall you enjoy both honor