THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.36, C.6.

the intellect. The Jews, however, were accustomed to receive Divine
answers through the angels; through whom they also received the
Law, according to Acts 7:53: "You . . . have received the Law by the
disposition of angels." And the Gentiles, especially astrologers, were
wont to observe the course of the stars. And therefore Christ's birth
was made known to the righteous, viz. Simeon and Anna, by the
interior instinct of the Holy Ghost, according to Lk. 2:26: "He had
received an answer from the Holy Ghost that he should not see
death before he had seen the Christ of the Lord." But to the
shepherds and Magi, as being occupied with material things, Christ's
birth was made known by means of visible apparitions. And since
this birth was not only earthly, but also, in a way, heavenly, to both
(shepherds and Magi) it is revealed through heavenly signs: for, as
Augustine says in a sermon on the Epiphany (cciv): "The angels
inhabit, and the stars adorn, the heavens: by both, therefore, do the
'heavens show forth the glory of God.'" Moreover, it was not without
reason that Christ's birth was made known, by means of angels, to
the shepherds, who, being Jews, were accustomed to frequent
apparitions of the angels: whereas it was revealed by means of a star
to the Magi, who were wont to consider the heavenly bodies.
Because, as Chrysostom says (Hom. vi in Matth.): "Our Lord deigned
to call them through things to which they were accustomed." There
is also another reason. For, as Gregory says (Hom. x in Evang.): "To
the Jews, as rational beings, it was fitting that a rational animal [FP,
Question 51, Article 1, ad 2]," viz. an angel, "should preach. Whereas
the Gentiles, who were unable to come to the knowledge of God
through the reason, were led to God, not by words, but by signs. And
as our Lord, when He was able to speak, was announced by heralds
who spoke, so before He could speak He was manifested by
speechless elements." Again, there is yet another reason. For, as
Augustine [Pope Leo] says in a sermon on the Epiphany: "To
Abraham was promised an innumerable progeny, begotten, not of
carnal propagation, but of the fruitfulness of faith. For this reason it
is compared to the multitude of stars; that a heavenly progeny might
be hoped for." Wherefore the Gentiles, "who are thus designated by
the stars, are by the rising of a new star stimulated" to seek Christ,
through whom they are made the seed of Abraham.
Reply to Objection 1: That which of itself is hidden needs to be
manifested, but not that which in itself is manifest. Now, the flesh of
Him who was born was manifest, whereas the Godhead was hidden.
And therefore it was fitting that this birth should be made known by
angels, who are the ministers of God. Wherefore also a certain