substance of the act, the way of acting, its origin and its effect: in
respect of which we find that contrition has been defined in various
ways. For, as regards the substance of the act, we have the
definition given above: and since the act of contrition is both an act
of virtue, and a part of the sacrament of Penance, its nature as an act
of virtue is explained in this definition by mentioning its genus, viz.
"sorrow," its object by the words "for sins," and the act of choice
which is necessary for an act of virtue, by the word "assumed":
while, as a part of the sacrament, it is made manifest by pointing out
its relation to the other parts, in the words "together with the
purpose of confessing and of making satisfaction."
There is another definition which defines contrition, only as an act of
virtue; but at the same time including the difference which confines
it to a special virtue, viz. penance, for it is thus expressed:
"Contrition is voluntary sorrow for sin whereby man punishes in
himself that which he grieves to have done," because the addition of
the word "punishes" defines the definition to a special virtue.
Another definition is given by Isidore (De Sum. Bono ii, 12) as
follows: "Contrition is a tearful sorrow and humility of mind, arising
from remembrance of sin and fear of the Judgment." Here we have
an allusion to the derivation of the word, when it is said that it is
"humility of the mind," because just as pride makes the mind rigid,
so is a man humbled, when contrition leads him to give up his mind.
Also the external manner is indicated by the word "tearful," and the
origin of contrition, by the words, "arising from remembrance of
sin," etc. Another definition is taken from the words of Augustine,
and indicates the effect of contrition. It runs thus: "Contrition is the
sorrow which takes away sin." Yet another is gathered from the
words of Gregory (Moral. xxxiii, 11) as follows: "Contrition is humility
of the soul, crushing sin between hope and fear." Here the derivation
is indicated by saying that contrition is "humility of the soul"; the
effect, by the words, "crushing sin"; and the origin, by the words,
"between hope and fear." Indeed, it includes not only the principal
cause, which is fear, but also its joint cause, which is hope, without
which, fear might lead to despair.
Reply to Objection 1: Although sins, when committed, were
voluntary, yet when we are contrite for them, they are no longer
voluntary, so that they occur against our will; not indeed in respect
of the will that we had when we consented to them, but in respect of
that which we have now, so as to wish they had never been.

Reply to Objection 2: Contrition is from God alone as to the form that
quickens it, but as to the substance of the act, it is from the free-will
and from God, Who operates in all works both of nature and of will.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the entire punishment may be
remitted by contrition, yet confession and satisfaction are still
necessary, both because man cannot be sure that his contrition was
sufficient to take away all, and because confession and satisfaction
are a matter of precept: wherefore he becomes a transgressor, who
confesses not and makes not satisfaction.