nothing of these things; for when she came out to meet me she concealed these
things from me, but disclosed them to her steward who was there, and ordered
him to afford me every possible means of repose, and if any of the monks should
make an assault, wishing to insult or maltreat me, he was to collect the labourers
from her other farms, and thus marshal a force against them. Moreover she
besought me to take refuge in her house, which had a fortress and was
impregnable, that I might escape the hands of the bishop and monks. This
however I could not be induced to do, but remained in the villa, knowing nothing
of the plans which were devised after these things. For even then they were not
content to desist from their fury against me but Pharetrius beset the lady as she
says, strictly threatening her, constraining and forcing her to expel me even from
the suburbs, so that at midnight, I knowing nothing of these things, the lady
being unable to endure his annoyance, announced, without my knowledge, that
the barbarians were at hand, for she was ashamed to mention the compulsion
which she had undergone. So in the middle of the night Evethius the presbyter
came to me, and having roused me from sleep, exclaimed with a loud voice "Get
up, I pray you, the barbarians are upon us, they are close at hand." Imagine my
condition on hearing this! Then, when I said to him what must we do? We
cannot take refuge in the city lest we suffer worse things than what the Isaurians
are going to do to us, he compelled me to go out. It was midnight, a dark, murky
night without a moon— a circumstance which filled up the measure of our
perplexity— we had no companion, no assistant, for all had deserted us.
Nevertheless under the pressure of fear and in the expectation of immediate
death, I got up, suffering as I was, having ordered torches to be lit. These
however the presbyter ordered to be put out, for fear as he said lest the
barbarians should be attracted by the light and attack us; so the torches were
extinguished. Then the mule which carried my litter fell on its knees, the road
being rugged, and steep and stony, and I who was inside was thrown down and
narrowly escaped destruction, after which I dismounted, and was dragged along
on foot, being held fast by Evethius the presbyter (for he also had alighted from

his mule), and so I plodded on, led, or rather hauled by the hand, for to walk was
impossible through such a difficult country, and among steep mountains in the
middle of the night. Imagine what my sufferings must have been, encompassed
as I was by such calamities, and oppressed by the fever, ignorant of the plans
which had been made, but in terror of the barbarians and trembling. with the
expectation of falling into their hands. Do you not think that these sufferings
alone, even if nothing else besides had befallen me, would avail to blot out many
of my sins, and afford ample material for obtaining praise with God? Now the
reason of all this, at least as I suppose, was, that as soon as I arrived in Cæsarea,
those who were in official positions, the learned men who were ex-vicars, and
ex-governors, the ex-tribunes and indeed the whole people visited me every day,
paid me great attention, and treated me as the apple of their eye; I suppose these
things irritated Pharetrius and that the envy which drove me from Constantinople
did not refrain from pursuing me even here. This at least is what I suppose, for I
do not positively declare it but only suspect it to be the fact.
And what is one to say about the other events which happened on the way,
the fears and the perils? As I recall them day by day, and continually bear them
in mind, I am elated with pleasure, I leap for joy as one who has a great treasure
laid up in store for him; for such is my position and feeling about them.
Wherefore also I beseech your Honour to rejoice at these things, to be glad, and
leap for joy, and to glorify God who has counted me worthy to suffer such
things. And I beseech you to keep these matters to yourself, and not to divulge
them to any one, although for the most part the proconsular soldiers can fill all
the city (with the story) as they themselves have undergone extreme danger.
4. Nevertheless do not let any one know this from your prudence, but rather
put down those who talk about it. But if you are distressed lest the consequences
of my ill-treatment should remain, know for certain that I have shaken myself
entirely free from them, and that I am in better bodily health than when I was
sojourning in Cæsarea. And why do you dread the cold? For a suitable dwelling
has been prepared for me, and my lord Dioscorus does and arranges everything