Will ye that I remind you of yet another prison? It seems necessary to go on
from this chain to another prison still. And which will you? Shall it be that of
Jeremiah, or of Joseph, or of John? Thanks to Paul's chain; how many prisons
has it opened to our discourse? Will you have that of John? He also was once
bound for Christ's sake, and for the law of God. What then? Was he idle when he
was in prison? Was it not from thence he sent, by his disciples, and said, "Are
You He that comes, or look we for another?" [Matthew 11:2-3] Even when there,
then, it seems he taught, for surely he did not disregard his duty. But again, did
not Jeremiah prophesy concerning the king of Babylon, and fulfil his work even
there in prison? And what of Joseph? Was he not in prison thirteen years? What
then? Not even there did he forget his virtue. I have yet to mention the bonds of
one and therewith will close my discourse. Our Master Himself was bound, He
who loosed the world from sins. Those hands were bound, those hands that
wrought ten thousand good deeds. For, "they bound Him," it says, "and led Him
away to Caiaphas;" [Matthew 27:2; John 18:24] yes, He was bound who had
wrought so many marvellous works.
Reflecting on these things, let us never repine; but whether we be in bonds,
let us rejoice; or whether we be not in bonds, let us be as though we were bound
together with Him. See how great a blessing are bonds! Knowing all these
things, let us send up our thanksgiving for all things to God, through Christ Jesus
our Lord with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory,
might, and honor, now and forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 9 on Ephesians

Chapter IV. Verses 1-3
"I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you, to walk worthily of the
calling wherewith you were called, with all lowliness and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love; giving diligence to keep the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace."
Great has the power of Paul's chain been shown to be, and more glorious
than miracles. It is not in vain then, as it should seem, nor without an object, that
he here holds it forward, but as the means of all others most likely to touch them.
And what says he? "I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beseech you, to walk
worthily of the calling wherewith you were called." And how is that? "with all
lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love."
It is not the being merely a prisoner that is honorable, but the being so for
Christ's sake. Hence he says, "in the Lord," i.e., the prisoner for Christ's sake.
Nothing is equal to this. But now the chain is dragging me away still more from
my subject, and pulling me back again, and I cannot bear to resist it, but am
drawn along willingly—yea, rather, with all my heart; and would that it were
always my lot to be descanting on Paul's chain.
But now do not become drowsy: for I am yet desirous to solve that other
question, which many raise, when they say, Why, if tribulation be a glory, how
came Paul himself to say in his defence to Agrippa, "I would to God that
whether with little or with much not thou only, but also all that hear me this day,
might become such as I am, except these bonds?" [Acts 26:29] He said not this,
God forbid! As deeming the thing a matter to be deprecated; no; for had it been
such, he would not have gloried in bonds, in imprisonments, in those other
tribulations; and when writing elsewhere he says, "Most gladly will I rather
glory in my weaknesses." [2 Corinthians 12:9] But what is the case? This was