any other temporal thing, he receive him, but because he is either a prophet or a
righteous man, he shall receive a prophet's reward, and a righteous man's reward;
such as it were meet for him to have, that has received a prophet, or a righteous
man; or, such as that other is himself to receive. Which kind of thing Paul also
said: "That your abundance may be a supply for their want, that their abundance
also may be a supply for your want." [2 Corinthians 8:14]
Then, lest any one should allege poverty, He says,
"Or whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup of cold
water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise
lose his reward." [Matthew 10:43]
"Though a cup of cold water be your gift, on which there is nothing laid
out, even of this shall a reward be stored up for you. For I do all things for the
sake of you the receivers."
Do you see what mighty persuasions He used, and how He opened to them
the houses of the whole world? Yea, He signified that men are their debtors: first,
by saying, "The workman is worthy of his hire;" secondly, by sending them forth
having nothing; thirdly, by giving them up to wars and fightings in behalf of
them that receive them; fourthly, by committing to them miracles also; fifthly, in
that He did by their lips introduce peace, the cause of all blessings, into the
houses of such as receive them; sixthly, by threatening things more grievous than
Sodom to such as receive them not: seventhly, by signifying that as many as
welcome them are receiving both Himself and the Father; eighthly, by promising
both a prophet's and a righteous man's reward: ninthly, by undertaking that the
recompenses shall be great, even for a cup of cold water. Now each one of these
things, even by itself, were enough to attract them. For who, tell me, when a
leader of armies wounded in innumerable places, and dyed in blood, came in
sight, returning after many trophies from war and conflict, would not receive
him, throwing open every door in his house?
5. But who now is like this? One may say. Therefore He added, "In the
name of a disciple, and of a prophet, and of a righteous man;" to instruct you

that not for the worthiness of the visitor, but for the purpose of him that gives
welcome, is His reward appointed. For though here He speak of prophets, and
righteous men, and disciples, yet elsewhere He bids men receive the veriest
outcasts, and punishes such as fail to do so. For, "Inasmuch as you did it not to
one of the least of these, you did it not to me;" [Matthew 25:45] and the converse
again He affirms with respect to the same persons.
Since though he may be doing no such great work, he is a man, inhabiting
the same world with you, beholding the same sun having the same soul, the same
Lord, a partaker with you of the same mysteries, called to the same heaven with
you; having a strong claim, his poverty, and his want of necessary food. But now
they that waken you with flutes and pipes in the winter season, and disturb you
without purpose or fruit, depart from you receiving many gifts. And they that
carry about swallows, and smut themselves over, and abuse every one, receive a
reward for this their conjuration. But if there come to you a poor man wanting
bread, there is no end of revilings, and reproaches, and charges of idleness, and
upbraidings, and insults, and jeers; and you consider not with yourself, that you
too art idle, and yet God gives you His gifts. For tell me not this, that you too art
doing somewhat, but point me out this rather, if it be anything really needful that
you do, and art busy about. But if you tell one of money-getting, and of traffic,
and of the care and increase of your goods, I also would say unto you, Not these,
but alms, and prayers, and the protection of the injured, and all such things, are
truly works, with respect to which we live in thorough idleness. Yet God never
told us, "Because you are idle, I light not up the sun for you; because you do
nothing of real consequence, I quench the moon, I paralyze the womb of the
earth, I restrain the lakes, the fountains, the rivers, I blot out the atmosphere: I
withhold the annual rains:" but He gives us all abundantly. And to some that are
not merely idle, but even doing evil, He freely gives the benefit of these things.
When therefore you see a poor man, and say, "It stops my breath that this
fellow, young as he is and healthy, having nothing, would rather be fed in
idleness; he is surely some slave and runaway, and has deserted his proper