Homily 7 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts II. 37
"Now when they heard these words (E.V. 'this,') they were pricked in their
heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren,
what shall we do?"
Do you see what a great thing gentleness is? More than any vehemence, it
pricks our hearts, inflicts a keener wound. For as in the case of bodies which
have become callous, the man that strikes upon them does not affect the sense so
powerfully, but if he first mollify them and make them tender, then he pierces
them effectually; so in this instance also, it is necessary first to mollify. But that
which softens, is not wrath, not vehement accusation, not personal abuse; it is
gentleness. The former indeed rather aggravate the callousness, this last alone
removes it. If then you are desirous to reprove any delinquent, approach him
with all possible mildness. For see here; he gently reminds them of the outrages
they have committed, adding no comment; he declares the gift of God, he goes
on to speak of the grace which bore testimony to the event, and so draws out his
discourse to a still greater length. So they stood in awe of the gentleness of Peter,
in that he, speaking to men who had crucified his Master, and breathed murder
against himself and his companions, discoursed to them in the character of an
affectionate father and teacher. Not merely were they persuaded; they even
condemned themselves, they came to a sense of their past behavior. For he gave
no room for their anger to be roused, and darken their judgment, but by means of
humility he dispersed, as it were, the mist and darkness of their indignation, and
then pointed out to them the daring outrage they had committed. For so it is;
when we say of ourselves that we are injured, the opposite party endeavor to
prove that they have not done the injury; but when we say, we have not been
injured, but have rather done the wrong, the others take the contrary line. If,

therefore, you wish to place your enemy ([εἰς ἀγώνα]) in the wrong, beware of
accusing him; nay ([ἀ] [γώνισαι]), plead for him, he will be sure to find himself
guilty. There is a natural spirit of opposition in man. Such was the conduct of
Peter. He did not accuse them harshly; on the contrary, he almost endeavored to
plead for them, as far as was possible. And this was the very reason that he
penetrated into their souls. You will ask, where is the proof that they were
pricked? In their own words; for what say they? "Men and brethren, what shall
we do?" Whom they had called deceivers, they call "brethren:" not that hereby
they put themselves on an equality with them, but rather by way of attracting
their brotherly affection and kindness: and besides, because the Apostles had
deigned to call them by this title. And, say they, "What shall we do?" They did
not straightway say, Well then, we repent; but they surrendered themselves to the
disciples. Just as a person on the point of shipwreck, upon seeing the pilot, or in
sickness the physician, would put all into his hands, and do his bidding in
everything; so have these also confessed that they are in extreme peril, and
destitute of all hope of salvation. They did not say, How shall we be saved? But,
"What shall we do?" Here again Peter, though the question is put to all, is the
man to answer. "Repent," says he, "and be baptized every one of you, in the
name of Jesus Christ." [Acts 2:38] He does not yet say, Believe, but, "Be
baptized every one of you." For this they received in baptism. Then he speaks of
the gain; "For the remission of sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost." If you are to receive a gift, if baptism conveys remission, why delay? He
next gives a persuasive turn to his address, adding, "For the promise is unto you"
[Acts 2:39]: for he had spoken of a promise above. "And to your children," he
says: the gift is greater, when these are to be heirs of the blessings. "And to all,"
he continues, "that are afar off:" if to those that are afar off, much more to you
that are near: "even as many as the Lord our God shall call." Observe the time
he takes for saying, "To those that are afar off." It is when he finds them
conciliated and self-accusing. For when the soul pronounces sentence against
itself, no longer can it feel envy. "And with many other words did he testify, and