Church, but the effect incidental to that action---thus from the giving
of alms there follow the relief of the poor and their prayer to God for
the deceased. In like manner the action of the agent may be
considered in relation either to the principal agent or to the executor.
I say, then, that the dying person, as soon as he provides for certain
suffrages to be offered for him, receives the full meed of those
suffrages, even before they are discharged, as regards the efficacy
of the suffrages that results from the action as proceeding from the
principal agent. But as regards the efficacy of the suffrages arising
from the action done or from the action as proceeding from the
executor, he does not receive the fruit before the suffrages are
discharged. And if, before this, he happens to be released from his
punishment, he will in this respect be deprived of the fruit of the
suffrages, and this will fall back upon those by whose fault he was
then defrauded. For it is not unreasonable that a person be
defrauded in temporal matters by another's fault---and the
punishment of purgatory is temporal---although as regards the
eternal retribution none can be defrauded save by his own fault.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether suffrages avail the children who are in

limbo?
Objection 1: It would seem that suffrages avail the children who are
in limbo. For they are not detained there except for another's sin.
Therefore it is most becoming that they should be assisted by the
suffrages of others.
Objection 2: Further, in the text (Sent. iv, D, 45) the words of
Augustine (Enchiridion cx) are quoted: "The suffrages of the Church
obtain forgiveness for those who are not very bad." Now children are
not reckoned among those who are very bad, since their punishment
is very light. Therefore the suffrages of the Church avail them.
On the contrary, The text (Sent. iv, D, 45) quotes Augustine as saying
(Serm. xxxii, De Verb Ap.) that "suffrages avail not those who have
departed hence without the faith that works by love." Now the
children departed thus. Therefore suffrages avail them not.
I answer that, Unbaptized children are not detained in limbo save
because they lack the state of grace. Hence, since the state of the
dead cannot be changed by the works of the living, especially as
regards the merit of the essential reward or punishment, the
suffrages of the living cannot profit the children in limbo.
Reply to Objection 1: Although original sin is such that one person
can be assisted by another on its account, nevertheless the souls of
the children in limbo are in such a state that they cannot be assisted,
because after this life there is no time for obtaining grace.
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine is speaking of those who are not
very bad, but have been baptized. This is clear from what precedes:
"Since these sacrifices, whether of the altar or of any alms
whatsoever are offered for those who have been baptized," etc.