Who is she, and Where from? And I do not say how great envy is hereby
produced. What then (tell me), is it disgraceful to be looked at or not to be
looked at? When is the shame greater, when all stare at her, or when no one
[does]? When they inform themselves about her, or when they do not even care?
Do you see that we do everything, not for modesty's sake but for vainglory?
However, since it is impossible to draw you away from that, I am content
for the present that you should learn that this [conduct] is no disgrace. Sin alone
is a disgrace, which no one thinks to be a disgrace. Sin alone is a disgrace, which
no one thinks to be a disgrace, but everything rather than this.
11. Let your dress be such as is needful, not superfluous. However, that we
may not shut you up too narrowly, this I assure you, that we have no need of
ornaments of gold, or of lace. And it is not I who say this. For that the words are
not mine, hear the blessed Paul saying, and solemnly charging women "to adorn
themselves, not with plaitings [of the hair], or gold, or pearls, or costly
apparel." [1 Timothy 2:9] But with what kind, O Paul, would you tell us? For
perhaps they will say, that only golden things are costly; and that silks are not
costly. Tell us with what kind you would. "But having food and raiment, let us
therewith" (he says) "be content." [1 Timothy 6:8] Let our garment be such as
merely to cover us. For God has given them to us for this reason, that we may
cover our nakedness; and this any sort of garment can do, though but of trifling
cost. Perhaps ye laugh, who wear dresses of silk; for in truth one may well laugh,
considering what Paul enjoined and what we practice!
But my discourse is not addressed to women only, but also to men. For the
rest of the things which we have are all superfluous; only the poor possess no
superfluities; and perhaps they too from necessity: since, if it had been in their
power, even they would not have abstained [from them]. Nevertheless, "whether
in pretense or in truth" [Philippians 1:18], so far they have no superfluities.
12. Let us then wear such clothes as are sufficient for our need. For what
does much gold mean? To those on the stage these things are fitting, this apparel
belongs to them, to harlots, to those who do everything to be looked at. Let her

beautify herself, who is on the stage or the dancing platform. For she wishes to
attract all to her. But a woman who professes godliness, let her not beautify
herself thus, but in a different way. You have a means of beautifying yourself far
better than that. You also have a theater: for that theater make yourself beautiful:
clothe yourself with those ornaments. What is your theater? Heaven, the
company of Angels. I speak not of Virgins only, but also of those in the world.
All as many as believe in Christ have that theater. Let us speak such things that
we may please those spectators. Put on such garments that you may gratify them.
For tell me, if a harlot putting aside her golden ornaments, and her robes,
and her laughter, and her witty and unchaste talk, clothe herself with a cheap
garment, and having dressed herself simply come [on the stage], and utter
religious words, and discourse of chastity, and say nothing indelicate, will not all
rise up? Will not this theater be dispersed? Will they not cast her out, as one who
does not know how to suit herself to the crowd, and speaks things foreign to that
Satanic theater? So thou also, if you enter into the Theater of Heaven clad with
her garments, the spectators will cast you out. For there, there is no need of these
garments of gold, but of different ones. Of what kind? Of such as the prophet
names, "clothed in fringed work of gold, and in varied colors" [Psalm 45:13],
not so as to make the body white and glistering, but so as to beautify the soul.
For the soul it is, which is contending and wrestling in that Theater. "All the
glory of the King's daughter is from within" [Psalm 45:13], it says. With these do
thou clothe yourself; for [so] thou both deliverest yourself from other evils
innumerable, and your husband from anxiety and yourself from care.
For so you will be respected by your husband, when you need not many
things. For every man is wont to be shy towards those who make requests of
him; but when he sees that they have no need of him, then he lets down his
pride, and converses with them as equals. When your husband sees that you have
no need of him in anything, that you think lightly of the presents which come
from him, then, even though he be very arrogant, he will respect you more, than
if you were clad in golden ornaments; and you will no longer be his slave. For