FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.6.

conscience tell us to do something which is good generically, there
is no error: and in like manner if it tell us not to do something which
is evil generically; since it is the same reason that prescribes what is
good and forbids what is evil. On the other hand if a man's reason or
conscience tells him that he is bound by precept to do what is evil in
itself; or that what is good in itself, is forbidden, then his reason or
conscience errs. In like manner if a man's reason or conscience tell
him, that what is indifferent in itself, for instance to raise a straw
from the ground, is forbidden or commanded, his reason or
conscience errs. They say, therefore, that reason or conscience
when erring in matters of indifference, either by commanding or by
forbidding them, binds: so that the will which is at variance with that
erring reason is evil and sinful. But they say that when reason or
conscience errs in commanding what is evil in itself, or in forbidding
what is good in itself and necessary for salvation, it does not bind;
wherefore in such cases the will which is at variance with erring
reason or conscience is not evil.
But this is unreasonable. For in matters of indifference, the will that
is at variance with erring reason or conscience, is evil in some way
on account of the object, on which the goodness or malice of the will
depends; not indeed on account of the object according as it is in its
own nature; but according as it is accidentally apprehended by
reason as something evil to do or to avoid. And since the object of
the will is that which is proposed by the reason, as stated above
(Article 3), from the very fact that a thing is proposed by the reason
as being evil, the will by tending thereto becomes evil. And this is
the case not only in indifferent matters, but also in those that are
good or evil in themselves. For not only indifferent matters can
received the character of goodness or malice accidentally; but also
that which is good, can receive the character of evil, or that which is
evil, can receive the character of goodness, on account of the reason
apprehending it as such. For instance, to refrain from fornication is
good: yet the will does not tend to this good except in so far as it is
proposed by the reason. If, therefore, the erring reason propose it as
an evil, the will tends to it as to something evil. Consequently the will
is evil, because it wills evil, not indeed that which is evil in itself, but
that which is evil accidentally, through being apprehended as such
by the reason. In like manner, to believe in Christ is good in itself,
and necessary for salvation: but the will does not tend thereto,
except inasmuch as it is proposed by the reason. Consequently if it
be proposed by the reason as something evil, the will tends to it as
to something evil: not as if it were evil in itself, but because it is evil