willed it, but, "Chose that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the
Gospel and believe." Whence is this proved? From the Spirit. Then he shows
that the testimony given them is not of grace merely, but of their virtue. "And
God which knows the hearts bare them witness" [Acts 15:8]; having afforded to
them nothing less (than to us), for, he says, "Put no difference between us and
them." [Acts 15:9] Why then, hearts are what one must everywhere look to. And
it is very appositely said, "God that knows the hearts bare them witness:" as in
the former instance, "You, Lord, that know the hearts of all men." [Acts 1:24] For
to show that this is the meaning, observe what he adds, "Put no difference
between us and them." When he has mentioned the testimony borne to them,
then he utters that great word, the same which Paul speaks, "Neither
circumcision avails anything, nor uncircumcision." [1 Corinthians 7:19] "That
he may make the two one in Himself." [Ephesians 2:5] Of all these the seeds lie
in Peter's discourse. And he does not say (between) them of the circumcision,
but "Between us," that is the Apostles, "and them." Then, that the expression,
"no difference" may not seem an outrage, After faith, he says— "Having purified
their hearts by faith" [Acts 15:10]— He thoroughly cleansed them first. Then he
shows, not that the Law was evil, but themselves weak.— "But we believe that
through the grace of the Lord Jesus we shall be saved even as they." [Acts 15:11]
Mark how he ends with a fearful consideration. He does not discourse to them
from the Prophets, but from things present, of which themselves were witnesses.
Of course (the Prophets) also themselves anon add their testimony (infra v. 15),
and make the reason stronger by what has now come to pass. And observe, he
first permits the question to be moved in the Church, and then speaks. "And put
no difference between"— he said not, them of the circumcision, but "us and
them," i.e. the Gentiles: for this (gradual advance) little by little is stronger. "Why
therefore do you tempt God?" who has become (the) God of the Gentiles: for this
was tempting: * * * whether He is able to save even after the Law. See what he
does. He shows that they are in danger. For if, what the Law could not do, faith
had power to do, "we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus we shall

be saved even as they" [comp. ]: but faith falling off, behold, themselves (are) in
destruction. And he did not say, Why do ye disbelieve? Which was more harsh,
but, "Tempt God," and that when the fact is demonstrated.
(c) Great effrontery this, of the Pharisees, that even after faith they set up
the Law, and will not obey the Apostles. But see these, how mildly they speak,
and not in the tone of authority: such words are amiable, and more apt to fix
themselves in the mind. Observe, it is nowhere a display of words, but
demonstration by facts, by the Spirit. And yet, though they have such proofs,
they still speak gently. And observe they do not come accusing those at Antioch,
but "declaring all things that God had done with them:" [Acts 15:4] but thence
again these men lay hold upon the occasion (to compass their own objects), "but
there rose up," etc. [Acts 15:1] Such were the pains they took in their love of
power: and it was not with the knowledge of the Apostles that they Paul and
Barnabas were blamed. But still they brought forward none of these charges: but
when they have proved the matter, then (the Apostles) write in stronger terms.
For gentleness is everywhere a great good: gentleness, I say, not stupid
indifference; gentleness, not adulation: for between these there is a vast
difference. Nothing ruffled Paul, nothing discomposed Peter. When you have
convincing proofs, why lose your temper, to render these of none effect? It is
impossible for one who is out of temper ever to persuade. Yesterday also we
discoursed about anger; but there is no reason why we should not today also;
perchance a second exhortation coming directly after the first will effect
somewhat. For indeed a medicine though of virtue to heal a wound, unless it be
constantly renewed, mars all. And think not that our continual discoursing about
the same things is a condemning of you: for if we condemned you, we should
not discourse; but now, hoping that you will gain much, we speak these things.
Would indeed that we did speak constantly of the same things: would that there
were no other subject of our discourses, than how we might overcome our
passions. For is it not contrary to all reason, that while emperors, living in luxury
and so great honor, have no subject of discourse either while sitting at table, or at