of which we are well or ill disposed with regard to actions and
passions" (Ethic. ii, 5); for by temperance we are well-disposed as
regards concupiscences, and by intemperance ill-disposed: and by
knowledge we are well-disposed to the act of the intellect when we
know the truth, and by the contrary ill-disposed. But the free-will is
indifferent to good and evil choice: wherefore it is impossible for
free-will to be a habit. Therefore it is a power.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not unusual for a power to be named from
its act. And so from this act, which is a free judgment, is named the
power which is the principle of this act. Otherwise, if free-will
denominated an act, it would not always remain in man.
Reply to Objection 2: Faculty sometimes denominates a power ready
for operation, and in this sense faculty is used in the definition of
free-will. But Bernard takes habit, not as divided against power, but
as signifying a certain aptitude by which a man has some sort of
relation to an act. And this may be both by a power and by a habit:
for by a power man is, as it were, empowered to do the action, and
by the habit he is apt to act well or ill.
Reply to Objection 3: Man is said to have lost free-will by falling into
sin, not as to natural liberty, which is freedom from coercion, but as
regards freedom from fault and unhappiness. Of this we shall treat
later in the treatise on Morals in the second part of this work (FS,
Question 85, seqq.; Question 109).

### ARTICLE 3. Whether free-will is an appetitive power?

Objection 1: It would seem that free-will is not an appetitive, but a
cognitive power. For Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 27) says that "freewill straightway accompanies the rational nature." But reason is a
cognitive power. Therefore free-will is a cognitive power.
Objection 2: Further, free-will is so called as though it were a free
judgment. But to judge is an act of a cognitive power. Therefore freewill is a cognitive power.
Objection 3: Further, the principal function of free-will is to choose.
But choice seems to belong to knowledge, because it implies a
certain comparison of one thing to another, which belongs to the
cognitive power. Therefore free-will is a cognitive power.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 3) that choice is
"the desire of those things which are in us." But desire is an act of
the appetitive power: therefore choice is also. But free-will is that by
which we choose. Therefore free-will is an appetitive power.
I answer that, The proper act of free-will is choice: for we say that we
have a free-will because we can take one thing while refusing
another; and this is to choose. Therefore we must consider the
nature of free-will, by considering the nature of choice. Now two
things concur in choice: one on the part of the cognitive power, the
other on the part of the appetitive power. On the part of the cognitive
power, counsel is required, by which we judge one thing to be
preferred to another: and on the part of the appetitive power, it is
required that the appetite should accept the judgment of counsel.
Therefore Aristotle (Ethic. vi, 2) leaves it in doubt whether choice
belongs principally to the appetitive or the cognitive power: since he
says that choice is either "an appetitive intellect or an intellectual
appetite." But (Ethic. iii, 3) he inclines to its being an intellectual
appetite when he describes choice as "a desire proceeding from
counsel." And the reason of this is because the proper object of
choice is the means to the end: and this, as such, is in the nature of
that good which is called useful: wherefore since good, as such, is
the object of the appetite, it follows that choice is principally an act
of the appetitive power. And thus free-will is an appetitive power.