159. Another feature of a good homily is that it is positive. It is not so much concerned with
pointing out what shouldn’t be done, but with suggesting what we can do better. In any case, if it

does draw attention to something negative, it will also attempt to point to a positive and attractive
value, lest it remain mired in complaints, laments, criticisms and reproaches. Positive preaching
always offers hope, points to the future, does not leave us trapped in negativity. How good it is
when priests, deacons and the laity gather periodically to discover resources which can make
preaching more attractive!

### IV. Evangelization and the deeper understanding of the kerygma

160. The Lord’s missionary mandate includes a call to growth in faith: “Teach them to observe all
that I have commanded you” (Mt 28:20). Hence it is clear that that the first proclamation also calls
for ongoing formation and maturation. Evangelization aims at a process of growth which entails
taking seriously each person and God’s plan for his or her life. All of us need to grow in Christ.
Evangelization should stimulate a desire for this growth, so that each of us can say
wholeheartedly: “It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me” (Gal 2:20).

161. It would not be right to see this call to growth exclusively or primarily in terms of doctrinal
formation. It has to do with “observing” all that the Lord has shown us as the way of responding to
his love. Along with the virtues, this means above all the new commandment, the first and the
greatest of the commandments, and the one that best identifies us as Christ’s disciples: “This is
my commandment, that you love one another as I have loved you” (Jn 15:12). Clearly, whenever
the New Testament authors want to present the heart of the Christian moral message, they
present the essential requirement of love for one’s neighbour: “The one who loves his neighbour
has fulfilled the whole law… therefore love of neighbour is the fulfilling of the law” (Rom 13:8, 10).
These are the words of Saint Paul, for whom the commandment of love not only sums up the law
but constitutes its very heart and purpose: “For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, ‘you shall
love your neighbour as yourself’” (Gal 5:14). To his communities Paul presents the Christian life as
a journey of growth in love: “May the Lord make you increase and abound in love for one another
and for all” (1 Th 3:12). Saint James likewise exhorts Christians to fulfil “the royal law according to
the Scripture: You shall love your neighbour as yourself” (2:8), in order not to fall short of any
commandment.

162. On the other hand this process of response and growth is always preceded by God’s gift,
since the Lord first says: “Baptize them in the name…” (Mt 28:19). The Father’s free gift which
makes us his sons and daughters, and the priority of the gift of his grace (cf. Eph 2:8-9; 1 Cor 4:7),
enable that constant sanctification which pleases God and gives him glory. In this way, we allow
ourselves to be transformed in Christ through a life lived “according to the Spirit” (Rom 8:5).