are commonly committed by men, take away some good from the person of the sinner,
such as grace and the due order of the parts of his soul: hence they are personal, and
not imputable to a second party beyond the one person of the sinner. But the first sin of
the first man not only robbed the sinner of his private and personal good, namely, grace
and the due order of his soul, but also took away a good that belonged to the common
nature of mankind. According to the original constitution of this nature, the lower powers
were perfectly subject to reason, reason to God, and the body to the soul, God
supplying by grace what was wanting to this perfection by nature. This benefit, which by
some is called `original justice,' was conferred on the first man in such sort that it
should be propagated by him to posterity along with human nature. But when by the sin
of the first man reason withdrew from its subjection to God, the consequence was a loss
of the perfect subjection of the lower powers to reason, and of the body to the soul, -and that not only in the first sinner, but the same common defect has come down to
posterity, to whom original justice would otherwise have descended. Thus then the sin
of the first man, from whom, according to the doctrine of faith, all other men are
descended, was at once a personal sin, inasmuch as it deprived that first man of his
own private good, and also a sin of nature (peccatum naturale), inasmuch as it took
away from that man, and consequently from his posterity, a benefit conferred upon the
whole of human nature. This defect, entailed upon other men by their first parent,
has in those other men the character of a fault, inasmuch as all men are counted one
man hy participation in a common nature. This sin is voluntary by the will of our first
parent, as the action of the hand has the character of a fault from the will of the prime
mover, reason. In a sin of nature different men are counted parts of a common nature,
like the different parts of one man in a personal sin.
Arg. 5. What is natural is no sin, as it is not the mole's fault for being blind.
Reply 5. The defects above mentioned are transmitted by natural origin, inasmuch as
nature is destitute of the aid of grace, which had been conferred upon nature in our first
parent, and was meant to pass from him to posterity along with nature; and, inasmuch
as this destitution has arisen from a voluntary sin, the defect so consequent comes to
bear the character of a fault. Thus these defects are at once culpable, as referred to
their first principle, which is the sin of Adam; and natural, as referred to a nature now
destitute [of original justice].
Arg. 6. A defect in a work of nature happens only through defect of some natural
principle.
Reply 6. There is a defect of principle, namely, of the gratuitous gift bestowed on human
nature in its first creation; which gift was in a manner `natural,' not that it was caused by
the principles of nature, but because it was given to man to be propagated along with
his nature.
Arg. 9. The good of nature is not taken away by sin: hence even in devils their natural
excellences remain. Therefore the origin of human generation, which is an act of nature,
cannot have been vitiated by sin.