FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether anger above all causes fervor in the

heart?
Objection 1: It would seem that heat is not above all the effect of
anger. For fervor, as stated above (Question 28, Article 5; Question
37, Article 2), belongs to love. But love, as above stated, is the
beginning and cause of all the passions. Since then the cause is
more powerful than its effect, it seems that anger is not the chief
cause of fervor.
Objection 2: Further, those things which, of themselves, arouse
fervor, increase as time goes on; thus love grows stronger the
longer it lasts. But in course of time anger grows weaker; for the
Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 3) that "time puts an end to anger."
Therefore fervor is not the proper effect of anger.
Objection 3: Further, fervor added to fervor produces greater fervor.
But "the addition of a greater anger banishes already existing
anger," as the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 3). Therefore anger does
not cause fervor.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 16) that "anger is
fervor of the blood around the heart, resulting from an exhalation of
the bile."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 44, Article 1), the bodily
transmutation that occurs in the passions of the soul is
proportionate to the movement of the appetite. Now it is evident that
every appetite, even the natural appetite, tends with greater force to
repel that which is contrary to it, if it be present: hence we see that
hot water freezes harder, as though the cold acted with greater force
on the hot object. Since then the appetitive movement of anger is
caused by some injury inflicted, as by a contrary that is present; it
follows that the appetite tends with great force to repel the injury by
the desire of vengeance; and hence ensues great vehemence and
impetuosity in the movement of anger. And because the movement
of anger is not one of recoil, which corresponds to the action of cold,
but one of prosecution, which corresponds to the action of heat, the
result is that the movement of anger produces fervor of the blood
and vital spirits around the heart, which is the instrument of the
soul's passions. And hence it is that, on account of the heart being

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.48, C.3.

so disturbed by anger, those chiefly who are angry betray signs
thereof in their outer members. For, as Gregory says (Moral. v, 30)
"the heart that is inflamed with the stings of its own anger beats
quick, the body trembles, the tongue stammers, the countenance
takes fire, the eyes grow fierce, they that are well known are not
recognized. With the mouth indeed he shapes a sound, but the
understanding knows not what it says."
Reply to Objection 1: "Love itself is not felt so keenly as in the
absence of the beloved," as Augustine observes (De Trin. x, 12).
Consequently when a man suffers from a hurt done to the excellence
that he loves, he feels his love thereof the more: the result being that
his heart is moved with greater heat to remove the hindrance to the
object of his love; so that anger increases the fervor of love and
makes it to be felt more.
Nevertheless, the fervor arising from heat differs according as it is to
be referred to love or to anger. Because the fervor of love has a
certain sweetness and gentleness; for it tends to the good that one
loves: whence it is likened to the warmth of the air and of the blood.
For this reason sanguine temperaments are more inclined to love;
and hence the saying that "love springs from the liver," because of
the blood being formed there. On the other hand, the fervor of anger
has a certain bitterness with a tendency to destroy, for it seeks to be
avenged on the contrary evil: whence it is likened to the heat of fire
and of the bile, and for this reason Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii,
16) that it "results from an exhalation of the bile whence it takes its
name chole."
Reply to Objection 2: Time, of necessity, weakens all those things,
the causes of which are impaired by time. Now it is evident that
memory is weakened by time; for things which happened long ago
easily slip from our memory. But anger is caused by the memory of a
wrong done. Consequently the cause of anger is impaired little by
little as time goes on, until at length it vanishes altogether. Moreover
a wrong seems greater when it is first felt; and our estimate thereof
is gradually lessened the further the sense of present wrong recedes
into the past. The same applies to love, so long as the cause of love
is in the memory alone; wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii,
5) that "if a friend's absence lasts long, it seems to make men forget
their friendship." But in the presence of a friend, the cause of
friendship is continually being multiplied by time: wherefore the
friendship increases: and the same would apply to anger, were its