the heart, He says, abide within, and when they are gone forth they defile, and
not when abiding only. And first He puts our evil thoughts, a kind of thing which
belonged to the Jews; and not as yet does He make His refutation from the
nature of the things, but from the manner of production from the belly and the
heart respectively, and from the fact that the one sort remains, the other not; the
one entering in from without, and departing again outwards, while the others are
bred within, and having gone forth they defile, and then more so, when they are
gone forth. Because they were not yet able, as I said, to be taught these things
with all due strictness.
But Mark says, that "cleansing the meats," He spoke this. He did not
however express it, nor at all say, "but to eat such and such meats defiles not the
man," for neither could they endure to be told it by Him thus distinctly. And
accordingly His conclusion was, "But to eat with unwashen hands defiles not the
man." [Matthew 15:20]
5. Let us learn then what are the things that defile the man; let us learn, and
let us flee them. For even in the church we see such a custom prevailing among
the generality, and men giving diligence to come in clean garments, and to have
their hands washed; but how to present a clean soul to God, they make no
account.
And this I say, not forbidding them to wash hands or mouth; but willing
men so to wash as is meet, not with water only, but instead of water, with all
virtues. For the filth of the mouth is evil speaking, blasphemy, reviling, angry
words, filthy talking, laughter, jesting: if then you are conscious to yourself of
uttering none of them, neither of being defiled with this filth, draw near with
confidence; but if you have times out of number received these stains, why do
you labor in vain, washing your tongue indeed with water, but bearing about on
it such deadly and hurtful filth? For tell me, had you dung on your hands, and
mire, would you indeed venture to pray? By no means. And yet this were no
hurt; but that is ruin. How then are you reverential in the different things, but in
the forbidden remiss?

What then? Should not we pray? Says one. We should indeed, but not while
defiled, and having upon us mire of that sort.
"What then, if I have been overtaken?" says one. Cleanse yourself. "How,
and in what way?" Weep, groan, give alms, apologize to him that is affronted,
reconcile him to yourself hereby, wipe clean your tongue, lest you provoke God
more grievously. For so if one had filled his hands with dung, and then should
lay hold of your feet, entreating you, far from hearing him, you would rather
spurn him with your foot; how then dared thou in such sort draw near to God?
Since in truth the tongue is the hand of them that pray, and by it we lay hold on
the knees of God. Defile it not therefore, lest to you also He say, "Though you
make many prayers, I will not hearken." [Isaiah 1:15] Yea, and "in the power of
the tongue are death and life;" [Proverbs 18:21] and, "By your words you shall
be justified, and by your words you shall be condemned." [Matthew 12:37]
I bid you then watch your tongue more than the apple of your eye. The
tongue is a royal steed. If then thou put a bridle on it, and teach it to pace orderly,
the King will rest and take His seat thereon; but if you suffer it to rush about
unbridled and leap wantonly, it becomes a beast for the devil and bad spirits to
ride on. And while thou, fresh from the company of your own wife, darest not
pray, although this is no blame at all; do you lift up your hands, fresh from
reviling and insult, which brings after it no less than hell, before you have well
cleansed yourself? And how do you not shudder? Tell me. Have you not heard
Paul, saying, "Marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled?" [Hebrews 13:4]
But if on rising from the undefiled bed, you dare not draw near in prayer, how do
you coming from the bed of the devil call on that awful and terrible name? For it
is truly the devil's bed, to wallow in insults and reviling. And like some wicked
adulterer, wrath dallies with us in great delight, casting into us deadly seed, and
making us give birth to diabolical enmity, and doing all things in a way opposite
to marriage. For whereas marriage causes the two to become one flesh, wrath
severs into many parts them that were united, and cleaves and cuts in pieces the
very soul.