even that has a pure participation thereof, by reason of innumerable cares and
toils, that harrass it.
Wherefore, I pray, let us seek the unmovable and eternal goods, and the life
that never has old age.
For even one dwelling in a city may imitate the self-denial of the monks;
yea, one who has a wife, and is busied in a household, may pray, and fast, and
learn compunction. Since they also, who at the first were instructed by the
apostles, though they dwelt in cities, yet showed forth the piety of the occupiers
of the deserts: and others again who had to rule over workshops, as Priscilla and
Aquila.
And the prophets too, all had both wives and households, as Isaiah, as
Ezekiel, as the great Moses, and received no hurt therefrom in regard of virtue.
These then let us also imitate, and continually offer thanksgiving to God,
continually sing hymns to Him; let us give heed to temperance, and to all other
virtues, and the self-denial that is practised in the deserts, let us bring into our
cities; that we may appear both well-pleasing before God, and approved before
men, and attain unto the good things to come, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom and with whom be unto the Father,
glory, honor, and might, together with the holy and life-giving Spirit, now and
always and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 56 on Matthew

Matt. XVI. 28.
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, There are some of them that stand here,
which shall not taste of death, until they see the Son of Man coming in His
kingdom."
Thus, inasmuch as He had discoursed much of dangers and death, and of
His own passion, and of the slaughter of the disciples, and had laid on them
those severe injunctions; and these were in the present life and at hand, but the
good things in hope and expectation:— for example, "They save their life who
lose it;" "He is coming in the glory of His Father;" "He renders His rewards:"—
He willing to assure their very sight, and to show what kind of glory that is
wherewith He is to come, so far as it was possible for them to learn it; even in
their present life He shows and reveals this; that they should not grieve any
more, either over their own death, or over that of their Lord, and especially Peter
in His sorrow.
And see what He does. Having discoursed of hell, and of the kingdom (for
as well by saying, "He that finds his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose it
for my sake, shall find it;" [Matthew 16:25] as by saying, "He shall reward every
man according to his works," He had manifested both of these): having, I say,
spoken of both, the kingdom indeed He shows in the vision, but hell not yet.
Why so? Because had they been another kind of people, of a grosser sort,
this too would have been necessary; but since they are approved and considerate,
He leads them on the gentler way. But not therefore only does He make this
disclosure, but because to Himself also it was far more suitable.
Not however that He passes over this subject either, but in some places He
almost brings even before our eyes the very realities of hell; as when He
introduces the picture of Lazarus, and mentions him that exacted the hundred