temple too all went on, and with more diligence and double toil. [Numbers 28:910] Thus even by the very shadow He was secretly opening unto them the truth.
Did Christ then, it will be said, repeal a thing so highly profitable? Far from
it; nay, He greatly enhanced it. For it was time for them to be trained in all things
by the higher rules, and it was unnecessary that his hands should be bound, who
was freed from wickedness, winged for all good works; or that men should
hereby learn that God made all things; or that they should so be made gentle,
who are called to imitate God's own love to mankind (for He says, "Be merciful,
as your Heavenly Father"); [Luke 6:36] or that they should make one day a
festival, who are commanded to keep a feast all their life long; ("For let us keep
the feast," it is said, "not with old leaven, neither with leaven of malice and
wickedness; but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth");
[1 Corinthians 5:8] as neither need they stand by an ark and a golden altar, who
have the very Lord of all for their inmate, and in all things hold communion with
Him; by prayer, and by oblation, and by scriptures, and by almsgiving, and by
having Him within them. Lo now, why is any Sabbath required, by him who is
always keeping the feast, whose conversation is in Heaven?
4. Let us keep the feast then continually, and do no evil thing; for this is a
feast: and let our spiritual things be made intense, while our earthly things give
place: and let us rest a spiritual rest, refraining our hands from covetousness;
withdrawing our body from our superfluous and unprofitable toils, from such as
the people of the Hebrews did of old endure in Egypt. For there is no difference
between us who are gathering gold, and those that were bound in the mire,
working at those bricks, and gathering stubble, and being beaten. Yea, for now
too the devil bids us make bricks, as Pharaoh did then. For what else is gold,
than mire? And what else is silver, than stubble? Like stubble, at least, it kindles
the flame of desire; like mire, so does gold defile him that possesses it.
Wherefore He sent us, not Moses from the wilderness, but His Son from
Heaven. If then, after He has come, thou abide in Egypt, you will suffer with the
Egyptians: but if leaving that land thou go up with the spiritual Israel, you shall

see all the miracles.
Yet not even this suffices for salvation. For we must not only be delivered
out of Egypt, but we must also enter into the promise. Since the Jews too, as
Paul says, both went through the Red Sea, and ate manna, and drank spiritual
drink, but nevertheless they all perished.
Lest then the same befall us also, let us not be slow, neither draw back; but
when you hear wicked spies even now bringing up an evil report against the
strait and narrow way, and uttering the same kind of talk as those spies of old, let
not the multitude, but Joshua, be our pattern, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh;
and do not thou give up, until thou have attained the promise, and entered into
the Heavens.
Neither account the journey to be difficult. "For if when we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God, much more, being reconciled, shall we be saved."
[Romans 5:10] "But this way," it will be said, "is strait and narrow." Well, but
the former, through which you have come, is not strait and narrow only, but even
impassable, and full of savage wild beasts. And as there was no passing through
the Red Sea, unless that miracle had been wrought, so neither could we, abiding
in our former life, have gone up into Heaven, but only by baptism intervening.
Now if the impossible has become possible, much more will the difficult be easy.
"But that," it will be said, "was of grace only." Why, for this reason
especially you have just cause to take courage. For if, where it was grace alone,
He wrought with you; will He not much more be your aid, where ye also show
forth laborious works? If He saved you, doing nothing, will He not much more
help you, working?
Above indeed I was saying, that from the impossibilities you ought to take
courage about the difficulties also; but now I add this, that if we are vigilant,
these will not be so much as difficult. For mark it: death is trodden under foot,
the devil has fallen, the law of sin is extinguished, the grace of the Spirit is
given, life is contracted into a small space, the heavy burdens are abridged.
And to convince you hereof by the actual results, see how many have