taken up into heaven. [Acts 2:14, 36] It is a greater thing to open a closed door,
and to commence an action, than to be free-spoken afterwards. How could he
ever dissemble who had exposed his life to such a populace? He who when
scourged and bound would not bate a jot of his courage, and this at the beginning
of his mission, and in the heart of the chief city where there was so much danger
—how could he, long afterwards in Antioch, where no danger was at hand, and
his character had received lustre from the testimony of his actions, feel any
apprehension of the believing Jews? How could he, I say, who at the very first
and in their chief city feared not the Jews while Jews, after a long time and in a
foreign city, fear those of them who had been converted? Paul therefore does not
speak this against Peter, but with the same meaning in which he said, "for they
who were reputed to be somewhat, whatsoever they were, it makes no matter to
me." But to remove any doubt on this point, we must unfold the reason of these
expressions.
The Apostles, as I said before, permitted circumcision at Jerusalem, an
abrupt severance from the law not being practicable; but when they come to
Antioch, they no longer continued this observance, but lived indiscriminately
with the believing Gentiles which thing Peter also was at that time doing. But
when some came from Jerusalem who had heard the doctrine he delivered there,
he no longer did so fearing to perplex them, but he changed his course, with two
objects secretly in view, both to avoid offending those Jews, and to give Paul a
reasonable pretext for rebuking him. For had he, having allowed circumcision
when preaching at Jerusalem, changed his course at Antioch, his conduct would
have appeared to those Jews to proceed from fear of Paul, and his disciples
would have condemned his excess of pliancy. And this would have created no
small offense; but in Paul, who was well acquainted with all the facts, his
withdrawal would have raised no such suspicion, as knowing the intention with
which he acted. Wherefore Paul rebukes, and Peter submits, that when the
master is blamed, yet keeps silence, the disciples may more readily come over.
Without this occurrence Paul's exhortation would have had little effect, but the

occasion hereby afforded of delivering a severe reproof, impressed Peter's
disciples with a more lively fear. Had Peter disputed Paul's sentence, he might
justly have been blamed as upsetting the plan, but now that the one reproves and
the other keeps silence, the Jewish party are filled with serious alarm; and this is
why he used Peter so severely. Observe too Paul's careful choice of expressions,
whereby he points out to the discerning, that he uses them in pursuance of the
plan, ([οἰκονομίας]) and not from anger.
His words are, "When Cephas came to Antioch, I resisted him to the face,
because he stood condemned;" that is, not by me but by others; had he himself
condemned him, he would not have shrunk from saying so. And the words, "I
resisted him to the face," imply a scheme for had their discussion been real, they
would not have rebuked each other in the presence of the disciples, for it would
have been a great stumblingblock to them. But now this apparent contest was
much to their advantage; as Paul had yielded to the Apostles at Jerusalem, so in
turn they yield to him at Antioch. The cause of censure is this, "For before that
certain came from James," who was the teacher at Jerusalem, "he did eat with
the Gentiles, but when they came he drew back and separated himself, fearing
them that were of the Circumcision:" his cause of fear was not his own danger,
(for if he feared not in the beginning, much less would he do so then,) but their
defection. As Paul himself says to the Galatians, "I am afraid of you, lest by any
means I have bestowed labor upon you in vain:" [Galatians 4:11] and again, "I
fear lest by any means as the serpent beguiled Eve,...so your minds should be
corrupted." [2 Corinthians 11:3] Thus the fear of death they knew not, but the
fear lest their disciples should perish, agitated their inmost soul.
Ver. 13. "Insomuch that even Barnabas was carried away with their
dissimulation."
Be not surprised at his giving this proceeding the name of dissimulation, for
he is unwilling, as I said before, to disclose the true state of the case, in order to
the correction of his disciples. On account of their vehement attachment to the
Law, he calls the present proceeding "dissimulation," and severely rebukes it, in