"Who shall speak of the mightinesses of the Lord, and make all His praises
to be heard?" [Psalm 106:2, Septuagint] How many blessings has He vouchsafed
to the human race! Those who are dead are raised first, and thus the meeting
takes place together. Abel who died before all shall then meet Him together with
those who are alive. So that they in this respect will have no advantage, but he
who is corrupted, and has been so many years in the earth, shall meet Him with
them, and so all the others. For if they awaited us, that we might be crowned, as
elsewhere he says in an Epistle, "God having provided some better thing
concerning us, that apart from us they should not be made perfect" [Hebrews
11:40], much more shall we also await them; or rather, they indeed awaited, but
we not at all. For the Resurrection takes place "in a moment, in the twinkling of
an eye."
But as to the saying, that they are gathered together; they arise indeed
everywhere, but are gathered together by the Angels. The former therefore is the
work of the power of God commanding the earth to give up its deposit, and there
is no one who ministers in it, as He then called Lazarus, "Lazarus, come forth"
[John 11:43]; but the gathering is the work of ministers. But if Angels gather
them together, and run to and fro, how are they caught up here? They are caught
up after the descent, after that they are gathered together.
For this is also done without any one being aware. For when they see the
earth agitated, the dust mingling, the bodies rising perchance on every side, no
one ministering to this, but the "shout" being sufficient, the whole earth filled
(for consider how great a thing it is that all the men from Adam unto His coming
shall then stand with wives and children)—when they see so great a tumult upon
the earth—then they shall know. As therefore in the Dispensation that was in the
Flesh, they had foreseen nothing of it, so also will it then be.
When these things then are done, then also will be the voice of the
Archangel shouting and commanding the Angels, and the trumpets, or rather the
sound of the trumpet. What trembling then, what fear will possess those that
remain upon the earth. For one woman is caught up and another is left behind,

and one man is taken, and another is passed over. [Matthew 24:40-41; Luke
17:34-35] What will be the state of their souls, when they see some indeed taken
up, but themselves left behind? Will not these things be able to shake their souls
more terribly than any hell? Let us represent then in word that this is now
present. For if sudden death, or earthquakes in cities, and threatenings thus
terrify our souls; when we see the earth breaking up, and crowded with all these,
when we hear the trumpets, and the voice of the Archangel louder than any
trumpet, when we perceive the heaven shriveled up, and God the King of all
himself coming near— what then will be our souls? Let us shudder, I beseech
you, and be frightened as if these things were now taking place. Let us not
comfort ourselves by the delay. For when it must certainly happen, the delay
profits us nothing.
How great will then be the fear and trembling! Have you ever seen men led
away to death? What do you think is the state of their souls, as they are going on
the way to the gate? Is it not worse than many deaths? What would they not
choose both to do and to suffer, so that they might be delivered from that cloud
of darkness? I have heard many say, who have been recalled by the mercy of the
king (Emperor), after having been led away, that they did not even see men as
men, their souls being so troubled, so horror-struck, and beside themselves. If
then the death of the body thus frightens us, when eternal death approaches,
what will be our feelings? And why do I speak of those who are led away? A
crowd then stands around, the greater part not even knowing them. If any one
looked into their souls, no one is so cruel, no one so hard-hearted, no one so
firm, as not to have his soul dejected, and relaxed with fear and despair. And if
when others are taken off by this death, which differs nothing from sleep, those
who are not concerned in it are thus affected; when we ourselves fall into greater
evils, what then will be our state? It is not, believe me, it is not possible to
represent the suffering by words.
Nay, you say, but God is full of love to man, and none of these things will
happen! Then it is written in vain! No, you say, but only as a threat, that we may