See then how after saying, "I have written the more boldly," and, "in some sort,"
and, "as putting you in mind," he was not satisfied even with these, but making
his language still more lowly, he proceeds:
"Because of the grace that is given me of God." As he said at the beginning,
"I am a debtor." [Romans 1:14] As if he had said, I have not snatched at the
honor for myself, neither was I first to leap forward to it, but God commanded
this, and this too according unto grace, not as if He had separated me for this
office because I deserved it. Do not ye then be exasperated, since it is not I that
raise myself up, but it is God that enjoins it. And as he there says, "whom I serve
in the Gospel of His Son" [Romans 1:9], so also here, after saying, "because of
the grace given unto me by God," he adds,
Ver. 16. "That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering ([ἱερουργοὕντα]) the Gospel of God."
For after his abundant proof of his statements, he draws his discourse to a
more lofty tone, not speaking of mere service, as in the beginning, but of service
and priestly ministering ([λειτουργίαν καί ὶερουργίαν]). For to me this is a
priesthood, this preaching and declaring. This is the sacrifice I bring. Now no
one will find fault with a priest, for being anxious to offer the sacrifice without
blemish. And he says this at once to elevate ([πτερὥν]) their thoughts, and show
them that they are a sacrifice, and in apology for his own part in the matter,
because he was appointed to this office. For my knife, he says, is the Gospel, the
word of the preaching. And the cause is not that I may be glorified, not that I
may appear conspicuous, but that the "offering up ([προσφορὰ]) of the Gentiles
may be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost."
That is, that the souls of those that are taught by me, may be accepted. For
it was not so much to honor me, that God led me to this pitch, as out of a
concern for you. And how are they to become acceptable? In the Holy Ghost.
For there is need not only of faith, but also of a spiritual way of life, that we may
keep the Spirit that was given once for all. For it is not wood and fire, nor altar
and knife, but the Spirit that is all in us. For this cause, I take all means to

prevent that Fire from being extinguished, as I have been also enjoined to do.
Why then do you speak to those that need it not? This is just the reason why I do
not teach you, but put you in mind, he replies. As the priest stands by stirring up
the fire, so I do, rousing up your ready-mindedness. And observe, he does not
say, "that the offering up of" you "may be" etc. but "of the Gentiles." But when
he says of the Gentiles, he means the whole world, the land, and the whole sea,
to take down their haughtiness, that they might not disdain to have him for a
teacher, who was putting himself forth ([τεινόμενον]) to the very end of the
world. As he said in the beginning, "as among the other Gentiles also, I am a
debtor to Greeks, and also to barbarians, to wise, and to foolish." [Romans
1:13-14]
Ver. 17. "I have therefore whereof I may glory, through Jesus Christ, in
those things which pertain to God."
Inasmuch as he had humbled himself exceedingly, he again raised his style,
doing this also for their sakes, lest he should seem to become readily an object of
contempt. And while he raises himself, he remembers his own proper temper,
and says, "I have therefore whereof to glory." I glory, he means, not in myself,
not in our zeal, but in the "grace of God."
Ver. 18. "For I will not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ
has not wrought by me, to make Gentiles obedient by word and deed, through
mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God."
And none, he means, can say that my words are a mere boast. For of this
priestly ministry of mine, the signs that I have, and the proofs of the appointment
too, are many. Not the long garment ([ποδήρης]) and the bells as they of old, nor
the mitre and the turban ([κίδαρις]), but signs and wonders, far more awful than
these. Nor can it be said that I have been entrusted indeed with the charge, but
yet have not executed it. Or rather, it is not I that have executed, but Christ.
Wherefore also it is in Him that I boast, not about common things, but about
spiritual. And this is the force of, "in things which pertain to God." For that I
have accomplished the purpose for which I was sent, and that my words are not