Reply to Objection 4: In such a case it is said that the master should
be compelled not to sell the slave in such a way as to increase the
weight of the marriage burden, especially since he is able to obtain
anywhere a just price for his slave.
Reply to Objection 5: By entering religion or receiving orders a man
is bound to the Divine service for all time; whereas a husband is
bound to pay the debt to his wife not always, but at a fitting time;
hence the comparison fails. Moreover, he who enters religion or
receives orders binds himself to works that are superadded to
natural works, and in which his master has power over him, but not
in natural works to which a man binds himself by marriage. Hence he
cannot vow continence without his master's consent.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether slavery can supervene to marriage?

Objection 1: It would seem that slavery cannot supervene to
marriage, by the husband selling himself to another as slave.
Because what is done by fraud and to another's detriment should not
hold. But a husband who sells himself for a slave, does so
sometimes to cheat marriage, and at least to the detriment of his
wife. Therefore such a sale should not hold as to the effect of
slavery.
Objection 2: Further, two favorable things outweigh one that is not
favorable. Now marriage and freedom are favorable things and are
contrary to slavery, which in law is not a favorable thing. Therefore
such a slavery ought to be entirely annulled in marriage.
Objection 3: Further, in marriage husband and wife are on a par with
one another. Now the wife cannot surrender herself to be a slave
without her husband's consent. Therefore neither can the husband
without his wife's consent.
Objection 4: Further, in natural things that which hinders a thing
being generated destroys it after it has been generated. Now
bondage of the husband, if unknown to the wife, is an impediment to
the act of marriage before it is performed. Therefore if it could
supervene to marriage it would dissolve it; which is unreasonable.
On the contrary, Everyone can give another that which is his own.
Now the husband is his own master since he is free. Therefore he
can surrender his right to another.
Further, a slave can marry without his master's consent, as stated
above (Article 2). Therefore a husband can in like manner subject
himself to a master, without his wife's consent.
I answer that, A husband is subject to his wife in those things which
pertain to the act of nature; in these things they are equal, and the
subjection of slavery does not extend thereto. Wherefore the
husband, without his wife's knowledge, can surrender himself to be
another's slave. Nor does this result in a dissolution of the marriage,
since no impediment supervening to marriage can dissolve it, as
stated above (Question 50, Article 1, ad 7).