utterly at an end and perish? Do you wish that I yet further extend the discourse
with reference to the body also? Let the hand then neither strike the head, nor cut
out the tongue, nor pluck out the eye, nor do any evil of this sort, but only
remain idle, and not render its due service to the body at large; would it not be
more fitting that it should be cut off, than that one should carry it about in
idleness, and a detriment to the whole body? And what too, if the mouth, without
either devouring the hand, or biting the breast, should nevertheless fail in all its
proper duties; were it not far better that it should be stopped up? If therefore both
in the case of servants, and of mechanics, and of the whole body, not only the
commission of evil, but also the omission of what is good, is great
unrighteousness, much more will this be the case in regard to the body of Christ.
Moral. And therefore the blessed Paul also, in leading us away from sin,
leads us on to virtue. For where, tell me, is the advantage of all the thorns being
cut out, if the good seeds be not sown? For our labor, remaining unfinished, will
come round and end in the same mischief. And therefore Paul also, in his deep
and affectionate anxiety for us, does not let his admonitions stop at eradicating
and destroying evil tempers, but urges us at once to evidence the implanting of
good ones. For having said, "Let all bitterness, and wrath, and clamor, and
railing be put away from you, with all malice," he adds, "And be ye kind one to
another, tender-hearted, forgiving each other." For all these are habits and
dispositions. And our abandonment of the one thing is not sufficient to settle us
in the habitual practice of the other, but there is need again of some fresh
impulse, and of an effort not less than that made in our avoidance of evil
dispositions, in order to our acquiring good ones. For so in the case of the body,
the black man, if he gets rid of this complexion, does not straightway become
white. Or rather let us not conduct our discourse with an argument from physical
subjects, but draw our example from those which concern moral choice. He who
is not our enemy, is not necessarily our friend; but there is an intermediate state,
neither of enmity nor of friendship, which is perhaps that in which the greater
part of mankind stand toward us. He that is not crying is not therefore

necessarily also laughing, but there is a state between the two. And so, I say, is
the case here. He that is not "bitter" is not necessarily "kind," neither is he that is
not "wrathful" necessarily "tender-hearted"; but there is need of a distinct effort,
in order to acquire this excellence. And now look how the blessed Paul,
according to the rules of the best husbandry, thoroughly cleans and works the
land entrusted to him by the Husbandman. He has taken away the bad seeds; he
now exhorts us to retain the good plants. "Be kind," says he, for if, when the
thorns are plucked up, the field remains idle, it will again bear unprofitable
weeds. And therefore there is need to preoccupy its unoccupied and fallow state
by the setting of good seeds and plants. He takes away "anger," he puts in
"kindness"; he takes away "bitterness," he puts in "tender-heartedness"; he
extirpates "malice" and "railing," he plants "forgiveness" in their stead. For the
expression, "forgiving one another," is this; be disposed, he means, to forgive
one another. And this forgiveness is greater than that which is shown in moneymatters. For he indeed who forgives a debt of money to him that has borrowed of
him, does, it is true, a noble and admirable deed, but then the kindness is
confined to the body, though to himself indeed he repays a full recompense by
that benefit which is spiritual and concerns the soul; whereas he who forgives
trespasses will be benefiting alike his own soul, and the soul of him who
receives the forgiveness. For by this way of acting, he not only renders himself,
but the other also, more charitable. Because we do not so deeply touch the souls
of those who have wronged us by revenging ourselves, as by pardoning them,
and thus shaming them and putting them out of countenance. For by the other
course we shall be doing no good, either to ourselves or to them, but shall be
doing harm to both by seeking ourselves for retaliation, like the rulers of the
Jews, and by kindling up the wrath that is in them; but if we return injustice with
gentleness, we shall disarm all his anger, and shall be setting up in his breast a
tribunal which will give a verdict in our favor, and will condemn him more
severely than we ourselves could. For he will convict and will pass sentence
upon himself, and will look for every pretext for repaying the share of long-