rebuilt the house, that is to say, He has made it stronger, and laid a firmer
foundation. So also here He has brought all under one and the same Head. For
thus will an union be effected, thus will a close bond be effected, if one and all
can be brought under one and the same Head, and thus have some constraining
bond of union from above. Honored then as we are with so great a blessing, so
high a privilege, so great loving-kindness, let us not shame our Benefactor, let us
not render in vain so great grace. Let us exemplify the life of Angels, the virtue
of Angels, the conversation of Angels, yea, I entreat and conjure you, that all
these things turn not to our judgment, nor to our condemnation, but to our
enjoyment of those good things, which may God grant we may all attain, in
Christ Jesus, our Lord, with whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost,
be glory, strength, etc. etc.

## Homily 2 on Ephesians

Chapter I. Verses 11-14
"In whom also we were made a heritage, having been foreordained
according to the purpose of Him who works all things after the counsel of his
will."
Paul earnestly endeavors on all occasions to display the unspeakable
loving-kindness of God towards us, to the utmost of his power. For that it is
impossible to do so adequately, hear his own words. "O! The depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God; how unsearchable are His judgments,
and His ways past tracing out." [Romans 11:33] Still, notwithstanding, so far as
it is possible, he does display it. What then is this which he is saying; "In whom
also we were made a heritage, being predestinated?" Above he used the word,
"He chose us;" here he says, "we were made a heritage." But inasmuch as a lot
is a matter of chance, not of deliberate choice, nor of virtue, (for it is closely
allied to ignorance and accident, and oftentimes passing over the virtuous, brings
forward the worthless into notice,) observe how he corrects this very point:
"having been foreordained," says he, "according to the purpose of Him who
works all things." That is to say, not merely have we been made a heritage, as,
again, we have not merely been chosen, (for it is God who chooses,) and so
neither have we merely been allotted, (for it is God who allots,) but it is
"according to a purpose." This is what he says also in the Epistle to the Romans,
[Romans 8:28-30] "To them that are called according to His purpose;" and
"whom He called, them He also justified, and whom He justified, them he also
glorified." Having first used the expression, "to them that are called according to
a purpose," and at the same time wishing to declare their privilege compared
with the rest of mankind, he speaks also of inheritance by lot, yet so as not to
divest them of free will. That point then, which more properly belongs to happy