other officers, and brought them without violence: for they feared the multitude,
lest they should have been stoned." (v. 25, 26.) O the folly of the men! "They
feared," says he, "the multitude." Why, how had the multitude helped the
Apostles? When they ought to have feared that God Who was continually
delivering them like winged creatures out of their power, instead of that, "they
feared the multitude!" "And the high-priest," shameless, reckless, senseless,
"asked them, saying, Did not we strictly command you that you should not teach
in this name? And, behold you have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine and
intend to bring this man's blood upon us." (v. 27, 28.) What then (say the
Apostles)? Again with mildness they address them; and yet they might have
said, "Who are you, that you countermand God?" But what do they say? Again
in the way of exhortation and advice, and with much mildness, they make
answer. "Then Peter and the other Apostles answered and said, We ought to obey
God rather than men." [Acts 5:29] High magnanimity! He shows them too that
they are fighting against God. For, he says, Whom you killed, Him has God
raised up. "The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, Whom you slew and hanged
on a tree. Him has God exalted with His right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour,
for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins." (v. 30, 31.) And again
they refer the whole to the Father, that He should not seem to be alien to the
Father. "And has exalted," says He, "with his right hand." He affirms not merely
the Resurrection, but the Exaltation also. "For to give repentance to Israel."
Observe here as before the gain (to them): observe the perfection of doctrine
conveyed in the form of apology. "And we are witnesses of these things." [Acts
5:32] Great boldness of speech! And the ground of their credibility: "And so is
also the Holy Ghost, Whom God has given to them that obey Him." Do you
observe that they allege not only the Spirit's testimony? And they said not,
"Whom He has given" to us, but, "to them that obey Him:" therein alike showing
their own unassuming temper, and intimating the greatness of the gift, and
showing the hearers that it was possible for them also to receive the Spirit. See,
how these people were instructed both by deeds and by words, and yet they paid

no heed, that their condemnation might be just. For to this end did God suffer the
Apostles to be brought to trial, that both their adversaries might be instructed,
and all might learn, and that the Apostles might be invigorated to boldness of
speech. "And they hearing that, were cut to the heart." [Acts 5:33] The others
(on a former occasion) "when they heard these things were pricked;" here they
were cut (as with a saw) ([διεπρίοντο]) "and desired to slay them." [Acts 2:37]
But it is necessary now to look over again what we have read. "But the
angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought them forth, and
said, Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.
Brought them forth." (Recapitulation, v. 19, 20.) He did not bring them away to
benefit themselves thereby, but, "Stand," he says, "and speak in the temple to the
people." But if the guards had put them out, as those thought, they would have
fled, that is, supposing they had been induced to come out: and if those had put
them forth, they would not have stood in the temple, but would have absconded.
No one is so void of sense, as not at once to see this. "Did we not strictly charge
you?" [Acts 5:28] Well, if they undertook to obey you, you do well to call them
to account: but if even at the very time they told you they would not obey, what
account have you to call them to, what defence is there for them to make? "And
behold you have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this
man's blood upon us." Mark the inconsistency of the accusations and the
exceeding folly. They want to make it appear now, that the dispositions of the
Jews are sanguinary, as if they were doing these things not for the truth's sake,
but in the wish to be revenged. And for this reason too the Apostles do not
answer them with defiance ([θρασέως]): for they were teachers. And yet where
is the man, who, with a whole city to back him, and endowed with so great
grace, would not have spoken and uttered something big? But not so did these:
for they were not angered; no, they pitied these men, and wept over them, and
marked in what way they might free them from their error and wrath. And they
no longer say to them, "Judge ye:" [Acts 4:19] but they simply affirm, saying,
"Whom God raised up, Him do we preach: it is by the will of God that these