THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.2.

not accidentally." Now this principle is either form or matter. Hence
sometimes form is called nature, and sometimes matter. And
because the end of natural generation, in that which is generated, is
the essence of the species, which the definition signifies, this
essence of the species is called the "nature." And thus Boethius
defines nature (De Duab. Nat.): "Nature is what informs a thing with
its specific difference,"---i.e. which perfects the specific definition.
But we are now speaking of nature as it signifies the essence, or the
"what-it-is," or the quiddity of the species.
Now, if we take nature in this way, it is impossible that the union of
the Incarnate Word took place in the nature. For one thing is made of
two or more in three ways. First, from two complete things which
remain in their perfection. This can only happen to those whose form
is composition, order, or figure, as a heap is made up of many
stones brought together without any order, but solely with
juxtaposition; and a house is made of stones and beams arranged in
order, and fashioned to a figure. And in this way some said the union
was by manner of confusion (which is without order) or by manner of
commensuration (which is with order). But this cannot be. First,
because neither composition nor order nor figure is a substantial
form, but accidental; and hence it would follow that the union of the
Incarnation was not essential, but accidental, which will be
disproved later on (Article 6). Secondly, because thereby we should
not have an absolute unity, but relative only, for there remain several
things actually. Thirdly, because the form of such is not a nature, but
an art, as the form of a house; and thus one nature would not be
constituted in Christ, as they wish.
Secondly, one thing is made up of several things, perfect but
changed, as a mixture is made up of its elements; and in this way
some have said that the union of the Incarnation was brought about
by manner of combination. But this cannot be. First, because the
Divine Nature is altogether immutable, as has been said (FP,
Question 9, Articles 1,2), hence neither can it be changed into
something else, since it is incorruptible; nor can anything else be
changed into it, for it cannot be generated. Secondly, because what
is mixed is of the same species with none of the elements; for flesh
differs in species from any of its elements. And thus Christ would be
of the same nature neither with His Father nor with His Mother.
Thirdly, because there can be no mingling of things widely apart; for
the species of one of them is absorbed, e.g. if we were to put a drop
of water in a flagon of wine. And hence, since the Divine Nature

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.2, C.2.

infinitely exceeds the human nature, there could be no mixture, but
the Divine Nature alone would remain.
Thirdly, a thing is made up of things not mixed nor changed, but
imperfect; as man is made up of soul and body, and likewise of
divers members. But this cannot be said of the mystery of the
Incarnation. First, because each nature, i.e. the Divine and the
human, has its specific perfection. Secondly, because the Divine and
human natures cannot constitute anything after the manner of
quantitative parts, as the members make up the body; for the Divine
Nature is incorporeal; nor after the manner of form and matter, for
the Divine Nature cannot be the form of anything, especially of
anything corporeal, since it would follow that the species resulting
therefrom would be communicable to several, and thus there would
be several Christs. Thirdly, because Christ would exist neither in
human nature nor in the Divine Nature: since any difference varies
the species, as unity varies number, as is said (Metaph. viii, text. 10).
Reply to Objection 1: This authority of Cyril is expounded in the Fifth
Synod (i.e. Constantinople II, coll. viii, can. 8) thus: "If anyone
proclaiming one nature of the Word of God to be incarnate does not
receive it as the Fathers taught, viz. that from the Divine and human
natures (a union in subsistence having taken place) one Christ
results, but endeavors from these words to introduce one nature or
substance of the Divinity and flesh of Christ, let such a one be
anathema." Hence the sense is not that from two natures one
results; but that the Nature of the Word of God united flesh to Itself
in Person.
Reply to Objection 2: From the soul and body a double unity, viz. of
nature and person---results in each individual---of nature inasmuch
as the soul is united to the body, and formally perfects it, so that one
nature springs from the two as from act and potentiality or from
matter and form. But the comparison is not in this sense, for the
Divine Nature cannot be the form of a body, as was proved (FP,
Question 3, Article 8). Unity of person results from them, however,
inasmuch as there is an individual subsisting in flesh and soul; and
herein lies the likeness, for the one Christ subsists in the Divine and
human natures.
Reply to Objection 3: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 6,11), the
Divine Nature is said to be incarnate because It is united to flesh
personally, and not that It is changed into flesh. So likewise the flesh