The Greek text here is, !"#$%&#' $(& )"*(& #+$,&, translated into Latin by "possiderent regnum suum,"—words which
are somewhat ambiguous in both languages. Massuet remarks, that "regnumeorum" would have been a better rendering, referring
the words to the Jews.
passage; so the Latin translation has been adopted here. Eusebius has -.'/0#&$.1 $.% 23.% 4-3" 56.783$.— God having
accomplished what He intended.

The Greek term is )&#$9:#0;#', which the Latin renders "re memorare," but Massuet prefers "digerere."

which were interpreted in the way I have related; and the preaching of the Church is without
interpolation. For the apostles, since they are of more ancient date than all these [heretics], agree
with this aforesaid translation; and the translation harmonizes with the tradition of the apostles. For
Peter, and John, and Matthew, and Paul, and the rest successively, as well as their followers, did
set forth all prophetical [announcements], just as the interpretation of the elders contains them.
4. For the one and the same Spirit of God, who proclaimed by the prophets what and of what
sort the advent of the Lord should be, did by these elders give a just interpretation of what had been
truly prophesied; and He did Himself, by the apostles, announce that the fulness of the times of the
adoption had arrived, that the kingdom of heaven had drawn nigh, and that He was dwelling within
those that believe on Him who was born Emmanuel of the Virgin. To this effect they testify, [saying,]
that before Joseph had come together with Mary, while she therefore remained in virginity, "she
was found with child of the Holy Ghost;" and that the angel Gabriel said unto her, "The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also
that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God;" and that the angel
said to Joseph in a dream, "Now this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah
the prophet, Behold, a virgin shall be with child." But the elders have thus interpreted what
Esaias said: "And the Lord, moreover, said unto Ahaz, Ask for thyself a sign from the Lord thy
God out of the depth below, or from the height above. And Ahaz said, I will not ask, and I will not
tempt the Lord. And he said, It is not a small thing for you to weary men; and how does the Lord
weary them? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and
bear a son; and ye shall call His name Emmanuel. Butter and honey shall He eat: before He knows
or chooses out things that are evil, He shall exchange them for what is good; for before the child
knows good or evil, He shall not consent to evil, that He may choose that which is good."
Carefully, then, has the Holy Ghost pointed out, by what has been said, His birth from a virgin,
and His essence, that He is God (for the name Emmanuel indicates this). And He shows that He is
a man, when He says, "Butter and honey shall He eat;" and in that He terms Him a child also, [in
saying,] "before He knows good and evil;" for these are all the tokens of a human infant. But that
He "will not consent to evil, that He may choose that which is good,"—this is proper to God; that
by the fact, that He shall eat butter and honey, we should not understand that He is a mere man
of the New Testament derived? Massuet, indeed, argues that it is of little or no weight in the controversy; but the passage speaks
for itself. Comp. Dr. Robert's Discussions on the Gospels, part i. ch. iv. and vii.