through a serpent.
Reply to Objection 2: God's work may be hindered by the devil's
work with God's permission; not that the devil is stronger than God
so as to destroy His works by violence.
Reply to Objection 3: Some spells are so perpetual that they can
have no human remedy, although God might afford a remedy by
coercing the demon, or the demon by desisting. For, as wizards
themselves admit, it does not always follow that what was done by
one kind of witchcraft can be destroyed by another kind, and even
though it were possible to use witchcraft as a remedy, it would
nevertheless be reckoned to be perpetual, since nowise ought one to
invoke the demon's help by witchcraft. Again, if the devil has been
given power over a person on account of sin, it does not follow that
his power ceases with the sin, because the punishment sometimes
continues after the fault has been removed. And again, the
exorcisms of the Church do not always avail to repress the demons
in all their molestations of the body, if God will it so, but they always
avail against those assaults of the demons against which they are
chiefly instituted.
Reply to Objection 4: Witchcraft sometimes causes an impediment in
relation to all, sometimes in relation to one only: because the devil is
a voluntary cause not acting from natural necessity. Moreover, the
impediment resulting from witchcraft may result from an impression
made by the demon on a man's imagination, whereby he is deprived
of the concupiscence that moves him in regard to a particular
woman and not to another.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether madness is an impediment to marriage?

Objection 1: It would seem that madness is not an impediment to
marriage. For spiritual marriage which is contracted in Baptism is
more excellent than carnal marriage. But mad persons can be
baptized. Therefore they can also marry.
Objection 2: Further, frigidity is an impediment to marriage because
it impedes carnal copulation, which is not impeded by madness.
Therefore neither is marriage impeded thereby.
Objection 3: Further, marriage is not voided save by a perpetual
impediment. But one cannot tell whether madness is a perpetual
impediment. Therefore it does not void marriage.
Objection 4: Further, the impediments that hinder marriage are
sufficiently contained in the verses given above (Question 50). But
they contain no mention of madness. Therefore, etc.
On the contrary, Madness removes the use of reason more than
error does. But error is an impediment to marriage. Therefore
madness is also.
Further, mad persons are not fit for making contracts. But marriage
is a contract. Therefore, etc.
I answer that, The madness is either previous or subsequent to
marriage. If subsequent, it nowise voids the marriage, but if it be
previous, then the mad person either has lucid intervals, or not. If he
has, then although it is not safe for him to marry during that interval,
since he would not know how to educate his children, yet if he
marries, the marriage is valid. But if he has no lucid intervals, or
marries outside a lucid interval, then, since there can be no consent
without use of reason, the marriage will be invalid.
Reply to Objection 1: The use of reason is not necessary for Baptism
as its cause, in which way it is necessary for matrimony. Hence the
comparison fails. We have, however, spoken of the Baptism of mad
persons (TP, Question 68, Article 12).
Reply to Objection 2: Madness impedes marriage on the part of the