whole commonwealths, and with such a message to declare; how, I say, did they
work conviction? For both the precepts brought much labor, and the doctrines
many dangers. And they that heard and were to obey, had been brought up in
luxury and drunkenness, and in great wickedness. Tell me then, how did they
convince? Whence had they their credibility? For, as I have just said, If without
signs they wrought conviction, far greater does the wonder appear. Do not then
urge the fact that signs are not done now, as a proof that they were not done then.
For as then they were usefully wrought; so now are they no longer so wrought.
Nor does it necessarily follow from discourse being the only instrument of
conviction, that now the "preaching" is in "wisdom." For both they who from the
beginning sowed the word were unprofessional ([ὶδιῶται]) and unlearned, and
spoke nothing of themselves; but what things they received from God, these they
distributed to the world: and we ourselves at this time introduce no inventions of
our own; but the things which from them we have received, we speak unto all.
And not even now persuade we by argumentation; but from the Divine
Scriptures and from the miracles done at that time we produce the proof of what
we say. On the other hand, even they at that time persuaded not by signs alone,
but also by discoursing. And the signs and the testimonies out of the Old
Scriptures, not the cleverness of the things said, made their words appear more
powerful.
5. How then, you will say, is it that signs were expedient then, and now
inexpedient? Let us suppose a case, (for as yet I am contending against the
Greek, and therefore I speak hypothetically of what must certainly come to
pass,) let us, I say, suppose a case; and let the unbeliever consent to believe our
affirmations, though it be only by way of concession: ([κἄν κατὰ συνδρομήν])
for instance, That Christ will come. When then Christ shall come and all the
angels with Him, and be manifested as God, and all things made subject unto
Him; will not even the Greek believe? It is quite plain that he will also fall down
and worship, and confess Him God, though his stubbornness exceed all
reckoning. For who, at sight of the heavens opened and Him coming upon the

clouds, and all the congregation of the powers above spread around Him, and
rivers of fire coming on, and all standing by and trembling, will not fall down
before Him, and believe Him God? Tell me, then; shall that adoration and
knowledge be accounted unto the Greek for faith? No, on no account. And why
not? Because this is not faith. For necessity has done this, and the evidence of
the things seen, and it is not of choice, but by the vastness of the spectacle the
powers of the mind are dragged along. It follows that by how much the more
evident and overpowering the course of events, by so much is the part of faith
abridged. For this reason miracles are not done now.
And that this is the truth, hear what He says unto Thomas [John 20:29]
"Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed." Therefore, in
proportion to the evidence wherewith the miracle is set forth is the reward of
faith lessened. So that if now also miracles were wrought, the same thing would
ensue. For that then we shall no longer know Him by faith, Paul has shown,
saying, "For now we walk by faith, not by sight." [2 Corinthians 5:7. νῦν]. As at
that time, although thou believe, it shall not be imputed unto you, because the
thing is so palpable; so also now, supposing that such miracles were done as
were formerly. For when we admit things which in no degree and in no way can
be made out by reasoning, then it is faith. It is for this that hell is threatened, but
is not shown: for if it were shown, the same would again ensue.
6. Besides if signs be what you seek after, even now you may see signs,
although not of the same kind; the numberless predictions and on an endless
variety of subject: the conversion of the world, the self-denying ([φιλοσοφίαν])
course of the Barbarians, the change from savage customs, the greater
intenseness of piety. "What predictions?" you will say. "For all the things just
mentioned were written after the present state of things had begun." When?
Where? By whom? Tell me. How many years ago? Will you have fifty, or an
hundred? They had not then, a hundred years ago, anything written at all. How
then did the world retain the doctrines and all the rest, since memory would not
be sufficient? How knew they that Peter was crucified? ([ἀνεσκολοπίσθη]) How