both him that had died, and him that never yet suffered this.
But the fifth motive, (for it is a fifth, besides those that have been
mentioned), even the evangelist himself has revealed. Now what was this? To
show the glory of the cross, and to console Peter and the others in their dread of
the passion, and to raise up their minds. Since having come, they by no means
held their peace, but "spoke," it is said, "of the glory which He was to
accomplish at Jerusalem; [Luke 9:31] " that is, of the passion, and the cross; for
so they call it always.
And not thus only did He cheer them, but also by the excellency itself of the
men, being such as He was especially requiring from themselves. I mean, that
having said, "If any man will come after me, let him take up his cross, and follow
me;" them that had died ten thousand times for God's decrees, and the people
entrusted to them, these persons He sets before them. Because each of these,
having lost his life, found it. For each of them both spoke boldly unto tyrants, the
one to the Egyptian, the other to Ahab; and in behalf of heartless and disobedient
men; and by the very persons who were saved by them, they were brought into
extreme danger; and each of them wishing to withdraw men from idolatry; and
each being unlearned; for the one was of a "slow tongue," [Exodus 4:10] and
dull of speech, and the other for his part also somewhat of the rudest in his
bearing: and of voluntary poverty both were very strict observers; for neither had
Moses made any gain, nor had Elias anything more than his sheepskin; and this
under the old law, and when they had not received so great a gift of miracles. For
what if Moses clave a sea? Yet Peter walked on the water, and was able to
remove mountains, and used to work cures of all manner of bodily diseases, and
to drive away savage demons, and by the shadow of his body to work those
wonderful and great prodigies; and changed the whole world. And if Elias too
raised a dead man, yet these raised ten thousand; and this before the spirit was as
yet vouchsafed to them. He brings them forward accordingly for this cause also.
For He would have them emulate their winning ways toward the people, and
their presence of mind and inflexibility; and that they should be meek like

Moses, and jealous for God like Elias, and full of tender care, as they were. For
the one endured a famine of three years for the Jewish people; and the other said,
"If you will forgive them their sin, forgive; else blot me too out of the book,
which you have written." [Exodus 32:32] Now of all this He was reminding them
by the vision.
For He brought those in glory too, not that these should stay where they
were, but that they might even surpass their limitary lines. For example, when
they said, "Should we command fire to come down from heaven," and made
mention of Elias as having done so, He says, "You know not what manner of
spirit you are of;" training them to forbearance by the superiority in their gift.
And let none suppose us to condemn Elias as imperfect; we say not this; for
indeed he was exceedingly perfect, but in his own times, when the mind of men
was in some degree childish, and they needed this kind of schooling. Since
Moses too was in this respect perfect; nevertheless these have more required of
them than he. For "unless your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
Heaven." [Matthew 5:20] For not into Egypt did they enter, but into the whole
world, worse disposed than the Egyptians; neither were they to speak with
Pharaoh, but to fight hand to hand with the devil, the very prince of wickedness.
Yea, and their appointed struggle was, both to bind him, and to spoil all his
goods; and this they did cleaving not the sea, but an abyss of ungodliness,
through the rod of Jesse—an abyss having waves far more grievous. See at any
rate how many things there were to put the men in fear; death, poverty, dishonor,
their innumerable sufferings; and at these things they trembled more than the
Jews of old at that sea. But nevertheless against all these things He persuaded
them boldly to venture, and to pass as along dry ground with all security.
To train them therefore for all this, He brought forward those who shone
forth under the old law.
4. What then says the ardent Peter? "It is good for us to be here."
[Matthew 16:4] For because he had heard that Christ was to go to Jerusalem and