Hebrews 4:14
He had said above "There is no creature that is not manifest in His sight,"
intimating His Godhead; then, since he had touched on the flesh, he again
discourses more condescendingly, saying [Hebrews 4:14], "Having then a great
High Priest, that is passed into the heavens": and shows that His care is greater
and that He protects them as His own, and would not have them fall away. For
Moses indeed (he says) did not enter into the rest, while He [Christ] did enter in.
And it is wonderful how he has nowhere stated the same, lest they might seem to
find an excuse; he however implied it, but that he might not appear to bring an
accusation against the man, he did not say it openly. For if, when none of these
things had been said, they yet brought forward these [charges], saying, This man
has spoken against Moses and against the law [see Acts 21:21, 28]; much more,
if he had said, It is not Palestine but Heaven, would they have said stronger
things than these.
5. But he attributes not all to the Priest, but requires also what is [to come]
from us, I mean our profession. For "having," he says, "a great High Priest, who
is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession"
[or "confession" ]. What sort of profession does he mean? That there is a
Resurrection, that there is a retribution: that there are good things innumerable;
that Christ is God, that the Faith is right. These things let us profess, these things
let us hold fast. For that they are true, is manifest from the fact, that the High
Priest is within. We have not failed of [our hopes], let us confess; although the
realities are not present, yet let us confess: if already they were present they were
but a lie. So that this also is true, that [our good things] are deferred. For our
High Priest also is Great.

Hebrews 4:15
"For we have not an High Priest, who cannot be touched with the feeling of
our infirmities." He is not (he means) ignorant of what concerns us, as many of
the High Priests, who know not those in tribulations, nor that there is tribulation
at any time. For in the case of men it is impossible that one should know the
affliction of the afflicted who has not had experience, and gone through the
actual sensations. Our High Priest endured all things. Therefore He endured first
and then ascended, that He might be able to sympathize with us.
But was "in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." Observe how
both above he has used the word "in like manner," and here "after the likeness."
[Hebrews 2:14] That is, He was persecuted, was spit upon, was accused, was
mocked at, was falsely informed against, was driven out, at last was crucified.
"After our likeness, without sin." In these words another thing also is
suggested, that it is possible even for one in afflictions to go through them
without sin. So that when he says also "in the likeness of flesh" [Romans 8:3], he
means not that He took on Him [merely] "the likeness of flesh," but "flesh." Why
then did he say "in the likeness"? Because he was speaking about "sinful flesh":
for it was "like" our flesh, since in nature it was the same with us, but in sin no
longer the same.