SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.2.

false premisses through employing an unsuitable middle term.
Hence both the aforesaid processes are contrary to euboulia
(deliberating well), as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. vi, 9).
Reply to Objection 2: Although virtue is essentially a perfection, it
does not follow that whatever is the matter of a virtue implies
perfection. For man needs to be perfected by virtues in all his parts,
and this not only as regards the acts of reason, of which counsel is
one, but also as regards the passions of the sensitive appetite,
which are still more imperfect.
It may also be replied that human virtue is a perfection according to
the mode of man, who is unable by simple insight to comprehend
with certainty the truth of things, especially in matters of action
which are contingent.
Reply to Objection 3: In no sinner as such is euboulia (deliberating
well) to be found: since all sin is contrary to taking good counsel.
For good counsel requires not only the discovery or devising of fit
means for the end, but also other circumstances. Such are suitable
time, so that one be neither too slow nor too quick in taking counsel,
and the mode of taking counsel, so that one be firm in the counsel
taken, and other like due circumstances, which sinners fail to
observe when they sin. On the other hand, every virtuous man takes
good counsel in those things which are directed to the end of virtue,
although perhaps he does not take good counsel in other particular
matters, for instance in matters of trade, or warfare, or the like.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether euboulia (deliberating well) is a special

virtue, distinct from prudence?
Objection 1: It would seem that euboulia (deliberating well) is not a
distinct virtue from prudence. For, according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. vi, 5), the "prudent man is, seemingly, one who takes good
counsel." Now this belongs to euboulia (deliberating well) as stated
above. Therefore euboulia (deliberating well) is not distinct from
prudence.
Objection 2: Further, human acts to which human virtues are
directed, are specified chiefly by their end, as stated above (FS,
Question 1, Article 3; FS, Question 18, Articles 4,6). Now euboulia
(deliberating well) and prudence are directed to the same end, as
stated in Ethic. vi, 9, not indeed to some particular end, but to the
common end of all life. Therefore euboulia (deliberating well) is not a
distinct virtue from prudence.
Objection 3: Further, in speculative sciences, research and decision
belong to the same science. Therefore in like manner these belong to
the same virtue in practical matters. Now research belongs to
euboulia (deliberating well), while decision belongs to prudence.
There euboulia (deliberating well) is not a distinct virtue from
prudence.
On the contrary, Prudence is preceptive, according to Ethic. vi, 10.
But this does not apply to euboulia (deliberating well). Therefore
euboulia (deliberating well) is a distinct virtue from prudence.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), virtue is properly directed
to an act which it renders good; and consequently virtues must differ
according to different acts, especially when there is a different kind
of goodness in the acts. For, if various acts contained the same kind
of goodness, they would belong to the same virtue: thus the
goodness of love, desire and joy depends on the same, wherefore all
these belong to the same virtue of charity.
Now acts of the reason that are ordained to action are diverse, nor
have they the same kind of goodness: since it is owing to different
causes that a man acquires good counsel, good judgment, or good
command, inasmuch as these are sometimes separated from one