21. When, therefore, He "shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
even the Father,"—that is, when He shall have brought those who believe
and live by faith, for whom now as Mediator He maketh intercession, to
that contemplation, for the obtaining of which we sigh and groan, and
when labor and groaning shall have passed away,—then, since the
kingdom will have been delivered up to God, even the Father, He will no
more make intercession for us. And this He signifies, when He says:
"These things have I spoken unto you in similitudes; but the time cometh
when I shall no more speak unto you in similitudes,3 but I shall declare to
you plainly of the Father:" that is, they will not then be "similitudes,"
when the sight shall be "face to face." For this it is which He says, "But I
will declare to you plainly of the Father;" as if He said, I will plainly show
you the Father. For He says, I will "declare" to you, because He is His
word. For He goes on to say, "At that day ye shall ask in my name; and I
say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: for the Father
Himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I
came out from God. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father." What is meant by
"I came forth from the Father," unless this, that I have not appeared in
that form in which I am equal to the Father, but otherwise, that is, as less
than the Father, in the creature which I have taken upon me? And what is
meant by "I am come into the world," unless this, that I have manifested
to the eyes even of sinners who love this world, the form of a servant
which I took, making myself of no reputation? And what is meant by
"Again, I leave the world," unless this, that I take away from the sight of
the lovers of this world that which they have seen? And what is meant by
"I go to the Father," unless this, that I teach those who are my faithful
ones to understand me in that being in which I am equal to the Father?
Those who believe this will be thought worthy of being brought by faith to
sight, that is, to that very sight, in bringing them to which He is said to
"deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father." For His faithful ones,
whom He has redeemed with His blood, are called His kingdom, for
whom He now intercedes; but then, making them to abide in Himself
there, where He is equal to the Father, He will no longer pray the Father
for them. "For," He says, "the Father Himself loveth you." For indeed He
"prays," in so far as He is less than the Father; but as He is equal with the
Father, He with the Father grants. Wherefore He certainly does not

exclude Himself from that which He says, "The Father Himself loveth
you;" but He means it to be understood after that manner which I have
above spoken of, and sufficiently intimated,—namely, that for the most
part each Person of the Trinity is so named, that the other Persons also
may be understood. Accordingly, "For the Father Himself loveth you," is
so said that by consequence both the Son and the Holy Spirit also may be
understood: not that He does not now love us, who spared not His own
Son, but delivered Him up for us all; but God loves us, such as we shall
be, not such as we are, For such as they are whom He loves, such are they
whom He keeps eternally; which shall then be, when He who now maketh
intercession for us shall have "delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father," so as no longer to ask the Father, because the Father Himself
loveth us. But for what deserving, except of faith, by which we believe
before we see that which is promised? For by this faith we shall arrive at
sight; so that He may love us, being such, as He loves us in order that we
may become; and not such, as He hates us because we are, and exhorts
and enables us to wish not to be always.