not call either the tongue of the apostle, or the parchments, or the ink, or
the significant sounds which his tongue uttered, or the alphabetical signs
written on skins, the body and blood of Christ; but that only which we
take of the fruits of the earth and consecrate by mystic prayer, and then
receive duly to our spiritual health in memory of the passion of our Lord
for us: and this, although it is brought by the hands of men to that visible
form, yet is not sanctified to become so great a sacrament, except by the
spirit of God working invisibly; since God works everything that is done
in that work through corporeal movements, by setting in motion
primarily the invisible things of His servants, whether the souls of men,
or the services of hidden spirits subject to Himself): what wonder if also
in the creature of heaven and earth, of sea and air, God works the sensible
and visible things which He wills, in order to signify and manifest
Himself in them, as He Himself knows it to be fitting, without any
appearing of His very substance itself, whereby He is, which is altogether
unchangeable, and more inwardly and secretly exalted than all spirits
whom He has created?

### CHAP. 5.—WHY MIRACLES ARE NOT USUAL WORKS.

11. For since the divine power administers the whole spiritual and
corporeal creature, the waters of the sea are summoned and poured out
upon the face of the earth on certain days of every year. But when this
was done at the prayer of the holy Elijah; because so continued and long a
course of fair weather had gone before, that men were famished; and
because at that very hour, in which the servant of God prayed, the air
itself had not, by any moist aspect, put forth signs of the coming rain; the
divine power was apparent in the great and rapid showers that followed,
and by which that miracle was granted and dispensed. In like manner,
God works ordinarily through thunders and lightnings: but because these
were wrought in an unusual manner on Mount Sinai, and those sounds
were not uttered with a confused noise, but so that it appeared by most
sure proofs that certain intimations were given by them, they were
miracles.7 Who draws up the sap through the root of the vine to the
bunch of grapes, and makes the wine, except God; who, while man plants
and waters, Himself giveth the increase? But when, at the command of
the Lord, the water was turned into wine with an extraordinary

quickness, the divine power was made manifest, by the confession even of
the foolish.9 Who ordinarily clothes the trees with leaves and flowers
except God? Yet, when the rod of Aaron the priest blossomed, the
Godhead in some way conversed with doubting humanity. Again, the
earthy matter certainly serves in common to the production and
formation both of all kinds of wood and of the flesh of all animals: and
who makes these things, but He who said, Let the earth bring them
forth;11 and who governs and guides by the same word of His, those
things which He has created? Yet, when He changed the same matter out
of the rod of Moses into the flesh of a serpent, immediately and quickly,
that change, which was unusual, although of a thing which was
changeable, was a miracle. But who is it that gives life to every living
thing at its birth, unless He who gave life to that serpent also for the
moment, as there was need.