2 Corinthians 6:17
Wherefore come ye out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch no
unclean thing; and I will receive you, says the Lord.
And He said not, 'Do not unclean things;' but, requiring greater strictness,
'do not even touch,' says he, 'nor go near them.' But what is filthiness of the
flesh? Adultery, fornication, lasciviousness of every kind. And what of the soul?
Unclean thoughts, as gazing with unchaste eyes, malice, deceits, and whatsoever
such things there be. He wishes then that they should be clean in both. Do you
see how great the prize? To be delivered from what is evil, to be made one with
God. Hear also what follows.

2 Corinthians 6:18
"And I will be to you a Father, and you shall be to me sons and daughters,
says the Lord."
Do you see how from the beginning the Prophet fore-announces our present
high birth, the Regeneration by grace?

2 Corinthians 7:1
"Having therefore these promises, beloved."
What promises? That we should be temples of God, sons and daughters,
have Him indwelling, and walking in us, be His people, have Him for our God
and Father.
"Let us cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit."
Let us neither touch unclean things, for this is cleansing of the flesh; nor
things which defile the soul, for this is cleansing of the spirit. Yet he is not
content with this only, but adds also,
"Perfecting holiness in the fear of God." For not to touch the unclean thing
does not make clean, but there needs something else besides to our becoming
holy; earnestness, heedfulness, piety. And he well said, "In the fear of God." For
it is possible to perfect chasteness, not in the fear of God but for vainglory. And
along with this he implies yet another thing, by saying, "In the fear of God;" the
manner, namely, whereafter holiness may be perfected. For if lust be even an
imperious thing, still if you occupy its territory with the fear of God, you have
stayed its frenzy.
4. Now by holiness here he means not chastity alone, but the freedom from
every kind of sin, for he is holy that is pure. Now one will become pure, not if he
be free from fornication only, but if from covetousness also, and envy, and pride
, and vainglory, yea especially from vainglory which in every thing indeed it
behooves to avoid, but much more in almsgiving; since neither will it be
almsgiving, if it have this distemper, but display and cruelty. For when thou dost
it not out of mercy, but from parade , such deed is not only no alms but even an
insult; for you have put your brother to open shame. Not then the giving money,
but the giving it out of mercy, is almsgiving. For people too at the theatres give,
both to prostitute boys and to others who are on the stage; but such a deed is not

almsgiving. And they too give that abuse the persons of prostitute women; but
this is not lovingkindness, but insolent treatment. Like this is the vainglorious
also. For just as he that abuses the person of the harlot, pays her a price for that
abuse; so too do you demand a price of him that receives of you, your insult of
him and your investing him as well as yourself with an evil notoriety. And
besides this, the loss is unspeakable. For just as a wild beast and a mad dog
springing upon us might, so does this ill disease and this inhumanity make prey
of our good things. For inhumanity and cruelty such a course is; yea, rather more
grievous even than this. For the cruel indeed would not give to him that asked;
but thou dost more than this; you hinder those that wish to give. For when you
parade your giving, you have both lowered the reputation of the receiver, and
hast pulled back him that was about to give, if he be of a careless mind. For he
will not give to him thenceforth, on the ground of his having already received,
and so not being in want; yea he will often accuse him even, if after having
received he should draw near to beg, and will think him impudent. What sort of
almsgiving then is this when thou both shamest yourself and him that receives;
and also in two ways Him that enjoined it: both because while having Him for a
spectator of your alms, you seek the eyes of your fellow-servants besides Him,
and because you transgress the law laid down by Him forbidding these things.
I could have wished to carry this out into those other subjects as well, both
fasting and prayer, and to show in how many respects vainglory is injurious there
also; but I remember that in the discourse before this I left unfinished a certain
necessary point. What was the point? I was saying, that the poor have the
advantage of the rich in the things of this life, when I discoursed concerning
health and pleasure; and this was shown indistinctly. Come then, today let us
show this, that not in the things of this life only, but also in those that are higher,
the advantage is with them. For what leads unto a kingdom, riches or poverty?
Let us hear the Lord Himself of the heavens saying of those, that "it is easier for
a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven:" [Matthew 19:24] but of the poor the contrary, "If you will