things shall all pass away, the torment ensuing upon them remains immortal and
unceasing; which sort of thing indeed takes place with respect to the children as
well, their father destroying their childish toys altogether for their idleness, and
causing them to weep incessantly.
11. And to convince you that these things are such, let us bring before us
wealth, that which more than anything seems to be worthy of our pains, and let
us set against it a virtue of the soul (which soever you will), and then shall you
see most clearly the vileness thereof. Let us, I say, suppose there are two men
(and I do not now speak of injuriousness, but as yet of honest wealth); and of
these two, let the one get together money, and sail on the sea, and till the land,
and find many other ways of merchandise (although I know not quite, whether,
so doing, he can make honest gains); nevertheless let it be so, and let it be
granted that his gains are gotten with honesty; that he buys fields, and slaves,
and all such things, and suppose no injustice connected therewith. But let the
other one, possessing as much, sell fields, sell houses, and vessels of gold and
silver, and give to the poor; let him supply the necessitous, heal the sick, free
such as are in straits, some let him deliver from bonds, others let him release that
are in mines, these let him bring back from the noose, those, who are captives,
let him rescue from their punishment. Of whose side then would you be? And
we have not as yet spoken of the future, but as yet of what is here. Of whose part
then would ye be? His that is gathering gold, or his that is doing away with
calamities? With him that is purchasing fields, or him who is making himself a
harbor of refuge for the human race? Him that is clothed with much gold, or him
that is crowned with innumerable blessings? Is not the one like some angel come
down from Heaven for the amendment of the rest of mankind; but the other not
so much as like a man, but like some little child that is gathering all together
vainly and at random?
But if to get money honestly be thus absurd, and of extreme madness; when
not even the honesty is there, how can such a man choose but be more wretched
than any? I say, if the absurdity be so great; when hell is added thereto, and the

loss of the kingdom, how great wailings are due to him, both living and dead?
12. Or will you that we take in hand some other part also of virtue? Let us
then introduce again another man, who is in power, commanding all, invested
with great dignity, having a gorgeous herald, and girdle, and lictors, and a large
company of attendants. Does not this seem great, and meet to be called happy?
Well then, against this man again let us set another, him that is patient of injuries,
and meek, and lowly, and long suffering; and let this last be despitefully used, be
beaten, and let him bear it quietly, and bless them that are doing such things.
Now which is the one to be admired, I pray you? He that is puffed up, and
inflamed, or he that is self-subdued? Is not the one again like the powers above,
that are so free from passion, but the other like a blown bladder, or a man who
has the dropsy, and great inflammation? The one like a spiritual physician, the
other, a ridiculous child that is puffing out his cheeks?
For why do you pride yourself, O man? Because you are borne on high in a
chariot? Because a yoke of mules is drawing you? And what is this? Why, this
one may see befalling mere logs of wood and stones. Is it that you are clothed
with beautiful garments? But look at him that is clad with virtue for garments,
and you will see yourself to be like withering hay, but him like a tree that bears
marvellous fruit, and affords much delight to the beholders. For you are bearing
about food for worms and moths, who, if they should set upon you, will quickly
strip you bare of this adorning (for truly garments and gold and silver, are the
one, the spinning of worms; the other earth and dust, and again become earth and
nothing more): but he that is clothed with virtue has such raiment, as not only
worms cannot hurt, but not even death itself. And very naturally; for these
virtues of the soul have not their origin from the earth, but are a fruit of the
Spirit; wherefore neither are they subject to the mouths of worms. Nay, for these
garments are woven in Heaven, where is neither moth, nor worm, nor any other
such thing.
Which then is better, tell me? To be rich, or to be poor? To be in power, or
in dishonor? In luxury, or in hunger? It is quite clear; to be in honor, and