the Father of the Bridegroom. Nevertheless, although this
endowment is made by all the Persons, it may be in a manner
appropriated to each Person. To the Person of the Father, as
endowing, since He possesses authority; and fatherhood in relation
to creatures is also appropriated to Him, so that He is Father of both
Bridegroom and bride. To the Son it is appropriated, inasmuch as it
is made for His sake and through Him: and to the Holy Ghost,
inasmuch as it is made in Him and according to Him, since love is
the reason of all giving [FP, Question 38, Article 2].
Reply to Objection 3: That which is effected by the dowry belongs to
the dowry by its nature, and that is the ease of marriage: while that
which the dowry removes, namely the marriage burden which is
lightened thereby, belongs to it accidentally: thus it belongs to grace
by its nature to make a man righteous, but accidentally to make an
ungodly man righteous. Accordingly, though there are no burdens in
the spiritual marriage, there is the greatest gladness; and that this
gladness may be perfected the bride is dowered with gifts, so that by
their means she may be happily united with the bridegroom.
Reply to Objection 4: The dowry is usually settled on the bride not
when she is espoused, but when she is taken to the bridegroom's
dwelling, so as to be in the presence of the bridegroom, since "while
we are in the body we are absent from the Lord" (2 Cor. 5:6). Hence
the gifts bestowed on the saints in this life are not called a dowry,
but those which are bestowed on them when they are received into
glory, where the Bridegroom delights them with His presence.
Reply to Objection 5: In spiritual marriage inward comeliness is
required, wherefore it is written (Ps. 44:14): "All the glory of the
king's daughter is within," etc. But in carnal marriage outward
comeliness is necessary. Hence there is no need for a dowry of this
kind to be appointed in spiritual marriage as in carnal marriage.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the dowry is the same as beatitude?

Objection 1: It would seem that the dowry is the same as beatitude.
For as appears from the definition of dowry (Article 1), the dowry is
"the everlasting adornment of body and soul in eternal happiness."
Now the happiness of the soul is an adornment thereof. Therefore
beatitude is a dowry.
Objection 2: Further, a dowry signifies something whereby the union
of bride and bridegroom is rendered delightful. Now such is
beatitude in the spiritual marriage. Therefore beatitude is a dowry.
Objection 3: Further, according to Augustine (In Ps. 92) vision is "the
whole essence of beatitude." Now vision is accounted one of the
dowries. Therefore beatitude is a dowry.
Objection 4: Further, fruition gives happiness. Now fruition is a
dowry. Therefore a dowry gives happiness and thus beatitude is a
dowry.
Objection 5: Further, according to Boethius (De Consol. iii),
"beatitude is a state made perfect by the aggregate of all good
things." Now the state of the blessed is perfected by the dowries.
Therefore the dowries are part of beatitude.
On the contrary, The dowries are given without merits: whereas
beatitude is not given, but is awarded in return for merits. Therefore
beatitude is not a dowry.
Further, beatitude is one only, whereas the dowries are several.
Therefore beatitude is not a dowry.
Further, beatitude is in man according to that which is principal in
him (Ethic. x, 7): whereas a dowry is also appointed to the body.
Therefore dowry and beatitude are not the same.
I answer that, There are two opinions on this question. For some say
that beatitude and dowry are the same in reality but differ in aspect:
because dowry regards the spiritual marriage between Christ and the
soul, whereas beatitude does not. But seemingly this will not stand,
since beatitude consists in an operation, whereas a dowry is not an