14. Thus it is possible that he who has nothing may possess all men's goods.
Thus may he who possesses nothing acquire the goods of all: whereas, were we
to get all men's goods, we are bereft of all. Perhaps this saying seems to be a
paradox; but it is not. "But," you will say, "how does he who has nothing possess
all men's goods? Does he not have much more who has what belongs to all?" By
no means: but the contrary. For he who has nothing commands all, even as they
did. And throughout the world all houses were open to them, and they who
offered them took their coming as a favor, and they came to them as to friends
and kindred. For so they came to the woman who was a seller of purple, [Acts
16:14] and she like a servant set before them what she had. And to the keeper of
the prison; and he opened to them all his house. And to innumerable others. Thus
they had all things and had nothing: for [Acts 4:32] "they said that none of the
things which they possessed was their own;" therefore all things were theirs. For
he that considers all things to be common, will not only use his own, but also the
things of others as if they belonged to him. But he that parts things off and sets
himself as master over his own only, will not be master even of these. And this is
plain from an example. He who possesses nothing at all, neither house, nor table,
nor garment to spare, but for God's sake is bereft of all, uses the things which are
in common as his own; and he shall receive from all whatsoever he may desire,
and thus he that has nothing possesses the things of all. But he that has some
things, will not be master even of these. For first, no one will give to him that
has possessions; and, secondly, his property shall belong to robbers and thieves
and informers and changing events and be any body's rather than his. Paul, for
instance, went up and down throughout all the world, carrying nothing with him,
though he went neither unto friends nor kindred. Nay, at first he was a common
enemy to all: but nevertheless he had all men's goods after he had made good his
entrance. But Ananias and Sapphira, hastening to gain a little more than their
own, lost all together with life itself. Withdraw then from your own, that you
may use others' goods as your own.
15. But I must stop: I know not how I have been carried into such a

transport in speaking such words as these unto men who think it a great thing to
impart but ever so little of their own. Wherefore let these my words have been
spoken to the perfect. But to the more imperfect, this is what we may say, Give
of what you have unto the needy. Increase your substance. For, says He,
[Proverbs 19:17] "He that gives unto the poor, lends unto God." But if you are in
a hurry and wait not for the time of recompense, think of those who lend money
to men: for not even these desire to get their interest immediately; but they are
anxious that the principal should remain a good long while in the hands of the
borrower, provided only the repayment be secure and they have no mistrust of
the borrower. Let this be done then in the present case also. Leave them with
God that He may pay you your wages manifold. Seek not to have the whole
here; for if you recover it all here, how will you receive it back there? And it is
on this account that God stores them up there, inasmuch as this present life is full
of decay. But He gives even here also; for, "Seek ye," says He, "the kingdom of
heaven, and all these things shall be added unto you." [Matthew 6:33] Well then,
let us look towards the kingdom, and not be in a hurry for the repayment of the
whole, lest we diminish our recompense. But let us wait for the fit season. For
the interest in these cases is not of that kind, but is such as is meet to be given to
God. This then having collected together in great abundance, so let us depart
hence, that we may obtain both the present and the future blessings; through the
grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom unto the Father
and the Holy Spirit be glory, power, honor, now, henceforth, and for evermore.
Amen.