have many wants. Nay, so desirous is He that we should be alienated from
superfluities, that He abridges many even of necessary things. Wherefore He
said, "Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has
not where to lay His head." [Matthew 8:20] Therefore He spent most of His time
in the mountains, and in the deserts, not by day only, but also by night. And this
David declared when he said, "He shall drink of the brook in the way" [Psalm
110:7]: by this showing His frugal way of life. This too the Evangelist shows in
this place.

John 4:6-8
"Jesus therefore, being wearied with His journey, sat thus by the well; and it was
about the sixth hour. There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus says
unto her, Give Me to drink. For His disciples had gone away into the city to buy
meat."
Hence we learn His activity in journeying, His carelessness about food, and
how He treated it as a matter of minor importance. And so the disciples were
taught to use the like disposition themselves; for they took with them no
provisions for the road. And this another Evangelist declares, saying, that when
He spoke to them concerning "the leaven of the Pharisees" [Matthew 16:6], they
thought that it was because they carried no bread; and when he introduces them
plucking the ears of grain, and eating [Matthew 12:1], and when he says that
Jesus came to the fig-tree by reason of hunger [Matthew 21:18], it is for nothing
else but only to instruct us by all these to despise the belly, and not to deem that
its service is anxiously to be attended to. Observe them, for instance, in this
place neither bringing anything with them, nor because they brought not
anything, caring for this at the very beginning and early part of the day, but
buying food at the time when all other people were taking their meal. Not like
us, who the instant we rise from our beds attend to this before anything else,
calling cooks and butlers, and giving our directions with all earnestness,
applying ourselves afterwards to other matters, preferring temporal things to
spiritual, valuing those things as necessary which we ought to have deemed of
less importance. Therefore all things are in confusion. We ought, on the contrary,
making much account of all spiritual things, after having accomplished these,
then to apply ourselves to the others.
And in this place it is not His laboriousness alone that is shown, but also
His freedom from pride; not merely by His being tired, nor by His sitting by the
way-side, but by His having been left alone, and His disciples having been

separated from Him. And yet it was in His power, if He had willed it, either not
to have sent them all away, or when they departed to have had other ministers.
But He would not; for so He accustomed His disciples to tread all pride beneath
their feet.
"And what marvel," says one, "if they were moderate in their wishes, since
they were fishermen and tentmakers?" Yes! Fishermen and tentmakers they
were; but they had in a moment mounted even to the height of heaven, and had
become more honorable than all earthly kings, being deemed worthy to become
the companions of the Lord of the world, and to follow Him whom all beheld
with awe. And ye know this too, that those men especially who are of humble
origin, whenever they gain distinction, are the more easily lifted up to folly,
because they are quite ignorant how to bear their sudden honor. Restraining them
therefore in their present humblemindedness, He taught them always to be
moderate, and never to require any to wait upon them.