What now may one reply to this? That the precepts then uttered had
reference to the weakness of them who were receiving the laws; since also to be
worshipped with the vapor of sacrifice is very unworthy of God, just as to lisp is
unworthy of a philosopher. That kind of thing accordingly was now laid down to
be adultery, and swearing to be of the evil one, now that the principles of virtue
have advanced. But if these things had been, from the first, laws of the devil,
they would not have attained to so great goodness. Yea, for had those not been
forerunners in the first place, these which we now have would not have been so
easily received. Do not thou then require their excellency now, when their use is
past: but then, when the time was calling for them. Or rather, if you will, even
now: yea, for now also is their virtue shown: and most of all for the very cause,
by reason of which we find fault with them. For their appearing such now, is the
greatest commendation of them. For had they not brought us up well, and made
us meet for the reception of the greater precepts, they would not have appeared
such.
Therefore as the breast, when it has fulfilled all its part, and is dismissing
the child to the more manly diet, after that appears useless; and the parents who
before thought it necessary for the babe, now abuse it with ten thousand
mockeries (and many even not content with words of abuse, anoint it also with
bitter drugs; that when their words have not power to remove the child's
unseasonable propensity towards it, the real things may quench their longing): so
also Christ says, that they are of the evil one, not to indicate that the old law is of
the devil, but in order that with most exceeding earnestness He might lead them
away from their ancient poverty. And to them He says these things; but with
regard to the Jews, who were insensible and persevered in the same ways, He
has anointed their city all round with the terror of captivity, as with some bitter
drug, and made it inaccessible. But since not even this had power to restrain
them, but they desired to see it again, running to it, just as a child to the breast,
He hid it from them altogether; both pulling it down, and leading away the more
part of them far from it: as it is with our cattle; many, by shutting out the calves,

in time induce them to forego their old familiar use of the milk.
But if the old law had belonged to the devil, it would not have led people
away from idolatry, but rather would have drawn them on and cast them into it;
for this did the devil desire. But now we see the opposite effect produced by the
old law. And indeed this very thing, the oath, was ordained of old for this cause,
that they might not swear by the idols. For "you shall swear," says He, "by the
true God." They were then no small advantages which the law effected, but
rather very great. For that they came unto the "strong meat," was the work of its
care.
"What then," it may be said, "is not swearing of the evil one?" Yes, indeed
it is altogether of the evil one; that is, now, after so high a rule of self-restraint;
but then not so.
"But how," one may say, "should the same thing become at one time good,
at another time not good?" Nay, I say the very contrary: how could it help
becoming good and not good, while all things are crying aloud, that they are so:
the arts, the fruits of the earth, and all things else?
See it, for example, taking place first in our own kind. Thus, to be carried,
in the earliest age of life, is good, but afterwards pernicious; to eat food that has
been softened in the mouth, in the first scene of our life, is good, but afterwards
it is full of disgust; to be fed upon milk and to fly to the breast, is at first
profitable and healthful, but tends afterwards to decay and harm. Do you see
how the same actions, by reason of the times, appear good, and again not so?
Yea, and to wear the robe of a child is well as long as you are a boy, but
contrariwise, when you have become a man, it is disgraceful. Would you learn of
the contrary case too, how to the child again the things of the man are unsuited?
Give the boy a man's robe, and great will be the laughter; and greater the danger,
he being often upset in walking after that fashion. Allow him to handle public
affairs, and to traffic, and sow, and reap, and great again will be the laughter.
And why do I mention these things? When killing, which among all is
acknowledged to be an invention of the evil one, killing, I say, having found its