but worship only, and imitate the clay. And as it follows the hands of the potter,
so do thou also the mind of Him that so orders things. For He works nothing at
random, or mere hazard, though thou be ignorant of the secret of His Wisdom.
Yet you allow the other of the same lump to make various things, and findest no
fault: but of Him you demand an account of His punishments and honors, and
will not allow Him to know who is worthy and who is not so; but since the same
lump is of the same substance, you assert that there are the same dispositions.
And, how monstrous this is! And yet not even is it on the potter that the honor
and the dishonor of the things made of the lump depends, but upon the use made
by those that handle them, so here also it depends on the free choice. Still, as I
said before, one must take this illustration to have one bearing only, which is that
one should not contravene God, but yield to His incomprehensible Wisdom. For
the examples ought to be greater than the subject, and than the things on account
of which they are brought forward, so as to draw on the hearer better. Since if
they were not greater and did not mount far above it, he could not attack as he
ought, and shame the objectors. However, their ill-timed obstinacy he silenced in
this way with becoming superiority. And then he introduces his answer. Now
what is the answer?
Ver. 22, 23, 24. "What if God, willing to show His wrath, and to make His
power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction: and that He might make known the riches of His glory on the vessels
of mercy, which He had afore prepared unto glory, even us, whom He has
chosen, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles."
What he means is somewhat as follows. Pharaoh was a vessel of wrath, that
is, a man who by his own hard-heartedness had kindled the wrath of God. For
after enjoying much long-suffering, he became no better, but remained
unimproved. Wherefore he calls him not only "a vessel of wrath," but also one
"fitted for destruction." That is, fully fitted indeed, but by his own proper self.
For neither had God left out anything of the things likely to recover him, nor did
he leave out anything of those that would ruin him, and put him beyond any

forgiveness. Yet still, though God knew this, "He endured him with much longsuffering," being willing to bring him to repentance. For had He not willed this,
then He would not have been thus long-suffering. But as he would not use the
long-suffering in order to repentance, but fully fitted himself for wrath, He used
him for the correction of others, through the punishment inflicted upon him
making them better, and in this way setting forth His power. For that it is not
God's wish that His power be so made known, but in another way, by His
benefits, namely, and kindnesses, he had shown above in all possible ways. For
if Paul does not wish to appear powerful in this way ("not that we should appear
approved," he says, "but that you should do that which is honest,") [2
Corinthians 13:7], much less does God. But after that he had shown longsuffering, that He might lead to repentance, but he did not repent, He suffered
him a long time, that He might display at once His goodness and His power,
even if that man were not minded to gain anything from this great longsuffering. As then by punishing this man, who continued incorrigible, He
showed His power, so by having pitied those who had done many sins but
repented, He manifested His love toward man. But it does not say, love towards
man, but glory, to show that this is especially God's glory, and for this He was
above all things earnest. But in saying, "which He had afore prepared unto
glory," he does not mean that all is God's doing. Since if this were so, there were
nothing to hinder all men from being saved. But he is setting forth again His
foreknowledge, and doing away with the difference between the Jews and the
Gentiles. And on this topic again he grounds a defence of his statement, which is
no small one. For it was not in the case of the Jews only that some men perished,
and some were saved, but with the Gentiles also this was the case. Wherefore he
does not say, all the Gentiles, but, "of the Gentiles," nor, all the Jews, but, "of the
Jews." As then Pharaoh became a vessel of wrath by his own lawlessness, so did
these become vessels of mercy by their own readiness to obey. For though the
more part is of God, still they also have contributed themselves some little.
Whence he does not say either, vessels of well-doing, or vessels of boldness