John 7:11
"Then the Jews sought Him, and said, Where is He?"
Excellent truly the good deeds at their feasts! They are eager for murder,
and wish to seize Him, even during the feast. At least, in another place they
speak thus, "Think ye that He will not come to the feast?" [John 11:56]; and here
they said, "Where is He?" Through their excessive hatred and enmity they would
not even call Him by name. Great was their reverence towards the feast, great
their caution. By occasion of the very feast they wished to entrap Him!

John 7:12
"And there was much murmuring among the people concerning Him."
I think they were exasperated by the place where the miracle had been
wrought, and were greatly infuriated and afraid, not so much from anger at what
had gone before, as from fear lest He should again work something similar. But
all fell out contrary to what they desired, and against their will they rendered
Him conspicuous.
"And some said, He is a good man; others said, Nay, but He deceives the
people."
Methinks the first of these opinions was that of the many, the other that of
the rulers and priests. For to slander Him suited their malice and wickedness.
"He deceives," say they, "the people." How, tell me? Was it by seeming to work,
not really working miracles? But experience witnesses the contrary.

John 7:13
"Howbeit no man spoke openly of Him for fear of the Jews."
Do you see everywhere the ruling body corrupted, and the ruled sound
indeed in judgment, but not having that proper courage which a multitude
especially lacks?

John 7:14
"Now about the middle of the feast Jesus went up and taught."
By the delay He made them more attentive; for they who had sought Him
on the first days and said, "Where is He?" when they saw Him suddenly present,
observe how they drew near, and were like to press upon Him as He was
speaking, both those who said that He was a good man, and those who said that
He was not such; the former so as to profit by and admire Him, the latter to lay
hold on and detain Him. One party then said, "He deceives the people," by
reason of the teaching and the doctrines, not understanding His meaning; the
other on account of the miracles said, "He is a good man." He therefore thus
came among them when He had slackened their anger, so that they might hear
His words at leisure, when passion no longer stopped their ears. What He taught,
the Evangelist has not told us; that He taught marvelously, this only he says, and
that He won and brought them over. Such was the power of His speech. And
they who had said, "He deceives the people," altered their opinion, "and
marveled." Wherefore also they said,

John 7:15
"How knows this man letters, having never learned?"
Observest thou how the Evangelist shows here also their marveling to be
full of wickedness? For he says not, that they admired the teaching, or that they
received the words, but simply that they "marveled." That is, were thrown into a
state of astonishment, and doubted, saying, "Whence has this man these things"?
When they ought from this very difficulty to have known that there was nothing
merely human in Him. But because they would not confess this, but stopped at
wondering only, hear what He says.