name, perhaps he would have been angry. And if he had not mentioned them at
all, he might have been displeased. Observe therefore how prudently he has
found a way by his manner of mentioning them, both to honor them by his
mention of them, and not to wound him. For the name of the "Church" does not
suffer masters to be angry, even though they are reckoned together with their
servants. For the Church knows not the distinction of master and servant. By
good actions and by sins she defines the one and the other. If then it is a Church,
be not displeased that your slave is saluted with you. "For in Christ Jesus there
is neither bond nor free." [Galatians 3:28]
"Grace to you, and peace."
By mentioning "grace," he brings his own sins to his remembrance.
Consider, he says, how great things God has pardoned in you, how by grace you
are saved. Imitate your Lord. And he prays for "peace" to him; and naturally: for
it comes then when we imitate Him, then grace abides. Since even that servant
who was unmerciful to his fellow-servants, until he demanded the hundred
pence, had the grace of his master abiding on him. But when he made that
demand, it was taken from him, and he was delivered to the tormentors.
Moral. Considering these things, then, let us also be merciful and forgiving
towards those who have trespassed against us. The offenses against us here are a
hundred pence, but those from us against God are ten thousand talents. But you
know that offenses are also judged by the quality of the persons: for instance, he
who has insulted a private person has done wrong, but not so much as he who
has insulted a magistrate, and he who has offended a greater magistrate offends
in a higher degree, and he who offends an inferior one in a lower degree; but he
who insults the king offends much more. The injury indeed is the same, but it
becomes greater by the excellence of the person. And if he who insults a king
receives intolerable punishment, on account of the superiority of the person; for
how many talents will he be answerable who insults God? So that even if we
should commit the same offenses against God, that we do against men, even so it
is not an equal thing: but as great as is the difference between God and men, so

great is that between the offenses against Him and them.
But now I find also that the offenses exceed, not only in that they become
great by the eminence of the person, but by their very nature. And it is a horrible
saying that I am about to utter, and truly awful, but it is necessary to be said, that
it may even so shake our minds and strike them with terror, showing that we fear
men much more than God, and we honor men much more than God. For
consider, he that commits adultery knows that God sees him, yet he disregards
Him; but if a man see him, he restrains his lust. Does not such a one not only
honor men above God, not only insult God, but, which is even much more
dreadful, while he fears them, despise Him? For if he sees them, he restrains the
flame of lust, but rather what flame? It is not a flame, but a willfulness. For if
indeed it was not lawful to have intercourse with a woman, the matter perhaps
would be a flame, but now it is insult and wantonness. For if he should see men,
he desists from his mad passion, but for the longsuffering of God he has less
regard. Again, another who steals, is conscious that he is committing robbery,
and endeavors to deceive men, and defends himself against those who accuse
him, and clothes his apology with a fair show; but though he cannot thus prevail
with God, he does not regard Him, nor stand in awe of Him, nor honor Him. And
if the king indeed commands us to abstain from other men's goods, or even to
give away our own, all readily contribute, but when God commands not to rob,
not to gather other men's goods, we do not forbear.
Do you see then that we honor men more than God? It is a sad and grievous
saying, a heavy charge. But show that it is grievous; flee from the fact! But if
you fear not the fact, how can I believe you when you say, We fear your words,
you lay a burden on us! It is you that by the deed lay a burden on yourselves, and
not our words. And if I but name the words of which you do the deeds, you are
offended. And is not this absurd?
May the thing spoken by me prove false! I would rather myself in That Day
bear the imputation of ill language, as having vainly and causelessly reproached
you, than see you accused of such things.