FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.75, C.4.

but not so as to be a sufficient cause thereof: and the will alone is
the sufficient completive cause of sin being accomplished.
Reply to Objection 1: From the very fact that the external motive
causes of sin do not lead to sin sufficiently and necessarily, it
follows that it remains in our power to sin or not to sin.
Reply to Objection 2: The fact that sin has an internal cause does not
prevent its having an external cause; for nothing external is a cause
of sin, except through the medium of the internal cause, as stated.
Reply to Objection 3: If the external causes inclining to sin be
multiplied, the sinful acts are multiplied, because they incline to the
sinful act in both greater numbers and greater frequency.
Nevertheless the character of guilt is lessened, since this depends
on the act being voluntary and in our power.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.75, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether one sin is a cause of another?

Objection 1: It would seem that one sin cannot be the cause of
another. For there are four kinds of cause, none of which will fit in
with one sin causing another. Because the end has the character of
good; which is inconsistent with sin, which has the character of evil.
In like manner neither can a sin be an efficient cause, since "evil is
not an efficient cause, but is weak and powerless," as Dionysius
declares (Div. Nom. iv). The material and formal cause seems to have
no place except in natural bodies, which are composed of matter and
form. Therefore sin cannot have either a material or a formal cause.
Objection 2: Further, "to produce its like belongs to a perfect thing,"
as stated in Meteor. iv, 2 [De Anima ii.]. But sin is essentially
something imperfect. Therefore one sin cannot be a cause of
another.
Objection 3: Further, if one sin is the cause of a second sin, in the
same way, yet another sin will be the cause of the first, and thus we
go on indefinitely, which is absurd. Therefore one sin is not the
cause of another.
On the contrary, Gregory says on Ezechiel (Hom. xi): "A sin is not
quickly blotted out by repentance, is both a sin and a cause of sin."
I answer that, Forasmuch as a sin has a cause on the part of the act
of sin, it is possible for one sin to be the cause of another, in the
same way as one human act is the cause of another. Hence it
happens that one sin may be the cause of another in respect of the
four kinds of causes. First, after the manner of an efficient or moving
cause, both directly and indirectly. Indirectly, as that which removes
an impediment is called an indirect cause of movement: for when
man, by one sinful act, loses grace, or charity, or shame, or anything
else that withdraws him from sin, he thereby falls into another sin, so
that the first sin is the accidental cause of the second. Directly, as
when, by one sinful act, man is disposed to commit more readily
another like act: because acts cause dispositions and habits
inclining to like acts. Secondly, after the manner of a material cause,
one sin is the cause of another, by preparing its matter: thus
covetousness prepares the matter for strife, which is often about the
wealth a man has amassed together. Thirdly, after the manner of a