different ways, as the same effect is attributed wholly to the instrument, and wholly also
to the principal agent.

## CHAPTER LXXI--That the Divine Providence is not wholly inconsistent with the
presence of Evil in Creation
PERFECT goodness could not be in creation if there were not found an order of
goodness among creatures, some being better than others: or else all possible grades
of goodness would not be filled up; nor would any creature be like God in having preeminence over another. Thus a great beauty would be lost to creation in the
removal of the order of distinct and dissimilar beings, one better than the other. A dead
level of goodness would be a manifest derogation to the perfection of creation. A higher
grade of goodness consists in there being something which cannot fall away from
goodness; a lower grade, in there being that which can fall away. The perfection of
the universe requires both grades of goodness. But it is the care of a ruler to uphold
perfection in the subjects of his government, not to make it less. Therefore it is no part
of divine providence wholly to exclude from creation the capability of falling away from
good. But upon this capability evil ensues: for what is capable of falling away,
sometimes does fall away; and the mere lack of good is evil (Chap.VII).
3. The best rule in any government is to provide for everything under government
according to the mode of its nature: just administration consists in this. As then it would
be contrary to any rational plan of human administration for the civil government to
debar its subjects from acting according to their offices and conditions of life, except
perhaps in an occasional hour of emergency, so it would be contrary to the plan of
divine government not to allow creatures to act according to the mode of their several
natures. But by the very fact of creatures so acting there follows destruction and evil in
the world, since by reason of mutual contrariety and inconsistency one thing is
destructive of another.
5. There are many good things in creation which would find no place there, unless evils
were there also. Thus there would be no patience of the just, if there were not the
malice of persecutors: no room for vindictive justice, if there were no offences: and in
the physical order one thing cannot come to be unless something else is destroyed.

7. Other things, and particularly inferior things, are ordained to the end of the good of
man. But if there were no evils in the world, much good would be lost to man, as well in
respect of knowledge, as also in respect of desire and love of good: for good is better
known in contrast with evil; and while evil results come about, we more ardently deire
good results: as sick men best know what a blessing health is.
Therefore it is said: Making peace and creating evil (Isai. xlv, 7): Shall there be evil in
the city that the Lord has not done? (Amos iii, 6.)
Boethius (De consolatione, Lib. I, prosa 4) introduces a philosopher asking the question:
`If there is a God, how comes evil?'. The argument should be turned the other way: `If
there is evil, there is a God.' For there would be no evil, if the order of goodness were
taken away, the privation of which is evil; and this order would not be, if God were not.
Hereby is taken away the occasion of the error of the Manicheans, who supposed two
primary agents, good and evil, as though evil could not have place under the providence
of a good God.
We have also the solution of a doubt raised by some, whether evil actions are of God.
Since it has been shown (Chap.LXVI) that every agent produces its action
inasmuch as it acts by divine power, and that thereby God is the cause of all effects and
of all actions (Chap.LXVII); and since it has been further shown (Chap.X)
that in things subject to divine providence evil and deficiency happens from some
condition of secondary causes, in which there may be defect; it is clear that evil actions,
inasmuch as they are defective, are not of God, but of defective proximate causes; but
so far as the action and entity contained in them goes, they must be of God, -- as
lameness is of motive power, so far as it has anything of motion, but so far as it has
anything of defect, it comes of curvature of the leg.