could not exceed them on the score of righteousness.
But of what kind was the required excess? Not to be angry, not even to look
upon a woman unchastely.
For what cause then does He call these commandments "least," though they
were so great and high? Because He Himself was about to introduce the
enactment of them; for as He humbled Himself, and speaks of Himself
frequently with measure, so likewise of His own enactments, hereby again
teaching us to be modest in everything. And besides, since there seemed to be
some suspicion of novelty, He ordered His discourse for a while with reserve.
But when you hear, "least in the kingdom of Heaven," surmise nothing but
hell and torments. For He was used to mean by "the kingdom," not merely the
enjoyment thereof, but also the time of the resurrection, and that awful coming.
And how could it be reasonable, that while he who called his brother fool, and
trangressed but one commandment, falls into hell; the breaker of them all, and
instigator of others to the same, should be within the kingdom. This therefore is
not what He means, but that such a one will be at that time least, that is, cast out,
last. And he that is last will surely then fall into hell. For, being God, He
foreknew the laxity of the many, He foreknew that some would think these
sayings were merely hyperbolical, and would argue about the laws, and say,
What, if any one call another a fool, is he punished? If one merely look on a
woman, does he become an adulterer? For this very cause He, destroying such
insolence beforehand, has set down the strongest denunciation against either
sort, as well them who transgress, as them who lead on others so to do.
Knowing then His threat as we do, let us neither ourselves transgress, nor
discourage such as are disposed to keep these things.
"But whosoever shall do and teach," says He, "shall be called great."
For not to ourselves alone, should we be profitable, but to others also; since
neither is the reward as great for him who guides himself aright, as for one who
with himself adds also another. For as teaching without doing condemns the
teacher (for "you who teach another," it is said, "do you not teach yourself"

[Romans 2:21]?) so doing but not guiding others, lessens our reward. One ought
therefore to be chief in either work, and having first set one's self right, thus to
proceed also to the care of the rest. For on this account He Himself has set the
doing before the teaching; to intimate that so most of all may one be able to
teach, but in no other way. For one will be told, "Physician, heal yourself."
[Luke 4:23] Since he who cannot teach himself, yet attempts to set others right,
will have many to ridicule him. Or rather such a one will have no power to teach
at all, his actions uttering their voice against him. But if he be complete in both
respects, "he shall be called great in the kingdom of Heaven."
6. "For I say unto you, Unless your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 5:20]
Here by righteousness He means the whole of virtue; even as also
discoursing of Job, He said, "He was a blameless man, righteous." According to
the same signification of the word, Paul also called that man "righteous" for
whom, as he said, no law is even set. "For," says he, "a law is not made for a
righteous man." [1 Timothy 1:9] And in many other places too one might find
this name standing for virtue in general.
But observe, I pray you, the increase of grace; in that He will have His
newly-come disciples better than the teachers in the old covenant. For by
"Scribes and Pharisees" here, He meant not merely the lawless, but the welldoers. For, were they not doing well, He would not have said they have a
righteousness; neither would He have compared the unreal to the real.
And observe also here, how He commends the old law, by making a
comparison between it and the other; which kind of thing implies it to be of the
same tribe and kindred. For more and less, is in the same kind. He does not, you
see, find fault with the old law, but will have it made stricter. Whereas, had it
been evil, He would not have required more of it; He would not have made it
more perfect, but would have cast it out.
And how one may say, if it be such, does it not bring us into the Kingdom?