Deut. xxxii. 6. "Owned thee," i.e., following the meaning of the Hebrew, "owned thee by generation."

have the Lord's money. "Well done," He says, "good and faithful servant: because thou hast been
faithful in little, I will appoint thee over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." The
Lord Himself thus promises very much.
3. As, therefore, He has promised to give very much to those who do now bring forth fruit,
according to the gift of His grace, but not according to the changeableness of "knowledge;" for the
Lord remains the same, and the same Father is revealed; thus, therefore, has the one and the same
Lord granted, by means of His advent, a greater gift of grace to those of a later period, than what
He had granted to those under the Old Testament dispensation. For they indeed used to hear, by
means of [His] servants, that the King would come, and they rejoiced to a certain extent, inasmuch
as they hoped for His coming; but those who have beheld Him actually present, and have obtained
liberty, and been made partakers of His gifts, do possess a greater amount of grace, and a higher
degree of exultation, rejoicing because of the King's arrival: as also David says, "My soul shall
rejoice in the Lord; it shall be glad in His salvation." And for this cause, upon His entrance into
Jerusalem, all those who were in the way recognised David their king in His sorrow of soul, and
spread their garments for Him, and ornamented the way with green boughs, crying out with great
joy and gladness, "Hosanna to the Son of David; blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord:
hosanna in the highest." But to the envious wicked stewards, who circumvented those under
them, and ruled over those that had no great intelligence, and for this reason were unwilling that
the king should come, and who said to Him, "Hearest thou what these say?" did the Lord reply,
"Have ye never read, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast Thou perfected praise?"—thus
pointing out that what had been declared by David concerning the Son of God, was accomplished
in His own person; and indicating that they were indeed ignorant of the meaning of the Scripture
and the dispensation of God; but declaring that it was Himself who was announced by the prophets
as Christ, whose name is praised in all the earth, and who perfects praise to His Father from the
mouth of babes and sucklings; wherefore also His glory has been raised above the heavens.
4. If, therefore, the self-same person is present who was announced by the prophets, our Lord
Jesus Christ, and if His advent has brought in a fuller [measure of] grace and greater gifts to those
who have received Him, it is plain that the Father also is Himself the same who was proclaimed
by the prophets, and that the Son, on His coming, did not spread the knowledge of another Father,
but of the same who was preached from the beginning; from whom also He has brought down
liberty to those who, in a lawful manner, and with a willing mind, and with all the heart, do Him