spent chiefly on their needs. For it is stated (Jn. 4:8) that "His
disciples were gone into the city to buy meats," and (Jn. 13:29) that
the disciples "thought, because Judas had the purse, that Jesus had
said to him: But those things which we have need of for the festival
day, or that he should give something to the poor." From this it is
evident that to keep money by, or any other common property for the
support of religious of the same order, or of any other poor, is in
accordance with the perfection which Christ taught by His example.
Moreover, after the resurrection, the disciples from whom all
religious orders took their origin kept the price of the lands, and
distributed it according as each one had need (Acts 4:34,35).
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 184, Article 3, ad 1),
this saying of our Lord does not mean that poverty itself is
perfection, but that it is the means of perfection. Indeed, as shown
above (Question 186, Article 8), it is the least of the three chief
means of perfection; since the vow of continence excels the vow of
poverty, and the vow of obedience excels them both. Since,
however, the means are sought not for their own sake, but for the
sake of the end, a thing is better, not for being a greater instrument,
but for being more adapted to the end. Thus a physician does not
heal the more the more medicine he gives, but the more the medicine
is adapted to the disease. Accordingly it does not follow that a
religious order is the more perfect, according as the poverty it
professes is more perfect, but according as its poverty is more
adapted to the end both common and special. Granted even that the
religious order which exceeds others in poverty be more perfect in
so far as it is poorer, this would not make it more perfect simply. For
possibly some other religious order might surpass it in matters
relating to continence, or obedience, and thus be more perfect
simply, since to excel in better things is to be better simply.
Reply to Objection 2: Our Lord's words (Mt. 6:34), "Be not solicitous
for tomorrow," do not mean that we are to keep nothing for the
morrow; for the Blessed Antony shows the danger of so doing, in the
Conferences of the Fathers (Coll. ii, 2), where he says: "It has been
our experience that those who have attempted to practice the
privation of all means of livelihood, so as not to have the
wherewithal to procure themselves food for one day, have been
deceived so unawares that they were unable to finish properly the
work they had undertaken." And, as Augustine says (De oper.
Monach. xxiii), "if this saying of our Lord, 'Be not solicitous for
tomorrow,' means that we are to lay nothing by for the morrow, those

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.8.

who shut themselves up for many days from the sight of men, and
apply their whole mind to a life of prayer, will be unable to provide
themselves with these things." Again he adds afterwards: "Are we to
suppose that the more holy they are, the less do they resemble the
birds?" And further on (De oper. Monach. xxiv): "For if it be argued
from the Gospel that they should lay nothing by, they answer rightly:
Why then did our Lord have a purse, wherein He kept the money that
was collected? Why, in days long gone by, when famine was
imminent, was grain sent to the holy fathers? Why did the apostles
thus provide for the needs of the saints?"
Accordingly the saying: "Be not solicitous for tomorrow," according
to Jerome (Super Matth.) is to be rendered thus: "It is enough that we
think of the present; the future being uncertain, let us leave it to
God": according to Chrysostom [Hom. xvi in Opus Imperfectum], "It
is enough to endure the toil for necessary things, labor not in excess
for unnecessary things": according to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte ii, 17): "When we do any good action, we should bear in mind
not temporal things which are denoted by the morrow, but eternal
things."
Reply to Objection 3: The saying of Jerome applies where there are
excessive riches, possessed in private as it were, or by the abuse of
which even the individual members of a community wax proud and
wanton. But they do not apply to moderate wealth, set by for the
common use, merely as a means of livelihood of which each one
stands in need. For it amounts to the same that each one makes use
of things pertaining to the necessaries of life, and that these things
be set by for the common use.
Reply to Objection 4: Isaac refused to accept the offer of
possessions, because he feared lest this should lead him to have
excessive wealth, the abuse of which would be an obstacle to
religious perfection. Hence Gregory adds (Dial. iii, 14): "He was as
afraid of forfeiting the security of his poverty, as the rich miser is
careful of his perishable wealth." It is not, however, related that he
refused to accept such things as are commonly necessary for the
upkeep of life.
Reply to Objection 5: The Philosopher says (Polit. i, 5,6) that bread,
wine, and the like are natural riches, while money is artificial riches.
Hence it is that certain philosophers declined to make use of money,
and employed other things, living according to nature. Wherefore