evil conscience, as to be always cast down and never able to look up with
confidence to its Lord. Priests are the salt of the earth. [Matthew 5:13] But who
would easily put up with my lack of understanding, and my inexperience in all
things, but thou, who hast been wont to love me beyond measure. For the Priest
ought not only to be thus pure as one who has been dignified with so high a
ministry, but very discreet, and skilled in many matters, and to be as well versed
in the affairs of this life as they who are engaged in the world, and yet to be free
from them all more than the recluses who occupy the mountains. For since he
must mix with men who have wives, and who bring up children, who possess
servants, and are surrounded with wealth, and fill public positions, and are
persons of influence, he too should be a many-sided man— I say many-sided,
not unreal, nor yet fawning and hypocritical, but full of much freedom and
assurance, and knowing how to adapt himself profitably, where the
circumstances of the case require it, and to be both kind and severe, for it is not
possible to treat all those under one's charge on one plan, since neither is it well
for physicians to apply one course of treatment to all their sick, nor for a pilot to
know but one way of contending with the winds. For, indeed, continual storms
beset this ship of ours, and these storms do not assail from without only, but take
their rise from within, and there is need of much condescension, and
circumspection, and all these different matters have one end in view, the glory of
God, and the edifying of the Church.
5. Great is the conflict which recluses undergo, and much their toil. But if
any one compare their exertions with those which the right exercise of the
Priesthood involves, he will find the difference as great as the distance between a
king and a commoner. For there, if the labor is great indeed, yet the conflict is
common to body and soul, or rather the greater part of it is accomplished by the
condition of the body, and if this be not strong, the inclination remains
undeveloped, and is unable to come out into action. For the habit of intense
fasting, and sleeping on the ground, and keeping vigil, and refraining from the
bath, and great toil, and all other means which they use for the affliction of the

body are given up, when the body to be thus disciplined is not strong. But in this
case purity of soul is the business in hand, and no bodily vigor is required to
show its excellence. For what does strength of body contribute towards our
being not self-willed, or proud, or headstrong, but sober and prudent, and
orderly, and all else, wherein St. Paul filled up the picture of the perfect Priest?
But no one could say this of the virtues of the recluse.
6. But as in the case of wonder-workers, a large apparatus is required, both
wheels and ropes and daggers; while the philosopher has the whole of his art
stored up in his mind, not requiring any external appliances: So accordingly in
the case before us. The recluse requires both a good condition of body, and a
place suitable for his course of life, in order that such may not be settled too far
from intercourse with their fellow men, and may have the tranquillity which
belongs to desert places, and yet further, may not fail to enjoy the most favorable
climate. For nothing is so unbearable to a body worn with fastings as a climate
which is not equable. And what trouble they are compelled to take in the
preparation of their clothing and daily food, as they are themselves ambitious of
doing all with their own hands, I need not speak of now. But the Priest will
require none of these things to supply his wants, but is unconcerned about them,
and participates in all things which are harmless, while he has all his skill stored
up in the treasure-house of his mind. But if any one admire a solitary life, and
retirement from the society of the multitude, I should say myself that such a life
was a token of patience, but not a sufficient proof of entire fortitude of soul. For
the man who sits at the helm in harbor, does not yet give any certain proof of his
art. But if one is able to guide his ship safely in the midst of the sea, no one
would deny him to be an excellent steersman.
7. It would be, therefore, in no wise excessively surprising to us, that the
recluse, living as he does by himself, is undisturbed and does not commit many
and great sins. For he does not meet with things which irritate and excite his
mind. But if any one who has devoted himself to whole multitudes, and has been
compelled to bear the sins of many, has remained steadfast and firm, guiding his