but even the unchaste look; and to be exempt not from false swearing only, but
even from true. [Matthew 5:21-33] And with their friends He orders them to love
their enemies also. And in all other duties, He gives us a longer ground to run
over, and if we do but obey, threatens us with hell, so showing that the things in
question are not matters of free-will offering for the combatants, as celibacy and
poverty are, but are binding upon us absolutely to fulfil. For they belong to
necessary and urgent requisites, and the man who does not do them is to be
punished to the utmost. This is why He said, "Unless your righteousness exceeds
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into
the kingdom of heaven." [Matthew 5:20] But he that does not see the kingdom,
shall certainly fall into hell. For this cause Paul too says, "Sin shall not have
dominion over you, because you are not under the Law, but under grace." And
here again, "that you should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of
the letter." For it is not the letter that condemns, that is the old Law, but the Spirit
that helps. And for this reason among the ancients, if any were found practising
virginity, it was quite astonishing. But now the thing is scattered over every part
of the world. And death in those times some few men did with difficulty despise,
but now in villages and cities there are hosts of martyrs without number,
consisting not of men only, but even of women. And next having done with this,
he again meets an objection which is rising, and as he meets it, gives
confirmation to his own object. And so he does not introduce the solution of it as
main argument, but by way of opposing this; that by the exigency of meeting it,
he may get a plea for saying what he wishes, and make his accusation not so
unpalatable. Having then said, "in the newness of the Spirit, and not in the
oldness of the letter," he proceeds.
Ver. 7. "What then? Is the Law sin? God forbid."
Even before this he had been saying, that "the motions of sins, which were
by the Law did work in our members" [Romans 7:5]: and, "sin shall have no
dominion over you, for you are not under the Law." [Romans 6:14] And that
"where no law is, there is no transgression." [Romans 4:15] And, "but the Law

came in, that the offense might abound" [Romans 5:20]; and, "the Law works
wrath." [Romans 4:15] Now as all these things seem to bring the Law into
disrepute, in order to correct the suspicion arising from them, he supposes also
an objection, and says, "What then, is the Law sin? God forbid." Before the
proof he uses this adjuration to conciliate the hearer, and by way of soothing any
who was troubled at it. For so, when he had heard this, and felt assured of the
speaker's disposition, he would join with him in investigating the seeming
perplexity, and feel no suspicions of him. Wherefore he has put the objection,
associating the other with him. Hence, he does not say, What am I to say? But
"What shall we say then?" As though a deliberation and a judgment were before
them, and a general meeting called together, and the objection came forward not
of himself, but in the course of discussion, and from real circumstances of the
case. For that the letter kills, he means, no one will deny, or that the Spirit gives
life [2 Corinthians 3:6]; this is plain too, and nobody will dispute it. If then these
are confessedly truths, what are we to say about the Law? That "it is sin? God
forbid." Explain the difficulty then. Do you see how he supposes the opponent to
be present, and having assumed the dignity of the teacher, he comes to the
explaining of it. Now what is this? Sin, he says, the Law is not. "Nay, I had not
known sin, but by the Law." Notice the reach of his wisdom! What the Law is
not, he has set down by way of objection, so that by removing this, and thereby
doing the Jew a pleasure, he may persuade him to accept the less alternative.
And what is this? Why that "I had not known sin, but by the Law. For I had not
known lust, except the Law had said, You shall not covet."
Do you observe, how by degrees he shows it to be not an accuser of sin
only, but in a measure its producer? Yet not from any fault of its own, but from
that of the froward Jews, he proves it was, that this happened. For he has taken
good heed to stop the mouths of the Manichees, that accuse the Law; and so after
saying, "Nay, I had not known sin, but by the Law;" and, "I had not known lust,
except the Law had said, You shall not covet;" he adds,
Ver. 8. "But sin, taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all