Following Harvey's explanation of a somewhat obscure passage.

were healed generally, did not change those parts of their bodies which had at their birth come forth
from the womb, but simply obtained these anew in a healthy condition.
6. For the Maker of all things, the Word of God, who did also from the beginning form man,
when He found His handiwork impaired by wickedness, performed upon it all kinds of healing. At
one time [He did so], as regards each separate member, as it is found in His own handiwork; and
at another time He did once for all restore man sound and whole in all points, preparing him perfect
for Himself unto the resurrection. For what was His object in healing [different] portions of the
flesh, and restoring them to their original condition, if those parts which had been healed by Him
were not in a position to obtain salvation? For if it was [merely] a temporary benefit which He
conferred, He granted nothing of importance to those who were the subjects of His healing. Or how
can they maintain that the flesh is incapable of receiving the life which flows from Him, when it
received healing from Him? For life is brought about through healing, and incorruption through
life. He, therefore, who confers healing, the same does also confer life; and He [who gives] life,
also surrounds His own handiwork with incorruption.

### Chapter XIII.—In the dead who were raised by Christ we possess the highest proof of the
resurrection; and our hearts are shown to be capable of life eternal, because they can now
receive the Spirit of God.
1. Let our opponents—that is, they who speak against their own salvation—inform us [as to
this point]: The deceased daughter of the high priest; the widow's dead son, who was being
carried out [to burial] near the gate [of the city]; and Lazarus, who had lain four days in the
tomb,—in what bodies did they rise again? In those same, no doubt, in which they had also died.
For if it were not in the very same, then certainly those same individuals who had died did not rise
again. For [the Scripture] says, "The Lord took the hand of the dead man, and said to him, Young
man, I say unto thee, Arise. And the dead man sat up, and He commanded that something should
be given him to eat; and He delivered him to his mother." Again, He called Lazarus "with a loud
voice, saying, Lazarus, come forth; and he that was dead came forth bound with bandages, feet and
hands." This was symbolical of that man who had been bound in sins. And therefore the Lord said,
"Loose him, and let him depart." As, therefore, those who were healed were made whole in those
members which had in times past been afflicted; and the dead rose in the identical bodies, their
and concordances and commentaries, and all manner of helps to memory, blame the Fathers for such mistakes, until they at least
equal them in their marvellous and minute familiarity with the inspired writers.]