intellectual nature; otherwise even brute animals would be to God's
image. Therefore, as in their intellectual nature, the angels are more
to the image of God than man is, we must grant that, absolutely
speaking, the angels are more to the image of God than man is, but
that in some respects man is more like to God.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine excludes the inferior creatures
bereft of reason from the image of God; but not the angels.
Reply to Objection 2: As fire is said to be specifically the most subtle
of bodies, while, nevertheless, one kind of fire is more subtle than
another; so we say that nothing is more like to God than the human
soul in its generic and intellectual nature, because as Augustine had
said previously, "things which have knowledge, are so near to Him in
likeness that of all creatures none are nearer." Wherefore this does
not mean that the angels are not more to God's image.
Reply to Objection 3: When we say that substance does not admit of
more or less, we do not mean that one species of substance is not
more perfect than another; but that one and the same individual
does not participate in its specific nature at one time more than at
another; nor do we mean that a species of substance is shared
among different individuals in a greater or lesser degree.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the image of God is found in every man?

Objection 1: It would seem that the image of God is not found in
every man. For the Apostle says that "man is the image of God, but
woman is the image of man" (1 Cor. 11:7). Therefore, as woman is an
individual of the human species, it is clear that every individual is
not an image of God.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (Rm. 8:29): "Whom God
foreknew, He also predestined to be made conformable to the image
of His Son." But all men are not predestined. Therefore all men have
not the conformity of image.
Objection 3: Further, likeness belongs to the nature of the image, as
above explained (Article 1). But by sin man becomes unlike God.
Therefore he loses the image of God.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 38:7): "Surely man passeth as an
image."
I answer that, Since man is said to be the image of God by reason of
his intellectual nature, he is the most perfectly like God according to
that in which he can best imitate God in his intellectual nature. Now
the intellectual nature imitates God chiefly in this, that God
understands and loves Himself. Wherefore we see that the image of
God is in man in three ways. First, inasmuch as man possesses a
natural aptitude for understanding and loving God; and this aptitude
consists in the very nature of the mind, which is common to all men.
Secondly, inasmuch as man actually and habitually knows and loves
God, though imperfectly; and this image consists in the conformity
of grace. Thirdly, inasmuch as man knows and loves God perfectly;
and this image consists in the likeness of glory. Wherefore on the
words, "The light of Thy countenance, O Lord, is signed upon
us" (Ps. 4:7), the gloss distinguishes a threefold image of "creation,"
of "re-creation," and of "likeness." The first is found in all men, the
second only in the just, the third only in the blessed.
Reply to Objection 1: The image of God, in its principal signification,
namely the intellectual nature, is found both in man and in woman.
Hence after the words, "To the image of God He created him," it is
added, "Male and female He created them" (Gn. 1:27). Moreover it is