explained above.
Reply to Objection 2: Multitude, which denotes something real in
creatures, is a species of quantity, and cannot be used when
speaking of God: unlike transcendental multitude, which adds only
indivision to those of which it is predicated. Such a kind of multitude
is applicable to God.
Reply to Objection 3: "One" does not exclude multitude, but division,
which logically precedes one or multitude. Multitude does not
remove unity, but division from each of the individuals which
compose the multitude. This was explained when we treated of the
divine unity (Question 11, Article 2).
It must be observed, nevertheless, that the opposite arguments do
not sufficiently prove the point advanced. Although the idea of
solitude is excluded by plurality, and the plurality of gods by unity, it
does not follow that these terms express this signification alone. For
blackness is excluded by whiteness; nevertheless, the term
whiteness does not signify the mere exclusion of blackness.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether this term "person" can be common to the

three persons?
Objection 1: It would seem that this term "person" cannot be
common to the three persons. For nothing is common to the three
persons but the essence. But this term "person" does not signify the
essence directly. Therefore it is not common to all three.
Objection 2: Further, the common is the opposite to the
incommunicable. But the very meaning of person is that it is
incommunicable; as appears from the definition given by Richard of
St. Victor (Question 29, Article 3, ad 4). Therefore this term "person"
is not common to all the three persons.
Objection 3: Further, if the name "person" is common to the three, it
is common either really, or logically. But it is not so really; otherwise
the three persons would be one person; nor again is it so logically;
otherwise person would be a universal. But in God there is neither
universal nor particular; neither genus nor species, as we proved
above (Question 3, Article 5). Therefore this term 'person' is not
common to the three.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. vii, 4) that when we ask,
"Three what?" we say, "Three persons," because what a person is, is
common to them.
I answer that, The very mode of expression itself shows that this
term "person" is common to the three when we say "three persons";
for when we say "three men" we show that "man" is common to the
three. Now it is clear that this is not community of a real thing, as if
one essence were common to the three; otherwise there would be
only one person of the three, as also one essence.
What is meant by such a community has been variously determined
by those who have examined the subject. Some have called it a
community of exclusion, forasmuch as the definition of "person"
contains the word "incommunicable." Others thought it to be a
community of intention, as the definition of person contains the word
"individual"; as we say that to be a "species" is common to horse
and ox. Both of these explanations, however, are excluded by the
fact that "person" is not a name of exclusion nor of intention, but the