come even unto death, and the death of the cross, and reckon this the great
wonder concerning Him; we ought to admire the Father also, that He begot such
a son, not as a slave under command, but as free, yielding obedience and giving
counsel. For the counsellor is no slave. But again, when you hear of a counsellor,
do not understand it as though the Father were in need, but that the Son has the
same honor with Him that begot Him. Do not therefore strain the example of the
man and the woman to all particulars.
For with us indeed the woman is reasonably subjected to the man: since
equality of honor causes contention. And not for this cause only, but by reason
also of the deceit [1 Timothy 2:14] which happened in the beginning. Wherefore
you see, she was not subjected as soon as she was made; nor, when He brought
her to the man, did either she hear any such thing from God, nor did the man say
any such word to her: he said indeed that she was "bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh:" [Genesis 2:23] but of rule or subjection he no where made mention
unto her. But when she made an ill use of her privilege and she who had been
made a helper was found to be an ensnarer and ruined all, then she is justly told
for the future, "your turning shall be to your husband." [Genesis 3:16]
To account for which; it was likely that this sin would have thrown our race
into a state of warfare; (for her having been made out of him would not have
contributed any thing to peace, when this had happened, nay, rather this very
thing would have made the man even the harsher, that she made as she was out
of him should not have spared even him who was a member of herself:)
wherefore God, considering the malice of the Devil, raised up the bulwark of
this word and what enmity was likely to arise from his evil device, He took away
by means of this sentence and by the desire implanted in us: thus pulling down
the partition-wall, i.e., the resentment caused by that sin of hers. But in God and
in that undefiled Essence, one must not suppose any such thing.
Do not therefore apply the examples to all, since elsewhere also from this
source many grievous errors will occur. For so in the beginning of this very
Epistle, he said, [1 Corinthians 3:22-23] "All are yours, and you are Christ's, and

Christ is God's." What then? Are all in like manner ours, as "we are Christ's, and
Christ is God's?" In no wise, but even to the very simple the difference is
evident, although the same expression is used of God, and Christ, and us. And
elsewhere also having called the husband "head of the wife," he added,
[Ephesians 5:23] "Even as Christ is Head and Saviour and Defender of the
Church, so also ought the man to be of his own wife." Are we then to understand
in like manner the saying in the text, both this, and all that after this is written to
the Ephesians concerning this subject? Far from it. It is impossible. For although
the same words are spoken of God and of men, they do not have the same force
in respect to God and to men, but in one way those must be understood, and in
another these. Not however on the other hand all things diversely: since
contrariwise they will seem to have been introduced at random and in vain, we
reaping no benefit from them. But as we must not receive all things alike, so
neither must we absolutely reject all.
Now that what I say may become clearer, I will endeavor to make it
manifest in an example. Christ is called "the Head of the Church." If I am to take
nothing from what is human in the idea, why, I would know, is the expression
used at all? On the other hand, if I understand all in that way, extreme absurdity
will result. For the head is of like passions with the body and liable to the same
things. What then ought we to let go, and what to accept? We should let go these
particulars which I have mentioned, but accept the notion of a perfect union, and
the first principle; and not even these ideas absolutely, but here also we must
form a notion, as we may by ourselves, of that which is too high for us and
suitable to the Godhead: for both the union is surer and the beginning more
honorable.
Again, you hear the word "Son;" do not thou in this case admit all
particulars; yet neither ought thou to reject all: but admitting whatever is meet
for God, e.g. that He is of the same essence, that He is of God; the things which
are incongruous and belong to human weakness, leave thou upon the earth.
Again, God is called "Light." Shall we then admit all circumstances which