good purpose, he who has paid down these with forwardness of mind, this is he
who most reaps the advantage; since indeed these are the price paid for the
medicinal treatment. And the rich and the poor man share the benefit alike; or
rather it is not alike that they share the benefit, but often the poor man goes away
in the enjoyment of more. What ever can be the reason? It is because the rich
man, possessed beforehand by many thoughts, having the pride and puffed-up
temper belonging to wealthiness; living with carelessness and lazy ease as
companions, receives the medicine of the hearing of the Scriptures not with
much attention, nor with much earnestness; but the poor man, far removed from
delicate living and gluttony and indolence; spending all his time in handicraft
and honest labours; and gathering hence much love of wisdom for the soul;
becomes thereby more attentive and free from slackness, and is wont to give his
mind with more accurate care to all that is said: whence also, inasmuch as the
price he has paid is higher, the benefit which he departs having reaped is greater.
2. It is not as absolutely bringing an accusation against those who are
wealthy that I say all this; nor as praising the poor without reference to
circumstances: for neither is wealth an evil, but the having made a bad use of
wealth; nor is poverty a virtue, but the having made a virtuous use of poverty.
That rich man who was in the time of Lazarus was punished, not because he was
rich, but because he was cruel and inhuman. And that poor man who rested in
the bosom of Abraham was praised, not because he was poor, but because he had
borne his poverty with thankfulness.
For of things— (now attend carefully to this saying; for it will avail to put
into you sufficient religious knowledge, and to cast out all unsound reasoning,
and to bring about your having your judgment right concerning the truth of
things)— well, of things some are by nature morally good, and others the
contrary; and others neither good nor evil, but they occupy the intermediate
position. A good thing piety is by nature, impiety an evil thing; a good thing
virtue, an evil thing wickedness; but wealth and poverty in themselves are
neither the one nor the other; but from the will of those who use them they

become either the one or the other. For if you have used your wealth for
purposes of philanthropy, the thing becomes to you a foundation of good; but if
for rapine and grasping and insolence, you have turned the use of it to the direct
opposite; but for this wealth is not chargeable, but he who has used his wealth
for insolence. So also we may say of poverty: if you have borne it nobly by
giving thanks to the Master, what has been done becomes to you a cause and
ground for receiving crowns; but if on account of this thou blaspheme your
Creator, and accuse Him for His providence, you have again used the thing to an
evil purpose. But just as in that case it is not wealth that is responsible for the
avarice, but the person who has made a bad use of wealth, so also here we are
not to lay the blame of the blasphemy on poverty, but on him who did not choose
to bear the thing in a sober spirit. For in every case both the praise and the blame
belong to our own will and choice. Good is wealth, yet not absolutely, but to him
only to whom it is not sin; and again poverty is wicked, but not absolutely, but
only in the mouth of the impious, because he is discontented, because he
blasphemes, because he is indignant, because he accuses Him who has made
him.
3. Let us not therefore accuse riches, nor revile poverty absolutely, but those
who do not will to use these virtuously; for the things themselves lie in the
middle. But as I was saying (for it is good to return to the former subject), both
rich and poor enjoy the benefit of the medicines administered here with the same
boldness and freedom; and often the poor with more earnestness. For the special
excellence of the medicines is not this only, that they heal souls, that their virtue
is not destroyed by length of time, that they are not worsted by any disease, that
the benefit is publicly offered gratuitously, that the healing treatment is on a
footing of equality both for rich and poor— but they have another quality also
not inferior to these good points. Pray of what character is this? It is that we do
not publicly expose those who come to this surgery. For they who go off to the
surgeries of the outside world, have many who examine their wounds, and unless
the physician have first uncovered the sore, he does not apply the dressing; but