SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the articles of faith have increased in

course of time?
Objection 1: It would seem that the articles of faith have not
increased in course of time. Because, as the Apostle says (Heb.
11:1), "faith is the substance of things to be hoped for." Now the
same things are to be hoped for at all times. Therefore, at all times,
the same things are to be believed.
Objection 2: Further, development has taken place, in sciences
devised by man, on account of the lack of knowledge in those who
discovered them, as the Philosopher observes (Metaph. ii). Now the
doctrine of faith was not devised by man, but was delivered to us by
God, as stated in Eph. 2:8: "It is the gift of God." Since then there
can be no lack of knowledge in God, it seems that knowledge of
matters of faith was perfect from the beginning and did not increase
as time went on.
Objection 3: Further, the operation of grace proceeds in orderly
fashion no less than the operation of nature. Now nature always
makes a beginning with perfect things, as Boethius states (De
Consol. iii). Therefore it seems that the operation of grace also
began with perfect things, so that those who were the first to deliver
the faith, knew it most perfectly.
Objection 4: Further, just as the faith of Christ was delivered to us
through the apostles, so too, in the Old Testament, the knowledge of
faith was delivered by the early fathers to those who came later,
according to Dt. 32:7: "Ask thy father, and he will declare to thee."
Now the apostles were most fully instructed about the mysteries, for
"they received them more fully than others, even as they received
them earlier," as a gloss says on Rm. 8:23: "Ourselves also who
have the first fruits of the Spirit." Therefore it seems that knowledge
of matters of faith has not increased as time went on.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. xvi in Ezech.) that "the
knowledge of the holy fathers increased as time went on . . . and the
nearer they were to Our Savior's coming, the more fully did they
received the mysteries of salvation."
I answer that, The articles of faith stand in the same relation to the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.0, C.8.

doctrine of faith, as self-evident principles to a teaching based on
natural reason. Among these principles there is a certain order, so
that some are contained implicitly in others; thus all principles are
reduced, as to their first principle, to this one: "The same thing
cannot be affirmed and denied at the same time," as the Philosopher
states (Metaph. iv, text. 9). In like manner all the articles are
contained implicitly in certain primary matters of faith, such as God's
existence, and His providence over the salvation of man, according
to Heb. 11: "He that cometh to God, must believe that He is, and is a
rewarder to them that seek Him." For the existence of God includes
all that we believe to exist in God eternally, and in these our
happiness consists; while belief in His providence includes all those
things which God dispenses in time, for man's salvation, and which
are the way to that happiness: and in this way, again, some of those
articles which follow from these are contained in others: thus faith in
the Redemption of mankind includes belief in the Incarnation of
Christ, His Passion and so forth.
Accordingly we must conclude that, as regards the substance of the
articles of faith, they have not received any increase as time went on:
since whatever those who lived later have believed, was contained,
albeit implicitly, in the faith of those Fathers who preceded them. But
there was an increase in the number of articles believed explicitly,
since to those who lived in later times some were known explicitly
which were not known explicitly by those who lived before them.
Hence the Lord said to Moses (Ex. 6:2,3): "I am the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob . . . and My name Adonai I did not
show them": David also said (Ps. 118:100): "I have had
understanding above ancients": and the Apostle says (Eph. 3:5) that
the mystery of Christ, "in other generations was not known, as it is
now revealed to His holy apostles and prophets."
Reply to Objection 1: Among men the same things were always to be
hoped for from Christ. But as they did not acquire this hope save
through Christ, the further they were removed from Christ in point of
time, the further they were from obtaining what they hoped for.
Hence the Apostle says (Heb. 11:13): "All these died according to
faith, not having received the promises, but beholding them afar off."
Now the further off a thing is the less distinctly is it seen; wherefore
those who were nigh to Christ's advent had a more distinct
knowledge of the good things to be hoped for.
Reply to Objection 2: Progress in knowledge occurs in two ways.