on his son's becoming disinclined to a continual stay with him, manage to bring
this about in another way. For since we have not the right feeling of desire after
Him, He keeps putting various other things before us, so as to hold us to
Himself. Yet not even for this do we abide with Him, but we keep springing off
to childish playthings. Not so Paul, but like a noble spirited child, who is open
and attached to his father, he seeks only after the Father's presence, and other
things he sets not so much store by; or rather, it is much more than a child. For
he does not value the Father and things that are His at the same rate, but when he
looks to the Father, he counts them nothing, but would choose rather to be
chastised and beaten, so he was with Him, than to be apart from Him and
indulge his ease. Let us then shudder, all of us that do not even feel above money
for the sake of Christ, or rather such of us as do not feel above it for our own
sakes. For it was Paul alone who suffered in good earnest all things for Christ's
sake, not for the sake of the kingdom, or his own honor, but owing to his
affection to Him. But as for us, neither Christ nor the things of Christ draw us
from the things of this life; but as serpents, or snakes, or swine, or even as all of
them at once, so do we keep dragging on in the mire. For wherein are we better
than those brutes, when with so many and such great examples before us we still
keep bowing down, and have not the heart to look up to Heaven for ever so little
a time? Yet did God give up even His Son. But you will not so much as share
your bread with Him, Who was given up for you, Who was slain for you. The
Father for your sake spared not Him, and this too when He was indeed His Son,
but you do not look upon Him even when pining with starvation, and this too
when you should but spend of His own, and spend it too for your own good!
What can be worse than such a breach of law as this? He was given up for you,
He was slain for you, He goes about in hunger for you, it is of His own you
should give, that you may yourself get the gain, and still thou dost not give!
What sort of stone is there than which these are not more senseless, who in
despite of such great inducements, continue in this diabolical cruel-heartedness?
For He was not satisfied even with death and the Cross only, but He took up with

becoming poor also, and a stranger, and a beggar, and naked, and being thrown
into prison, and undergoing sickness, that so at least He might call you off. If
you will not requite Me, He says, as having suffered for you, show mercy on Me
for My poverty. And if you are not minded to pity Me for My poverty, do for My
disease be moved, for My imprisonment be softened. And if even these things
make you not charitable, for the easiness of the request comply with Me. For it is
no costly gift I ask, but bread and lodging, and words of comfort; but if even
after this thou still continuest unsubdued, still for the Kingdom's sake be
improved for the rewards which I have promised. Have you then no regard even
for these? Yet still for very nature's sake be softened at seeing Me naked, and
remember that nakedness wherewith I was naked on the Cross for you; or, if not
this, yet that wherewith I am now naked through the poor. I was then bound for
you, nay, still am so for you, that whether moved by the former ground or the
latter, you might be minded to show some pity. I fasted for you, again I am
hungry for you. I was thirsty when hanging on the Cross, I am thirsty also
through the poor, that by the former as also by the latter I may draw you to
Myself, and make you charitable to your own salvation. Hence also of you that
owest Me the requital of benefits without number, I make not demand as of one
that owes, but crown you as one that favors Me, and a kingdom do I give you for
these small things. For I do not say so much as put an end to My poverty, or give
Me riches, and yet I did become poor for you; yet still I ask for bread and
clothing, and a small solace for My hunger. And if I be thrown into prison, I do
not insist upon your loosing My bonds and setting Me free, but one thing only do
I seek after, that you would visit Me, Who was (or am) bound for you, and I shall
have received favor enough, and for this only will I give you Heaven. And yet I
delivered you from most galling bonds, but for Me it is quite enough, if you will
but visit Me when in prison. For I am able indeed to crown you even without all
this; yet I would fain be a debtor to you, that the crown may give you some
feeling of confidence. This is why, though I am able to support Myself, I come
about begging, and stand beside your door, and stretch out Mine hand, since My