all times: yet this is not true since consanguinity is now an
impediment to marriage as far as the fourth degree, whereas
formerly it was an impediment as far as the seventh.
Objection 6: Further, one and the same union cannot be a kind of
sacrament and a kind of incest. But this would be the case if the
Church had the power of fixing a different number in the degrees
which are an impediment to marriage. Thus if certain parties related
in the fifth degree were married when that degree was an
impediment, their union would be incestuous, and yet this same
union would be a marriage afterwards when the Church withdrew her
prohibition. And the reverse might happen if certain degrees which
were not an impediment were subsequently to be forbidden by the
Church. Therefore seemingly the power of the Church does not
extend to this.
Objection 7: Further, human law should copy the Divine law. Now
according to the Divine law which is contained in the Old Law, the
prohibition of degrees does not apply equally in the ascending and
descending lines: since in the Old Law a man was forbidden to marry
his father's sister but not his brother's daughter. Therefore neither
should there remain now a prohibition in respect of nephews and
uncles.
On the contrary, Our Lord said to His disciples (Lk. 10:16): "He that
heareth you heareth Me." Therefore a commandment of the Church
has the same force as a commandment of God. Now the Church
sometimes has forbidden and sometimes allowed certain degrees
which the Old Law did not forbid. Therefore those degrees are an
impediment to marriage.
Further, even as of old the marriages of pagans were controlled by
the civil law, so now is marriage controlled by the laws of the
Church. Now formerly the civil law decided which degrees of
consanguinity impede marriage, and which do not. Therefore this
can be done now by a commandment of the Church.
I answer that, The degrees within which consanguinity has been an
impediment to marriage have varied according to various times. For
at the beginning of the human race father and mother alone were
debarred from marrying their children, because then mankind were
few in number, and then it was necessary for the propagation of the

human race to be ensured with very great care, and consequently
only such persons were to be debarred as were unfitted for marriage
even in respect of its principal end which is the good of the
offspring, as stated above (Article 3). Afterwards however, the
human race having multiplied, more persons were excluded by the
law of Moses, for they already began to curb concupiscence.
Wherefore as Rabbi Moses says (Doc. Perp. iii, 49) all those persons
were debarred from marrying one another who are wont to live
together in one household, because if a lawful carnal intercourse
were possible between them, this would prove a very great incentive
to lust. Yet the Old Law permitted other degrees of consanguinity, in
fact to a certain extent it commanded them; to wit that each man
should take a wife from his kindred, in order to avoid confusion of
inheritances: because at that time the Divine worship was handed
down as the inheritance of the race. But afterwards more degrees
were forbidden by the New Law which is the law of the spirit and of
love, because the worship of God is no longer handed down and
spread abroad by a carnal birth but by a spiritual grace: wherefore it
was necessary that men should be yet more withdrawn from carnal
things by devoting themselves to things spiritual, and that love
should have a yet wider play. Hence in olden times marriage was
forbidden even within the more remote degrees of consanguinity, in
order that consanguinity and affinity might be the sources of a wider
natural friendship; and this was reasonably extended to the seventh
degree, both because beyond this it was difficult to have any
recollection of the common stock, and because this was in keeping
with the sevenfold grace of the Holy Ghost. Afterwards, however,
towards these latter times the prohibition of the Church has been
restricted to the fourth degree, because it became useless and
dangerous to extend the prohibition to more remote degrees of
consanguinity. Useless, because charity waxed cold in many hearts
so that they had scarcely a greater bond of friendship with their
more remote kindred than with strangers: and it was dangerous
because through the prevalence of concupiscence and neglect men
took no account of so numerous a kindred, and thus the prohibition
of the more remote degrees became for many a snare leading to
damnation. Moreover there is a certain fittingness in the restriction
of the above prohibition to the fourth degree. First because men are
wont to live until the fourth generation, so that consanguinity cannot
lapse into oblivion, wherefore God threatened (Ex. 20:5) to visit the
parent's sins on their children to the third and fourth generation.
Secondly, because in each generation the blood, the identity of
which causes consanguinity, receives a further addition of new