FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.8.

likeness is conditioned by a certain superiority, since ruling and
presiding pertain to the excellence of a man's own good: because
they belong to men who are wise and better than others; the result
being that they give man an idea of his own excellence. Another
reason is that by ruling and presiding, a man does good to others,
which is pleasant.
Reply to Objection 2: That which gives pleasure to the sorrowful
man, though it be unlike sorrow, bears some likeness to the man that
is sorrowful: because sorrows are contrary to his own good.
Wherefore the sorrowful man seeks pleasure as making for his own
good, in so far as it is a remedy for its contrary. And this is why
bodily pleasures, which are contrary to certain sorrows, are more
sought than intellectual pleasures, which have no contrary sorrow,
as we shall state later on (Question 35, Article 5). And this explains
why all animals naturally desire pleasure: because animals ever
work through sense and movement. For this reason also young
people are most inclined to seek pleasures; on account of the many
changes to which they are subject, while yet growing. Moreover this
is why the melancholic has a strong desire for pleasures, in order to
drive away sorrow: because his "body is corroded by a base humor,"
as stated in Ethic. vii, 14.
Reply to Objection 3: Bodily goods are conditioned by a certain fixed
measure: wherefore surfeit of such things destroys the proper good,
and consequently gives rise to disgust and sorrow, through being
contrary to the proper good of man.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.32, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether wonder is a cause of pleasure?

Objection 1: It would seem that wonder is not a cause of pleasure.
Because wonder is the act of one who is ignorant of the nature of
something, as Damascene says. But knowledge, rather than
ignorance, is a cause of pleasure. Therefore wonder is not a cause of
pleasure.
Objection 2: Further, wonder is the beginning of wisdom, being as it
were, the road to the search of truth, as stated in the beginning of
Metaph. i, 2. But "it is more pleasant to think of what we know, than
to seek what we know not," as the Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 7):
since in the latter case we encounter difficulties and hindrances, in
the former not; while pleasure arises from an operation which is
unhindered, as stated in Ethic. vii, 12,13. Therefore wonder hinders
rather than causes pleasure.
Objection 3: Further, everyone takes pleasure in what he is
accustomed to: wherefore the actions of habits acquired by custom,
are pleasant. But "we wonder at what is unwonted," as Augustine
says (Tract. xxiv in Joan.). Therefore wonder is contrary to the cause
of pleasure.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Rhet. i, 11) that wonder is the
cause of pleasure.
I answer that, It is pleasant to get what one desires, as stated above
(Question 23, Article 4): and therefore the greater the desire for the
thing loved, the greater the pleasure when it is attained: indeed the
very increase of desire brings with it an increase of pleasure,
according as it gives rise to the hope of obtaining that which is
loved, since it was stated above (Article 3, ad 3) that desire resulting
from hope is a cause of pleasure. Now wonder is a kind of desire for
knowledge; a desire which comes to man when he sees an effect of
which the cause either is unknown to him, or surpasses his
knowledge or faculty of understanding. Consequently wonder is a
cause of pleasure, in so far as it includes a hope of getting the
knowledge which one desires to have. For this reason whatever is
wonderful is pleasing, for instance things that are scarce. Also,
representations of things, even of those which are not pleasant in
themselves, give rise to pleasure; for the soul rejoices in comparing