70. It is also true that at times greater emphasis is placed on the outward expressions and
traditions of some groups, or on alleged private revelations which would replace all else, than on
the impulse of Christian piety. There is a kind of Christianity made up of devotions reflecting an
individual and sentimental faith life which does not in fact correspond to authentic “popular piety”.
Some people promote these expressions while not being in the least concerned with the
advancement of society or the formation of the laity, and in certain cases they do so in order to
obtain economic benefits or some power over others. Nor can we overlook the fact that in recent
decades there has been a breakdown in the way Catholics pass down the Christian faith to the
young. It is undeniable that many people feel disillusioned and no longer identify with the Catholic
tradition. Growing numbers of parents do not bring their children for baptism or teach them how to
pray. There is also a certain exodus towards other faith communities. The causes of this
breakdown include: a lack of opportunity for dialogue in families, the influence of the
communications media, a relativistic subjectivism, unbridled consumerism which feeds the market,
lack of pastoral care among the poor, the failure of our institutions to be welcoming, and our
difficulty in restoring a mystical adherence to the faith in a pluralistic religious landscape.

Challenges from urban cultures

71. The new Jerusalem, the holy city (cf. Rev 21:2-4), is the goal towards which all of humanity is
moving. It is curious that God’s revelation tells us that the fullness of humanity and of history is
realized in a city. We need to look at our cities with a contemplative gaze, a gaze of faith which
sees God dwelling in their homes, in their streets and squares. God’s presence accompanies the
sincere efforts of individuals and groups to find encouragement and meaning in their lives. He
dwells among them, fostering solidarity, fraternity, and the desire for goodness, truth and justice.
This presence must not be contrived but found, uncovered. God does not hide himself from those
who seek him with a sincere heart, even though they do so tentatively, in a vague and haphazard
manner.

72. In cities, as opposed to the countryside, the religious dimension of life is expressed by different

lifestyles, daily rhythms linked to places and people. In their daily lives people must often struggle
for survival and this struggle contains within it a profound understanding of life which often
includes a deep religious sense. We must examine this more closely in order to enter into a
dialogue like that of our Lord and the Samaritan woman at the well where she sought to quench
her thirst (cf. Jn 4:1-15).

73. New cultures are constantly being born in these vast new expanses where Christians are no
longer the customary interpreters or generators of meaning. Instead, they themselves take from
these cultures new languages, symbols, messages and paradigms which propose new
approaches to life, approaches often in contrast with the Gospel of Jesus. A completely new
culture has come to life and continues to grow in the cities. The Synod noted that today the
changes taking place in these great spaces and the culture which they create are a privileged
locus of the new evangelization. This challenges us to imagine innovative spaces and
possibilities for prayer and communion which are more attractive and meaningful for city dwellers.
Through the influence of the media, rural areas are being affected by the same cultural changes,
which are significantly altering their way of life as well.