THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.50, C.3.

adoption is never lost without fault. Since, then there was no sin in
Christ, it was impossible for the union of the Godhead with the flesh
to be dissolved. Consequently, as before death Christ's flesh was
united personally and hypostatically with the Word of God, it
remained so after His death, so that the hypostasis of the Word of
God was not different from that of Christ's flesh after death, as
Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii).
Reply to Objection 1: Such forsaking is not to be referred to the
dissolving of the personal union, but to this, that God the Father
gave Him up to the Passion: hence there "to forsake" means simply
not to protect from persecutors. or else He says there that He is
forsaken, with reference to the prayer He had made: "Father, if it be
possible, let this chalice pass away from Me," as Augustine explains
it (De Gratia Novi Test.).
Reply to Objection 2: The Word of God is said to be united with the
flesh through the medium of the soul, inasmuch as it is through the
soul that the flesh belongs to human nature, which the Son of God
intended to assume; but not as though the soul were the medium
linking them together. But it is due to the soul that the flesh is human
even after the soul has been separated from it---namely, inasmuch as
by God's ordinance there remains in the dead flesh a certain relation
to the resurrection. And therefore the union of the Godhead with the
flesh is not taken away.
Reply to Objection 3: The soul formally possesses the life-giving
energy, and therefore, while it is present, and united formally, the
body must necessarily be a living one, whereas the Godhead has not
the life-giving energy formally, but effectively; because It cannot be
the form of the body: and therefore it is not necessary for the flesh to
be living while the union of the Godhead with the flesh remains,
since God does not act of necessity, but of His own will.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.50, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether in Christ's death there was a severance

between His Godhead and His soul?
Objection 1: It would seem that there was a severance in death
between Christ's Godhead and His soul, because our Lord said (Jn.
10:18): "No man taketh away My soul from Me: but I lay it down of
Myself, and I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
up again." But it does not appear that the body can set the soul
aside, by separating the soul from itself, because the soul is not
subject to the power of the body, but rather conversely: and so it
appears that it belongs to Christ, as the Word of God, to lay down
His soul: but this is to separate it from Himself. Consequently, by
death His soul was severed from the Godhead.
Objection 2: Further, Athanasius [Vigilius Tapsensis, De Trin. vi;
Bardenhewer assigns it to St. Athanasius: 45, iii. The full title is De
Trinitate et Spiritu Sancto] says that he "is accursed who does not
confess that the entire man, whom the Son of God took to Himself,
after being assumed once more or delivered by Him, rose again from
the dead on the third day." But the entire man could not be assumed
again, unless the entire man was at one time separated from the
Word of God: and the entire man is made of soul and body.
Therefore there was a separation made at one time of the Godhead
from both the body and the soul.
Objection 3: Further, the Son of God is truly styled a man because of
the union with the entire man. If then, when the union of the soul with
the body was dissolved by death, the Word of God continued united
with the soul, it would follow that the Son of God could be truly
called a soul. But this is false, because since the soul is the form of
the body, it would result in the Word of God being the form of the
body; which is impossible. Therefore, in death the soul of Christ was
separated from the Word of God.
Objection 4: Further, the separated soul and body are not one
hypostasis, but two. Therefore, if the Word of God remained united
with Christ's soul and body, then, when they were severed by
Christ's death, it seems to follow that the Word of God was two
hypostases during such time as Christ was dead; which cannot be
admitted. Therefore after Christ's death His soul did not continue to
be united with the Word.