wholly subverted, both in faith and life, but in life only, we are under the power
of the devil. For "Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven"; and again, "I know you not; depart from me, you that
work iniquity." [Matthew 7:21-23] You see there is no advantage from our faith,
when our Lord knows us not: and to the virgins he says the same, "I know you
not." [Matthew 25:12] What then is the benefit of virginity, or of many labors,
when the Lord knows us not? And in many places we find men not blamed for
their faith, but punished for their evil life only; as elsewhere, not reproved for
evil lives, but perishing for their pravity of doctrine. For these things hold
together. You see that when we do not the will of God, we are under the snare of
the devil. And often not only from a bad life, but from one defect, we enter into
Hell, where there are not good qualities to counterbalance it, since the virgins
were not accused of fornication or adultery, nor of envy or ill-will, nor of
drunkenness, nor of unsound faith, but of a failure of oil, that is, they failed in
almsgiving, for that is the oil meant. And those who were pronounced accursed
in the words, "Depart from me, you cursed, into everlasting fire," were not
accused of any such crimes, but because they had not fed Christ.
Moral. Do you see that a failure in almsgiving is enough to cast a man into
hell fire? For where will he avail who does not give alms? Do you fast every
day? So also did those virgins, but it availed them nothing. Do you pray? What
of that? prayer without almsgiving is unfruitful, without that all things are
unclean and unprofitable. The better part of virtue is destroyed. "He that loves
not his brother," it is said, "knows not God." [1 John 4:8] And how do you love
him, when you do not even impart to him of these poor worthless things? Tell
me, therefore, do you observe chastity? On what account? From fear of
punishment? By no means. It is of a natural endowment that you observe it,
since if you were chaste from fear of punishment, and did violence to nature in
submitting to so severe a rule, much more ought thou to do alms. For to govern
the desire of wealth, and of bodily pleasures, is not the same thing. The latter is
much more difficult to restrain. And wherefore? Because the pleasure is natural,

and the desire of it is innate and of natural growth in the body. It is not so with
riches. Herein we are able to resemble God, in showing mercy and pity. When
therefore we have not this quality, we are devoid of all good. He has not said,
"you shall be like your Father, if you fast," nor "if you be virgins," nor "if you
pray," has He said, "you shall be like your Father," for none of these things can
be applied to God, nor are they His acts. But what? "Be merciful, as your Father
in Heaven is merciful." [Luke 6:36] This is the work of God. If therefore you
have not this, what have you? He says: "I will have mercy, and not sacrifice."
[Hosea 6:6] God made Heaven, and earth, and sea. Great works these, and
worthy of His wisdom! But by none of these has He so powerfully attracted
human nature to Himself, as by mercy and the love of mankind. For that indeed
is the work of power and wisdom and goodness. But it is far more so that He
became a servant. Do we not for this more especially admire Him? Are we not
for this still more amazed at Him? Nothing attracts God to us so much as mercy.
And the prophets from beginning to end discourse upon this subject. But I speak
not of mercy that is accompanied with covetousness. That is not mercy. For it is
not the root of the thorn but of the olive that produces the oil ; so it is not the root
of covetousness, of iniquity, or of rapine, that produces mercy. Do not put a
slander on almsgiving. Do not cause it to be evil spoken of by all. If you commit
robbery for this, that you may give alms, nothing is more wicked than your
almsgiving. For when it is produced by rapine, it is not almsgiving, it is
inhumanity, it is cruelty, it is an insult to God. If Cain so offended, by offering
inferior gifts of his own, shall he not offend, who offers the goods of another?
An offering is nothing else but a sacrifice, a purification, not a pollution. And
thou who darest not to pray with unclean hands, do you offer the dirt and filth of
robbery, and think you do nothing wrong? Thou sufferest not your hands to be
full of dirt and filth, but having first cleansed these, you offer. Yet that filth is no
charge against you, while the other deserves reproach and blame. Let it not
therefore be our consideration, how we may offer prayers and oblations with
clean hands, but how the things offered may be pure. If one, after having washed