FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.3.

obtain; namely, a stretching forth of the appetite to such a good.
Reply to Objection 1: Since hope regards a possible good, there
arises in man a twofold movement of hope; for a thing may be
possible to him in two ways, viz. by his own power, or by another's.
Accordingly when a man hopes to obtain something by his own
power, he is not said to wait for it, but simply to hope for it. But,
properly speaking, he is said to await that which he hopes to get by
another's help as though to await [exspectare] implied keeping one's
eyes on another [ex alio spectare], in so far as the apprehensive
power, by going ahead, not only keeps its eye on the good which
man intends to get, but also on the thing by whose power he hopes
to get it; according to Ecclus. 51:10, "I looked for the succor of men."
Wherefore the movement of hope is sometimes called expectation,
on account of the preceding inspection of the cognitive power.
Reply to Objection 2: When a man desires a thing and reckons that
he can get it, he believes that he can get it, he believes that he will
get it; and from this belief which precedes in the cognitive power, the
ensuing movement in the appetite is called confidence. Because the
movement of the appetite takes its name from the knowledge that
precedes it, as an effect from a cause which is better known; for the
apprehensive power knows its own act better than that of the
appetite.
Reply to Objection 3: Certainty is ascribed to the movement, not only
of the sensitive, but also of the natural appetite; thus we say that a
stone is certain to tend downwards. This is owing to the inerrancy
which the movement of the sensitive or even natural appetite derives
from the certainty of the knowledge that precedes it.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.40, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether hope is in dumb animals?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no hope in dumb animals.
Because hope is for some future good, as Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. ii, 12). But knowledge of the future is not in the competency of
dumb animals, whose knowledge is confined to the senses and does
not extend to the future. Therefore there is no hope in dumb animals.
Objection 2: Further, the object of hope is a future good, possible of
attainment. But possible and impossible are differences of the true
and the false, which are only in the mind, as the Philosopher states
(Metaph. vi, 4). Therefore there is no hope in dumb animals, since
they have no mind.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ix, 14) that "animals
are moved by the things that they see." But hope is of things
unseen: "for what a man seeth, why doth he hope for?" (Rm. 8:24).
Therefore there is no hope in dumb animals.
On the contrary, Hope is an irascible passion. But the irascible
faculty is in dumb animals. Therefore hope is also.
I answer that, The internal passions of animals can be gathered from
their outward movements: from which it is clear that hope is in dumb
animals. For if a dog see a hare, or a hawk see a bird, too far off, it
makes no movement towards it, as having no hope to catch it:
whereas, if it be near, it makes a movement towards it, as being in
hopes of catching it. Because as stated above (Question 1, Article 2;
Question 26, Article 1; Question 35, Article 1), the sensitive appetite
of dumb animals, and likewise the natural appetite of insensible
things, result from the apprehension of an intellect, just as the
appetite of the intellectual nature, which is called the will. But there
is a difference, in that the will is moved by an apprehension of the
intellect in the same subject; whereas the movement of the natural
appetite results from the apprehension of the separate Intellect, Who
is the Author of nature; as does also the sensitive appetite of dumb
animals, who act from a certain natural instinct. Consequently, in the
actions of irrational animals and of other natural things, we observe
a procedure which is similar to that which we observe in the actions
of art: and in this way hope and despair are in dumb animals.