but, "if He come," from tenderness for His hearers; and because all their
obstinacy was not yet complete. He was silent as to the reason of His coming;
but Paul, for those who can understand, has particularly alluded to it. For it is he
who takes away all excuse from them.
Christ then puts also the cause of their unbelief, saying . . .

John 5:44
"How can you believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only?"
Hence again He shows that they looked not to the things of God, but that
under this pretense they desired to gratify private feeling, and were so far from
doing this on account of His glory, that they preferred honor from men to that
which comes from Him. How then were they likely to entertain such hostility
towards Him for a kind of honor which they so despised, as to prefer to it the
honor which comes from men?
Having told them that they had not the love of God, and having proved it by
what was doing in His case, and by what should be in the case of Antichrist, and
having demonstrated that they were deprived of all excuse, He next brings
Moses to be their accuser, going on to say,

John 5:45-47
"Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father; there is one that accuses you,
even Moses, in whom you trust. For had ye believed Moses, you would have
believed Me; for he wrote of Me. But if you believe not his writings, how shall
you believe My words?"
What He says is of this kind: "It is Moses who has been insulted more than
I by your conduct towards Me, for you have disbelieved him rather than Me."
See how in every way He has cast them out from all excuse. "You said that you
loved God when you persecuted Me; I have shown that you did so from hatred of
Him: ye say that I break the Sabbath and annul the Law; I have rid Me of this
slander also: ye maintain that you believe in Moses by what ye dare to do
against Me; I on the contrary show that this is most to disbelieve in Moses; for
so far am I from opposing the Law, that he who shall accuse you is none other
than the man who gave you the Law." As then He said of the Scriptures, in which
"ye think you have eternal life," so of Moses also He says, "in whom you trust";
everywhere conquering them by their own weapons.
"And whence," says some one, "is it clear that Moses will accuse us, and
that you are not a boaster? What have you to do with Moses? You have broken
the Sabbath which he ordained that we should keep; how then should he accuse
us? And how does it appear that we shall believe in another who comes in his
own name? All these assertions you make without evidence." Now in truth all
these points are proved above. "For" (Christ would reply) "since it is
acknowledged that I came from God, both by the works, by the voice of John,
and by the testimony of the Father, it is evident that Moses will accuse the Jews."
For what says he? "If a man come doing miracles and leading you to God, and
truly foretelling things future, you must hearken unto him with all readiness."
Now Christ had done all this. He wrought miracles in very truth, He drew all
men to God, and (so that He ) caused accomplishment to follow His predictions.