third reason is that its effect on the body, viz. bodily health, is not
caused by a natural property of the matter. wherefore it has to derive
this efficacy from being consecrated.
Reply to Objection 1: The first consecration sanctifies the matter in
itself, but the second regards rather the use of the matter considered
as actually producing its effect. Hence neither is superfluous,
because instruments also receive their efficacy from the craftsman,
both when they are made, and when they are used for action.
Reply to Objection 2: The efficacy which the sacrament derives from
its institution, is applied to this particular matter when it is
consecrated.
The Reply to the Third Objection is gathered from what has been
said.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the matter of this sacrament need be

consecrated by a bishop?
Objection 1: It would seem that the matter of this sacrament need not
be consecrated by a bishop. Because the consecration of the
Eucharistic elements surpasses that of the matter in this sacrament.
But a priest can consecrate the matter in the Eucharist. Therefore he
can do so in this sacrament also.
Objection 2: Further, in material works the higher art never prepares
the matter for the lower, because the art which applies the matter is
more excellent than that which prepares it, as stated in Phys. ii, text.
25. Now a bishop is above a priest. Therefore he does not prepare
the matter of a sacrament which is applied by a priest. But a priest
dispenses this sacrament, as we shall state further on (Question 31).
Therefore the consecration of the matter does not belong to a
bishop.
On the contrary, In other anointings also the matter is consecrated
by a bishop. Therefore the same applies to this.
I answer that, The minister of a sacrament produces the effect, not
by his own power, as though he were the principal agent, but by the
efficacy of the sacrament which he dispenses. This efficacy comes,
in the first place, from Christ, and from Him flows down to others in
due order, viz. to the people through the medium of the ministers
who dispense the sacraments, and to the lower ministers through
the medium of the higher ministers who sanctify the matter.
Wherefore, in all the sacraments which require a sanctified matter,
the first consecration of the matter is performed by a bishop, and the
application thereof sometimes by a priest, in order to show that the
priest's power is derived from the bishop's, according to Ps. 132:2:
"Like the precious ointment on the head," i.e. Christ, "that ran down
upon the beard of Aaron" first, and then "to the skirt of his garment."
Reply to Objection 1: The sacrament of the Eucharist consists in the
consecration of the matter and not in its use. Consequently, strictly
speaking, that which is the matter of the sacrament is not a
consecrated thing. Hence no consecration of the matter by a bishop
is required beforehand: but the altar and such like things, even the
priest himself, need to be consecrated, all of which can be done by