Not at all. For suppose first there should be need to build; one does not want
gold and silver and pearls, but skill, and hands, and hands not of any kind, but
such as have become callous, and fingers hardened, and great strength, and
wood, and stones: suppose again one would weave a garment, neither here have
we need of gold and silver, but, as before, of hands and skill, and women to
work. And what if one require husbandry, and digging the ground? Is it rich
men who are wanted, or poor? It is evident to every one, poor. And when iron
too is to be wrought, or any such thing to be done, this is the race of men
whereof we most stand in need. What respect then remains wherein we may
stand in need of the rich? Except the thing required be, to pull down this city. For
should that sort of people make an entrance, and these philosophers, for (for I
call them philosophers, who seek after nothing superfluous,) should fall to
desiring gold and jewels, giving themselves up to idleness and luxury; they will
ruin everything from that day forward.
9. "But unless wealth be useful," says one, "wherefore has it been given by
God?" And whence is it evident, that being rich is from God? "The Scripture
says, 'The silver is Mine, and the gold is Mine,' and to whomsoever I will, I will
give it." [Haggai 2:8] Here, if I were not doing an unseemly thing, I could at this
moment laugh loudly, in derision of those who say these things: because as little
children admitted to a King's table, together with that food they thrust into their
mouth everything that comes to hand; so also do these together with the divine
Scriptures privily bring in their own notions. For this, "the silver is Mine, and the
gold is Mine," I know to have been spoken by the Prophet; but that, "to
whomsoever I will, I will give it," is not added, but is brought in by these
offscourings of the people. And as to the former, why it was said, I will explain.
The Prophet Haggai, because he was continually promising to the Jews after
their return from Babylon, that he would show the temple in its former
appearance, and some doubted of the thing spoken, and considered it to be well
near impossible that after being reduced to dust and ashes, the house should
appear again such as it was—he, to remove their unbelief, in the person of God

says these things; as if he said, "Why are you afraid? And why do ye refuse to
believe? 'The silver is Mine, and the gold is Mine,' and I need not to borrow from
others, and so to beautify the house." And to show that this is the meaning he
adds, "and the glory of this house, the latter glory shall be greater than the glory
of the former." Let us not then bring in spiders' webs upon the royal robe. For if
any person, detected in weaving a counterfeit thread in a purple vest, is to suffer
the severest punishment, much more in spiritual things; since neither is it an
ordinary sin, which is hereby committed. And why say I, by adding and taking
away? By a mere point, and by a mere circumstance of delivery in the reading,
many impious thoughts have not seldom been brought into being.
"Whence then the rich," says one? "for it has been said, 'Riches and poverty
are from the Lord.'" Let us then ask those who object these things against us,
whether all riches and all poverty are from the Lord? Nay, who would say this?
For we see that both by rapine, and by wickedly breaking open of tombs, and by
witchcraft, and by other such devices, great wealth is gathered by many, and the
possessors are not worthy even to live. What then, tell me, do we say that this
wealth is from God? Far from it. Whence then? From sin. For so the harlot by
doing indignity to her own body grows rich, and a handsome youth oftentimes
selling his bloom with disgrace brings himself gold, and the tomb-spoiler by
breaking open men's sepulchres gathers together unjust wealth, and the robber by
digging through walls. All wealth therefore is not from God. "What then," says
one, "shall we say to this expression?" Acquaint yourself first with a kind of
poverty which proceeds not from God, and then we will proceed to the saying
itself. I mean, that when any dissolute youth spends his wealth either on harlots,
or on conjurors, or on any other such evil desires, and becomes poor, is it not
very evident that this has not come from God, but from his own profligacy?
Again, if any through idleness become poor, if any through folly be brought
down to beggary, if any, by taking in hand perilous and unlawful practices; is it
not quite evident, that neither has any one of these and other such persons been
brought down to this their poverty by God?