master can adopt, without the consent of the sovereign and with the
authority of a magistrate: and one who is thus adopted does not
inherit the estate of the adopter, nor is the latter bound to bequeath
to him any of his goods in his will, unless he will.
This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: Natural procreation is directed to the
production of the species; wherefore anyone in whom the specific
nature is not hindered is competent to be able to beget naturally. But
adoption is directed to hereditary succession, wherefore those alone
are competent to adopt who have the power to dispose of their
estate. Consequently one who is not his own master, or who is less
than twenty-five years of age, or a woman, cannot adopt anyone,
except by special permission of the sovereign.
Reply to Objection 4: An inheritance cannot pass to posterity
through one who has a perpetual impediment from begetting: hence
for this very reason it ought to pass to those who ought to succeed
to him by right of relationship; and consequently he cannot adopt, as
neither can he beget. Moreover greater is sorrow for children lost
than for children one has never had. Wherefore those who are
impeded from begetting need no solace for their lack of children as
those who have had and have lost them, or could have had them but
have them not by reason of some accidental impediment.
Reply to Objection 5: Spiritual relationship is contracted through a
sacrament whereby the faithful are born again in Christ, in Whom
there is no difference between male and female, bondman and free,
youth and old age (Gal. 3:28; Col. 3:11). Wherefore anyone can
indifferently become another's godfather. But adoption aims at
hereditary succession and a certain subjection of the adopted to the
adopter: and it is not fitting that older persons should be subjected
to younger in the care of the household. Consequently a younger
person cannot adopt an older; but according to law the adopted
person must be so much younger than the adopter, that he might
have been the child of his natural begetting.
Reply to Objection 6: One may lose one's grandchildren and so forth
even as one may lose one's children. Wherefore since adoption was
introduced as a solace for children lost, just as someone may be
adopted in place of a child, so may someone be adopted in place of a

grandchild and so on.
Reply to Objection 7: A relative ought to succeed by right of
relationship; and therefore such a person is not competent to be
chosen to succeed by adoption. And if a relative, who is not
competent to inherit the estate, be adopted, he is adopted not as a
relative, but as a stranger lacking the right of succeeding to the
adopter's goods.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a tie that is an impediment to marriage is

contracted through adoption?
Objection 1: It would seem that there is not contracted through
adoption a tie that is an impediment to marriage. For spiritual care is
more excellent than corporeal care. But no tie of relationship is
contracted through one's being subjected to another's spiritual care:
else all those who dwell in the parish would be related to the parish
priest and would be unable to marry his son. Neither therefore can
this result from adoption which places the adopted under the care of
the adopter.
Objection 2: Further, no tie of relationship results from persons
conferring a benefit on another. But adoption is nothing but the
conferring of a benefit. Therefore no tie of relationship results from
adoption.
Objection 3: Further, a natural father provides for his child chiefly in
three things, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 11,12), namely by
giving him being, nourishment and education; and hereditary
succession is subsequent to these. Now no tie of relationship is
contracted by one's providing for a person's nourishment and
education, else a person would be related to his nourishers, tutors
and masters, which is false. Therefore neither is any relationship
contracted through adoption by which one inherits another's estate.
Objection 4: Further, the sacraments of the Church are not subject to
human laws. Now marriage is a sacrament of the Church. Since then
adoption was introduced by human law, it would seem that a tie
contracted from adoption cannot be an impediment to marriage.
On the contrary, Relationship is an impediment to marriage. Now a
kind of relationship results from adoption, namely legal relationship,
as evidenced by its definition, for "legal relationship is a connection
arising out of adoption." Therefore adoption results in a tie which is
an impediment to marriage.
Further, the same is proved by the authorities quoted in the text
(Sent. iv, D, 42).
I answer that, The Divine law especially forbids marriage between