SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.177, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: Our Lord is speaking there of the miracles to
be wrought at the time of Antichrist, of which the Apostle says (2
Thess. 2:9) that the coming of Antichrist will be "according to the
working of Satan, in all power, and signs, and lying wonders." To
quote the words of Augustine (De Civ. Dei xx, 19), "it is a matter of
debate whether they are called signs and lying wonders, because he
will deceive the senses of mortals by imaginary visions, in that he
will seem to do what he does not, or because, though they be real
wonders, they will seduce into falsehood them that believe." They
are said to be real, because the things themselves will be real, just
as Pharaoh's magicians made real frogs and real serpents; but they
will not be real miracles, because they will be done by the power of
natural causes, as stated in the FP, Question 114, Article 4; whereas
the working of miracles which is ascribed to a gratuitous grace, is
done by God's power for man's profit.
Reply to Objection 3: Two things may be considered in miracles. One
is that which is done: this is something surpassing the faculty of
nature, and in this respect miracles are called "virtues." The other
thing is the purpose for which miracles are wrought, namely the
manifestation of something supernatural, and in this respect they are
commonly called "signs": but on account of some excellence they
receive the name of "wonder" or "prodigy," as showing something
from afar [procul].
Reply to Objection 4: The "grace of healing" is mentioned separately,
because by its means a benefit, namely bodily health, is conferred
on man in addition to the common benefit bestowed in all miracles,
namely the bringing of men to the knowledge of God.
Reply to Objection 5: The working of miracles is ascribed to faith for
two reasons. First, because it is directed to the confirmation of faith,
secondly, because it proceeds from God's omnipotence on which
faith relies. Nevertheless, just as besides the grace of faith, the grace
of the word is necessary that people may be instructed in the faith,
so too is the grace of miracles necessary that people may be
confirmed in their faith.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.177, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.177, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the wicked can work miracles?

Objection 1: It would seem that the wicked cannot work miracles. For
miracles are wrought through prayer, as stated above (Article 1, ad
1). Now the prayer of a sinner is not granted, according to Jn. 9:31,
"We know that God doth not hear sinners," and Prov. 28:9, "He that
turneth away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be an
abomination." Therefore it would seem that the wicked cannot work
miracles.
Objection 2: Further, miracles are ascribed to faith, according to Mt.
17:19, "If you have faith as a grain of mustard seed you shall say to
this mountain: Remove from hence hither, and it shall remove." Now
"faith without works is dead," according to James 2:20, so that,
seemingly, it is devoid of its proper operation. Therefore it would
seem that the wicked, since they do not good works, cannot work
miracles.
Objection 3: Further, miracles are divine attestations, according to
Heb. 2:4, "God also bearing them witness by signs and wonders and
divers miracles": wherefore in the Church the canonization of certain
persons is based on the attestation of miracles. Now God cannot
bear witness to a falsehood. Therefore it would seem that wicked
men cannot work miracles.
Objection 4: Further, the good are more closely united to God than
the wicked. But the good do not all work miracles. Much less
therefore do the wicked.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:2): "If I should have all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing." Now whosoever has not charity is wicked, because "this
gift alone of the Holy Ghost distinguishes the children of the
kingdom from the children of perdition," as Augustine says (De Trin.
xv, 18). Therefore it would seem that even the wicked can work
miracles.
I answer that, Some miracles are not true but imaginary deeds,
because they delude man by the appearance of that which is not;
while others are true deeds, yet they have not the character of a true
miracle, because they are done by the power of some natural cause.