children always, that they may not bring them into a habit (of wanting to be
carried) and so make them helpless? This is why those children which are
brought up under the eyes of their parents are weak, in consequence of the
indulgence, which by sparing them too much injures their health. It is a good
thing, even pain in moderation; a good thing, care; a good thing, want; for they
make us strong: good also are their opposites: but each of these when in excess
destroys us; and the one relaxes, but the other (by overmuch tension) breaks us.
Do you see not, that Christ also thus trains His own disciples? If they needed
these things, much more do we. But if we need them, let us not grieve, but even
rejoice in our afflictions. For these are remedies, answering to our wounds, some
of them bitter, others mild; but either of them by itself would be useless. Let us
therefore return thanks to God for all these things: for He does not suffer them to
happen at random, but for the benefit of our souls. Therefore, showing forth our
gratitude, let us return Him thanks, let us glorify Him, let us bear up
courageously, considering that it is but for a time, and stretching forward our
minds to the things future, that we may both lightly bear the things present, and
be counted worthy to attain unto the good things to come, through the grace and
mercy of His only begotten Son, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
together be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 55 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XXVIII. 17-20
"And it came to pass, that after three days Paul called the chief of the Jews
together: and when they had come together, he said unto them, Men and
brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people, or customs of our
fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the
Romans. Who, when they had examined me, would have let me go, because there
was no cause of death in me. But when the Jews spoke against it, I was
constrained to appeal unto Cæsar; not that I had anything to accuse my nation
of. For this cause therefore have I called for you, to see you, and to speak with
you: because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain."
He wished to exculpate both himself and others; himself, that they might
not accuse him, and by so doing hurt themselves; and those (others), that it might
not seem that the whole thing was of their doing. For it was likely that a report
was prevalent, that he had been delivered up by the Jews; and this was enough to
alarm them. He therefore addresses himself to this, and defends himself as to his
own conduct. "How then is it reasonable," it might be said, "that they should
deliver you up without a cause?" The Roman governors, he says, bear me
witness, who wished to let me go. "How was it then that they did not let (you)
go?" "When the Jews spoke against it," he says. Observe how he extenuates (in
speaking of) their charges against him. Since if he had wished to aggravate
matters, he might have used them so as to bear harder upon them. Wherefore, he
says, "I was constrained to appeal unto Cæsar:" so that his whole speech is of a
forgiving nature. What then? Did you this, that you might accuse them? No, he
says: "Not that I had anything to accuse my nation of:" but that I might escape
the danger. For it is for your sakes "that I am bound with this chain." So far am I,
he says, from any hostile feeling towards you. Then they also were so subdued