even in a far greater degree, burned towards all his subjects ([τὥν ἀρχομένων]).
Wherefore he made his disciples of such affection towards himself, that he said,
"If were possible, you would have pulled out your eyes and given them to me."
[Galatians 4:15] On this ground too it is, that God charges the teachers of the
Jews above all things with this, saying, "Oh shepherds of Israel, do shepherds
feed themselves? Do they not feed the flock?" [Ezekiel 34:2-3] But they did the
reverse. For he says, "You eat the milk, and clothe you with the wool, and you kill
them that are fed, but you feed not the flock." And Christ, in bringing out the rule
for the fittest Pastor, said, "The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep."
[John 10:11] This David did also, both on sundry other occasions, and also when
that fearful wrath from above came down upon the whole people. For while all
were being slain he said, "I the shepherd have sinned, I the shepherd have done
amiss, and these the flock what have they done?" [2 Samuel 24:17] And so in the
choice of those punishments also, he chose not famine, nor flight before
enemies, but the pestilence sent by God, whereby he hoped to place all the others
in safety, but that he should himself in preference to all the rest be carried off.
But since this was not so, he bewails, and says, "On me be Your Hand:" or if this
be not enough, "on my father's house" also. "For I," he says, "the shepherd have
sinned." As though he had said, that if they also sinned, I was the person who
should suffer the vengeance, as I corrected them not. But since the sin is mine
also, it is I who deserve to suffer the vengeance. For wishing to increase the
crime he used the name of "Shepherd." Thus then he stayed the wrath, thus he
got the sentence revoked! So great is the power of confession. "For the righteous
is his own accuser first." So great is the concern and sympathy of a good Pastor.
For his bowels were writhed at their falling, as when one's own children are
killed. And on this ground he begged that the wrath might come upon himself.
And in the beginning of the slaughter he would have done this, unless he had
seen it advancing and expected that it would come to himself. When therefore he
saw that this did not happen, but that the calamity was raging among them, he no
longer forebore, but was touched more than for Amnon his first-born. For then

he did not ask for death, but now he begs to fall in preference to the others. Such
ought a ruler to be and to grieve rather at the calamities of others than his own.
Some such thing he suffered in his son's case likewise, that you might see that he
did not love his son more than his subjects, and yet the youth was unchaste, and
an ill-user of his father ([πατραλοίας]), and still he said, "Would that I might
have died for you!" [2 Samuel 18:33] What do you say, thou blessed one, you
meek of all men? Your son was set upon killing you, and compassed you about
with ills unnumbered. And when he had been removed, and the trophy was
raised, do you then pray to be slain? Yea, he says, for it is not for me that the
army has been victorious, but I am warred against more violently than before,
and my bowels are now more torn than before. These however were all
thoughtful for those committed to their charge, but the blessed Abraham
concerned himself much even for those that were not entrusted to him, and so
much so as even to throw himself among alarming dangers. For when he did
what he did, not for his nephew only, but for the people of Sodom also, he did
not leave driving those Persians before him until he had set them all free: and yet
he might have departed after he had taken him, yet he did not choose it. For he
had the like concern for all, and this he showed likewise by his subsequent
conduct. When then it was not a host of barbarians that was on the point of
laying siege to them, but the wrath of God that was plucking their cities up from
the foundations, and it was no longer the time for arms, and battle, and array, but
for supplication; so great was the zeal he showed for them, as, if he himself had
been on the point of perishing. For this reason he comes once, twice, thrice, aye
and many times to God, and finds a refuge (i.e. an excuse) in his nature by
saying, "I am dust and ashes" [Genesis 18:27]: and since he saw that they were
traitors to themselves, he begs that they may be saved for others. Wherefore also
God said, "I will hide not from Abraham My servant that thing which I am about
to do" [Genesis 18:17], that we might learn how loving to man the righteous is.
And he would not have left off beseeching, unless God had left off first [so he
takes Genesis 18:33]. And he seems indeed to be praying for the just, but is