one as much as if they were offered for one alone, because charity is
not diminished if its effect be divided among many, in fact rather is it
increased; and in like manner joy increases through being shared by
many, as Augustine says (Confess. viii). Consequently many in
purgatory rejoice in one good deed no less than one does. On the
other hand, if we consider the value of suffrages, inasmuch as they
are a kind of satisfaction applied to the dead by the intention of the
person offering them, then the suffrage for some person in particular
avails him more than that which is offered for him in common with
many others; for in this case the effect of the suffrages is divided in
virtue of Divine justice among those for whom the suffrages are
offered. Hence it is evident that this question depends on the first;
and, moreover, it is made clear why special suffrages are appointed
to be offered in the Church.
Reply to Objection 1: Suffrages considered as works of satisfaction
do not profit after the manner of an action as teaching does; for
teaching, like any other action, produces its effect according to the
disposition of the recipient. But they profit after the manner of the
payment of a debt, as stated above (Article 12, ad 1); and so the
comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 2: Since suffrages offered for one person avail
others in a certain way, as stated (Article 1), it follows that when
Mass is said for one person, it is not unfitting for prayers to be said
for others also. For these prayers are said, not that the satisfaction
offered by one suffrage be applied to those others chiefly, but that
the prayer offered for them in particular may profit them also.
Reply to Objection 3: Prayer may be considered both on the part of
the one who prays, and on the part of the person prayed: and its
effect depends on both. Consequently though it is no more difficult
to the Divine power to absolve many than to absolve one,
nevertheless the prayer of one who prays thus is not as satisfactory
for many as for one.

### ARTICLE 14. Whether general suffrages avail those for whom

special suffrages are not offered, as much as special
suffrages avail those for whom they are offered in addition to
general suffrages?
Objection 1: It would seem that general suffrages avail those for
whom special suffrages are not offered, as much as special
suffrages avail those for whom they are offered in addition to general
suffrages. For in the life to come each one will be rewarded
according to his merits. Now a person for whom no suffrages are
offered merited to be assisted after death as much as one for whom
special suffrages are offered. Therefore the former will be assisted
by general suffrages as much as the latter by special and general
suffrages.
Objection 3: Further, the Eucharist is the chief of the suffrages of the
Church. Now the Eucharist, since it contains Christ whole, has
infinite efficacy so to speak. Therefore one offering of the Eucharist
for all in general is of sufficient value to release all who are in
purgatory: and consequently general suffrages alone afford as much
assistance as special and general suffrages together.
On the contrary, Two goods are more eligible than one. Therefore
special suffrages, together with general suffrages, are more
profitable to the person for whom they are offered than general
suffrages alone.
I answer that, The reply to this question depends on that which is
given to the twelfth inquiry (Article 12): for if the suffrages offered for
one person in particular avail indifferently for all, then all suffrages
are common; and consequently one for whom the special suffrages
are not offered will be assisted as much as the one for whom they
are offered, if he be equally worthy. On the other hand, if the
suffrages offered for a person do not profit all indifferently, but those
chiefly for whom they are offered, then there is no doubt that general
and special suffrages together avail a person more than general
suffrages alone. Hence the Master, in the text (Sent. iv, D, 45),
mentions two opinions: one, when he says that a rich man derives
from general, together with special suffrages, an equal profit to that
which a poor man derives from special suffrages alone; for although
the one receives assistance from more sources than the other, he