dispensing all things? And even if you were deceived by the wise men, what is
that to the young children, who have done no wrong?
2. "Yea," says one, "Herod you have full well deprived of excuse, and
proved him blood-thirsty; but you have not yet solved the question about the
injustice of what took place. For if he did unjustly, wherefore did God permit it?"
Now, what should we say to this? That which I do not cease to say continually,
in church, in the market-place and everywhere; that which I also wish you
carefully to keep in mind, for it is a sort of rule for us, suited to every such
perplexity. What then is our rule, and what our saying? That although there be
many that injure, yet is there not so much as one that is injured. And in order that
the riddle may not disturb you too much, I add the solution too with all speed. I
mean, that what we may suffer unjustly from any one, it tells either to the doing
away of our sins, God so putting that wrong to our account; or unto the
recompense of rewards.
And that what I may say may be clearer, let us conduct our argument in the
way of illustration. As thus: suppose a certain servant who owes much money to
his master, and then that this servant has been despitefully used by unjust men,
and robbed of some of his goods. If then the master, in whose power it was to
stay the plunderer and wrong doer, should not indeed restore that same property,
but should reckon what was taken away towards what was owed him by his
servant, is the servant then injured? By no means. But what if he should repay
him even more? Has he not then even gained more than he has lost? Every one, I
suppose, perceives it.
Now this same reckoning we are to make in regard of our own sufferings.
For as to the fact, that in consideration of what we may suffer wrongfully, we
either have sins done away, or receive more glorious crowns, if the amount of
our sins be not so great: hear what Paul says concerning him that had committed
fornication, "Deliver ye such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved." [1 Corinthians 5:5] "But what is this?" you may say,
"for the discourse was about them that were injured by others, not about them

that are corrected by their teachers." I might answer, that there is no difference;
for the question was, whether to suffer evil be not an indignity to the sufferer.
But, to bring my argument nearer the very point inquired of; remember David,
how, when he saw Shimei at a certain time assailing him, and trampling on his
affliction, and pouring on him revilings without end, his captains desiring to slay
him, he utterly forbade them, saying, "Let him curse, that the Lord may look
upon mine abasement, and that he may requite me good for this cursing this
day." And in the Psalms too in his chanting, he said, "Consider mine enemies,
that they are multiplied, and they hate me with unjust hatred," and "forgive all
my sins." And Lazarus again for the same cause enjoyed remission, having in
this life suffered innumerable evils. They therefore who are wronged, are not
wronged if they bear nobly all that they suffer, yea, rather they gain even more
abundantly, whether they be smitten of God, or scourged by the devil.
3. "But what kind of sin had these children," it may be said, "that they
should do it away? For touching those who are of full age, and have been guilty
of many negligences, one might with show of reason speak thus: but they who so
underwent premature death, what sort of sins did they by their sufferings put
away?" Did you not hear me say, that though there were no sins, there is a
recompense of rewards hereafter for them that suffer ill here? Wherein then were
the young children hurt in being slain for such a cause, and borne away speedily
into that waveless harbor? "Because," do you say, "they would in many instances
have achieved, had they lived, many and great deeds of goodness." Why, for this
cause He lays up for them beforehand no small reward, the ending their lives for
such a cause. Besides, if the children were to have been any great persons, He
would not have suffered them to be snatched away beforehand. For if they that
eventually will live in continual wickedness are endured by Him with so great
long-sufferings, much more would He not have suffered these to be so taken off
had He foreknown they would accomplish any great things.
And these are the reasons we have to give; yet these are not all; but there
are also others more mysterious than these, which He knows perfectly, who