continually, saying, "to the maintenance of His glory ;" [Ephesians 1:14] and
every where he lays down this, and shows the necessity of this result. And in this
regard he here says, that His promises lie not: for they not only save us, but also
glorify Him. Dwell not on this therefore that they were promised by us; and so
doubt. For they are not fulfilled by us, but by Him. Yea, and the promises were
by Him; for we spoke not to you our own words, but His.

2 Corinthians 1:21-22
"Now He which establishes us with you in Christ, and anointed us, is God;
Who also sealed us, and gave us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts."
Again, from the past He establishes the future. For if it is He that
establishes us in Christ; (i.e., who suffers us not to be shaken from the faith
which is in Christ;) and He that anointed us and gave the Spirit in our hearts,
how shall He not give us the future things?
For if He gave the principles and the foundations, and the root and the
fount, (to wit, the true knowledge of Him, the partaking of the Spirit,) how shall
He not give the things that come of these: for if for the sake of these those are
given, much more will he supply those. And if to such as were enemies he gave
these, much more when now made friends will He "freely give" to them those.
Wherefore He said not simply "the Spirit," but named "earnest," that from this
you might have a good hope of the whole as well. For did He not purpose to give
the whole, He would never have chosen to give "the earnest" and to waste it
without object or result. And observe Paul's candor. For why need I say, says he,
that the truth of the promises stands not in us? The fact of your standing
unwavering and fixed is not in us, but this too is of God; "for" says he, "He who
establishes us is God." It is not we who strengthen you: for even we also need
Him that establishes. So then let none imagine that the Preaching is hazardous in
us. He has undertaken the whole, He cared for the whole.
And what is, "anointed," and "sealed?" Gave the Spirit by Whom He did
both these things, making at once prophets and priests and kings, for in old times
these three sorts were anointed. But we have now not one of these dignities, but
all three preeminently. For we are both to enjoy a kingdom and are made priests
by offering our bodies for a sacrifice, (for, says he, present your members a
living sacrifice unto God;) and withal we are constituted prophets too: for what

things "eye has not seen, nor ear heard," [1 Corinthians 2:9] these have been
revealed unto us.
5. And in another way too we become kings: if we have the mind to get
dominion over our unruly thoughts, for that such an one is a king and more than
he who wears the diadem, I will now make plain to you. He has many armies,
but we again have thoughts exceeding them in number; for it is impossible to
number the infinite multitude of the thoughts within us. Nor is their multitude all
that one is to consider, but also that in this multitude of thoughts, there are many
generals, and colonels, and captains, and archers, and slingers. What else makes
a king? His apparel? But this one too is arrayed in a better and braver robe,
which neither does moth devour nor age impair. A crown too he has of curious
workmanship , that of glory, that of the tender mercies of God. For says [the
Psalmist], "Bless the Lord, O my soul, that crowns you with pity and tender
mercies." [Psalm 103:2-4] Again, that of glory: "For you have crowned him with
glory and honor." [Psalm 8:6] And "with favor You have crowned us with a
shield." [Psalm 5:12. Septuagint] Again, that of grace: "For you shall receive a
crown of grace upon your head." [Proverbs 1:9. Septuagint] Do you see this
diadem of many wreaths, and surpassing the other in grace. But let us institute
anew and from the beginning a stricter inquiry into the condition of these kings.
That king has dominion over his guards, and issues orders to all, and all obey
and serve him; but here I show you greater authority. For the number here is as
great or even greater: it remains to inquire into their obedience. And bring me
not forth those that have ruled amiss , since I too bring those that have been
driven from their kingdom and murdered by their very body guards. Let us then
bring forth these instances, but seek for those of either kind who have ordered
well their kingdom. And do thou put forward whom you will. I oppose unto you
the patriarch against all. For when he was commanded to sacrifice his son,
consider how many thoughts then rose up against him. Nevertheless, he brought
all under submission, and all trembled before him more than before a king his
guards; and with a look only he stilled them all and not one of them dared so