there object of derision, mere slavery, and many other names one might call it
by. Tell me, what is proper to a ruler? Is it not to help one's subjects, and to do
them good? What then, if this be not the case? How shall he help others, who has
not helped himself? He who has numberless tyrannies of the passions in his own
soul, how shall he root out those of others? Again, with respect to "luxury" or
delightful living: the true luxury or delight is not this (which is so called), but
quite another thing. For as we have shown that the ruler is not he who is so
called, but another (who has something more than the name), so the person who
lives indeed in delight is another sort of person (than he whom we so describe).
For "luxury" or delightful living seems indeed to be, the enjoying pleasure and
the gratifying the belly: yet it is not this thing, but the contrary: it is, to have a
soul worthy of admiration, and to be in a state of pleasure. For let there be a man
eating, drinking, and wantoning; then let him suffer cares and loss of spirits: can
this man be said to be in a state of delight? Therefore, it is not eating and
drinking, it is the being in pleasure, that makes true luxury or delightful living.
Let there be a man who gets only dry bread, and let him be filled with gladness:
is not this pleasure? Well then, it is the true luxury. Let us see then, to whom this
befalls— whether to the rich, or to those who are not rich? Neither to the one
part altogether, nor to the other, but to those who so order their own souls, that
they may not have many grounds for sorrows. And where is such a life as this to
be found? For I see you all eager and wishing to hear what this life is which has
no sorrows. Well then, let this be acknowledged first by you, that this is pleasure,
this the true luxury, to have no sorrow to cause annoyance; and ask not of me
meats, and wine, and sauces, and silken robes, and a sumptuous table. But if I
shall show that apart from all these such a life as that is present (within our
reach), then welcome thou this pleasure, and this life: for the most part of painful
things happen to us from our not calculating things as we ought. Who then will
have the most sorrows— he that cares for none of these things, or he that cares
for them? He that fears changes, or he that does not fear? He that is in dread of
jealousy, of envy, of false accusations, of plottings, of destruction, or he that

stands aloof from these fears? He that wants many things, or he that wants
nothing? He that is a slave to masters without number, or he that is a slave to
none? He that has need of many things, or he that is free? He that has one lord to
fear, or he that fears despots innumerable? Well then, greater is the pleasure here.
This then let us pursue, and not be excited about the things present: but let us
laugh to scorn all the pomp of life, and everywhere practise moderation, that we
may be enabled so to pass through this life, that it may be without pain, and to
attain unto the good things promised, through the grace and mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory,
might, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.