Homily 42 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XIX. 21, 23
"After these things were ended, Paul purposed in the Spirit, when he had
passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have
been there, I must also see Rome. So he sent into Macedonia two of them that
ministered unto him, Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself stayed in Asia for a
season. And the same time there arose no small stir about the Way."
He sends Timothy and Erastus into Macedonia, but himself remains at
Ephesus. Having made a long enough stay in that city, he wishes to remove
elsewhere again. But how is it, that having from the first chosen to depart into
Syria, he turns back to Macedonia? "He purposed," it says, "in the Spirit,"
showing that all (that he did) was done not of his own power. Now he
prophesies, saying, "I must also see Rome:" perhaps to comfort them with the
consideration of his not remaining at a distance, but coming nearer to them
again, and to arouse the minds of the disciples by the prophecy. At this point, I
suppose, it was that he wrote his Epistle to the Corinthians from Ephesus,
saying, "I would not have you ignorant of the trouble which came to us in Asia."
[2 Corinthians 1:8] For since he had promised to go to Corinth, he excuses
himself on the score of having loitered, and mentions the trial relating the affair
of Demetrius. "There arose no small stir about the Way." Do you see the renown
(acquired)? They contradicted, it says: (then) came miracles, twofold: (then)
again, danger: such is the way the threads alternate throughout the whole texture
(of the history). "For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made
silver temples of Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen." [Acts
19:24]. "Which made," it says, "silver temples of Diana." And how is it possible
that temples could be made of silver? Perhaps as small boxes ([κιβώρια].) Great
was the honor paid to this (Diana) in Ephesus; since, when (Hom. in Eph. Prol.)

their temple was burnt it so grieved them, that they forbade even the name of the
incendiary ever to be mentioned. See how, wherever there is idolatry, in every
case we find money at the bottom of it. Both in the former instance it was for
money, and in the case of this man, for money. [Acts 19:13] It was not for their
religion, because they thought that in danger; no, it was for their lucrative craft,
that it would have nothing to work upon. Observe the maliciousness of the man.
He was wealthy himself, and to him indeed it was no such great loss; but to them
the loss was great, since they were poor, and subsisted on their daily earnings.
Nevertheless, these men say nothing, but only he. And observe: "Whom having
collected, and the workmen of like occupation," having themselves common
cause with him, "he said, Sirs, you know that by this craft we have our wealth"
[Acts 19:25]; then he brought the danger home to them, that we are in danger of
falling from this our craft into starvation. "Moreover ye see and hear, that not
alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and
turned away much people, saying that they be no gods, which are made with
hands: so that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at naught; but also,
that the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her
magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worships. And
when they heard these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out, saying,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians." [Acts 19:26-28] And yet the very things he
spoke were enough to bring them to true religion: but being poor senseless
creatures, this is the part they act. For if this (Paul being) man is strong enough
to turn away all, and the worship of the gods is in jeopardy, one ought to reflect,
how great must this man's God be, and that he will much more give you those
things, for which you are afraid. Already (at the outset) he has secured a hold
upon their minds by saying, "This Paul has turned away much people, saying,
that they be no gods, which are made with men's hands." See what it is that the
heathen are so indignant at; because he said that "they which be made of men are
no gods." Throughout, he drives his speech at their craft. Then that which most
grieved them he brings in afterwards. But, with the other gods, he would say, we