rather despise them who are so minded: neither let us be dejected at poverty. But
let us seek that wealth, which consists in good works; let us flee that poverty,
which causes men to be in wickedness, by reason of which also that rich man
was poor; [Luke 16:24] wherefore he had not at his command so much as a drop
of water, and that, although he made much entreaty. Whereas, who can be so
poor among us, as to want water enough even for comfort? There is none such.
For even they that are pining with extreme hunger, may have the comfort of a
drop of water; and not of a drop only, but of refreshment too far more abundant.
Not so that rich man, but he was poor even to this degree: and what was yet
more grievous, he could not so much as soothe his poverty from any source.
Why then do we gape after riches, since they bring us not into Heaven?
For tell me, if any king among those upon earth had said, It is impossible
for him that is rich to be distinguished at court, or to enjoy any honor; would ye
not have thrown away every one his riches with contempt? So then, if they cast
us out from such honor as is in the palaces below, they shall be worthy of all
contempt: but, when the King of Heaven is day by day crying aloud and saying,
"It is hard with them, to set foot on that sacred threshold;" shall we not give up
all, and withdraw from our possessions, that with boldness we may enter into the
kingdom? And of what consideration are we worthy, who are at great pains to
encompass ourselves with the things that obstruct our way there; and to hide
them not only in chests, but even in the earth, when we might entrust them to the
guard of the very Heavens? Since now surely you are doing the same, as if any
husbandman, having gotten wheat wherewith to sow a rich land, was to leave the
land alone, and bury all the wheat in a pit, so as neither to enjoy it himself, nor
for the wheat to come to ought, but decay and waste. But what is their common
plea, when we accuse them of these things? It gives no little comfort, say they, to
know that all is laid up for us in safety at home. Nay, rather not to know of its
being laid up is a comfort. For even if you are not afraid of famine, yet other
more grievous things, on account of this store, must needs be a terror to you:
deaths, wars, plots laid against you. And if a famine should ever befall us, the

people again, constrained by the belly, takes weapon in hand against your house.
Or rather, in so doing, you are first of all bringing famine into our cities, and
next you are forming for your own house this gulf, more grievous than famine.
For by stress of famine I know not any who have come to a speedy end; there
being in fact many means in many quarters which may be devised to assuage
that evil: but for possessions and riches, and the pursuits connected with them, I
can show many to have come by their ruin, some in secret, some openly. And
with many such instances the highways abound, with many the courts of law,
and the market-places. But why speak I of the highways, the courts of law and
the market-places? Why, the very sea you may behold filled with their blood. For
not over the land only, as it seems, has this tyranny prevailed, but over the ocean
also has walked in festal procession with great excess. And one makes a voyage
for gold, another, again, is stabbed for the same; and the same tyrannical power
has made one a merchant, the other a murderer.
What then can be less trustworthy than Mammon, seeing that for his sake
one travels, and ventures, and is slain? "But who," it is said, "will pity a charmer
that is bitten with a serpent?" [Sirach 12:13] For we ought, knowing its cruel
tyranny, to flee that slavery, and destroy that grievous longing. "But how," says
one, "is this possible?" By introducing another longing, the longing for Heaven.
Since he that desires the kingdom will laugh covetousness to scorn; he that has
become Christ's slave is no slave of mammon, but rather his lord; for him that
flies from him, he is wont to follow, and to fly from him that pursues. He honors
not so much his pursuer as his despiser; no one does he so laugh to scorn, as
them that desire him; nor does he only laugh them to scorn, but wraps round
them also innumerable bonds.
Be it ours then, however late, to loose these grievous chains. Why bring
your reasonable soul into bondage to brute matter, to the mother of those untold
evils? But, oh the absurdity! That while we are warring against it in words, it
makes war with us by deeds, and leads and carries us everywhere about,
insulting us as purchased with money, and meet for the lash; and what can be