FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

Objection 7. Further, every defect in an animal is a step towards
corruption and death. If therefore slain animals were offered to God,
it was unreasonable to forbid the offering of an imperfect animal, e.g.
a lame, or a blind, or otherwise defective animal.
Objection 8. Further, those who offer victims to God should partake
thereof, according to the words of the Apostle (1 Cor. 10:18): "Are
not they that eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?" It was
therefore unbecoming for the offerers to be denied certain parts of
the victims, namely, the blood, the fat, the breastbone and the right
shoulder.
Objection 9. Further, just as holocausts were offered up in honor of
God, so also were the peace-offerings and sin-offerings. But no
female animals was offered up to God as a holocaust, although
holocausts were offered of both quadrupeds and birds. Therefore it
was inconsistent that female animals should be offered up in peaceofferings and sin-offerings, and that nevertheless birds should not
be offered up in peace-offerings.
Objection 10. Further, all the peace-offerings seem to be of one kind.
Therefore it was unfitting to make a distinction among them, so that
it was forbidden to eat the flesh of certain peace-offerings on the
following day, while it was allowed to eat the flesh of other peaceofferings, as laid down in Lev. 7:15, seqq.
Objection 11. Further, all sins agree in turning us from God.
Therefore, in order to reconcile us to God, one kind of sacrifice
should have been offered up for all sins.
Objection 12. Further, all animals that were offered up in sacrifice,
were offered up in one way, viz. slain. Therefore it does not seem to
be suitable that products of the soil should be offered up in various
ways; for sometimes an offering was made of ears of corn,
sometimes of flour, sometimes of bread, this being baked sometimes
in an oven, sometimes in a pan, sometimes on a gridiron.
Objection 13. Further, whatever things are serviceable to us should
be recognized as coming from God. It was therefore unbecoming
that besides animals, nothing but bread, wine, oil, incense, and salt
should be offered to God.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

Objection 14. Further, bodily sacrifices denote the inward sacrifice of
the heart, whereby man offers his soul to God. But in the inward
sacrifice, the sweetness, which is denoted by honey, surpasses the
pungency which salt represents; for it is written (Sirach 24:27): "My
spirit is sweet above honey." Therefore it was unbecoming that the
use of honey, and of leaven which makes bread savory, should be
forbidden in a sacrifice; while the use was prescribed, of salt which
is pungent, and of incense which has a bitter taste. Consequently it
seems that things pertaining to the ceremonies of the sacrifices have
no reasonable cause.
On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 1:13): "The priest shall offer it all
and burn it all upon the altar, for a holocaust, and most sweet savor
to the Lord." Now according to Wis. 7:28, "God loveth none but him
that dwelleth with wisdom": whence it seems to follow that whatever
is acceptable to God is wisely done. Therefore these ceremonies of
the sacrifices were wisely done, as having reasonable causes.
I answer that, As stated above (2), the ceremonies of the Old Law
had a twofold cause, viz. a literal cause, according as they were
intended for Divine worship; and a figurative or mystical cause,
according as they were intended to foreshadow Christ: and on either
hand the ceremonies pertaining to the sacrifices can be assigned to
a fitting cause.
For, according as the ceremonies of the sacrifices were intended for
the divine worship, the causes of the sacrifices can be taken in two
ways. First, in so far as the sacrifice represented the directing of the
mind to God, to which the offerer of the sacrifice was stimulated.
Now in order to direct his mind to God aright, man must recognize
that whatever he has is from God as from its first principle, and
direct it to God as its last end. This was denoted in the offerings and
sacrifices, by the fact that man offered some of his own belongings
in honor of God, as though in recognition of his having received
them from God, according to the saying of David (1 Paral. xxix, 14):
"All things are Thine: and we have given Thee what we received of
Thy hand." Wherefore in offering up sacrifices man made
protestation that God is the first principle of the creation of all
things, and their last end, to which all things must be directed. And
since, for the human mind to be directed to God aright, it must
recognize no first author of things other than God, nor place its end
in any other; for this reason it was forbidden in the Law to offer
sacrifice to any other but God, according to Ex. 22:20: "He that