taken you, and with manifold labour moulded, reformed you and increased your
ardour on your departing from this place, the urgency of business, besetting you
on every side, again perverts you, and causes us increased difficulty. Therefore, I
supplicate and beseech you to put your own hand to the work; and when you
depart hence, to show the same earnest regard for your own safety, that I have
here shown for your amendment.
14. Oh! That it were possible that I could perform good works as your
substitute, and that you could receive the rewards of those works! Then I would
not give you so much trouble. But how can I do this? The thing is impossible;
for to every man will He render according to his own works. Wherefore as a
mother, when she beholds her son in a fever, while she witnesses his sufferings
from choking and inflammation, frequently bewails him, and says to him, "O my
son, would that I could sustain your fever, and draw off its flame upon myself!"
so now I say, Oh! That by labouring as your substitute, I could do good works
for you all! But no, this is not to be done. But of his own doings must each man
give the account, and one cannot see one person suffer punishment in the room
of another. For this reason I am pained and mourn, that on That Day, when you
are called to judgment, I shall not be able to assist you, since, to say the truth, no
such confidence of speech with God belongs to me. But even if I had much
confidence, I am not holier than Moses, or more righteous than Samuel; of
whom it is said, that though they had attained to so great virtue, they could not in
any way avail to assist the Jews; inasmuch as that people had given themselves
over to excessive negligence. [Jeremiah 15:1] Since, then, from our own works
we shall be punished or saved; let us endeavour, I beseech you, in conjunction
with all the other precepts, to fulfill this one; that, finally departing this life with
a favourable hope, we may obtain those good things which are promised,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, through Whom
and with Whom, to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory both now and ever,
world without end. Amen.

## Homily 14 on the Statues
After the whole people had been freed from all distress, and had
become assured of safety, certain persons again disturbed the city by
fabricating false reports, and were convicted. Wherefore this Homily refers
to that subject; and also to the admonition concerning oaths; for which
reason also, the history of Jonathan, and Saul, and that of Jephthah, is
brought forward; and it is shown how many perjuries result from one oath.
1. Not a little did the devil yesterday disturb our city; but God also has not a
little comforted us again; so that each one of us may seasonably take up that
prophetic saying, "In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, your
comforts have refreshed my soul." And not only in consoling, but even in
permitting us to be troubled, God has manifested His tender care towards us. For
today I shall repeat what I have never ceased to say, that not only our deliverance
from evils, but also the permission of them arises from the benevolence of God.
For when He sees us falling away into listlessness, and starting off from
communion with Him, and making no account of spiritual things, He leaves us
for a while; that thus brought to soberness, we may return to Him the more
earnestly. And what marvel is it, if He does this towards us, listless as we are;
since even Paul declares that with regard to himself and his disciples, this was
the cause of their trials? For inditing his second Epistle to the Corinthians, he
speaks thus: "We would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which
came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above strength,
insomuch that we despaired even of life; but we had the sentence of death in
ourselves." [2 Corinthians 1:8-9] As though he would say, "Dangers so great
hung over us, that we gave up ourselves for lost; and no longer hoped that any
favourable change would take place, but were altogether in expectation of
death." For such is the sense of that clause, "We had the sentence of death in