former argument also had of course its proper weight.
For tell me not, that it is not freeing one's self from blame, to bring forward
another who is committing the same sin. For when the doer incurs no blame, the
act on which he has ventured becomes a rule for others to plead.
Nevertheless He was not satisfied with this, but subjoins also what is more
decisive, saying that the deed is no sin at all; and this more than anything was
the sign of a glorious victory, to point to the law repealing itself, and in two ways
doing so, first by the place, then by the Sabbath; or rather even in three ways, in
that both the work is twofold that is done, and with it goes also another thing, its
being done by the priests; and what is yet more, that it is not even brought as a
charge. "For they," says He, "are blameless."
Do you see how many points He has stated? The place; for He says, "In the
temple;" the persons, for they are "the priests;" the time, for He says, "the
Sabbath;" the act itself, for "they profane;" (He not having said, "they break,"
but what is more grievous, "they profane;") that they not only escape
punishment, but are even free from blame, "for they," says He, "are blameless."
Do not ye therefore account this, He says, like the former instance. For that
indeed was done both but once, and not by a priest, and was of necessity;
wherefore also they were deserving of excuse; but this last is both done every
Sabbath, and by priests, and in the temple, and according to the law. And
therefore again not by favor, but in a legal way, they are acquitted of the charges.
For not at all as blaming them did I so speak, says He, nor yet as freeing them
from blame in the way of indulgence, but according to the principle of justice.
And He seems indeed to be defending them, but it is His disciples whom
He is clearing of the alleged faults. For when He says, "those are blameless," He
means, "much more are these."
"But they are not priests." Nay, they are greater than priests. For the Lord of
the temple Himself is here: the truth, not the type. Wherefore He said also,
"But I say unto you, That in this place is one greater than the temple."
Nevertheless, great as the sayings were which they heard, they made no

reply, for the salvation of men was not their object.
Then, because to the hearers it would seem harsh, He quickly draws a veil
over it, giving His discourse, as before, a lenient turn, yet even so expressing
Himself with a rebuke. "But if you had known what this means, I will have mercy
and not sacrifice, you would not have condemned the guiltless." [Matthew 12:7]
Do you see how again He inclines His speech to lenity, yet again shows
them to be out of the reach of lenity? "For you would not have condemned," says
He, "the guiltless." Before indeed He inferred the same from what is said of the
priests, in the words, "they are guiltless;" but here He states it on His own
authority; or rather, this too is out of the law, for He was quoting a prophetic
saying. [Hosea 6:6]
3. After this He mentions another reason likewise; "For the Son of man,"
says He, "is Lord of the Sabbath day;" [Matthew 12:8] speaking it of Himself.
But Mark relates Him to have said this of our common nature also; for He said,
"The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath." [Mark 2:27]
Wherefore then was he punished that was gathering the sticks?
[Numbers 15:32-36] Because if the laws were to be despised even at the
beginning, of course they would scarcely be observed afterwards.
For indeed the Sabbath did at the first confer many and great benefits; for
instance, it made them gentle towards those of their household, and humane; it
taught them God's providence and the creation, as Ezekiel says; [Ezekiel 20:12]
it trained them by degrees to abstain from wickedness, and disposed them to
regard the things of the Spirit.
For because they could not have borne it, if when He was giving the law for
the Sabbath, He had said, "Do your good works on the Sabbath, but do not the
works which are evil," therefore He restrained them from all alike for, "You must
do nothing at all," says He: and not even so were they kept in order. But He
Himself, in the very act of giving the law of the Sabbath, did even therein darkly
signify that He will have them refrain from the evil works only, by the saying,
"You must do no work, except what shall be done for your life." And in the