other. But since we are addressing the Church, let us not take our examples from
the Heathens, but from the Scriptures. This then the blessed Paul places almost
in the rank of a command. "Having food and raiment, let us be therewith
content." [1 Timothy 6:8] But concerning women he says, "Defraud not one the
other, except it be with consent"— and "come together again." [1 Corinthians
7:5] And you see him often laying down rules for a lawful intercourse, and he
permits the enjoyment of this desire, and allows of a second marriage, and
bestows much consideration upon the matter, and never punishes on account of
it. But he everywhere condemns him that is fond of money. Concerning wealth
also Christ often commanded that we should avoid the corruption of it, but He
says nothing about abstaining from a wife. For hear what He says concerning
money; "Whosoever forsakes not all that he has" [Luke 14:33]; but he nowhere
says, "Whosoever forsakes not his wife"; for he knew how imperious that passion
is. And the blessed Paul says, "Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed
undefiled" [Hebrews 13:4]; but he has nowhere said that the care of riches is
honorable, but the reverse. Thus he says to Timothy, "They that will be rich fall
into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts." [1 Timothy
6:9] He says not, they that will be covetous, but, they that will be rich.
And that you may learn from the common notions the true state of this
matter, it must be set before you generally. If a man were once for all deprived of
money, he would no longer be tormented with the desire of it, for nothing so
much causes the desire of wealth, as the possession of it. But it is not so with
respect to lust, but many who have been made eunuchs have not been freed from
the flame that burned within them, for the desire resides in other organs, being
seated inwardly in our nature. To what purpose then is this said? Because the
covetous is more intemperate than the fornicator, inasmuch as the former gives
way to a weaker passion. Indeed it proceeds less from passion than from
baseness of mind. But lust is natural, so that if a man does not approach a
woman, nature performs her part and operation. But there is nothing of this sort
in the case of avarice.

"That we should live godly in this present world."
And what is this hope? What the reward of our labors?
"Looking for the blessed hope and the appearing."
For nothing is more blessed and more desirable than that appearing. Words
are not able to represent it, the blessings thereof surpass our understanding.
"Looking for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of our great God and
Saviour."
Where are those who say that the Son is inferior to the Father?
"Our great God and Saviour." He who saved us when we were enemies.
What will He not do then when He has us approved?
"The great God." When he says great with respect to God, he says it not
comparatively but absolutely, after Whom no one is great, since it is relative. For
if it is relative, He is great by comparison, not great by nature. But now He is
incomparably great.
Ver. 14. "Who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto Himself a peculiar people."
"Peculiar": that is, selected from the rest, and having nothing in common
with them.
"Zealous of good works."
Do you see that our part is necessary, not merely works, but "zealous"; we
should with all alacrity, with a becoming earnestness, go forward in virtue. For
when we were weighed down with evils, and incurably diseased, it was of His
lovingkindness that we were delivered. But what follows after this is our part as
well as His.
Ver. 15. "These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all authority."
"These things speak and exhort." Do you see how he charges Timothy?
"Reprove, rebuke, exhort." But here, "Rebuke with all authority." For the
manners of this people were more stubborn, wherefore he orders them to be
rebuked more roughly, and with all authority. For there are some sins, which
ought to be prevented by command. We may with persuasion advise men to