observe the character of the shepherd. What then is it?

John 10:2-4
"He that enters in by the door, the same is the shepherd of the sheep; to him the
doorkeeper opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own by name.
And when he has brought them out, he goes before them."
3. He has set down the marks of the shepherd, and of the evil doer; let us
now see how He has fitted to them what follows. "To him," He says, "the
doorkeeper opens"; He continues in the metaphor to make the discourse more
emphatic. But if you should be minded to examine the parable word by word,
there is nothing to hinder you from supposing Moses to be the doorkeeper, for to
him were entrusted the oracles of God. "Whose voice the sheep hear, and he
calls his own by name." Because they everywhere said that He was a deceiver,
and confirmed this by their own unbelief, saying, "Which of the rulers has
believed on him?" [John 7:48] He shows that they ought not on account of the
unbelief of those persons to call Him a spoiler and deceiver, but that they,
because they gave no heed to Him were consequently even excluded from the
rank of sheep. For if a shepherd's part is to enter through the usual door, and if
He entered through this, all they who followed Him might be sheep, but they
who rent themselves away, hurt not the reputation of the Shepherd, but cast
themselves out from the kindred of the sheep. And if farther on He says that He
is "the door," we must not again be disturbed, for He also calls Himself
"Shepherd," and "Sheep," and in different ways proclaims His dispensations.
Thus, when He brings us to the Father, He calls Himself "a Door," when He
takes care of us, "a Shepherd"; and it is that you may not suppose, that to bring
us to the Father is His only office, that He calls Himself a Shepherd. "And the
sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep, and leads them out, and goes
before them." Shepherds indeed do the contrary, for they follow after them; but
He to show that He will lead all men to the truth, does differently; as also when
He sent the sheep, He sent them, not out of the way of wolves, but "in the midst

of wolves." [Matthew 10:16] For far more wonderful is this manner of keeping
sheep than ours. He seems to me also to allude to the blind man, for him too,
having "called," He "led out" from the midst of the Jews, and the man heard
"His voice," and "knew" it.

John 10:5
"And a stranger will they not follow, for they know not the voice of strangers."
Certainly here He speaks of Theudas and Judas, (for "all, as many as
believed on them, were scattered" [ Acts v. 36 ], It says,) or of the false Christs
who after that time should deceive. For lest any should say that He was one of
these, He in many ways separates Himself from them. And the first difference
He sets down is His teaching from the Scriptures; for He by means of these led
men to Him, but the others did not from these draw men after them. The second
is, the obedience of the sheep; for on Him they all believed, not only while He
lived, but when He had died; the others they straightway left. With these we may
mention a third difference, no trifling one. They did all as rebels, and to cause
revolts, but He placed Himself so far from such suspicion, that when they would
have made Him a king, He fled; and when they asked, "Is it lawful to give tribute
unto Cæsar?" He bade them pay it, and Himself gave the two drachm piece.
[Matthew 17:27] Besides this, He indeed came for the saving of the sheep, "That
they might have life, and that they might have more abundantly" [John 10:10],
but the others deprived them even of this present life. They betrayed those who
were entrusted to them and fled, but He withstood so nobly as even to give up
His life. They unwillingly, and by compulsion, and desiring to escape, suffered
what they suffered, but He willingly and by choice endured all.