he was counted worthy to prophesy again even concerning His Godhead; and
thereby stopping their mouths, He said, "How then does David in spirit call Him
Lord, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit on my right hand?" And much as
with Moses, so it fell out also with David. For as Miriam, even against Moses'
will, was punished by God for insolence to her brother, [Numbers 12:13-14]
because He greatly loved the holy man; even so this man, injuriously treated by
his son, God did swiftly avenge, and that against his will.
These things then are sufficient, yea rather before all others these are
sufficient to indicate the man's excellency. For when God pronounces His
judgment, we ought to inquire no further. But if you would become particularly
acquainted with His self command, you may by perusing his history after his sin,
perceive his confidence towards God, his benevolence, his growth in virtue, his
strictness unto his last breath.
10. Having then these examples, let us be sober, and let us strive not to
despond, and if at any time we fall, not to lie prostrate. For not to cast you into
slothfulness, did I speak of the sins of David, but to work in you more fear. For if
that righteous man through a little remissness received such wounds, what shall
we have to suffer, who are every day negligent? Do not therefore look at his fall,
and be remiss, but consider what great things he did even after this, what great
mournings, how much repentance he showed forth, adding his nights to his days,
pouring forth fountains of tears, washing his couch with his tears, withal clothing
himself in sackcloth.
Now if he needed so great a conversion, when will it be possible for us to
be saved, feeling insensible after so many sins? For he that has many good
deeds, would easily even by this throw a shade over his sins; but he that is
unarmed, wherever he may receive a dart, receives a mortal wound.
In order therefore that this may not be so, let us arm ourselves with good
works; and if any offense have befallen us, let us wash it away: that we may be
counted worthy, after having lived the present life to the glory of God, to enjoy
the life to come; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards

man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.

## Homily 27 on Matthew

Matt. VIII. 14.
" And when Jesus had come into Peter's house, He saw his wife's mother
laid and sick of a fever: and He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she
arose and ministered unto Him."
But Mark adds also, "immediately," meaning to declare the time as well; but
this evangelist has set down only the miracle, without signifying besides the
time. And whereas the others say, that she that lay ill did also entreat Him, this
too he has passed over in silence. But this comes not of any dissonance, but the
one of brevity, the other of exact narrative. But for what intent did He go into
Peter's house? As it seems to me, to take food. This at least is declared when it is
said,
"She arose and ministered unto Him." [Matthew 8:15]
For He used to visit His disciples (as Matthew likewise, when He had called
him), so honoring them and making them more zealous.
But do thou mark, I pray you, herein also Peter's reverence towards Him.
For though he had his wife's mother at home lying ill, and very sick of a fever,
he drew Him not into his house, but waited first for the teaching to be finished,
then for all the others to be healed; and then when He had come in, besought
Him. Thus from the beginning was he instructed to prefer the things of all others
to his own.
Therefore neither does he himself bring Him in, but He entered of His own
accord (after the centurion had said, "I am not worthy that You should come
under my roof" [Matthew 8:8]): to show how much favor He bestowed on His
disciple. And yet consider of what sort were the houses of these fishermen; but
for all that, He disdained not to enter into their mean huts, teaching you by all
means to trample under foot human pride.