a good; and thus every actual being is a good; and likewise every
potential being, as such, is a good, as having a relation to good. For
as it has being in potentiality, so has it goodness in potentiality.
Therefore, the subject of evil is good.
Reply to Objection 1: Dionysius means that evil is not in existing
things as a part, or as a natural property of any existing thing.
Reply to Objection 2: "Not-being," understood negatively, does not
require a subject; but privation is negation in a subject, as the
Philosopher says (Metaph. iv, text 4), and such "not-being" is an evil.
Reply to Objection 3: Evil is not in the good opposed to it as in its
subject, but in some other good, for the subject of blindness is not
"sight," but "animal." Yet, it appears, as Augustine says (Enchiridion
13), that the rule of dialectics here fails, where it is laid down that
contraries cannot exist together. But this is to be taken as referring
to good and evil in general, but not in reference to any particular
good and evil. For white and black, sweet and bitter, and the like
contraries, are only considered as contraries in a special sense,
because they exist in some determinate genus; whereas good enters
into every genus. Hence one good can coexist with the privation of
another good.
Reply to Objection 4: The prophet invokes woe to those who say that
good as such is evil. But this does not follow from what is said
above, as is clear from the explanation given.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether evil corrupts the whole good?

Objection 1: It would seem that evil corrupts the whole good. For one
contrary is wholly corrupted by another. But good and evil are
contraries. Therefore evil corrupts the whole good.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (Enchiridion 12) that "evil hurts
inasmuch as it takes away good." But good is all of a piece and
uniform. Therefore it is wholly taken away by evil.
Objection 3: Further, evil, as long as it lasts, hurts, and takes away
good. But that from which something is always being removed, is at
some time consumed, unless it is infinite, which cannot be said of
any created good. Therefore evil wholly consumes good.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchiridion 12) that "evil cannot
wholly consume good."
I answer that, Evil cannot wholly consume good. To prove this we
must consider that good is threefold. One kind of good is wholly
destroyed by evil, and this is the good opposed to evil, as light is
wholly destroyed by darkness, and sight by blindness. Another kind
of good is neither wholly destroyed nor diminished by evil, and that
is the good which is the subject of evil; for by darkness the
substance of the air is not injured. And there is also a kind of good
which is diminished by evil, but is not wholly taken away; and this
good is the aptitude of a subject to some actuality.
The diminution, however, of this kind of good is not to be considered
by way of subtraction, as diminution in quantity, but rather by way of
remission, as diminution in qualities and forms. The remission
likewise of this habitude is to be taken as contrary to its intensity.
For this kind of aptitude receives its intensity by the dispositions
whereby the matter is prepared for actuality; which the more they are
multiplied in the subject the more is it fitted to receive its perfection
and form; and, on the contrary, it receives its remission by contrary
dispositions which, the more they are multiplied in the matter, and
the more they are intensified, the more is the potentiality remitted as
regards the actuality.
Therefore, if contrary dispositions cannot be multiplied and