could it be done for any such cause, but only for such as could
hinder the good of the offspring, whether in body as barrenness, or
leprosy and the like, or in soul, for instance if she were a woman of
wicked habits which her children through continual contact with her
would imitate. There is however a gloss on Dt. 24:1, "If . . . she find
not favor in his eyes," which would seem to restrict them yet more,
namely to sin, by saying that there "uncleanness" denotes sin: but
"sin" in the gloss refers not only to the morality of the soul but also
to the condition of the body. Accordingly we grant the first two
objections.
Reply to Objection 3: Barrenness and other like things are causes of
hatred, and so they are remote causes of divorce.
Reply to Objection 4: No one is hateful on account of virtue as such,
because goodness is the cause of love. Wherefore the argument
does not hold.
Reply to Objection 5: The husband was punished in that case by
being unable to put away his wife for ever, just as in the case when
he had corrupted a maid (Dt. 22:28-30).

### ARTICLE 7. Whether the causes of divorce had to be written in

the bill?
Objection 1: It would seem that the causes of divorce had to be
written in the bill: because the husband was absolved from the
punishment of the law by the written bill of divorce. But this would
seem altogether unjust, unless sufficient causes were alleged for a
divorce. Therefore it was necessary for them to be written in the bill.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly this document was of no use except
to show the causes for divorce. Therefore, if they were not written
down, the bill was delivered for no purpose.
Objection 3: Further, the Master says that it was so in the text (Sent.
iv, D, 33).
On the contrary, The causes for divorce were either sufficient or not.
If they were sufficient, the wife was debarred from a second
marriage, though this was allowed her by the Law. If they were
insufficient, the divorce was proved to be unjust, and therefore could
not be effected. Therefore the causes for divorce were by no means
particularized in the bill.
I answer that, The causes for divorce were not particularized in the
bill, but were indicated in a general way, so as to prove the justice of
the divorce. According to Josephus (Antiq. iv, 6) this was in order
that the woman, having the written bill of divorce, might take another
husband, else she would not have been believed. Wherefore
according to him it was written in this wise: "I promise never to have
thee with me again." But according to Augustine (Contra Faust. xix,
26) the bill was put into writing in order to cause a delay, and that the
husband might be dissuaded by the counsel of the notaries to refrain
from his purpose of divorce.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.