## Homily 59 on Matthew

Matt. XVIII. 7.
Woe unto the world because of offenses: for it must needs be that offenses
come: but woe to that man by whom the offense comes.
"And if 'it must needs be that offenses come,'" (some one of our adversaries
may perchance say), "why does He lament over the world, when He ought rather
to afford succor, and to stretch forth His hand in its behalf? For this were the
part of a physician, and a protector, whereas the other might be looked for even
from any ordinary person."
What then could we possibly say, in answer to so shameless a tongue? Nay
what do you seek for equal to this healing care of His? For indeed being God He
became man for you, and took the form of a slave, and underwent all
extremities, and left undone none of those things which it concerned Him to do.
But inasmuch as unthankful men were nothing the better for this, He laments
over them, for that after so much fostering care they continued in their
unsoundness.
It was like as if over the sick man, that had had the advantage of much
attendance, and who had not been willing to obey the rules of the physician, any
one were to lament and say, "Woe to such a man from his infirmity, which he has
increased by his own remissness." But in that case indeed there is no advantage
from the bewailing, but here this too is a kind of healing treatment to foretell
what would be, and to lament it. For many oftentimes, though, when advised,
they were nothing profited, yet, when mourned for, they amended.
For which reason most of all He used the word "Woe," thoroughly to rouse
them, and to make them in earnest, and to work upon them to be wakeful. And at
the same time He shows forth the good will He had towards those very men and
His own mildness, that He mourns for them even when gainsaying, not taking

mere disgust at it, but correcting them, both with the mourning, and with the
prediction, so as to win them over.
But how is this possible? He may say. For if "it must needs be that offenses
come," how is it possible to escape these? Because that the offenses come indeed
must needs be, but that men should perish is not altogether of necessity. Like as
though a physician should say (for nothing hinders our using the same
illustration again), it must needs be that this disease should come on, but it is not
a necessary consequence that he who gives heed should be of course destroyed
by the disease. And this He said, as I mentioned, to awaken together with the
others His disciples. For that they may not slumber, as sent unto peace and unto
untroubled life, He shows many wars close upon them, from without, from
within. Declaring this, Paul said, "Without were fightings, within were fears;"
[2 Corinthians 7:5] and, "In perils among false brethren;" [2 Corinthians 11:26]
and in his discourse to the Milesians too He said, "Also of you shall some arise
speaking perverse things;" [Acts 20:30] and He Himself too said, "The man's
foes shall be they of his own household." [Matthew 10:36] But when He said, "It
must needs be," it is not as taking away the power of choosing for themselves,
nor the freedom of the moral principle, nor as placing man's life under any
absolute constraint of circumstances, that He says these things, but He foretells
what would surely be; and this Luke has set forth in another form of expression,
"It is impossible but that offenses should come." [Luke 17:1]
But what are the offenses? The hindrances on the right way. Thus also do
those on the stage call them that are skilled in those matters, them that distort
their bodies.
It is not then His prediction that brings the offenses; far from it; neither
because He foretold it, therefore does it take place; but because it surely was to
be, therefore He foretold it; since if those who bring in the offenses had not been
minded to do wickedly, neither would the offenses have come; and if they had
not been to come, neither would they have been foretold. But because those men
did evil, and were incurably diseased, the offenses came, and He foretells that