is treasuring up against himself a greater wrath, unless he repent. For what?
"Think ye," says He, "that they alone were sinners upon whom the tower fell
down? Nay, I say unto you, but except ye repent, you also shall suffer the same
things."
Let us repent then, and give alms pure from covetousness, and in great
abundance. Consider that the Jews used to feed eight thousand Levites, and
together with the Levites, widows also and orphans, and they bore many other
public charges, and together with these things also served as soldiers; but now
there are fields, and houses, and hirings of lodgings, and carriages, and
muleteers, and mules, and a great array of this kind in the church on account of
you, and your hardness of heart. For this store of the church ought to be with
you, and your readiness of mind ought to be a revenue to her; but now two
wrong things come to pass, both you continue unfruitful, and God's priests do
not practise their proper duties.
Was it not possible for the houses and the lands to have remained in the
time of the apostles? Wherefore then did they sell them and give away? Because
this was a better thing.
4. But now a fear seized our fathers (when you were so mad after worldly
things, and because of your gatherings, and not dispersing abroad), lest the
companies of the widows and orphans, and of the virgins, should perish of
famine; therefore were they constrained to provide these things. For it was not
their wish to thrust themselves unto what was so unbecoming; but their desire
was that your good will should have been a supply for them, and that they should
gather their fruits from thence, and that they themselves should give heed to
prayers only.
But now you have constrained them to imitate the houses of them that
manage public affairs; whereby all things are turned upside down. For when both
you and we are entangled in the same things, who is there to propitiate God?
Therefore it is not possible for us to open our mouths, when the state of the
church is no better than that of worldly men. Have ye not heard that the apostles

would not consent so much as to distribute the money that was collected without
any trouble? But now our bishops have gone beyond agents, and stewards, and
hucksters in their care about these things; and when they ought to be careful and
thoughtful about your souls, they are vexing themselves every day about these
things, for which the innkeepers, and tax-gatherers, and accountants, and
stewards are careful.
These things I do not mention for nought in the way of complaint, but in
order that there may be some amendment and change, in order that we may be
pitied for serving a grievous servitude, in order that you may become a revenue
and store for the church.
But if you are not willing, behold the poor before your eyes; as many as it is
possible for us to suffice, we will not cease to feed; but those, whom it is not
possible, we will leave to you, that you may not hear those words on the awful
day, which shall be spoken to the unmerciful and cruel. "You saw me an
hungered, and fed me not." [Matthew 25:42]
For together with you this inhumanity makes us laughing-stocks, because
leaving our prayers, and our teaching, and the other parts of holiness, we are
fighting all our time, some with wine merchants, some with grain-factors, others
with them that retail other provisions.
Hence come battles, and strifes, and daily revilings, and reproaches, and
jeers, and on each of the priests names are imposed more suitable for houses of
secular men; when it would have been fit to take other names in the place of
these, and to be named from those things, from which also the apostles ordained,
from the feeding of the hungry, from the protection of the injured, from the care
of strangers, from succoring them that are despitefully used, from providing for
the orphans, from taking part with the widows, from presiding over the virgins;
and these offices should be distributed among us instead of the care of the lands
and houses.
These are the stores of the church, these the treasures that become her, and
that afford in great degree both ease to us and profit to you; or rather to you ease