#### Replies to Opposing Arguments:

Reply to 1. When the mathematician abstracts he does not consider something otherwise than it
is. Thus, he does not think that a line exists without sensible matter, but he treats of a line and its
properties without considering sensible matter. So there is no disagreement between his intellect
and reality, because even in reality what belongs to the nature of a line does not depend upon that
which makes matter sensible, but vice versa. Consequently, it is evident that "there is no error in
the one who abstracts," as is said in the Physics.

Reply to 2. By "material" is meant not only that which has matter as a part, but also that which
exists in matter; and in this way sensible line can be called something material. So this does not
prevent a line from being understood without matter. For sensible matter is not related to a line as
a part, but rather as the subject in which it exists, and this is also the case with a surface or body.
Obviously, the mathematician does not treat of the kind of body that is in the category of

substance, whose parts are matter and form, but rather the body in the category of quantity,
constituted by three dimensions. Body, in this sense of the term, is related to body the category
of substance (of which physical matter is a part) as accident to its subject.

Reply to 3. Matter is the principle of numerical diversity or inasmuch as, being divided into
many parts, and receiving in each part a form of the same nature, it constitutes many individuals
of the same species. Now matter can be divided only if we presuppose quantity in it; if that is
taken away, even substance remains indivisible. So the primary reason for the diversification of
things of one species lies in quantity. And this is due to quantity because position, which is the
arrangement of parts in place, is contained in its notion as a kind of formal difference. So even
when the intellect has abstracted quantity from sensible matter, it is still possible to imagine
numerically different things in the same species, for example, several equilateral triangles and
several equal straight lines.

Reply to 4. Mathematics does not abstract from every kind of matter but only from sensible
matter. Now the parts of quantity that seem to be in a way the basis for a demonstration by
means of a material cause are not sensible matter; rather, they pertain to intelligible matter, which
indeed is found in mathematics, as is clear in the Metaphysics.

Reply to 5. By its very nature motion is not in the category of quantity, but it partakes somewhat
of the nature of quantity from another source, namely, according as the division of motion
derives from either the division of space or the division of the thing subject to motion. So it does
not belong to the mathematician to treat of motion, although mathematical principles can be
applied to motion. Therefore, inasmuch as the principles of quantity are applied to motion, the
natural scientist treats of the division and continuity of motion, as is clear in the Physics. And the
measurements of motions are studied in the intermediate sciences between mathematics and
natural science: for instance, in the science of the moved sphere and in astronomy.