star differs from another star in glory," but not in qualities, nor substance, nor in the fact of being
passible or impassible; so all these, since they are alike derived from the light of the Father, must
either be naturally impassible and immutable, or they must all, in common with the light of the
Father, be passible, and are capable of the varying phases of corruption.
6. The same conclusion will follow, although they affirm that the production of Æons sprang
from Logos, as branches from a tree, since Logos has his generation from their Father. For all [the
Æons] are formed of the same substance with the Father, differing from one another only in size,
and not in nature, and filling up the greatness of the Father, even as the fingers complete the hand.
If therefore He exists in passion and ignorance, so must also those Æons who have been generated
by Him. But if it is impious to ascribe ignorance and passion to the Father of all, how can they
describe an Æon produced by Him as being passible; and while they ascribe the same impiety to
the very wisdom (Sophia) of God, how can they still call themselves religious men?
7. If, again, they declare that their Æons were sent forth just as rays are from the sun, then,
since all are of the same substance and sprung from the same source, all must either be capable of
passion along with Him who produced them, or all will remain impassible for ever. For they can
no longer maintain that, of beings so produced, some are impassible and others passible. If, then,
they declare all impassible, they do themselves destroy their own argument. For how could the
youngest Æon have suffered passion if all were impassible? If, on the other hand, they declare that
all partook of this passion, as indeed some of them venture to maintain, then, inasmuch as it
originated with Logos, but flowed onwards to Sophia, they will thus be convicted of tracing
back the passion to Logos, who is the Nous of this Propator, and so acknowledging the Nous of
the Propator and the Father Himself to have experienced passion. For the Father of all is not to be
regarded as a kind of compound Being, who can be separated from his Nous (mind), as I have
already shown; but Nous is the Father, and the Father Nous. It necessarily follows, therefore, both
that he who springs from Him as Logos, or rather that Nous himself, since he is Logos, must be
perfect and impassible, and that those productions which proceed from him, seeing that they are
of the same substance with himself, should be perfect and impassible, and should ever remain
similar to him who produced them.
8. It cannot therefore longer be held, as these men teach, that Logos, as occupying the third
place in generation, was ignorant of the Father. Such a thing might indeed perhaps be deemed
probable in the case of the generation of human beings, inasmuch as these frequently know nothing
of their parents; but it is altogether impossible in the case of the Logos of the Father. For if, existing
in the Father, he knows Him in whom he exists—that is, is not ignorant of himself—then those
productions which issue from him being his powers (faculties), and always present with him, will