## Homily 8 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 3:1-3
And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto
Carnal, as unto babes in Christ. I fed you with milk, and not with meat: for you
were not yet able to bear it; nay, not even now are you able. For you are yet
carnal.
After having overturned the philosophy which is from without, and cast
down all its arrogance, he comes unto another argument. For it was likely that
they would say, "If we were putting forth the opinions of Plato, or of Pythagoras,
or any other of the philosophers, reason were you should draw out such a long
discourse against us. But if we announce the things of the Spirit, for what reason
do you turn and toss up and down ([ἄνω καὶ κάτω στρέφεις]) the wisdom which
is from without?"
Hear then how he makes his stand against this. "And I, brethren, could not
speak unto you as unto spiritual." Why, in the first place, says he, though you
had been perfect in spiritual things also, not even so ought you to be elated; for
what you preach is not your own, nor such as yourselves have found from your
own means. But now even these things you know not as you ought to know
them, but you are learners, and the last of all. Whether therefore the Gentile
wisdom be the occasion of your high imaginations; that has been proved to be
nothing, nay, in regard to spiritual things to be even contrary unto us: or if it be
on account of things spiritual, in these, too, you come short and have your place
among the hindmost. Wherefore he says, "I could not speak unto you as unto
spiritual." He said not, "I did not speak," lest the thing might seem to proceed
from his grudging them somewhat; but in two ways he brings down their high
spirit; first, because they knew not the things that are perfect; next, because their

ignorance was owing to themselves: yea, in a third way besides these, by
pointing out that "not even now are they able [to bear it]." For as to their want of
ability at first, that perhaps arose from the nature of the case. In fact, however, he
does not leave them even this excuse. For not through any inability on their part
to receive high doctrines, does he say they received them not, but because they
were "carnal." However, in the beginning this was not so blame-worthy; but that
after so long a time, they had not yet arrived at the more perfect knowledge, this
was a symptom of most utter dulness.
It may be observed, that he brings the same charge against the Hebrews, not
however, with so much vehemence. For those, he says, are such, partly because
of tribulation: but these, because of some appetite for wickedness. Now the two
things are not the same. He implies too, that in the one case he was intending
rebuke, in the other rather stirring them up, when he spoke these words of truth.
For to these Corinthians he says, "Neither yet now are you able;" but unto the
others [Hebrews 6:1] "Wherefore let us cease to speak of the first principles of
Christ, and press on unto perfection:" and again, [Hebrews 5:9] "we are
persuaded better things concerning you, and things which accompany salvation,
though we thus speak."
2. And how calls he those "carnal," who had attained so large a measure of
the Spirit; and into whose praises, at the beginning he had entered so much at
large? Because they also were carnal, unto whom the Lord says, [Matthew 7:2223] "Depart from Me, you workers of iniquity, I know you not;" and yet they both
cast out devils, and raised the dead, and uttered prophecies. So that it is possible
even for one who wrought miracles to be carnal. For so God wrought by Balaam,
and unto Pharaoh He revealed things to come, and unto Nebuchadnezzar; and
Caiaphas prophesied, not knowing what he said; yea, and some others cast out
devils in His name, though they were [Luke 9:49] "not with Him;" since not for
the doers' sake are these things done, but for others' sake: nor is it seldom, that
those who were positively unworthy have been made instrumental to them. Now
why wonder, if in the case of unworthy men these things are done for others'