and through this virtue allow themselves to be affected and moved by the powerful hand of the author of all good. On the other hand, great talent may be seen exerting great labor with less than ordinary fruit, because being themselves the source of their activity, that is, their own self-love, or at least not allowing themselves to be moved by God our Lord through obedience to their superiors, they do not produce results proportionate to the almighty hand of God our Lord, who does not accept them as His instruments. They achieve results proportioned to their own weak and feeble hands. Their highnesses understand this, and I am sure that they will make no difficulty. And while we have enough to do here without burdening ourselves with this additional task from Portugal, we will not decline the added burden because of the special charity which God our Lord causes us to feel toward Portugal. This is all for the present, except to beg the Divine and Supreme Goodness to give us all His abundant grace to know His most holy will and perfectly to fulfill it.

From Rome, December 17, 1552.

This precept of obedience which I am sending you, requiring you to dismiss those who are disobedient, or to send them here to Rome, is to be published in all the colleges and houses throughout the province. See that the king is informed of it, so that those who are sent beyond the borders of the kingdom, because they have need of help, do not appear as being withdrawn from Portugal because we here are looking for workers who would otherwise be useful within the territory of his highness. Rather, let it appear that they are being sent elsewhere to prepare them to be such when they return, as his highness desires, as are all the others in the service of God and of souls in his kingdom.

Yours in our Lord, Ignatius

1 Torres was born in the province of Aragon in 1509. He studied in Paris and became acquainted with Ignatius but always felt some antagonism toward him. Upon his return to Spain, Torres taught at Alcalá and eventually became its rector. In 1542 he went to Rome on business for the university and again met Ignatius, made the Exercises, and decided to enter the Society. He secretly pronounced vows in 1545, and when his business in Rome was over he returned to Spain (end of 1546) and openly joined the Society's ranks in 1547. When it was time to open a Jesuit college in Salamanca, Torres was sent there as its rector (1548) , and then on January 1, 1552, he was appointed visitor for Portugal. He became provincial of Baetica in 1554, and succeeded Miró as provincial in Portugal in 1556. When his labors were completed in Portugal, he returned to Spain and died at Toledo during the night of October 23-24, 1593. 2 Leonard Kessel was born in Louvain, Belgium, about 1519, and there entered the Jesuits in December 1543. He was already a priest. He was sent to the Jesuit college in Cologne, where he became rector of the community, spent his life, and died on October 26, 1574. The incident to which Ignatius refers took place in 1552.