above.
Reply to Objection 2: The likeness of the agent is in the patient in
two ways. First, in the same way as in the agent, and thus it is in all
univocal agents, for instance a thing that is hot makes another thing
hot, and fire generates fire. Secondly, otherwise than in the agent,
and thus it is in all equivocal agents. In these it happens sometimes
that a form which is in the agent spiritually is received into the
patient materially: thus the form of the house built by the craftsman
is materially in itself, but spiritually in the mind of the craftsman. On
the other hand, sometimes it is in the agent materially, but is
received into the patient spiritually: thus whiteness is materially on
the wall wherein it is received, whereas it is spiritually in the pupil
and in the transferring medium. And so it is in the case at issue,
because the species which is in the fire materially is received
spiritually into the bodies of the damned; thus it is that the fire will
assimilate the bodies of the damned to itself, without consuming
them withal.
Reply to Objection 3: According to the Philosopher (De Prop.
Element.), "no animal can live in fire." Galen also (De simp. medic.)
says "that there is no body which at length is not consumed by fire";
although sometimes certain bodies may remain in fire without hurt,
such as ebony. The instance of the salamander is not altogether
apposite, since it cannot remain in the fire without being at last
consumed, as do the bodies of the damned in hell. Nor does it follow
that because the bodies of the damned suffer no corruption from the
fire, they therefore are not tormented by the fire, because the
sensible object has a natural aptitude to please or displease the
senses, not only as regards its natural action of stimulating or
injuring the organ, but also as regards its spiritual action: since
when the sensible object is duly proportionate to the sense, it
pleases, whereas the contrary is the result when it is in excess or
defect. Hence subdued colors and harmonious sounds are pleasing,
whereas discordant sounds displease the hearing.
Reply to Objection 4: Pain does not sever the soul from the body, in
so far as it is confined to a power of the soul which feels the pain,
but in so far as the passion of the soul leads to the body being
changed from its natural disposition. Thus it is that we see that
through anger the body becomes heated, and through fear, chilled:
whereas after the resurrection it will be impossible for the body to be
changed from its natural disposition, as stated above (Article 2).

Consequently, however great the pain will be, it will not sever the
body from the soul.

## QUESTION 87 — OF THE KNOWLEDGE WHICH, AFTER RISING AGAIN,

MEN WILL HAVE AT THE JUDGMENT CONCERNING
MERITS AND DEMERITS

Prologue
In the next place we must treat of those things which follow the
resurrection. The first of these to be considered will be the
knowledge, which after rising again, men will have at the judgment,
concerning merits and demerits; the second will be the general
judgment itself, as also the time and place at which it will be; thirdly
we shall consider who will judge and who will be judged; fourthly we
shall treat of the form wherein the judge will come to judge; and
fifthly we shall consider what will be after the judgment, the state of
the world and of those who will have risen again.
Under the first head there are three points of inquiry:
(1) Whether at the judgment every man will know all his sins?
(2) Whether every one will be able to read all that is on another's
conscience?
(3) Whether one will be able at one glance to see all merits and
demerits?