our life is the season of war. How and in what respect? The devil is ever at hand.
Hear what it says, "As a roaring lion, he walks about, seeking whom he may
devour." [1 Peter 5:8] Numberless bodily affections assail us, which it is
necessary to enumerate, that we may not vainly deceive ourselves. For tell me,
what does not war against us? Riches, beauty, pleasure, power, authority, envy,
glory, pride? For not only does our own glory war against us, forbidding us to
descend to humility; but the glory of others also, leading us to envy and illnature. But what do their opposites, poverty, dishonor, the being despised,
rejected, the having no power? These things indeed are in us. But from men
proceed wickedness, plots, deceits, slanders, assaults innumerable. In like
manner on the part of the demons, "principalities, powers, the world rulers of
this darkness, spiritual hosts of wickedness." Some of us are rejoicing, others
grieving, both are deviations from the right course. But health and sickness (war
against us). From what quarter will not man be falling into sin? Would you that I
should tell you from the beginning, commencing even immediately from Adam?
What took captive the first created? Pleasure, and eating, and the love of
dominion. What the son who came next after him? Grudging and envy. What
those in the time of Noah? Fleshly pleasures, and the evils issuing from them.
What his son? Insolence and irreverence. What the Sodomites? Insolence,
wantonness; and fullness of bread. But often even poverty has this effect. On this
account a certain wise man said, "Give me neither poverty nor riches." [Proverbs
30:8] However it is neither poverty nor riches, but the will that cannot use either
of them. "Acknowledge," he says, "that you pass through the midst of snares."
[Sirach 9:13]
The blessed Paul has admirably said, "Hereunto we are appointed." He has
not said merely, that we are tempted, but that "hereunto we are appointed," as if
he had said, For this were we born. This is our business, this our life, and do you
seek rest? The executioner does not stand over us, lacerating our sides, and
compelling us to sacrifice; but the desire of riches, and of possessing more, is
instant, tearing out our eyes. No soldier has kindled a pile, nor placed us on a

gridiron, but more than this, the flames of the flesh set fire on our souls. No king
is present promising numberless bounties, and putting us out of countenance.
But there is present a rage for glory, tickling us worse than he. A great war, truly,
exceedingly great, if we would watch.
And the present season too has its crowns. Hear Paul saying, "Henceforth
there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge
shall give me...and not only to me, but also to all them that have loved His
appearing." [2 Timothy 4:8] When you have lost a beloved and only son, whom
thou were bringing up in much wealth, displaying good hopes, himself being the
only one to succeed to your inheritance; do not complain, but give thanks to
God, and glorify Him who has taken him, and in this respect you will not be
worse than Abraham. For as he gave him to God, when he commanded it, so you
have not complained, when He has taken him. Have you fallen into a severe
sickness, and do many come, constraining you, some with charms, some with
amulets, and others with other things, to remedy the evil? And have you borne it
firmly and unflinchingly from the fear of God, and would you have chosen to
suffer all things rather than submit to do any of those idolatrous practices? This
brings to you the crown of martyrdom. Doubt it not. And how and by what
means, I will tell you. For as such an one bears firmly the pains of torture, so as
not to worship the image, so thou also bearest the sufferings of your disease, so
as to want nothing of those remedies which the other offers, nor to do the things
which he prescribes. "But those pains are more violent"— yes, but these are of
longer duration, so that it is the same in the end; nay often these are more violent
too. For tell me, when fever is raging and burning within, and you reject the
charm that others recommend to you, have you not bound on you the crown of
martyrdom?
Again, has any one lost money? Many advise you to have recourse to
diviners; but thou, from fear of God, because it is forbidden, choosest rather not
to receive your money than to disobey God— you have a reward equal to him
who has given it to the poor, if having lost, you give thanks, and when able to