conflict, but that she has something more than an aureole, on
account of her most perfect purpose of observing virginity. Others
say that she has an aureole even in its proper signification, and that
a most transcendent one: for though she experienced no conflict,
she had a certain conflict of the flesh, but owing to the exceeding
strength of her virtue, her flesh was so subdued that she did not feel
this conflict. This, however, would seem to be said without reason,
for since we believe the Blessed Virgin to have been altogether
immune from the inclination of the fomes on account of the
perfection of her sanctification, it is wicked to suppose that there
was in her any conflict with the flesh, since such like conflict is only
from the inclination of the fomes, nor can temptation from the flesh
be without sin, as declared by a gloss [St. Augustine, De Civ. Dei xix,
4] on 2 Cor. 12:7, "There was given me a sting of my flesh." Hence
we must say that she has an aureole properly speaking, so as to be
conformed in this to those other members of the Church in whom
virginity is found: and although she had no conflict by reason of the
temptation which is of the flesh, she had the temptation which is of
the enemy, who feared not even Christ (Mt. 4).
Reply to Objection 3: The aureole is not due to virginity except as
adding some excellence to the other degrees of continence. If Adam
had not sinned, virginity would have had no perfection over conjugal
continence, since in that case marriage would have been honorable,
and the marriage-bed unsullied, for it would not have been
dishonored by lust: hence virginity would not then have been
observed, nor would an aureole have been due to it. But the
condition of human nature being changed, virginity has a special
beauty of its own, and consequently a special reward is assigned to
it.
During the time of the Mosaic law, when the worship of God was to
be continued by means of the carnal act, it was not altogether
praiseworthy to abstain from carnal intercourse: wherefore no
special reward would be given for such a purpose unless it came
from a Divine inspiration, as is believed to have been the case with
Jeremias and Elias, of whose marriage we do not read.
Reply to Objection 4: If a virgin is violated, she does not forfeit the
aureole, provided she retain unfailingly the purpose of observing
perpetual virginity, and nowise consent to the act. Nor does she
forfeit virginity thereby; and be this said, whether she be violated for
the faith, or for any other cause whatever. But if she suffer this for

the faith, this will count to her for merit, and will be a kind of
martyrdom: wherefore Lucy said: "If thou causest me to be violated
against my will, my chastity will receive a double crown" [Office of S.
Lucy; lect. vi of Dominican Breviary, December 13th]; not that she
has two aureoles of virginity, but that she will receive a double
reward, one for observing virginity, the other for the outrage she has
suffered. Even supposing that one thus violated should conceive,
she would not for that reason forfeit her virginity: nor would she be
equal to Christ's mother, in whom there was integrity of the flesh
together with integrity of the mind [SS, Question 64, Article 3, ad 3;
SS, Question 124, Article 4, ad 2; SS, Question 152, Article 1].
Reply to Objection 5: Virginity is inborn in us as to that which is
material in virginity: but the purpose of observing perpetual
incorruption, whence virginity derives its merit, is not inborn, but
comes from the gift of grace.
Reply to Objection 6: The sixtyfold fruit is due, not to every widow,
but only to those who retain the purpose of remaining widows, even
though they do not make it the matter of a vow, even as we have said
in regard to virginity.
Reply to Objection 7: If cold-blooded persons and eunuchs have the
will to observe perpetual incorruption even though they were
capable of sexual intercourse, they must be called virgins and merit
the aureole: for they make a virtue of necessity. If, on the other hand,
they have the will to marry if they could, they do not merit the
aureole. Hence Augustine says (De Sancta Virgin. xxiv): "For those
like eunuchs whose bodies are so formed that they are unable to
beget, it suffices when they become Christians and keep the
commandments of God, that they have a mind to have a wife if they
could, in order to rank with the faithful who are married."