righteousness is meant universal virtue. For hearken to Christ, how He says,
"Unless your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees, you shall in nowise enter into the kingdom of heaven." [Matthew
5:20] And again, he is called righteous, who has no charge against him; for so
even in courts of justice we say that that man is righteous, who has been
unrighteously treated, and has not done unrighteously in return. If therefore we
also before the terrible Tribunal shall be able to appear righteous one towards
another, we may meet with some lovingkindness. Toward God indeed it is
impossible we should appear so, whatever we may have to show. For
everywhere He overcomes in what is righteous, as the Prophet also says, "That
You might prevail when You come into judgment." But if we violate not what is
righteous towards each other, then shall we be righteous. If we shall be able to
show that we have been treated unrighteously, then shall we be righteous.
How does he say to them who are already clothed, "put on"? He is now
speaking of that clothing which is from life and good works. Before, the clothing
was from Baptism, whereas now it is from the daily life and from works; no
longer "after the lusts of deceit," but "after God." But what means the word
"holy"? It is that which is pure, that which is due; hence also we use the word of
the last duty in the case of the departed, as much as to say, "I owe them nothing
further, I have nothing else to answer for." Thus it is usual for us to say, "I have
acquitted myself of all obligations," and the like, meaning, "I owe nothing more."
Moral. Our part then is, never to put off the garment of righteousness,
which also the Prophet calls, "the garment of salvation" [Isaiah 61:10], that so
we may be made like God. For He indeed has put on righteousness. This
garment let us put on. Now the word, "put on," plainly declares nothing else,
than that we should never at all put it off. For hear the Prophet, where he says,
"He clothed himself also with cursing as with his garment, and it came into his
inward parts." [Psalm 109:18] And again, "Who coverest Yourself with light as
with a garment." [Psalm 104:2] And again, it is usual with us to speak
concerning men, such an one has "put on" such an one. So then it is not for one

day, nor for two, nor for three, but he would have us ever arrayed in virtue, and
never stripped of this garment. For a man is not so disfigured when he is stripped
of his clothing, as when he is stripped of his virtue. In the former case his fellowservants behold his nakedness, in the latter his Lord and the Angels. If ever thou
happen to see any one going out naked through the public square, tell me, are
you not distressed? When then you go about stripped of this garment, what shall
we say? Seest not those beggars whom we are wont to call strollers, how they
roam about, how we pity even them? And yet nevertheless they are without
excuse. We do not excuse them when they have lost their clothes by gaming; and
how then, if we lose this garment, shall God pardon us? For whenever the devil
sees a man stripped of his virtue, he straightway disguises and disfigures his
face, and wounds him, and drives him to great straits.
Let us strip ourselves of our riches, that we be not stripped of righteousness.
The garb of wealth mars this garment. It is a robe of thorns. Thorns are of this
nature; and the more closely they are wrapped around us, the more naked are we
made. Lasciviousness strips us of this garment; for it is a fire, and the fire will
consume this garment. Wealth is a moth; and as the moth eats through all things
alike, and spares not even silken garments, so does this also. All these therefore
let us put off, that we may become righteous, that we may "put on the new man."
Let us keep nothing old, nothing outward, nothing that is "corrupt." Virtue is not
toilsome, she is not difficult to attain. Do you not see them that are in the
mountains? They forsake both houses, and wives, and children, and all
preëminence, and shut themselves away from the world, and clothe themselves
in sackcloth, and strew ashes beneath them; they wear collars hung about their
necks, and have pent themselves up in a narrow cell. Nor do they stop here, but
torture themselves with fastings and continual hunger. Did I now enjoin you to
do the like, would ye not all start away? Would ye not say, it is intolerable? But
no, I say not that we must needs do anything like this:— I would fain indeed that
it were so, still I lay down no law. What then? Enjoy your baths, take care of
your body, and throw yourself freely into the world, and keep a household, have