SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.3.

Objection 7: Further, it sometimes happens that a man raises the
price of his goods under guise of loan, or buys another's goods at a
low figure; or raises his price through delay in being paid, and
lowers his price that he may be paid the sooner. Now in all these
cases there seems to be payment for a loan of money: nor does it
appear to be manifestly illicit. Therefore it seems to be lawful to
expect or exact some consideration for money lent.
On the contrary, Among other conditions requisite in a just man it is
stated (Ezech. 18:17) that he "hath not taken usury and increase."
I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 1), a thing is
reckoned as money "if its value can be measured by money."
Consequently, just as it is a sin against justice, to take money, by
tacit or express agreement, in return for lending money or anything
else that is consumed by being used, so also is it a like sin, by tacit
or express agreement to receive anything whose price can be
measured by money. Yet there would be no sin in receiving
something of the kind, not as exacting it, nor yet as though it were
due on account of some agreement tacit or expressed, but as a
gratuity: since, even before lending the money, one could accept a
gratuity, nor is one in a worse condition through lending.
On the other hand it is lawful to exact compensation for a loan, in
respect of such things as are not appreciated by a measure of
money, for instance, benevolence, and love for the lender, and so
forth.
Reply to Objection 1: A lender may without sin enter an agreement
with the borrower for compensation for the loss he incurs of
something he ought to have, for this is not to sell the use of money
but to avoid a loss. It may also happen that the borrower avoids a
greater loss than the lender incurs, wherefore the borrower may
repay the lender with what he has gained. But the lender cannot
enter an agreement for compensation, through the fact that he
makes no profit out of his money: because he must not sell that
which he has not yet and may be prevented in many ways from
having.
Reply to Objection 2: Repayment for a favor may be made in two
ways. In one way, as a debt of justice; and to such a debt a man may
be bound by a fixed contract; and its amount is measured according

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.3.

to the favor received. Wherefore the borrower of money or any such
thing the use of which is its consumption is not bound to repay more
than he received in loan: and consequently it is against justice if he
be obliged to pay back more. In another way a man's obligation to
repayment for favor received is based on a debt of friendship, and
the nature of this debt depends more on the feeling with which the
favor was conferred than on the greatness of the favor itself. This
debt does not carry with it a civil obligation, involving a kind of
necessity that would exclude the spontaneous nature of such a
repayment.
Reply to Objection 3: If a man were, in return for money lent, as
though there had been an agreement tacit or expressed, to expect or
exact repayment in the shape of some remuneration of service or
words, it would be the same as if he expected or exacted some real
remuneration, because both can be priced at a money value, as may
be seen in the case of those who offer for hire the labor which they
exercise by work or by tongue. If on the other hand the remuneration
by service or words be given not as an obligation, but as a favor,
which is not to be appreciated at a money value, it is lawful to take,
exact, and expect it.
Reply to Objection 4: Money cannot be sold for a greater sum than
the amount lent, which has to be paid back: nor should the loan be
made with a demand or expectation of aught else but of a feeling of
benevolence which cannot be priced at a pecuniary value, and which
can be the basis of a spontaneous loan. Now the obligation to lend in
return at some future time is repugnant to such a feeling, because
again an obligation of this kind has its pecuniary value.
Consequently it is lawful for the lender to borrow something else at
the same time, but it is unlawful for him to bind the borrower to grant
him a loan at some future time.
Reply to Objection 5: He who lends money transfers the ownership
of the money to the borrower. Hence the borrower holds the money
at his own risk and is bound to pay it all back: wherefore the lender
must not exact more. On the other hand he that entrusts his money
to a merchant or craftsman so as to form a kind of society, does not
transfer the ownership of his money to them, for it remains his, so
that at his risk the merchant speculates with it, or the craftsman uses
it for his craft, and consequently he may lawfully demand as
something belonging to him, part of the profits derived from his
money.