THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.22, C.3.

prescribed in the third chapter of Leviticus. Thirdly, in order that the
spirit of man be perfectly united to God: which will be most perfectly
realized in glory. Hence, under the Old Law, the holocaust was
offered, so called because the victim was wholly burnt, as we read in
the first chapter of Leviticus.
Now these effects were conferred on us by the humanity of Christ.
For, in the first place, our sins were blotted out, according to Rm.
4:25: "Who was delivered up for our sins." Secondly, through Him
we received the grace of salvation, according to Heb. 5:9: "He
became to all that obey Him the cause of eternal salvation." Thirdly,
through Him we have acquired the perfection of glory, according to
Heb. 10:19: "We have a confidence in the entering into the Holies" (i.
e. the heavenly glory) "through His Blood." Therefore Christ Himself,
as man, was not only priest, but also a perfect victim, being at the
same time victim for sin, victim for a peace-offering, and a holocaust.
Reply to Objection 1: Christ did not slay Himself, but of His own freewill He exposed Himself to death, according to Is. 53:7: "He was
offered because it was His own will." Thus He is said to have offered
Himself.
Reply to Objection 2: The slaying of the Man Christ may be referred
to a twofold will. First, to the will of those who slew Him: and in this
respect He was not a victim: for the slayers of Christ are not
accounted as offering a sacrifice to God, but as guilty of a great
crime: a similitude of which was borne by the wicked sacrifices of
the Gentiles, in which they offered up men to idols. Secondly, the
slaying of Christ may be considered in reference to the will of the
Sufferer, Who freely offered Himself to suffering. In this respect He is
a victim, and in this He differs from the sacrifices of the Gentiles.
Reply to Objection 3: The fact that Christ's manhood was holy from
its beginning does not prevent that same manhood, when it was
offered to God in the Passion, being sanctified in a new way--namely, as a victim actually offered then. For it acquired then the
actual holiness of a victim, from the charity which it had from the
beginning, and from the grace of union sanctifying it absolutely.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.22, C.3.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.22, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the effect of Christ's priesthood is the

expiation of sins?
Objection 1: It would seem that the effect of Christ's priesthood is
not the expiation of sins. For it belongs to God alone to blot out sins,
according to Is. 43:25: "I am He that blot out thy iniquities for My own
sake." But Christ is priest, not as God, but as man. Therefore the
priesthood of Christ does not expiate sins.
Objection 2: Further, the Apostle says (Heb. 10:1-3) that the victims
of the Old Testament could not "make" (the comers thereunto)
"perfect: for then they would have ceased to be offered; because the
worshipers once cleansed should have no conscience of sin any
longer; but in them there is made a commemoration of sins every
year." But in like manner under the priesthood of Christ a
commemoration of sins is made in the words: "Forgive us our
trespasses" (Mt. 6:12). Moreover, the Sacrifice is offered
continuously in the Church; wherefore again we say: "Give us this
day our daily bread." Therefore sins are not expiated by the
priesthood of Christ.
Objection 3: Further, in the sin-offerings of the Old Law, a he-goat
was mostly offered for the sin of a prince, a she-goat for the sin of
some private individual, a calf for the sin of a priest, as we gather
from Lev. 4:3,23,28. But Christ is compared to none of these, but to
the lamb, according to Jer. 11:19: "I was as a meek lamb, that is
carried to be a victim." Therefore it seems that His priesthood does
not expiate sins.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 9:14): "The blood of Christ,
Who by the Holy Ghost offered Himself unspotted unto God, shall
cleanse our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God."
But dead works denote sins. Therefore the priesthood of Christ has
the power to cleanse from sins.
I answer that, Two things are required for the perfect cleansing from
sins, corresponding to the two things comprised in sin---namely, the
stain of sin and the debt of punishment. The stain of sin is, indeed,
blotted out by grace, by which the sinner's heart is turned to God:
whereas the debt of punishment is entirely removed by the
satisfaction that man offers to God. Now the priesthood of Christ