## QUESTION 71 — ON THE WORK OF THE FIFTH DAY

ARTICLE UNIQUE
We must next consider the work of the fifth day.
Objection 1: It would seem that this work is not fittingly described.
For the waters produce that which the power of water suffices to
produce. But the power of water does not suffice for the production
of every kind of fishes and birds since we find that many of them are
generated from seed. Therefore the words, "Let the waters bring
forth the creeping creature having life, and the fowl that may fly over
the earth," do not fittingly describe this work.
Objection 2: Further, fishes and birds are not produced from water
only, but earth seems to predominate over water in their
composition, as is shown by the fact that their bodies tend naturally
to the earth and rest upon it. It is not, then, fittingly that fishes and
birds are produced from water.
Objection 3: Further, fishes move in the waters, and birds in the air.
If, then, fishes are produced from the waters, birds ought to be
produced from the air, and not from the waters.
Objection 4: Further, not all fishes creep through the waters, for
some, as seals, have feet and walk on land. Therefore the production
of fishes is not sufficiently described by the words, "Let the waters
bring forth the creeping creature having life."
Objection 5: Further, land animals are more perfect than birds and
fishes which appears from the fact that they have more distinct
limbs, and generation of a higher order. For they bring forth living
beings, whereas birds and fishes bring forth eggs. But the more
perfect has precedence in the order of nature. Therefore fishes and
birds ought not to have been produced on the fifth day, before land
animals.

On the contrary, Suffices the authority of Scripture.
I answer that, As said above, (Question 70, Article 1), the order of the
work of adornment corresponds to the order of the work of
distinction. Hence, as among the three days assigned to the work of
distinction, the middle, or second, day is devoted to the work of
distinction of water, which is the intermediate body, so in the three
days of the work of adornment, the middle day, which is the fifth, is
assigned to the adornment of the intermediate body, by the
production of birds and fishes. As, then, Moses makes mention of
the lights and the light on the fourth day, to show that the fourth day
corresponds to the first day on which he had said that the light was
made, so on this fifth day he mentions the waters and the firmament
of heaven to show that the fifth day corresponds to the second. It
must, however, be observed that Augustine differs from other writers
in his opinion about the production of fishes and birds, as he differs
about the production of plants. For while others say that fishes and
birds were produced on the fifth day actually, he holds that the
nature of the waters produced them on that day potentially.
Reply to Objection 1: It was laid down by Avicenna that animals of all
kinds can be generated by various minglings of the elements, and
naturally, without any kind of seed. This, however, seems repugnant
to the fact that nature produces its effects by determinate means,
and consequently, those things that are naturally generated from
seed cannot be generated naturally in any other way. It ought, then,
rather to be said that in the natural generation of all animals that are
generated from seed, the active principle lies in the formative power
of the seed, but that in the case of animals generated from
putrefaction, the formative power of is the influence of the heavenly
bodies. The material principle, however, in the generation of either
kind of animals, is either some element, or something compounded
of the elements. But at the first beginning of the world the active
principle was the Word of God, which produced animals from
material elements, either in act, as some holy writers say, or
virtually, as Augustine teaches. Not as though the power possessed
by water or earth of producing all animals resides in the earth and
the water themselves, as Avicenna held, but in the power originally
given to the elements of producing them from elemental matter by
the power of seed or the influence of the stars.
Reply to Objection 2: The bodies of birds and fishes may be
considered from two points of view. If considered in themselves, it