enemies: but thou even accusest them. And what forgiveness shall you obtain,
when thou both revilest, and at such a time when yourself needest much mercy.
For you drew near to supplicate for your own sins: make not mention then of
those of others, lest you recall the memory of your own. For if you say, 'Smite
mine enemy,' you have stopped your mouth, you have cut off boldness from your
tongue; first, indeed, because you have angered the Judge at once in beginning;
next, because thou asks things at variance with the character of your prayer. For
if you come near for forgiveness of sins, how do you discourse of punishment?
The contrary surely was there need to do, and to pray for them in order that we
may with boldness beseech this for ourselves also. But now you have forestalled
the Judge's sentence by your own, demanding that He punish them that sin: for
this deprives of all pardon. But if you pray for them, even if you say nothing in
your own sins' behalf, you have achieved all. Consider how many sacrifices
there are in the law; a sacrifice of praise, a sacrifice of acknowledgment, a
sacrifice of peace , a sacrifice of purifications, and numberless others, and not
one of them against enemies, but all in behalf of either one's own sins or one's
own successes. For do you come to another God? To him you come that said,
"Pray for your enemies." [Luke 6:27-35; Romans 12:14] How then do you cry
against them? How do you beseech God to break his own law? This is not the
guise of a suppliant. None supplicates the destruction of another, but the safety
of himself. Why then do you wear the guise of a suppliant, but hast the words of
an accuser? Yet when we pray for ourselves, we scratch ourselves and yawn, and
fall into ten thousand thoughts; but when against our enemies, we do so
wakefully. For since the devil knows that we are thrusting the sword against
ourselves, he does not distract nor call us off then, that he may work us the
greater harm. But, says one, 'I have been wronged and am afflicted.' Why not
then pray against the devil, who injures us most of all. This you have also been
commanded to say, "Deliver us from the evil one." He is your irreconcileable foe,
but man, do whatsoever he will, is a friend and brother. With him then let us all
be angry; against him let us beseech God, saying, "Bruise Satan under our feet;"

[Romans 16:20] for he it is that breeds also the enemies [we have]. But if you
pray against enemies, you pray so as he would have you pray, just as if for your
enemies, then against him. Why then letting him go who is your enemy indeed,
do you tear your own members, more cruel in this than wild beasts. 'But,' says
one, 'he insulted me and robbed me of money;' and which has need to grieve, he
that suffered injury, or he that inflicted injury? Plainly he that inflicted injury,
since while he gained money he cast himself out of the favor of God, and lost
more than he gained: so that he is the injured party. Surely then need is not that
one pray against, but for him, that God would be merciful to him. See how many
things the three children suffered, though they had done no harm. They lost
country, liberty, were taken captive and made slaves; and when carried away into
a foreign and barbarous land, were even on the point of being slain on account of
the dream, without cause or object. [Daniel 2:13] What then? When they had
entered in with Daniel, what prayed they? What said they? Dash down
Nabuchodonosor, pull down his diadem, hurl him from the throne? Nothing of
this sort; but they desired "mercies of God." [Daniel 2:18. Septuagint] And when
they were in the furnace, likewise. But not so ye: but when you suffer far less
than they, and oftentimes justly, you cease not to vent ten thousand imprecations.
And one says, 'Strike down my enemy as You overwhelmed the chariot of
Pharaoh;' another, 'Blast his flesh;' another again, 'Requite it on his children.'
Recognize ye not these words? Whence then is this your laughter? Do you see
how laughable this is, when it is uttered without passion. And so all sin then
discovers how vile it is, when you strip it of the state of mind of the perpetrator.
Should thou remind one who has been angered of the words which he said in his
passion, he will sink for shame and scorn himself and wish he had suffered a
thousand punishments rather than those words to be his. And should you, when
the embrace is over, bring the unchaste to the woman he sinned with, he too will
turn away from her as disgusting. And so do ye, because you are not under the
influence of the passion, laugh now. For worthy to be laughed at are they, and
the words of drunken old gossips; and springing from a womanish littleness of