SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the prohibitive precepts relating to the

vices opposed to prudence are fittingly propounded in the Old
Law?
Objection 1: It would seem that the prohibitive precepts relating to
the vices opposed to prudence are unfittingly propounded in the Old
Law. For such vices as imprudence and its parts which are directly
opposed to prudence are not less opposed thereto, than those which
bear a certain resemblance to prudence, such as craftiness and
vices connected with it. Now the latter vices are forbidden in the
Law: for it is written (Lev. 19:13): "Thou shalt not calumniate thy
neighbor," and (Dt. 25:13): "Thou shalt not have divers weights in thy
bag, a greater and a less." Therefore there should have also been
prohibitive precepts about the vices directly opposed to prudence.
Objection 2: Further, there is room for fraud in other things than in
buying and selling. Therefore the Law unfittingly forbade fraud solely
in buying and selling.
Objection 3: Further, there is the same reason for prescribing an act
of virtue as for prohibiting the act of a contrary vice. But acts of
prudence are not prescribed in the Law. Therefore neither should
any contrary vices have been forbidden in the Law.
The contrary, however, appears from the precepts of the Law which
are quoted in the first objection.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), justice, above all, regards
the aspect of something due, which is a necessary condition for a
precept, because justice tends to render that which is due to
another, as we shall state further on (Question 58, Article 2). Now
craftiness, as to its execution, is committed chiefly in matters of
justice, as stated above (Question 55, Article 8): and so it was fitting
that the Law should contain precepts forbidding the execution of
craftiness, in so far as this pertains to injustice, as when a man uses
guile and fraud in calumniating another or in stealing his goods.
Reply to Objection 1: Those vices that are manifestly opposed to
prudence, do not pertain to injustice in the same way as the
execution of craftiness, and so they are not forbidden in the Law, as
fraud and guile are, which latter pertain to injustice

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.55, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: All guile and fraud committed in matters of
injustice, can be understood to be forbidden in the prohibition of
calumny (Lev. 19:13). Yet fraud and guile are wont to be practiced
chiefly in buying and selling, according to Ecclus. 26:28, "A huckster
shall not be justified from the sins of the lips": and it is for this
reason that the Law contained a special precept forbidding
fraudulent buying and selling.
Reply to Objection 3: All the precepts of the Law that relate to acts of
justice pertain to the execution of prudence, even as the precepts
prohibitive of stealing, calumny and fraudulent selling pertain to the
execution of craftiness.