(Bacon, N. O. Aph. lib. 2, §7), we cannot even form an idea of what is here
meant. For there be some that are so wholly unworthy even to hear the name of
Paul, and that stand at such an interval and distance from that vehemency of his,
as to fancy that he says this of temporal death. Who I should say were as
ignorant of Paul, as the blind of the sun's rays, or even much more so. For he that
died daily, and set before him dangers thick as a snow-storm, and then said,
"Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine?" and still unsatisfied with what he had said, and after
going above the heaven and the heaven of heavens, and running through the
Angels and Archangels, and all the higher orders of beings, and taking in at once
things present, things to come, things visible, things intelligible, things grievous,
and things good, that were on either part, and leaving nothing out at all, yet not
even thus satiated, but even bodying forth another non-existing creation, how
should he, by way of saying some great thing after all those things, make
mention of a temporal death? It is not so, surely it is not! But such a notion is
that of worms nestling in their dunghill. For had he said this, in what sense
would he be wishing himself accursed from Christ? For death [Philippians 1:23]
of that sort would have joined him more closely with the band of Christ, and
made him enjoy that glory the more. Yet some there are who venture to say
things different from these, even more ridiculous. It was not then, they say, death
that he wished to have, but to be a treasure, a thing set apart, of Christ's. And
who even of the most worthless and indolent that would not wish for this? And
in what way was this likely to be in his kinsmen's behalf? Let us then leave these
fables and trifles (for it is no more worth while making a reply to these things
than to children babbling at play), and let us go back again to the words
themselves, luxuriating in this very ocean of love, and fearlessly swimming there
in every direction, and reflecting upon the unspeakable flame of love— or rather
say what one may, one shall say nothing worthy the subject. For there is no
ocean so wide, no flame so intense, as this. And no language can set it forth as it
deserves, but he alone knew it who in good earnest gained it. And now let me

bring the words themselves before you again.
"For I could wish that I myself were accursed." What does the "I myself"
mean? It means I that have been a teacher [1 Corinthians 9:27] of all, that have
gathered together countless good deeds, that am waiting for countless crowns,
that desired Him so much, as to value His love above all things, who all my days
am burning for Him, and hold all things [Philippians 3:8] of second importance
to the love of Him. For even being loved by Christ was not the only thing he
cared for, but loving Him exceedingly also. And this last he cared most for
([τούτου μάλιστα ἦν]). So it was that he looked to this only, and took all things
light-heartedly. For he kept one aim in view in all circumstances, the fulfilling of
this excellent love. And this he wishes for. But since things were not to take this
course, nor he to become accursed, he next attempts to go into a defence against
the charges, and so to bring what was bruited abroad by all before them as to
overthrow it. And before he openly enters into his defence against these, he first
lays down some seeds of it beforehand. For when he says, "to whom pertains the
adoption, and the glory, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and
the promises," he does but say that God willed them indeed to be saved, and this
he showed by His former dealings, and by Christ's having sprung from them, and
by what He promised to the Fathers. But they out of their own untreatable
temper thrust the benefit away from them. And this is also the reason of his
setting down such things as set forth God's gift, not such as were encomiums
upon them. For the adoption came of His grace, and so too the glory, and the
promises, and the Law. After taking all these things then into consideration, and
reflecting how earnest God along with His Son, had been for their salvation, he
lifts up his voice aloud, and says, "Who is blessed forever. Amen."
So himself offering up thanksgiving for all men unto the Only-Begotten of
God. What, he says, if others do blaspheme? Still we who know His mysteries,
and His unspeakable Wisdom, and great Providence over us, know well that it is
not to be blasphemed, but to be glorified, that He is worthy. Still not satisfied
with being himself conscious of it, he endeavors next to use arguments, and to