from us, and injures us both in regard of the future and in respect of the present
life. For before hell fire, and before that punishment, even here it surrounds us
with innumerable wars, and stirs up strifes and contests. For nothing is so apt to
cause war as avarice: nothing so apt to produce beggary, whether it show itself in
wealth or in poverty. For in the souls of poor men also this grievous disease
arises, and aggravates their poverty the more. And if there be found a poor
covetous man, such an one suffers not punishment in money, but in hunger. For
he allows not himself to enjoy his moderate means with comfort, but both racks
his belly with hunger and punishes his whole body with nakedness and cold, and
every where appears more squalid and filthy than any prisoners; and is always
wailing and lamenting as though he were more wretched than all, though there
be ten thousand poorer than he. This man, whether he go into the market-place,
goes away with many a stripe; or into the bath, or into the theatre, he will still be
receiving more wounds, not only from the spectators, but also from those upon
the stage, where he beholds not a few of the unchaste women glittering in gold.
This man again, whether he sail upon the sea, regarding the merchants and their
richly-freighted ships and their enormous profits, will not even count himself to
live: or whether he travel by land, reckoning up the fields, the suburban farms,
the inns, the baths, the revenues arising out of them, will count his own life
thenceforth not worth living; or whether thou shut him up at home, he will but
rub and fret the wounds received in the market, and so do greater despite to his
own soul: and he knows only one consolation for the evils which oppress him;
death and deliverance from this life.
And these things not the poor man only, but the rich also, will suffer, who
falls into this disease, and so much more than the poor, inasmuch as the tyranny
presses more vehemently on him, and the intoxication is greater. Wherefore also
he will account himself poorer than all; or rather, he is poorer. For riches and
poverty are determined not by the measure of the substance, but by the
disposition of the mind: and he rather is the poorest of all, who is always
hangering after more and is never able to stay this wicked lust.

On all these accounts then let us flee covetousness, the maker of beggars,
the destroyer of souls, the friend of hell, the enemy of the kingdom of heaven,
the mother of all evils together; and let us despise wealth that we may enjoy
wealth, and with wealth may enjoy also the good things laid up for us; unto
which may we all attain, etc.

## Homily 24 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 10:13
There has no temptation taken you, but such as man can bear: but God is
faithful, Who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able; but will
with the temptation make also the way of escape, that you may be able to endure
it.
Thus, because he terrified them greatly, relating the ancient examples, and
threw them into an agony, saying, Let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he
fall; though they had borne many temptations, and had exercised themselves
many times therein; for "I was with you," says he, "in weakness, and in fear, and
in much trembling:" [1 Corinthians 2:3] lest they should say, "Why terrify and
alarm us? We are not unexercised in these troubles, for we have been both driven
and persecuted, and many and continual dangers have we endured:" repressing
again their pride, he says, "there has no temptation taken you but such as man
can bear," i.e., small, brief, moderate. For he uses the expression "man can bear
," in respect of what is small; as when he says, "I speak after the manner of men
because of the infirmity of your flesh." [Romans 6:19] "Think not then great
things," says he, "as though ye had overcome the storm. For never have ye seen
a danger threatening death nor a temptation intending slaughter:" which also he
said to the Hebrews, "you have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against sin."
[Hebrews 12:4]
Then, because he terrified them, see how again he raises them up, at the
same time recommending moderation; in the words, "God is faithful, Who will
not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able." There are therefore
temptations which we are not able to bear. And what are these? All, so to speak.
For the ability lies in God's gracious influence; a power which we draw down by