both its being at all and its being of such and such a nature, arise from the
intelligible and unchangeable life, which is above all things, and which
reaches even to the most distant and earthly things), is a very copious
subject, and one not now necessary. But I thought the act of Jacob about
the cattle should be noticed, for this reason, viz. in order that it might be
perceived that, if the man who thus placed those rods cannot be called the
creator of the colors in the lambs and kids; nor yet even the souls
themselves of the mothers, which colored the seeds conceived in the flesh
by the image of variegated color, conceived through the eyes of the body,
so far as nature permitted it; much less can it be said that the creators of
the frogs and serpents were the bad angels, through whom the magicians
of Pharaoh then made them.

### CHAP. 9.—THE ORIGINAL CAUSE OF ALL THINGS IS FROM GOD.

16. For it is one thing to make and administer the creature from the
innermost and highest turning-point of causation, which He alone does
who is God the Creator; but quite another thing to apply some operation
from without in proportion to the strength and faculties assigned to each
by Him, so that what is created may come forth into being at this time or
at that, and in this or that way. For all these things in the way of original
and beginning have already been created in a kind of texture of the
elements, but they come forth when they get the opportunity. For as
mothers are pregnant with young, so the world itself is pregnant with the
causes of things that are born; which are not created in it, except from
that highest essence, where nothing either springs up or dies, either
begins to be or ceases. But the applying from without of adventitious
causes, which, although they are not natural, yet are to be applied
according to nature, in order that those things which are contained and
hidden in the secret bosom of nature may break forth and be outwardly
created in some way by the unfolding of the proper measures and
numbers and weights which they have received in secret from Him "who
has ordered all things in measure and number and weight:" this is not
only in the power of bad angels, but also of bad men, as I have shown
above by the example of agriculture.
17. But lest the somewhat different condition of animals should trouble
any one, in that they have the breath of life with the sense of desiring

those things that are according to nature, and of avoiding those things
that are contrary to it; we must consider also, how many men there are
who know from what herbs or flesh, or from what juices or liquids you
please, of whatever sort, whether so placed or so buried, or so bruised or
so mixed, this or that animal is commonly born; yet who can be so foolish
as to dare to call himself the creator of these animals? Is it, therefore, to
be wondered at, if just as any, the most worthless of men, can know
whence such or such worms and flies are produced; so the evil angels in
proportion to the subtlety of their perceptions discern in the more hidden
seeds of the elements whence frogs and serpents are produced, and so
through certain and known opportune combinations applying these seeds
by secret movements, cause them to be created, but do not create them?
Only men do not marvel at those things that are usually done by men. But
if any one chance to wonder at the quickness of those growths, in that
those living beings were so quickly made, let him consider how even this
may be brought about by men in proportion to the measure of human
capability. For whence is it that the same bodies generate worms more
quickly in summer than in winter, or in hotter than in colder places? Only
these things are applied by men with so much the more difficulty, in
proportion as their earthly and sluggish members are wanting in subtlety
of perception, and in rapidity of bodily motion. And hence it arises that in
the case of any kind of angels, in proportion as it is easier for them to
draw out the proximate causes from the elements, so much the more
marvellous is their rapidity in works of this kind.
18. But He only is the creator who is the chief former of these things.
Neither can any one be this, unless He with whom primarily rests the
measure, number, and weight of all things existing; and He is God the
one Creator, by whose unspeakable power it comes to pass, also, that
what these angels were able to do if they were permitted, they are
therefore not able to do because they are not permitted. For there is no
other reason why they who made frogs and serpents were not able to
make the most minute flies, unless because the greater power of God was
present prohibiting them, through the Holy Spirit; which even the
magicians themselves confessed, saying, "This is the finger of God." But
what they are able to do by nature, yet cannot do, because they are
prohibited; and what the very condition of their nature itself does not