SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.141, C.2.

even necessary for the sake of an end, to abstain from such
pleasures as result from these operations. Thus, for the sake of the
body's health, certain persons refrain from pleasures of meat, drink,
and sex; as also for the fulfilment of certain engagements: thus
athletes and soldiers have to deny themselves many pleasures, in
order to fulfil their respective duties. In like manner penitents, in
order to recover health of soul, have recourse to abstinence from
pleasures, as a kind of diet, and those who are desirous of giving
themselves up to contemplation and Divine things need much to
refrain from carnal things. Nor do any of these things pertain to the
vice of insensibility, because they are in accord with right reason.
Reply to Objection 1: Daniel abstained thus from pleasures, not
through any horror of pleasure as though it were evil in itself, but for
some praiseworthy end, in order, namely, to adapt himself to the
heights of contemplation by abstaining from pleasures of the body.
Hence the text goes on to tell of the revelation that he received
immediately afterwards.
Reply to Objection 2: Since man cannot use his reason without his
sensitive powers. which need a bodily organ. as stated in the FP,
Question 84, Articles 7,8, man needs to sustain his body in order that
he may use his reason. Now the body is sustained by means of
operations that afford pleasure: wherefore the good of reason cannot
be in a man if he abstain from all pleasures. Yet this need for using
pleasures of the body will be greater or less, according as man
needs more or less the powers of his body in accomplishing the act
of reason. Wherefore it is commendable for those who undertake the
duty of giving themselves to contemplation, and of imparting to
others a spiritual good, by a kind of spiritual procreation, as it were,
to abstain from many pleasures, but not for those who are in duty
bound to bodily occupations and carnal procreation.
Reply to Objection 3: In order to avoid sin, pleasure must be
shunned, not altogether, but so that it is not sought more than
necessity requires.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.141, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether intemperance is a childish sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that intemperance is not a childish sin.
For Jerome in commenting on Mt. 18:3, "Unless you be converted,
and become as little children," says that "a child persists not in
anger, is unmindful of injuries, takes no pleasure in seeing a
beautiful woman," all of which is contrary to intemperance. Therefore
intemperance is not a childish sin.
Objection 2: Further, children have none but natural desires. Now "in
respect of natural desires few sin by intemperance," according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 11). Therefore intemperance is not a childish
sin.
Objection 3: Further, children should be fostered and nourished:
whereas concupiscence and pleasure, about which intemperance is
concerned, are always to be thwarted and uprooted, according to
Col. 3:5, "Mortify . . . your members upon the earth, which are . . .
concupiscence", etc. Therefore intemperance is not a childish sin.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 12) that "we apply
the term intemperance to childish faults."
I answer that, A thing is said to be childish for two reasons. First,
because it is becoming to children, and the Philosopher does not
mean that the sin of intemperance is childish in this sense.
Secondly. by way of likeness, and it is in this sense that sins of
intemperance are said to be childish. For the sin of intemperance is
one of unchecked concupiscence, which is likened to a child in three
ways. First, as rewards that which they both desire, for like a child
concupiscence desires something disgraceful. This is because in
human affairs a thing is beautiful according as it harmonizes with
reason. Wherefore Tully says (De Offic. i, 27) under the heading
"Comeliness is twofold," that "the beautiful is that which is in
keeping with man's excellence in so far as his nature differs from
other animals." Now a child does not attend to the order of reason;
and in like manner "concupiscence does not listen to reason,"
according to Ethic. vii, 6. Secondly, they are alike as to the result.
For a child, if left to his own will, becomes more self-willed: hence it
is written (Ecclus. 30:8): "A horse not broken becometh stubborn,
and a child left to himself will become headstrong." So, too,