FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.3.

worthy of praise or blame: and in such like actions, evil, sin and guilt
are one and the same thing.
Reply to Objection 1: Natural actions are not in the power of the
natural agent: since the action of nature is determinate. And,
therefore, although there be sin in natural actions, there is no blame.
Reply to Objection 2: Reason stands in different relations to the
productions of art, and to moral actions. In matters of art, reason is
directed to a particular end, which is something devised by reason:
whereas in moral matters, it is directed to the general end of all
human life. Now a particular end is subordinate to the general end.
Since therefore sin is a departure from the order to the end, as stated
above (Article 1), sin may occur in two ways, in a production of art.
First, by a departure from the particular end intended by the artist:
and this sin will be proper to the art; for instance, if an artist produce
a bad thing, while intending to produce something good; or produce
something good, while intending to produce something bad.
Secondly, by a departure from the general end of human life: and
then he will be said to sin, if he intend to produce a bad work, and
does so in effect, so that another is taken in thereby. But this sin is
not proper to the artist as such, but as man. Consequently for the
former sin the artist is blamed as an artist; while for the latter he is
blamed as a man. On the other hand, in moral matters, where we take
into consideration the order of reason to the general end of human
life, sin and evil are always due to a departure from the order of
reason to the general end of human life. Wherefore man is blamed
for such a sin, both as man and as a moral being. Hence the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "in art, he who sins voluntarily is
preferable; but in prudence, as in the moral virtues," which prudence
directs, "he is the reverse."
Reply to Objection 3: Weakness that occurs in voluntary evils, is
subject to man's power: wherefore it neither takes away nor
diminishes guilt.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a human action is meritorious or

demeritorious in so far as it is good or evil?
Objection 1: It would seem that a human action is not meritorious or
demeritorious on account of its goodness or malice. For we speak of
merit or demerit in relation to retribution, which has no place save in
matters relating to another person. But good or evil actions are not
all related to another person, for some are related to the person of
the agent. Therefore not every good or evil human action is
meritorious or demeritorious.
Objection 2: Further, no one deserves punishment or reward for
doing as he chooses with that of which he is master: thus if a man
destroys what belongs to him, he is not punished, as if he had
destroyed what belongs to another. But man is master of his own
actions. Therefore a man does not merit punishment or reward,
through putting his action to a good or evil purpose.
Objection 3: Further, if a man acquire some good for himself, he
does not on that account deserve to be benefited by another man:
and the same applies to evil. Now a good action is itself a kind of
good and perfection of the agent: while an inordinate action is his
evil. Therefore a man does not merit or demerit, from the fact that he
does a good or an evil deed.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 3:10,11): "Say to the just man that it
is well; for he shall eat the fruit of his doings. Woe to the wicked unto
evil; for the reward of his hands shall be given him."
I answer that, We speak of merit and demerit, in relation to
retribution, rendered according to justice. Now, retribution according
to justice is rendered to a man, by reason of his having done
something to another's advantage or hurt. It must, moreover, be
observed that every individual member of a society is, in a fashion, a
part and member of the whole society. Wherefore, any good or evil,
done to the member of a society, redounds on the whole society:
thus, who hurts the hand, hurts the man. When, therefore, anyone
does good or evil to another individual, there is a twofold measure of
merit or demerit in his action: first, in respect of the retribution owed
to him by the individual to whom he has done good or harm;
secondly, in respect of the retribution owed to him by the whole of