And from things not worthy of abhorrence you turn away; while others
which are to be abhorred, so far from hating, thou dost even court. Many, for
instance, on coming back from tombs, are used to wash themselves, but on
returning from theatres they have never groaned, nor poured forth any fountains
of tears; yet surely the dead man is no unclean thing, whereas sin induces such a
blot, that not even with ten thousand fountains could one purge it away, but with
tears only, and with confessions. But no one has any sense of this blot. Thus
because we fear not what we ought, therefore we shrink from what we ought not.
And what again is the applause? What the tumult, and the satanical cries,
and the devilish gestures? For first one, being a young man, wears his hair long
behind, and changing his nature into that of a woman, is striving both in aspect,
and in gesture, and in garments, and generally in all ways, to pass into the
likeness of a tender damsel. Then another who is grown old, in the opposite way
to this, having his hair shaven, and with his loins girt about, his shame cut off
before his hair, stands ready to be smitten with the rod, prepared both to say and
do anything. The women again, their heads uncovered, stand without a blush,
discoursing with a whole people, so complete is their practice in shamelessness;
and thus pour forth all effrontery and impurity into the souls of their hearers.
And their one study is, to pluck up all chastity from the foundations, to disgrace
our nature, to satiate the desire of the wicked demon. Yea, and there are both foul
sayings, and gestures yet fouler; and the dressing of the hair tends that way, and
the gait, and apparel, and voice, and flexure of the limbs; and there are turnings
of the eyes, and flutes, and pipes, and dramas, and plots; and all things, in short,
full of the most extreme impurity. When then will you be sober again, I pray
you, now that the devil is pouring out for you so much of the strong wine of
whoredom, mingling so many cups of unchastity? For indeed both adulteries and
stolen marriages are there, and there are women playing the harlot, men
prostituting, youths corrupting themselves: all there is iniquity to the full, all
sorcery, all shame. Wherefore they that sit by should not laugh at these things,
but weep and groan bitterly.

"What then? Are we to shut up the stage?" it will be said, "and are all
things to be turned upside down at your word?" Nay, but as it is, all things are
turned upside down. For whence are they, tell me, that plot against our
marriages? Is it not from this theatre? Whence are they that dig through into
chambers? Is it not from that stage? Comes it not of this, when husbands are
insupportable to their wives? Of this, when the wives are contemptible to their
husbands? Of this, that the more part are adulterers? So that the subverter of all
things is he that goes to the theatre; it is he that brings in a grievous tyranny.
"Nay," you will say, "this is appointed by the good order of the laws." Why, to
tear away men's wives, and to insult young boys, and to overthrow houses, is
proper to those who have seized on citadels. "And what adulterer," will you say,
"has been made such by these spectacles?" Nay, who has not been made an
adulterer? And if one might but mention them now by name, I could point out
how many husbands those harlots have severed from their wives, how many they
have taken captive, drawing some even from the marriage bed itself, not
suffering others so much as to live at all in marriage.
"What then? I pray you, are we to overthrow all the laws?" Nay, but it is
overthrowing lawlessness, if we do away with these spectacles. For hence are
they that make havoc in our cities; hence, for example, are seditions and tumults.
For they that are maintained by the dancers, and who sell their own voice to the
belly, whose work it is to shout, and to practise everything that is monstrous,
these especially are the men that stir up the populace, that make the tumults in
our cities. For youth, when it has joined hands with idleness, and is brought up in
so great evils, becomes fiercer than any wild beast. The necromancers too, I pray
you, whence are they? Is it not from hence, that in order to excite the people who
are idling without object, and make the dancing men have the benefit of much
and loud applause, and fortify the harlot women against the chaste, they proceed
so far in sorcery, as not even to shrink from disturbing the bones of the dead?
Comes it not hence, when men are forced to spend without limit on that wicked
choir of the devil? And lasciviousness, whence is that, and its innumerable