neither can we be delivered from bodily death except by resurrection
wrought by the Divine power. And therefore as Christ, in respect of
His human nature, received the firstfruits of grace from above, and
His grace is the cause of our grace, because "of His fulness we all
have received . . . grace for grace" (Jn. 1:16), so in Christ has our
resurrection begun, and His resurrection is the cause of ours. Thus
Christ as God is, as it were, the equivocal cause of our resurrection,
but as God and man rising again, He is the proximate and, so to say,
the univocal cause of our resurrection. Now a univocal efficient
cause produces its effect in likeness to its own form, so that not only
is it an efficient, but also an exemplar cause in relation to that effect.
This happens in two ways. For sometimes this very form, whereby
the agent is likened to its effect, is the direct principle of the action
by which the effect is produced, as heat in the fire that heats: and
sometimes it is not the form in respect of which this likeness is
observed, that is primarily and directly the principle of that action,
but the principles of that form. For instance, if a white man beget a
white man, the whiteness of the begetter is not the principle of active
generation, and yet the whiteness of the begetter is said to be the
cause of the whiteness of the begotten, because the principles of
whiteness in the begetter are the generative principles causing
whiteness in the begotten. In this way the resurrection of Christ is
the cause of our resurrection, because the same thing that wrought
the resurrection of Christ, which is the univocal efficient cause of
our resurrection, is the active cause of our resurrection, namely the
power of Christ's Godhead which is common to Him and the Father.
Hence it is written (Rm. 8:11): "He that raised up Jesus Christ from
the dead shall quicken also your mortal bodies." And this very
resurrection of Christ by virtue of His indwelling Godhead is the
quasi-instrumental cause of our resurrection: since the Divine
operations were wrought by means of Christ's flesh, as though it
were a kind of organ; thus the Damascene instances as an example
(De Fide Orth. iii, 15) the touch of His body whereby He healed the
leper (Mt. 8:3).
Reply to Objection 1: A sufficient cause produces at once its effect
to which it is immediately directed, but not the effect to which it is
directed by means of something else, no matter how sufficient it may
be: thus heat, however intense it be, does not cause heat at once in
the first instant, but it begins at once to set up a movement towards
heat, because heat is its effect by means of movement. Now Christ's
resurrection is said to be the cause of ours, in that it works our
resurrection, not immediately, but by means of its principle, namely