SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.5.

belong by virtue of their office. Consequently to assist one's
superiors in such a ministry is proper to a religious order of this
kind.
Reply to Objection 3: Bishops do not allow these religious severally
and indiscriminately to preach or hear confessions, but according to
the discretion of the religious superiors, or according to their own
appointment.
Reply to Objection 4: The faithful are not bound by law to contribute
to the support of other than their ordinary prelates, who receive the
tithes and offerings of the faithful for that purpose, as well as other
ecclesiastical revenues. But if some men are willing to minister to
the faithful by exercising the aforesaid acts gratuitously, and without
demanding payment as of right, the faithful are not burdened thereby
because their temporal contributions can be liberally repaid by those
men, nor are they bound by law to contribute, but by charity, and yet
not so that they be burdened thereby and others eased, as stated in
2 Cor. 8:13. If, however, none be found to devote themselves
gratuitously to services of this kind, the ordinary prelate is bound, if
he cannot suffice by himself, to seek other suitable persons and
support them himself.
Reply to Objection 5: The seventy-two disciples are represented not
only by the parish priests, but by all those of lower order who in any
way assist the bishops in their office. For we do not read that our
Lord appointed the seventy-two disciples to certain fixed parishes,
but that "He sent them two and two before His face into every city
and place whither He Himself was to come." It was fitting, however,
that in addition to the ordinary prelates others should be chosen for
these duties on account of the multitude of the faithful, and the
difficulty of finding a sufficient number of persons to be appointed to
each locality, just as it was necessary to establish religious orders
for military service, on account of the secular princes being unable
to cope with unbelievers in certain countries.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether a religious order should be established

for the purpose of study?
Objection 1: It would seem that a religious order should not be
established for the purpose of study. For it is written (Ps. 70:15,16):
"Because I have not known letters, I will enter into the powers of the
Lord," i.e. "Christian virtue," according to a gloss. Now the
perfection of Christian virtue, seemingly, pertains especially to
religious. Therefore it is not for them to apply themselves to the
study of letters.
Objection 2: Further, that which is a source of dissent is unbecoming
to religious, who are gathered together in the unity of peace. Now
study leads to dissent: wherefore different schools of thought arose
among the philosophers. Hence Jerome (Super Epist. ad Tit. 1:5)
says: "Before a diabolical instinct brought study into religion, and
people said: I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas," etc. Therefore it
would seem that no religious order should be established for the
purpose of study.
Objection 3: Further, those who profess the Christian religion should
profess nothing in common with the Gentiles. Now among the
Gentiles were some who professed philosophy, and even now some
secular persons are known as professors of certain sciences.
Therefore the study of letters does not become religious.
On the contrary, Jerome (Ep. liii ad Paulin.) urges him to acquire
learning in the monastic state, saying: "Let us learn on earth those
things the knowledge of which will remain in heaven," and further
on: "Whatever you seek to know, I will endeavor to know with you."
I answer that As stated above (Article 2), religion may be ordained to
the active and to the contemplative life. Now chief among the works
of the active life are those which are directly ordained to the
salvation of souls, such as preaching and the like. Accordingly the
study of letters is becoming to the religious life in three ways. First,
as regards that which is proper to the contemplative life, to which
the study of letters helps in a twofold manner. In one way by helping
directly to contemplate, namely by enlightening the intellect. For the
contemplative life of which we are now speaking is directed chiefly
to the consideration of divine things, as stated above (Question 180,