means of wealth, the other of ruin. Adorn the bride not with these ornaments that
are made of gold, but with gentleness and modesty, and the customary robes; in
place of all golden ornament and braiding, arraying her in blushes, and
shamefacedness, and the not desiring such things. Let there be no uproar, no
confusion; let the bridegroom be called, let him receive the virgin. The dinners
and suppers, let them not be full of drunkenness, but of abundance and pleasure.
See how many good things will result, whenever we see such marriages as those;
but from the marriages that are now celebrated, (if at least one ought to call them
marriages and not pageants,) how many are the evils! The banquet hall is no
sooner broken up, than straightway comes care and fear, lest anything that is
borrowed should have been lost, and there succeeds to the pleasure melancholy
intolerable. But this distress belongs to the mother-in-law,— nay, rather not even
is the bride herself free; all that follows at least belongs to the bride herself. For
to see all broken up, is a ground for sadness, to see the house desolate.
There is Christ, here is Satan; there is cheerfulness, here anxious care; there
pleasure, here pain; there expense, here nothing of the kind; there indecency,
here modesty; there envy, here no envy; there drunkenness, here soberness, here
health, here temperance. Bearing in mind all these things, let us stay the evil at
this point, that we may please God, and be counted worthy to obtain the good
things promised to them that love Him, through the grace and love toward man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom, to the Father, together with the Holy
Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 1 on First Thessalonians

[1 Thessalonians 1:1-3]
" Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, unto the Church of the Thessalonians in
God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you, and peace. We give
thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers;
remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of love and patience
of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father."
[Wherefore] then, when writing to the Ephesians, and having Timothy with
him, did he not include him with himself (in his salutation), known as he was to
them and admired, for he says, "You know the proof of him, that as a child serves
the father, so he served with me in the Gospel" [Philippians 2:22]; and again, "I
have no man like-minded who will care truly for your state" [Philippians 2:20];
but here he does associate him with himself? It seems to me, that he was about to
send him immediately, and it was superfluous for him to write, who would
overtake the letter. For he says, "Him therefore I hope to send immediately."
[Philippians 2:23] But here it was not so; but he had just returned to him, so that
he naturally joined in the letter. For he says, "Now when Timothy came from you
unto us." [1 Thessalonians 3:6] But why does he place Silvanus before him,
though he testifies to his numberless good qualities, and prefers him above all?
Perhaps Timothy wished and requested him to do so from his great humility; for
when he saw his teacher so humble-minded, as to associate his disciple with
himself, he would much the more have desired this, and eagerly sought it. For he
says,
"Paul, and Silvanus, and Timothy, unto the Church of the Thessalonians."
Here he gives himself no title— not "an Apostle," not "a Servant"; I suppose,
because the men were newly instructed, and had not yet had any experience of
him, he does not apply the title; and it was as yet the beginning of his preaching