hearts; and at one time exposing them, at another time leaving the refutation of
them that question Him to their conscience. See, at any rate here, how He proves
both points, as well that there will be a resurrection, as that it will not be such a
resurrection as they suspect.
For what says He? "You do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power
of God." [Matthew 22:29] For since, as if they knew them, they put forward
Moses and the law, He shows that this question is that of men very ignorant of
the Scriptures. For hence also arose their tempting Him, from their being
ignorant of the Scriptures, and from their not knowing the power of God as they
ought.
"For what marvel then is it," He says, "if you tempt me, who am as yet
unknown to you, when at least ye know not so much as the power of God, of
which you have had so much experience, and neither from common sense nor
from the Scriptures have become acquainted with it;" if indeed even common
sense causes us to know this, that to God all things are possible. And in the first
place He answers to the question asked. For since this was the cause for their not
believing a resurrection, that they think the order of things is like this, He cures
the cause, then the symptom also (for thence arose the disease too), and shows
the manner of the resurrection. "For in the resurrection," says He, "they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as angels of God in Heaven." But
Luke says, "As Sons of God." [Luke 20:36]
If then they marry not, the question is vain. But not because they do not
marry, therefore are they angels, but because they are as angels, therefore they
do not marry. By this He removed many other difficulties also, all which things
Paul intimated by one word, saying, "For the fashion of this world passes away."
[1 Corinthians 7:31]
And by these words He declared how great a thing the resurrection is; and
that moreover there is a resurrection, He proves. And indeed this too was
demonstrated at the same time by what He had said, nevertheless over and above
He adds again to His word by what He says now. For neither at their question

only did He stop, but at their thought. Thus when they are not dealing with great
craft, but are asking in ignorance, He teaches even over and above, but when it is
of wickedness only, not even to their question does He answer.
And again by Moses does He stop their mouths, since they too had brought
forward Moses; and He says, "But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have
ye not read, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living." Not of them that are not
His meaning is, and that are utterly blotted out, and are to rise no more. For He
said not, I was, but, I am; of them that are, and them that live. For like as Adam,
although he lived on the day that he ate of the tree, died in the sentence: even so
also these, although they had died, lived in the promise of the resurrection.
How then does He say elsewhere, "That He might be Lord both of the dead
and of the living?" [Romans 14:9] But this is not contrary to that. For here He
speaks of the dead, who are also themselves to live. And moreover too, "I am the
God of Abraham," is another thing from, "That He might be Lord both of the
dead and of the living." He knew of another death too, concerning which He
says, "Let the dead bury their dead." [Matthew 8:22]
"And when the multitudes heard this, they were astonished at His doctrine."
[Matthew 22:33] Yet not even here the Sadducees; but these go away defeated,
while the impartial multitude reap the benefit.
Since then the resurrection is like this, come let us do all things, that we
may obtain the first honors there. But, if you will, let us show you some even
before the resurrection here pursuing and reaping these blessings, again having
made our resort to the deserts. For again will I enter upon the same discourse,
since I see you listening with more pleasure.
Let us behold then today also the spiritual camps, let us behold their
pleasure unalloyed with fear. For not with spears are they encamped like the
soldiers, for at this point I lately ended my discourse, neither with shields and
breastplates; but bare of all these will you see them, yet achieving such things, as
not even with arms do they.