hungry; but if you have even stripped one who was clothed, what sort of pardon
shall you obtain? These things I will never desist from saying, for they who have
not heard today perhaps will hear tomorrow, and they who take no heed
tomorrow perhaps will be persuaded the next day; and even if any be so disposed
as not to be persuaded, yet for us there will be no account to give of them at the
Judgment. Our part we have fulfilled; may we never have cause to be ashamed
of our words, nor you to hide your faces, but may all be able to stand with
boldness before the judgment-seat of Christ, that we also may be able to rejoice
over you, and to have some compensation of our own faults, in your being
approved in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost
be glory for ever. Amen.

Homily 68 on the Gospel of John
John 12:34
"The people answered Him, We have heard out of the Law that Christ abides for
ever; and how do you say, The Son of Man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of
Man?"
1. Deceit is a thing easily detected, and weak, though it be daubed outside
with ten thousand colors. For as those who whitewash decayed walls, cannot by
the plastering make them sound, so too those who lie are easily found out, as in
fact was the case here with the Jews. For when Christ said to them, "If I be lifted
up I will draw all men unto Me; We have heard," says one of them, "out of the
Law, that Christ remains forever; and how do you say, that the Son of Man must
be lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?" Even they then knew that Christ was
some Immortal One, and had life without end. And therefore they also knew
what He meant; for often in Scripture the Passion and the Resurrection are
mentioned in the same place. Thus Isaiah puts them together, saying, "He was
led as a sheep to the slaughter" [Isaiah 53:7], and all that follows. David also in
the second Psalm, and in many other places, connects these two things. The
Patriarch too after saying, "He lay down, He couched as a lion," adds, "And as a
lion's cub, who shall raise Him up?" [Genesis 49:9] He shows at once the
Passion and the Resurrection. But these men when they thought to silence Him,
and to show that He was not the Christ, confessed by this very circumstance that
the Christ remains forever. And observe their evil dealing; they said not, "We
have heard that Christ neither suffers nor is crucified," but that "He remains
forever." Yet even this which has been mentioned, would have been no real
objection, for the Passion was no hindrance to His Immortality. Hence we may
see that they understood many of the doubtful points, and deliberately went
wrong. For since He had before spoken about death, when they now heard in this

place the, "be lifted up," they guessed that death was referred to. Then they said,
"Who is this Son of Man?" This too they did deceitfully. "Think not, I pray," says
one, "that we say this concerning you, assert not that we oppose you through
enmity, for, lo, we know not concerning whom you speak, and still we declare
our opinion." What then does Christ? To silence them, and to show that the
Passion is no impediment to His enduring forever, He says,