human nature that one man should have one wife, according to Gn.
2:24, "They shall be two in one flesh." Therefore it is of natural law.
Objection 7: Further, it is contrary to the law of nature that man
should bind himself to the impossible, and that what is given to one
should be given to another. Now when a man contracts with a wife,
he gives her the power of his body, so that he is bound to pay her
the debt when she asks. Therefore it is against the law of nature that
he should afterwards give the power of his body to another, because
it would be impossible for him to pay both were both to ask at the
same time.
Objection 8: Further, "Do not to another what thou wouldst not were
done to thyself" [Tobias 4:16] is a precept of the natural law. But a
husband would by no means be willing for his wife to have another
husband. Therefore he would be acting against the law of nature,
were he to have another wife in addition.
Objection 9: Further, whatever is against the natural desire is
contrary to the natural law. Now a husband's jealousy of his wife and
the wife's jealousy of her husband are natural, for they are found in
all. Therefore, since jealousy is "love impatient of sharing the
beloved," it would seem to be contrary to the natural law that several
wives should share one husband.
I answer that, All natural things are imbued with certain principles
whereby they are enabled not only to exercise their proper actions,
but also to render those actions proportionate to their end, whether
such actions belong to a thing by virtue of its generic nature, or by
virtue of its specific nature: thus it belongs to a magnet to be borne
downwards by virtue of its generic nature, and to attract iron by
virtue of its specific nature. Now just as in those things which act
from natural necessity the principle of action is the form itself,
whence their proper actions proceed proportionately to their end, so
in things which are endowed with knowledge the principles of action
are knowledge and appetite. Hence in the cognitive power there
needs to be a natural concept, and in the appetitive power a natural
inclination, whereby the action befitting the genus or species is
rendered proportionate to the end. Now since man, of all animals,
knows the aspect of the end, and the proportion of the action to the
end, it follows that he is imbued with a natural concept, whereby he
is directed to act in a befitting manner, and this is called "the natural
law" or "the natural right," but in other animals "the natural instinct."

For brutes are rather impelled by the force of nature to do befitting
actions, than guided to act on their own judgment. Therefore the
natural law is nothing else than a concept naturally instilled into
man, whereby he is guided to act in a befitting manner in his proper
actions, whether they are competent to him by virtue of his generic
nature, as, for instance, to beget, to eat, and so on, or belong to him
by virtue of his specific nature, as, for instance, to reason and so
forth. Now whatever renders an action improportionate to the end
which nature intends to obtain by a certain work is said to be
contrary to the natural law. But an action may be improportionate
either to the principal or to the secondary end, and in either case this
happens in two ways. First, on account of something which wholly
hinders the end; for instance a very great excess or a very great
deficiency in eating hinders both the health of the body, which is the
principal end of food, and aptitude for conducting business, which is
its secondary end. Secondly, on account of something that renders
the attainment of the principal or secondary end difficult, or less
satisfactory, for instance eating inordinately in respect of undue
time. Accordingly if an action be improportionate to the end, through
altogether hindering the principal end directly, it is forbidden by the
first precepts of the natural law, which hold the same place in
practical matters, as the general concepts of the mind in speculative
matters. If, however, it be in any way improportionate to the
secondary end, or again to the principal end, as rendering its
attainment difficult or less satisfactory, it is forbidden, not indeed by
the first precepts of the natural law, but by the second which are
derived from the first even as conclusions in speculative matters
receive our assent by virtue of self-known principles: and thus the
act in question is said to be against the law of nature.
Now marriage has for its principal end the begetting and rearing of
children, and this end is competent to man according to his generic
nature, wherefore it is common to other animals (Ethic. viii, 12), and
thus it is that the "offspring" is assigned as a marriage good. But for
its secondary end, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 12), it has,
among men alone, the community of works that are a necessity of
life, as stated above (Question 41, Article 1). And in reference to this
they owe one another "fidelity" which is one of the goods of
marriage. Furthermore it has another end, as regards marriage
between believers, namely the signification of Christ and the Church:
and thus the "sacrament" is said to be a marriage good. Wherefore
the first end corresponds to the marriage of man inasmuch as he is
an animal: the second, inasmuch as he is a man; the third, inasmuch