THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.2.

### ARTICLE 1. Whether sins once forgiven return through a

subsequent sin?
Objection 1: It would seem that sins once forgiven return through a
subsequent sin. For Augustine says (De Bapt. contra Donat. i, 12):
"Our Lord teaches most explicitly in the Gospel that sins which have
been forgiven return, when fraternal charity ceases, in the example
of the servant from whom his master exacted the payment of the
debt already forgiven, because he had refused to forgive the debt of
his fellow-servant." Now fraternal charity is destroyed through each
mortal sin. Therefore sins already taken away through Penance,
return through each subsequent mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, on Lk. 11:24, "I will return into my house,
whence I came out," Bede says: "This verse should make us tremble,
we should not endeavor to explain it away lest through carelessness
we give place to the sin which we thought to have been taken away,
and become its slave once more." Now this would not be so unless it
returned. Therefore a sin returns after once being taken away by
Penance.
Objection 3: Further, the Lord said (Ezech. 18:24): "If the just man
turn himself away from his justice, and do iniquity . . . all his justices
which he hath done, shall not be remembered." Now among the
other "justices" which he had done, is also his previous penance,
since it was said above (Question 85, Article 3) that penance is a part
of justice. Therefore when one who has done penance, sins, his
previous penance, whereby he received forgiveness of his sins, is
not imputed to him. Therefore his sins return.
Objection 4: Further, past sins are covered by grace, as the Apostle
declares (Rm. 4:7) where he quotes Ps. 31:1: "Blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered." But a
subsequent mortal sin takes away grace. Therefore the sins
committed previously, become uncovered: and so, seemingly, they
return.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 11:29): "The gifts and the
calling of God are without repentance." Now the penitent's sins are
taken away by a gift of God. Therefore the sins which have been
taken away do not return through a subsequent sin, as though God

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.88, C.2.

repented His gift of forgiveness.
Moreover, Augustine says (Lib. Resp. Prosperi i [Prosper,
Responsiones ad Capitula Gallorum ii]): "When he that turns away
from Christ, comes to the end of this life a stranger to grace, whither
does he go, except to perdition? Yet he does not fall back into that
which had been forgiven, nor will he be condemned for original sin."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 86, Article 4), mortal sin
contains two things, aversion from God and adherence to a created
good. Now, in mortal sin, whatever attaches to the aversion, is,
considered in itself, common to all mortal sins, since man turns
away from God by every mortal sin, so that, in consequence, the
stain resulting from the privation of grace, and the debt of
everlasting punishment are common to all mortal sins. This is what
is meant by what is written (James 2:10): "Whosoever . . . shall
offend in one point, is become guilty of all." On the other hand, as
regards their adherence they are different from, and sometimes
contrary to one another. Hence it is evident, that on the part of the
adherence, a subsequent mortal sin does not cause the return of
mortal sins previously dispelled, else it would follow that by a sin of
wastefulness a man would be brought back to the habit or
disposition of avarice previously dispelled, so that one contrary
would be the cause of another, which is impossible. But if in mortal
sins we consider that which attaches to the aversion absolutely, then
a subsequent mortal sin causes the return of that which was
comprised in the mortal sins before they were pardoned, in so far as
the subsequent mortal sin deprives man of grace, and makes him
deserving of everlasting punishment, just as he was before.
Nevertheless, since the aversion of mortal sin is diversified
somewhat in relation to various adherences, as it were to various
causes, so that there will be a different aversion, a different stain, a
different debt of punishment, according to the different acts of
mortal sin from which they arise; hence the question is moved
whether the stain and the debt of eternal punishment, as caused by
acts of sins previously pardoned, return through a subsequent
mortal sin.
Accordingly some have maintained that they return simply even in
this way. But this is impossible, because what God has done cannot
be undone by the work of man. Now the pardon of the previous sins
was a work of Divine mercy, so that it cannot be undone by man's
subsequent sin, according to Rm. 3:3: "Shall their unbelief make the