SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.13.

### ARTICLE 12. Whether the children of Jews and other

unbelievers ought to be baptized against their parents' will?
Objection 1: It would seem that the children of Jews and of other
unbelievers ought to be baptized against their parents' will. For the
bond of marriage is stronger than the right of parental authority over
children, since the right of parental authority can be made to cease,
when a son is set at liberty; whereas the marriage bond cannot be
severed by man, according to Mt. 19:6: "What . . . God hath joined
together let no man put asunder." And yet the marriage bond is
broken on account of unbelief: for the Apostle says (1 Cor. 7:15): "If
the unbeliever depart, let him depart. For a brother or sister is not
under servitude in such cases": and a canon [Can. Uxor legitima,
and Idololatria, qu. i] says that "if the unbelieving partner is unwilling
to abide with the other, without insult to their Creator, then the other
partner is not bound to cohabitation." Much more, therefore, does
unbelief abrogate the right of unbelieving parents' authority over
their children: and consequently their children may be baptized
against their parents' will.
Objection 2: Further, one is more bound to succor a man who is in
danger of everlasting death, than one who is in danger of temporal
death. Now it would be a sin, if one saw a man in danger of temporal
death and failed to go to his aid. Since, then, the children of Jews
and other unbelievers are in danger of everlasting death, should they
be left to their parents who would imbue them with their unbelief, it
seems that they ought to be taken away from them and baptized, and
instructed in the faith.
Objection 3: Further, the children of a bondsman are themselves
bondsmen, and under the power of his master. Now the Jews are
bondsmen of kings and princes: therefore their children are also.
Consequently kings and princes have the power to do what they will
with Jewish children. Therefore no injustice is committed if they
baptize them against their parents' wishes.
Objection 4: Further, every man belongs more to God, from Whom
he has his soul, than to his carnal father, from whom he has his
body. Therefore it is not unjust if Jewish children be taken away from
their parents, and consecrated to God in Baptism.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.13.

Objection 5: Further, Baptism avails for salvation more than
preaching does, since Baptism removes forthwith the stain of sin
and the debt of punishment, and opens the gate of heaven. Now if
danger ensue through not preaching, it is imputed to him who
omitted to preach, according to the words of Ezech. 33:6 about the
man who "sees the sword coming and sounds not the trumpet."
Much more therefore, if Jewish children are lost through not being
baptized are they accounted guilty of sin, who could have baptized
them and did not.
On the contrary, Injustice should be done to no man. Now it would
be an injustice to Jews if their children were to be baptized against
their will, since they would lose the rights of parental authority over
their children as soon as these were Christians. Therefore these
should not be baptized against their parents' will.
I answer that, The custom of the Church has very great authority and
ought to be jealously observed in all things, since the very doctrine
of catholic doctors derives its authority from the Church. Hence we
ought to abide by the authority of the Church rather than by that of
an Augustine or a Jerome or of any doctor whatever. Now it was
never the custom of the Church to baptize the children of the Jews
against the will of their parents, although at times past there have
been many very powerful catholic princes like Constantine and
Theodosius, with whom most holy bishops have been on most
friendly terms, as Sylvester with Constantine, and Ambrose with
Theodosius, who would certainly not have failed to obtain this favor
from them if it had been at all reasonable. It seems therefore
hazardous to repeat this assertion, that the children of Jews should
be baptized against their parents' wishes, in contradiction to the
Church's custom observed hitherto.
There are two reasons for this custom. One is on account of the
danger to the faith. For children baptized before coming to the use of
reason, afterwards when they come to perfect age, might easily be
persuaded by their parents to renounce what they had unknowingly
embraced; and this would be detrimental to the faith.
The other reason is that it is against natural justice. For a child is by
nature part of its father: thus, at first, it is not distinct from its
parents as to its body, so long as it is enfolded within its mother's
womb; and later on after birth, and before it has the use of its freewill, it is enfolded in the care of its parents, which is like a spiritual