Reply to Objection 3: Equality of justice has its place in retribution,
since equal rewards or punishments are due to equal merit or
demerit. But this does not apply to things as at first instituted. For
just as an architect, without injustice, places stones of the same kind
in different parts of a building, not on account of any antecedent
difference in the stones, but with a view to securing that perfection
of the entire building, which could not be obtained except by the
different positions of the stones; even so, God from the beginning, to
secure perfection in the universe, has set therein creatures of
various and unequal natures, according to His wisdom, and without
injustice, since no diversity of merit is presupposed.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether corporeal creatures were produced by

God through the medium of the angels?
Objection 1: It would seem that corporeal creatures were produced
by God through the medium of the angels. For, as all things are
governed by the Divine wisdom, so by it were all things made,
according to Ps. 103:24 "Thou hast made all things in wisdom." But
"it belongs to wisdom to ordain," as stated in the beginning of the
Metaphysics (i, 2). Hence in the government of things the lower is
ruled by the higher in a certain fitting order, as Augustine says (De
Trin. iii, 4). Therefore in the production of things it was ordained that
the corporeal should be produced by the spiritual, as the lower by
the higher.
Objection 2: Further, diversity of effects shows diversity of causes,
since like always produces like. It then all creatures, both spiritual
and corporeal, were produced immediately by God, there would be
no diversity in creatures, for one would not be further removed from
God than another. But this is clearly false; for the Philosopher says
that some things are corruptible because they are far removed from
God (De Gen. et Corrup. ii, text. 59).
Objection 3: Further, infinite power is not required to produce a finite
effect. But every corporeal thing is finite. Therefore, it could be, and
was, produced by the finite power of spiritual creatures: for in
suchlike beings there is no distinction between what is and what is
possible: especially as no dignity befitting a nature is denied to that
nature, unless it be in punishment of a fault.
On the contrary, It is said (Gn. 1:1): "In the beginning God created
heaven and earth"; by which are understood corporeal creatures.
These, therefore, were produced immediately by God.
I answer that, Some have maintained that creatures proceeded from
God by degrees, in such a way that the first creature proceeded from
Him immediately, and in its turn produced another, and so on until
the production of corporeal creatures. But this position is untenable,
since the first production of corporeal creatures is by creation, by
which matter itself is produced: for in the act of coming into being
the imperfect must be made before the perfect: and it is impossible
that anything should be created, save by God alone.