trades whereby to support themselves, let them go free. But when you scourge,
when you put them in chains, it is no more a work of humanity.
And I know that I am giving disgust to my hearers. But what must I do? For
this I am set, and I shall not cease to say these things, whether any thing come of
them or not. For what means your clearing the way before you in the market
place? Are you walking then among wild beasts that you drive away them that
meet you? Be not afraid; none of these bite who approach you and walk near
you. But do you consider it an insult to walk along side of other men? What
madness is this, what prodigious folly, when a horse is following close after you,
to think not of his bringing on you any insult; but if it be a man, unless he be
driven an hundred miles off, to reckon that he disgraces you. And why have you
also servants to carry fasces, employing freemen as slaves, or rather yourself
living more dishonorably than any slave? For, in truth, meaner than any servant
is he who bears about with him so much pride.
Therefore they shall not so much as have a sight of the real liberty, who
have enslaved themselves to this grievous passion. Nay, if you must drive and
clear away, let it not be them that come near you, but your own pride which you
drive away; not by your servant, but by yourself: not with this scourge, but with
that which is spiritual. Since now your servant drives away them that walk by
your side, but you are yourself driven from your high place more disgracefully
by your own self-will than any servant can drive your neighbor. But if,
descending from your horse, you will drive away pride by humility, you shall sit
higher and place yourself in greater honor, needing no servant to do this. I mean,
that when you have become modest and walkest on the ground, you will be
seated on the car of humility which bears you up to the very heavens, that car
which has winged steeds : but if falling from it, thou pass into that of arrogance,
you will be in no better state than the beggars who are drawn along the ground,
nay even much more wretched and pitiable than they: since them the
imperfection of their bodies compels thus to be drawn, but you the disease of
your own arrogance. "For every one that exalts himself," says He, "shall be

abused." [Matthew 23:12] That we then may not be abused but exalted, let us
approach towards that exaltation. For thus also shall we "find rest for our souls"
according to the divine oracle, and shall obtain the true and most exalted honor;
the which may we all obtain, through the grace and mercy, etc. etc.

## Homily 41 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 15:35-36
But some one will say, How are the dead raised? And with what manner of
body do they come? Thou foolish one, that which you yourself sowest is not
quickened, except it die.
Gentle and lowly as the apostle is to a great degree every where, he here
adopts a style rather pungent, because of the impiety of the gainsayers. He is not
however content with this, but he also employs reasons and examples, subduing
thereby even the very contentious. And above he says, "Since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead;" but here he solves an
objection brought in by the Gentiles. And see how again he abates the
vehemence of his censure; in that he said not, "but perhaps you will say," but he
set down the objector indefinitely, in order that, although employing his
impetuous style with all freedom, he might not too severely wound his hearers.
And he states two difficulties, one touching the manner of the resurrection, the
other, the kind of bodies. For of both they on their part made a question, saying,
"How is that which has been dissolved raised up?" and, "with what manner of
body do they come?" But what means, "with what manner of body?" It is as if
they had said, "with this which has been wasted, which has perished, or with
some other?"
Then, to point out that the objects of their enquiry are not questionable but
admitted points, he at once meets them more sharply, saying, "Thou foolish one,
that which you yourself sowest is not quickened, except it die." Which we also
are wont to do in the case of those who gainsay things acknowledged.
2. And wherefore did he not at once appeal to the power of God? Because
he is discoursing with unbelievers. For when his discourse is addressed to