not the treatment they had received at his hands; though, had he died, all would
have escaped. You see that they chose rather to remain in bonds, than to suffer
him to perish. Hence too might he reason within himself, "Had they been
sorcerers, doubtless they would have set the others at liberty, and have released
themselves from their bonds:" (for it is likely that many such had also been
imprisoned.) He was the more amazed, in that having often received sorcerers in
charge, he had yet witnessed nothing done like this. A sorcerer never would have
shaken the foundations, so as to startle the jailer from sleep, and thus render his
own escape more difficult.
Now, however, let us proceed to look at the jailor's faith. "And," says the
Scripture, "he called for lights and sprang in, and trembling for fear fell down
before Paul and Silas, and brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be
saved?" He grasped fire and sword, and cried, "Sirs, what must I do to be
saved?" "And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be
saved, you and your house." [Acts 16:29-31] "This is not the act of sorcerers,"
he would say, "to deliver a doctrine like this. No mention any where here of an
evil spirit." You see how worthy he was to be saved: for when he beheld the
miracle, and was relieved from his terror, he did not forget what most concerned
him, but even in the midst of so great peril, he was solicitous about that salvation
which concerned his soul: and came before them in such a manner as it was meet
to come before teachers: he fell down at their feet. "And they spoke," it
continues, "the word of the Lord, unto him with all that were in his house. And he
took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and was
baptized, he and all his, immediately." [Acts 16:32-33] Observe the fervency of
the man! He did not delay; he did not say, "Let day come, let us see, let us look
about us;" but with great fervency, he was both himself baptized, and all his
house. Yes, not like most men now-a-days, who suffer both servants and wives
and children to go unbaptized. Be, I beseech you, like the jailor. I say not, in
authority, but in purpose; for what is the benefit of authority, where purpose is
weak? The savage one, the inhuman one, who lived in the practice of

unnumbered wrongs and made this his constant study, has become all at once so
humane, so tenderly attentive. "He washed," it is said, "their stripes."
And mark, on the other hand, the fervency of Paul also. Bound, scourged,
thus he preached the Gospel. Oh, that blessed chain, with how great travail did it
travail that night, what children did it bring forth! Yea of them too may he say,
"Whom I have begotten in my bonds." [Philemon 10] Mark thou, how he glories,
and will have the children thus begotten, to be on that account the more
illustrious! Mark thou, how transcendant is the glory of those bonds, in that they
give lustre not only to him that wore them, but also to them who were on that
occasion begotten by him. They have some advantage, who were begotten in
Paul's bonds, I say not in respect of grace, (for grace is one and the same,) nor in
respect of remission, (for remission is one and the same to all,) but in that they
are thus from the very outset taught to rejoice and to glory in such things. "The
same hour of the night," it is said, "he took them, and washed their stripes, and
was baptized."
And now then behold the fruit. He straightway recompensed them with his
carnal things. "He brought them up into his house, and set meat before them, and
rejoiced greatly with all his house, having believed in God." For what was he not
ready to do, now that by the opening of the prison doors, heaven itself was
opened to him? He washed his teacher, he set food before him, and rejoiced.
Paul's chain entered into the prison, and transformed all things there into a
Church; it drew in its train the body of Christ, it prepared the spiritual feast, and
travailed with that birth, at which Angels rejoice. And was it without reason then
that I said that the prison was more glorious than Heaven? For it became a
source of joy there; yes, if "there is joy in Heaven over one sinner that repents,"
[Luke 15:7] if, "where two or three are gathered together in His Name, there is
Christ in the midst of them;" [Matthew 18:20] how much more, where Paul and
Silas, and the jailor and all his house were, and faith so earnest as theirs!
Observe the intense earnestness of their faith.
But this prison has reminded me of another prison. And what then is that? It