SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the subject of pride is the irascible

faculty?
Objection 1: It would seem that the subject of pride is not the
irascible faculty. For Gregory says (Moral. xxiii, 17): "A swollen mind
is an obstacle to truth, for the swelling shuts out the light." Now the
knowledge of truth pertains, not to the irascible but to the rational
faculty. Therefore pride is not in the irascible.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxiv, 8) that "the proud
observe other people's conduct not so as to set themselves beneath
them with humility, but so as to set themselves above them with
pride": wherefore it would seem that pride originates in undue
observation. Now observation pertains not to the irascible but to the
rational faculty.
Objection 3: Further. pride seeks pre-eminence not only in sensible
things, but also in spiritual and intelligible things: while it consists
essentially in the contempt of God, according to Ecclus. 10:14, "The
beginning of the pride of man is to fall off from God." Now the
irascible, since it is a part of the sensitive appetite, cannot extend to
God and things intelligible. Therefore pride cannot be in the
irascible.
Objection 4: Further, as stated in Prosper's Liber Sententiarum, sent.
294, "Pride is love of one's own excellence." But love is not in the
irascible, but in the concupiscible. Therefore pride is not in the
irascible.
On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. ii, 49) opposes pride to the gift of
fear. Now fear belongs to the irascible. Therefore pride is in the
irascible.
I answer that, The subject of any virtue or vice is to be ascertained
from its proper object: for the object of a habit or act cannot be other
than the object of the power, which is the subject of both. Now the
proper object of pride is something difficult, for pride is the desire of
one's own excellence, as stated above (Articles 1,2). Wherefore pride
must needs pertain in some way to the irascible faculty. Now the
irascible may be taken in two ways. First in a strict sense, and thus it
is a part of the sensitive appetite, even as anger, strictly speaking, is

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.161, C.4.

a passion of the sensitive appetite. Secondly, the irascible may be
taken in a broader sense, so as to belong also to the intellective
appetite, to which also anger is sometimes ascribed. It is thus that
we attribute anger to God and the angels, not as a passion, but as
denoting the sentence of justice pronouncing judgment.
Nevertheless the irascible understood in this broad sense is not
distinct from the concupiscible power, as stated above in the FP,
Question 59, Article 4; FS, Question 82, Article 5, ad 1 and 2.
Consequently if the difficult thing which is the object of pride, were
merely some sensible object, whereto the sensitive appetite might
tend, pride would have to be in the irascible which is part of the
sensitive appetite. But since the difficult thing which pride has in
view is common both to sensible and to spiritual things, we must
needs say that the subject of pride is the irascible not only strictly so
called, as a part of the sensitive appetite, but also in its wider
acceptation, as applicable to the intellective appetite. Wherefore
pride is ascribed also to the demons.
Reply to Objection 1: Knowledge of truth is twofold. One is purely
speculative, and pride hinders this indirectly by removing its cause.
For the proud man subjects not his intellect to God, that he may
receive the knowledge of truth from Him, according to Mt. 11:25,
"Thou hast hid these things from the wise and the prudent," i.e. from
the proud, who are wise and prudent in their own eyes, "and hast
revealed them to little ones," i.e. to the humble.
Nor does he deign to learn anything from man, whereas it is written
(Ecclus. 6:34): "If thou wilt incline thy ear, thou shalt receive
instruction." The other knowledge of truth is affective, and this is
directly hindered by pride, because the proud, through delighting in
their own excellence, disdain the excellence of truth; thus Gregory
says (Moral. xxiii, 17) that "the proud, although certain hidden truths
be conveyed to their understanding, cannot realize their sweetness:
and if they know of them they cannot relish them." Hence it is written
(Prov. 11:2): "Where humility is there also is wisdom."
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 161, Articles 2, 6),
humility observes the rule of right reason whereby a man has true
self-esteem. Now pride does not observe this rule of right reason, for
he esteems himself greater than he is: and this is the outcome of an
inordinate desire for his own excellence, since a man is ready to
believe what he desires very much, the result being that his appetite