## CHAPTER XLI--Some further Elucidation of the Incarnation
EUTYCHES made the union of God and man a union of nature: Nestorius, a union
neither of nature nor of person: the Catholic faith makes it a union of person, not of
nature. To forestall objections, we need to form clear notions of what it is to be united `in
nature,' and what it is to be united `in person.'
Those things then are united `in nature,' which combine to constitute the integrity of
some specific type, as soul and body are united to constitute the specific type of
`animal.' Once a specific type is set up in its integrity, no foreign element can be united
with it in unity of nature without the breaking up of that specific type. But what is
not of the integrity of the specific type is readily found in some individual contained
under the species, as whiteness and clothedness in Socrates or Plato. All such
non-specific attributes are said to be united `in unity of suppositum,' or in the case of
rational beings, `in unity of person,' with the individual.
Now some have reckoned the union of God and man in Christ to be after the manner of
things united `in unity of nature.' Thus Arius and Apollinaris and Eutyches. But that is
quite an impossibility. For the nature of the Word is a sovereignly perfect whole from all
eternity, incapable of alteration or change: nothing foreign to the divine nature, -- no
human nature, nor any element of human nature, -- can possibly come to thrust itself
into that unity. Others saw the impossibility of this position, and turned aside in the
contrary direction. Whatever is added to any nature without belonging to the integrity of
the same, may be reckoned to be either an accident, as whiteness and music, or to
stand in an accidental relation to the subject, as a ring, a dress, a house. Considering
then that human nature is added to the Word of God without belonging to the integrity of
His nature, these [Nestorians] thought that the union of this supperadded human nature
with the Word was merely accidental. Manifestly, it could not be in the Word as an
accident, for God is not susceptible of accidents; and besides human nature itself
stands in the category of substance, and cannot be an accident of anything. The
alternative which they embraced was to conclude that the human nature stood in an
accidental relation with the Word. Nestorius then laid it down that the human nature
stood to the word in the relation of a temple to the Deity whose temple it was; and that
union with human nature meant a mere indwelling of the Word in that nature. And
because a temple has its individuality apart from him that dwells in it, and the
individuality proper to human nature is personality, it followed that the personality of the
human nature was one, and the personality of the Word another; and thus the Word and
the Man were two persons: all which conclusion has been set aside by our previous
arguments.
We must therefore lay it down that the union of the Word with the Man was such, that
neither was one nature compounded out of two; nor was the union of the Word with
human nature like the union of a substance with something exterior to it and standing in
an accidental relation to it, like the relation of a man to his garment and his house: but
the Word must be considered to subsist in human nature as in a nature made properly
its own, so that that Body is truly the Body of the Word of God, and that Soul the Soul of