## Homily 33 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 13:4-5
Love suffers long, and is kind; love envies not; love vaunts not itself, is not
puffed up.
Thus, whereas he had showed, that both faith and knowledge and prophecy
and tongues and gifts and healing and a perfect life and martyrdom, if love be
absent, are no great advantage; of necessity he next makes an outline of its
matchless beauty, adorning its image with the parts of virtue as with a sort of
colors, and putting together all its members with exactness. But do not thou
hastily pass by, beloved, the things spoken, but examine each one of them with
much care, that you may know both the treasure which is in the thing and the art
of the painter. Consider, for example, from what point he at once began, and
what he set first, as the cause of all its excellence. And what is this? Longsuffering. This is the root of all self-denial. Wherefore also a certain wise man
said, "A man that is long-suffering is of great understanding; but he that is hasty
of spirit is mightily foolish. "
And comparing it too with a strong city, he said that it is more secure than
that. For it is both an invincible weapon and a sort of impregnable tower, easily
beating off all annoyances. And as a spark falling into the deep does it no injury,
but is itself easily quenched: so upon a long-suffering soul whatever unexpected
thing falls, this indeed speedily vanishes, but the soul it disturbs not: for of a
truth there is nothing so impenetrable as long-suffering. You may talk of armies,
money, horses, walls, arms, or any thing else whatsoever; you will name nothing
like long-suffering. For he that is encompassed with those, oftentimes, being
overcome by anger, is upset like a worthless child, and fills all with confusion
and tempest: but this man, settled as it were in a harbor, enjoys a profound calm.

Though thou surround him with loss, you have not moved the rock; though thou
bring insult upon him, you have not shaken the tower: and though thou bruise
him with stripes, you have not wounded the adamant.
Yea, and therefore is he called long-suffering, because he has a kind of long
and great soul. For that which is long is also called great. But this excellence is
born of love, both to them who possess and to them who enjoy it contributing no
small advantage. For tell me not of those abandoned wretches, who, doing evil
and suffering none, become worse: since here, not from his long-suffering, but
from those who abuse it, this result arises. Tell me not therefore of these, but of
those gentler persons, who gain great benefit therefrom. For when, having done
ill, they suffer none, admiring the meekness of the sufferer, they reap thereby a
very great lesson of self command.
But Paul does not stop here, but adds also the other high achievements of
love, saying, "is kind." For since there are some who practise their long-suffering
with a view not to their own self-denial, but to the punishment of those who have
provoked them, to make them burst with wrath; he says that neither has charity
this defect. Wherefore also he added, "is kind." For not at all with a view to light
up the fire, in those who are inflamed by anger, do they deal more gently with
them, but in order to appease and extinguish it: and not only by enduring nobly,
but also by soothing and comforting, do they cure the sore and heal the wound of
passion.
"Envies not." For it is possible for one to be both long-suffering and
envious, and thereby that excellency is spoiled. But love avoids this also.
"Vaunts not itself;" i.e., is not rash. For it renders him who loves both
considerate, and grave, and steadfast. In truth, one mark of those who love
unlawfully is a defect in this point. Whereas he to whom this love is known, is of
all men the most entirely freed from these evils. For when there is no anger
within, both rashness and insolence are clean taken away. Love, like some
excellent husbandman, taking her seat inwardly in the soul and not suffering any
of these thorns to spring up.