understood either by comparison with their formation in glory; and
so the absence of formation preceded formation by priority of time.
Or else it can be understood of the formation according to grace:
and so it did not precede in the order of time, but in the order of
nature; as Augustine holds with regard to the formation of corporeal
things (Gen. ad lit. i, 15).
Reply to Objection 2: Every form inclines the subject after the mode
of the subject's nature. Now it is the mode of an intellectual nature to
be inclined freely towards the objects it desires. Consequently the
movement of grace does not impose necessity; but he who has
grace can fail to make use of it, and can sin.
Reply to Objection 3: Although in the order of nature grace comes
midway between nature and glory, nevertheless, in the order of time,
in created nature, glory is not simultaneous with nature; because
glory is the end of the operation of nature helped by grace. But grace
stands not as the end of operation, because it is not of works, but as
the principle of right operation. Therefore it was fitting for grace to
be given straightway with nature.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether an angel merits his beatitude?

Objection 1: It would seem that the angel did not merit his beatitude.
For merit arises from the difficulty of the meritorious act. But the
angel experienced no difficulty in acting rightly. Therefore righteous
action was not meritorious for him.
Objection 2: Further, we do not merit by merely natural operations.
But it was quite natural for the angel to turn to God. Therefore he did
not thereby merit beatitude.
Objection 3: Further, if a beatified angel merited his beatitude, he did
so either before he had it, or else afterwards. But it was not before;
because, in the opinion of many, he had no grace before whereby to
merit it. Nor did he merit it afterwards, because thus he would be
meriting it now; which is clearly false, because in that case a lower
angel could by meriting rise up to the rank of a higher, and the
distinct degrees of grace would not be permanent; which is not
admissible. Consequently the angel did not merit his beatitude.
On the contrary, It is stated (Apoc. 21:17) that the "measure of the
angel" in that heavenly Jerusalem is "the measure of a man."
Therefore the same is the case with the angel.
I answer that, Perfect beatitude is natural only to God, because
existence and beatitude are one and the same thing in Him.
Beatitude, however, is not of the nature of the creature, but is its
end. Now everything attains its last end by its operation. Such
operation leading to the end is either productive of the end, when
such end is not beyond the power of the agent working for the end,
as the healing art is productive of health; or else it is deserving of
the end, when such end is beyond the capacity of the agent striving
to attain it; wherefore it is looked for from another's bestowing. Now
it is evident from what has gone before (Articles 1,2; Question 12,
Articles 4,5), ultimate beatitude exceeds both the angelic and the
human nature. It remains, then, that both man and angel merited
their beatitude.
And if the angel was created in grace, without which there is no
merit, there would be no difficulty in saying that he merited
beatitude: as also, if one were to say that he had grace in any way