Reply to Objection 4: Defective knowledge results not only from
excess and deficiency of the knowable object in relation to the
intellect, but also from the fact that the aspect of knowableness is
not united to the intellect: thus sometimes the sight sees not a
stone, through the image of the stone not being united to it. And
although the Divine essence which is the type of all things is united
to the intellect of one who sees God, it is united thereto not as the
type of all things, but as the type of some and of so much the more
according as one sees the Divine essence more fully.
Reply to Objection 5: When a passive power is perceptible by several
perfections in order, if it be perfected with its ultimate perfection, it is
not said to be imperfect, even though it lack some of the preceding
dispositions. Now all knowledge by which the created intellect is
perfected is directed to the knowledge of God as its end. Wherefore
he who sees God in His essence, even though he know nothing else,
would have a perfect intellect: nor is his intellect more perfect
through knowing something else besides Him, except in so far as it
sees Him more fully. Hence Augustine says (Confess. v.): "Unhappy
is he who knoweth all these" (namely, creatures), "and knoweth not
Thee: but happy whoso knoweth Thee, though he know not these.
And whoso knoweth both Thee and them is not the happier for them
but for Thee only."
Reply to Objection 6: This mirror has a will: and even as He will show
Himself to whom He will, so will He show in Himself whatsoever He
will. Nor does the comparison with a material mirror hold, for it is not
in its power to be seen or not to be seen.
We may also reply that in a material mirror both object and mirror are
seen under their proper image; although the mirror be seen through
an image received from the thing itself, whereas the stone is seen
through its proper image reflected in some other thing, where the
reason for seeing the one is the reason for seeing the other. But in
the uncreated mirror a thing is seen through the form of the mirror,
just as an effect is seen through the image of its cause and
conversely. Consequently it does not follow that whoever sees the
eternal mirror sees all that is reflected in that mirror: since he who
sees the cause does not of necessity see all its effects, unless he
comprehend the cause.
Reply to Objection 7: The desire of the saints to know all things will

be fulfilled by the mere fact of their seeing God: just as their desire
to possess all good things will be fulfilled by their possessing God.
For as God suffices the affections in that He has perfect goodness,
and by possessing Him we possess all goods as it were, so does the
vision of Him suffice the intellect: "Lord, show us the Father and it is
enough for us" (Jn. 14:8).
Reply to Objection 8: Ignorance properly so called denotes a
privation and thus it is a punishment: for in this way ignorance is
nescience of things, the knowledge of which is a duty or a necessity.
Now the saints in heaven will not be ignorant of any of these things.
Sometimes, however, ignorance is taken in a broad sense of any
kind of nescience: and thus the angels and saints in heaven will be
ignorant of certain things. Hence Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that
"the angels will be cleansed from their ignorance." In this sense
ignorance is not a penalty but a defect. Nor is it necessary for all
such defects to be done away by glory: for thus we might say that it
was a defect in Pope Linus that he did not attain to the glory of Peter.
Reply to Objection 9: Our body will be conformed to the body of
Christ in glory, in likeness but not in equality, for it will be endowed
with clarity even as Christ's body, but not equally. In like manner our
soul will have glory in likeness to the soul of Christ, but not in
equality thereto: thus it will have knowledge even as Christ's soul,
but not so great, so as to know all as Christ's soul does.
Reply to Objection 1:: Although the Divine essence is the type of all
things knowable it will not be united to each created intellect
according as it is the type of all. Hence the objection proves nothing.
Reply to Objection 1:: The active intellect is a form proportionate to
the passive intellect; even as the passive power of matter is
proportionate to the power of the natural agent, so that whatsoever
is in the passive power of matter or the passive intellect is in the
active power of the active intellect or of the natural agent.
Consequently if the active intellect become the form of the passive
intellect, the latter must of necessity know all those things to which
the power of the active intellect extends. But the Divine essence is
not a form proportionate to our intellect in this sense. Hence the
comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 1:: Nothing hinders us from saying that after the