own country: therefore he is kept back by numberless constraints, first by
subjection to a master, secondly by being in prison, thirdly by being over the
kingdom, to the end that all this might be brought about by the Providence of
God. Like a spirited steed that is eager to bound off to his fellows, did God keep
him back there, for causes full of glory. For that he longed to see his father, and
free him from his distress, is evident from his calling him there. [Genesis 45:9]
Shall we look at other instances of evil designing, how they turn out to our
good, not only by having their reward, but also by their working at the very time
precisely what is for our good? This (Joseph's) uncle (Esau) had ill designs
against his father (Jacob), and drove him out of his native land: what then?
[Genesis 27:41] He too set him (thereby) aloof from the danger; for he too got
(thereby) to be in safety. He made him a wiser and a better man
([φιλοσοφώτερον]); he was the means of his having that dream [Genesis 28:12]
But, you will say, he was a slave in a foreign land? Yes, but he arrives among his
own kindred, and receives a bride, and appears worthy to his father-in-law.
[Genesis 29:23] But he too cheated him? Yes, but this also turned out to his
good, that he might be the father of many children. But it was in his mind to
design evil against him? True, but even this was for his good, that he might
thereupon return to his own country; for if he had been in good circumstances,
he would not have so longed for home. But he defrauded him of his hire? Aye,
but he got more by the means. [Genesis 31:7] Thus, in every point of these men's
history, the more people designed their hurt, the more their affairs flourished. If
(Jacob) had not received the elder daughter, he would not soon have been the
father of so many children; he would have dragged out a long period in
childlessness, he would have mourned as his wife did. For she indeed had reason
to mourn, as not having become a mother (ib. 30:1, 2.); but he had his
consolation: whence also he gives her a repulse. Again, had not (Laban)
defrauded him of his hire, he would not have longed to see his own country; the
higher points ([φιλοσοφία]) of the man's character would not have come to light,
(his wives) would not have become more closely attached to him. For see what

they say: "With devouring has he devoured us and our money." [Genesis 31:15]
So that this became the means of riveting their love to him. After this he had in
them not merely wives, but (devoted) slaves; he was beloved by them: a thing
that no possession can equal: for nothing, nothing whatever, is more precious
than to be thus loved by a wife and to love her. "And a wife," Scripture says,
"that agrees with her husband." [Sirach 25:1] "A man and a wife that agree
together." E.V.) One thing this, as the Wise Man puts it, of the things for which a
man is to be counted happy; for where this is, there all wealth, all prosperity
abounds: as also, where it is not, there all besides profits nothing, but all goes
wrong, all is mere unpleasantness and confusion. Then let us seek this before all
things. He that seeks money, seeks not this. Let us seek those things which can
remain fixed. Let us not seek a wife from among the rich, lest the excess of
wealth on her side produce arrogance, lest that arrogance be the means of
marring all. See you not what God did? How He put the woman in subjection?
[Genesis 3:16] Why are you ungrateful, why without perception? The very
benefit God has given you by nature, do not thou mar the help it was meant to
be. So that it is not for her wealth that we ought to seek a wife: it is that we may
receive a partner of our life, for the appointed order of the procreation of
children. It was not that she should bring money, that God gave the woman; it
was that she might be an helpmate. But she that brings money, becomes, instead
of a wife, a setter up of her own will ([ἐ] [πίβουλος]), a mistress— it may be a
wild beast instead of a wife— while she thinks she has a right to give herself airs
upon her wealth. Nothing more shameful than a man who lays himself out to get
riches in this way. If wealth itself is full of temptations, what shall we say to
wealth so gotten? For you must not look to this, that one or another as a rare and
unusual case, and contrary to the reason of the thing, has succeeded: as neither
ought we in other matters to fix our regards upon the good which people may
enjoy, or their chance successes, out of the common course: but let us look to the
reason of the thing as it is in itself, and see whether this thing be not fraught with
endless annoyance. Not only you bring yourself into a disreputable position; you