have been committed against a man. He is also himself a ruler and a ruler of
more dignity than the other. For the sacred laws take and place under his hands
even the royal head. And when there is need of any good thing from above, the
Emperor is accustomed to fly to the priest: but not the priest to the Emperor. He
too has his breast-plate, that of righteousness. He too has his girdle, that of truth,
and sandals of much greater dignity, those of the Gospel of peace. He too has a
sword, not of iron, but of the Spirit; he too has a crown resting on his head. This
panoply is the more splendid. The weapons are grander, the license of speech
greater, and mightier the strength. So that from the weight of his authority, and
from his own greatness of soul; and more than all the rest, from the hope which
he has in God, he will address the Emperor with much freedom and much
discretion.
7. Let us not then despair of our safety, but let us pray; let us make
invocation; let us supplicate; let us go on embassy to the King that is above with
many tears! We have this fast too as an ally, and as an assistant in this good
intercession. Therefore, as when the winter is over and the summer is appearing,
the sailor draws his vessel to the deep; and the soldier burnishes his arms, and
makes ready his steed for the battle; and the husbandman sharpens his sickle;
and the traveller boldly undertakes a long journey, and the wrestler strips and
bares himself for the contest. So too, when the fast makes its appearance, like a
kind of spiritual summer, let us as soldiers burnish our weapons; and as
husbandmen let us sharpen our sickle; and as sailors let us order our thoughts
against the waves of extravagant desires; and as travellers let us set out on the
journey towards heaven; and as wrestlers let us strip for the contest. For the
believer is at once a husbandman, and a sailor, and a soldier, a wrestler, and a
traveller. Hence St. Paul says, "We wrestle not against flesh and blood, but
against principalities, against powers. Put on therefore the whole armour of
God." [Ephesians 6:12] Have you observed the wrestler? Have you observed the
soldier? If you are a wrestler, it is necessary for you to engage in the conflict
naked. If a soldier, it behooves you to stand in the battle line armed at all points.

How then are both these things possible, to be naked, and yet not naked; to be
clothed, and yet not clothed! How? I will tell you. Divest yourself of worldly
business, and you have become a wrestler. Put on the spiritual armour, and you
have become a soldier. Strip yourself of worldly cares, for the season is one of
wrestling. Clothe yourself with the spiritual armour, for we have a heavy warfare
to wage with demons. Therefore also it is needful we should be naked, so as to
offer nothing that the devil may take hold of, while he is wrestling with us; and
to be fully armed at all points, so as on no side to receive a deadly blow.
Cultivate your soul. Cut away the thorns. Sow the word of godliness. Propagate
and nurse with much care the fair plants of divine wisdom, and you have become
a husbandman. And Paul will say to you, "The husbandman that labours must be
first partaker of the fruits." He too himself practised this art. Therefore writing to
the Corinthians, he said, "I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the
increase." [1 Corinthians 3:6] Sharpen your sickle, which you have blunted
through gluttony— sharpen it by fasting. Lay hold of the pathway which leads
towards heaven; rugged and narrow as it is, lay hold of it, and journey on. And
how may thou be able to do these things? By subduing your body, and bringing
it into subjection. For when the way grows narrow, the corpulence that comes of
gluttony is a great hindrance. Keep down the waves of inordinate desires. Repel
the tempest of evil thoughts. Preserve the bark; display much skill, and you have
become a pilot. But we shall have the fast for a groundwork and instructor in all
these things.
8. I speak not, indeed, of such a fast as most persons keep, but of real
fasting; not merely an abstinence from meats; but from sins too. For the nature
of a fast is such, that it does not suffice to deliver those who practise it, unless it
be done according to a suitable law. "For the wrestler," it is said, "is not crowned
unless he strive lawfully." [2 Timothy 2:5] To the end then, that when we have
gone through the labour of fasting, we forfeit not the crown of fasting, we should
understand how, and after what manner, it is necessary to conduct this business;
since that Pharisee also fasted, [Luke 18:12] but afterwards went down empty,