Such seems to be the meaning of the Latin, but the original text is conjectural.

with contempt, and that for this reason he was endowed with faculties, by means of which he
destroyed those passions which dwelt in men as a punishment [for their sins].
2. The soul, therefore, which is like that of Christ can despise those rulers who were the creators
of the world, and, in like manner, receives power for accomplishing the same results. This idea has
raised them to such a pitch of pride, that some of them declare themselves similar to Jesus; while
others, still more mighty, maintain that they are superior to his disciples, such as Peter and Paul,
and the rest of the apostles, whom they consider to be in no respect inferior to Jesus. For their souls,
descending from the same sphere as his, and therefore despising in like manner the creators of the
world, are deemed worthy of the same power, and again depart to the same place. But if any one
shall have despised the things in this world more than he did, he thus proves himself superior to
him.
3. They practise also magical arts and incantations; philters, also, and love-potions; and have
recourse to familiar spirits, dream-sending demons, and other abominations, declaring that they
possess power to rule over, even now, the princes and formers of this world; and not only them,
but also all things that are in it. These men, even as the Gentiles, have been sent forth by Satan
to bring dishonour upon the Church, so that, in one way or another, men hearing the things which
they speak, and imagining that we all are such as they, may turn away their ears from the preaching
of the truth; or, again, seeing the things they practise, may speak evil of us all, who have in fact
no fellowship with them, either in doctrine or in morals, or in our daily conduct. But they lead a
licentious life, and, to conceal their impious doctrines, they abuse the name [of Christ], as a
means of hiding their wickedness; so that "their condemnation is just," when they receive from
God a recompense suited to their works.
4. So unbridled is their madness, that they declare they have in their power all things which are
irreligious and impious, and are at liberty to practise them; for they maintain that things are evil or
good, simply in virtue of human opinion. They deem it necessary, therefore, that by means of
transmigration from body to body, souls should have experience of every kind of life as well as
every kind of action (unless, indeed, by a single incarnation, one may be able to prevent any need
for others, by once for all, and with equal completeness, doing all those things which we dare not
either speak or hear of, nay, which we must not even conceive in our thoughts, nor think credible,
if any such thing is mooted among those persons who are our fellow-citizens), in order that, as their
writings express it, their souls, having made trial of every kind of life, may, at their departure, not
be wanting in any particular. It is necessary to insist upon this, lest, on account of some one thing
being still wanting to their deliverance, they should be compelled once more to become incarnate.