1. It was necessary, therefore, that the Lord, coming to the lost sheep, and making recapitulation
of so comprehensive a dispensation, and seeking after His own handiwork, should save that very
man who had been created after His image and likeness, that is, Adam, filling up the times of His
condemnation, which had been incurred through disobedience,—[times] "which the Father had
placed in His own power." [This was necessary,] too, inasmuch as the whole economy of salvation
regarding man came to pass according to the good pleasure of the Father, in order that God might
not be conquered, nor His wisdom lessened, [in the estimation of His creatures.] For if man, who
had been created by God that he might live, after losing life, through being injured by the serpent
that had corrupted him, should not any more return to life, but should be utterly [and for ever]
abandoned to death, God would [in that case] have been conquered, and the wickedness of the
serpent would have prevailed over the will of God. But inasmuch as God is invincible and
long-suffering, He did indeed show Himself to be long-suffering in the matter of the correction of
man and the probation of all, as I have already observed; and by means of the second man did He
bind the strong man, and spoiled his goods, and abolished death, vivifying that man who had
been in a state of death. For at the first Adam became a vessel in his (Satan's) possession, whom
he did also hold under his power, that is, by bringing sin on him iniquitously, and under colour of
immortality entailing death upon him. For, while promising that they should be as gods, which was
in no way possible for him to be, he wrought death in them: wherefore he who had led man captive,
was justly captured in his turn by God; but man, who had been led captive, was loosed from the
bonds of condemnation.
2. But this is Adam, if the truth should be told, the first formed man, of whom the Scripture
says that the Lord spake, "Let Us make man after Our own image and likeness;" and we are all
from him: and as we are from him, therefore have we all inherited his title. But inasmuch as man
is saved, it is fitting that he who was created the original man should be saved. For it is too absurd
to maintain, that he who was so deeply injured by the enemy, and was the first to suffer captivity,
was not rescued by Him who conquered the enemy, but that his children were, —those whom he
had begotten in the same captivity. Neither would the enemy appear to be as yet conquered, if the

old spoils remained with him. To give an illustration: If a hostile force had overcome certain
[enemies], had bound them, and led them away captive, and held them for a long time in servitude,
so that they begat children among them; and somebody, compassionating those who had been made
slaves, should overcome this same hostile force; he certainly would not act equitably, were he to
liberate the children of those who had been led captive, from the sway of those who had enslaved
their fathers, but should leave these latter, who had suffered the act of capture, subject to their
enemies,—those, too, on whose very account he had proceeded to this retaliation,— the children
succeeding to liberty through the avenging of their fathers' cause, but not so that their fathers,
who suffered the act of capture itself, should be left [in bondage]. For God is neither devoid of
power nor of justice, who has afforded help to man, and restored him to His own liberty.
3. It was for this reason, too, that immediately after Adam had transgressed, as the Scripture
relates, He pronounced no curse against Adam personally, but against the ground, in reference to
his works, as a certain person among the ancients has observed: "God did indeed transfer the curse
to the earth, that it might not remain in man." But man received, as the punishment of his
transgression, the toilsome task of tilling the earth, and to eat bread in the sweat of his face, and to
return to the dust from whence he was taken. Similarly also did the woman [receive] toil, and labour,
and groans, and the pangs of parturition, and a state of subjection, that is, that she should serve her
husband; so that they should neither perish altogether when cursed by God, nor, by remaining
unreprimanded, should be led to despise God. But the curse in all its fulness fell upon the serpent,
which had beguiled them. "And God," it is declared, "said to the serpent: Because thou hast done
this, cursed art thou above all cattle, and above all the beasts of the earth." And this same thing
does the Lord also say in the Gospel, to those who are found upon the left hand: "Depart from me,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which my Father hath prepared for the devil and his angels;"
indicating that eternal fire was not originally prepared for man, but for him who beguiled man, and
caused him to offend—for him, I say, who is chief of the apostasy, and for those angels who became
apostates along with him; which [fire], indeed, they too shall justly feel, who, like him, persevere
in works of wickedness, without repentance, and without retracing their steps.
4. [These act] as Cain [did, who], when he was counselled by God to keep quiet, because
he had not made an equitable division of that share to which his brother was entitled, but with envy
and malice thought that he could domineer over him, not only did not acquiesce, but even added
sin to sin, indicating his state of mind by his action. For what he had planned, that did he also put