away, that knowledge should be done away, this is what may cause some
perplexity. For this also he added, "Whether there be knowledge, it shall be done
away." What then? Are we then to live in ignorance? Far from it. Nay, then
specially it is probable that our knowledge is made intense. Wherefore also he
said, "Then shall I know, even as also I am known." For this reason, if you mark
it, that you might not suppose this to be done away equally with the prophecy
and the tongues, having said, "Whether there be knowledge, it shall be done
away," he was not silent, but added also the manner of its vanishing away,
immediately subjoining the saying,

1 Corinthians 13:9-10
"We know in part, and we prophesy in part. But when that which is perfect
has come, then that which is in part shall be done away."
It is not therefore knowledge that is done away, but the circumstance that
our knowledge is in part. For we shall not only know as much but even a great
deal more. But that I may also make it plain by example; now we know that God
is every where, but how, we know not. That He made out of things that are not
the things that are we know; but of the manner we are ignorant. That He was
born of a virgin, we know; but how, we know not yet. But then shall we know
somewhat more and clearer concerning these things. Next he points out also how
great is the distance between the two, and that our deficiency is no small one,
saying,

1 Corinthians 13:11
"When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I felt as a child, I thought as a
child; but now that I have become a man, I have put away childish things."
And by another example too he manifests the same thing again, saying,

1 Corinthians 13:12
"For now we see in a mirror." Further, because the glass sets before us the
thing seen indefinitely, he added, "darkly ," to show very strongly that the
present knowledge is most partial.
"But then face to face." Not as though God has a face, but to express the
notion of greater clearness and perspicuity. Do you see how we learn all things
by gradual addition?
"Now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I have been
known." Do you see how in two ways he pulls down their pride? Both because
their knowledge is in part, and because not even this have they of themselves.
"For I knew Him not, but He made Himself known to me," says he. Wherefore,
even as now He first knew me, and Himself hastened towards me, so shall I
hasten towards Him then much more than now. For so he that sits in darkness, as
long as he sees not the sun does not of himself hasten to meet the beauty of its
beam, which indeed shows itself as soon as it has begun to shine: but when he
perceives its brightness, then also himself at length follows after its light: This
then is the meaning of the expression, "even as also I have been known." Not
that we shall so know him as He is, but that even as He hastened toward us now,
so also shall we cleave unto Him then, and shall know many of the things which
are now secret, and shall enjoy that most blessed society and wisdom. For if Paul
who knew so much was a child, consider what those things must be. If these be
"a glass" and "a riddle," do thou hence again infer, God's open Face, how great a
thing It is.
3. But that I may open out to you some small part of this difference, and
may impart some faint ray of this thought to your soul, I would have you recall
to mind things as they were in the Law, now after that grace has shone forth. For
those things too, that came before grace, had a certain great and marvellous