seem that the power of the soul is its own essence.
On the contrary, Dionysius (Coel. Hier. xi) says that "heavenly spirits
are divided into essence, power, and operation." Much more, then, in
the soul is the essence distinct from the virtue or power.
I answer that, It is impossible to admit that the power of the soul is
its essence, although some have maintained it. For the present
purpose this may be proved in two ways. First, because, since power
and act divide being and every kind of being, we must refer a power
and its act to the same genus. Therefore, if the act be not in the
genus of substance, the power directed to that act cannot be in the
genus of substance. Now the operation of the soul is not in the
genus of substance; for this belongs to God alone, whose operation
is His own substance. Wherefore the Divine power which is the
principle of His operation is the Divine Essence itself. This cannot be
true either of the soul, or of any creature; as we have said above
when speaking of the angels (Question 54, Article 3). Secondly, this
may be also shown to be impossible in the soul. For the soul by its
very essence is an act. Therefore if the very essence of the soul were
the immediate principle of operation, whatever has a soul would
always have actual vital actions, as that which has a soul is always
an actually living thing. For as a form the soul is not an act ordained
to a further act, but the ultimate term of generation. Wherefore, for it
to be in potentiality to another act, does not belong to it according to
its essence, as a form, but according to its power. So the soul itself,
as the subject of its power, is called the first act, with a further
relation to the second act. Now we observe that what has a soul is
not always actual with respect to its vital operations; whence also it
is said in the definition of the soul, that it is "the act of a body having
life potentially"; which potentiality, however, "does not exclude the
soul." Therefore it follows that the essence of the soul is not its
power. For nothing is in potentiality by reason of an act, as act.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine is speaking of the mind as it knows
and loves itself. Thus knowledge and love as referred to the soul as
known and loved, are substantially or essentially in the soul, for the
very substance or essence of the soul is known and loved. In the
same way are we to understand what he says in the other passage,
that those things are "one life, one mind, one essence." Or, as some
say, this passage is true in the sense in which the potential whole is
predicated of its parts, being midway between the universal whole,
and the integral whole. For the universal whole is in each part

according to its entire essence and power; as animal in a man and in
a horse; and therefore it is properly predicated of each part. But the
integral whole is not in each part, neither according to its whole
essence, nor according to its whole power. Therefore in no way can
it be predicated of each part; yet in a way it is predicated, though
improperly, of all the parts together; as if we were to say that the
wall, roof, and foundations are a house. But the potential whole is in
each part according to its whole essence, not, however, according to
its whole power. Therefore in a way it can be predicated of each part,
but not so properly as the universal whole. In this sense, Augustine
says that the memory, understanding, and the will are the one
essence of the soul.
Reply to Objection 2: The act to which primary matter is in
potentiality is the substantial form. Therefore the potentiality of
matter is nothing else but its essence.
Reply to Objection 3: Action belongs to the composite, as does
existence; for to act belongs to what exists. Now the composite has
substantial existence through the substantial form; and it operates
by the power which results from the substantial form. Hence an
active accidental form is to the substantial form of the agent (for
instance, heat compared to the form of fire) as the power of the soul
is to the soul.
Reply to Objection 4: That the accidental form is a principle of action
is due to the substantial form. Therefore the substantial form is the
first principle of action; but not the proximate principle. In this sense
the Philosopher says that "the soul is that whereby we understand
and sense."
Reply to Objection 5: If we take accident as meaning what is divided
against substance, then there can be no medium between substance
and accident; because they are divided by affirmation and negation,
that is, according to existence in a subject, and non-existence in a
subject. In this sense, as the power of the soul is not its essence, it
must be an accident; and it belongs to the second species of
accident, that of quality. But if we take accident as one of the five
universals, in this sense there is a medium between substance and
accident. For the substance is all that belongs to the essence of a
thing; whereas whatever is beyond the essence of a thing cannot be
called accident in this sense; but only what is not caused by the
essential principle of the species. For the 'proper' does not belong to