the vast extent of earth standing on the waters, tell me, ever stand so firmly, and
so long a time, without some power to hold it together? And can these views
have any reason? Is it not the extreme of absurdity to conceive such a notion?
And if the earth supports the heaven, behold another burden still; but if the
heaven also is borne upon the waters, there arises again another question. Or
rather not another question, for it is the work of providence. For things which are
borne upon the water ought not to be made convex, but concave. Wherefore?
Because the whole body of anything which is concave is immersed in the waters,
as is the case with a ship; whereas of the convex the body is entirely above, and
only the rim rests upon the surface; so that it requires a resisting body, hard, and
able to sustain it, in order to bear the burden imposed. But does the atmosphere
then support the heaven? Why, that is far softer, and more yielding even than
water, and cannot sustain anything, no, not the very lightest things, much less so
vast a bulk. In fine, if we chose to follow out the argument of providence, both
generally and in detail, time itself would fail us. For I will now ask him who
would start those questions above mentioned, are these things the result of
providence, or of the want of providence? And if he shall say, that they are not
from providence, then again I will ask, how then did they arise? But no, he will
never be able to give any account at all. And do you not know that?
Much more then is it your duty not to question, not to be over curious, in
those things which concern man. And why not? Because man is nobler than all
these, and these were made for his sake, not he for their sake. If then you know
not so much as the skill and contrivance that are visible in His providence, how
shall you be able to know the reasons, where he himself is the subject? Tell me, I
pray, why did God form him so small, so far below the height of heaven, as that
he should even doubt of the things which appear above him? Why are the
northern and southern climes uninhabitable? Tell me, I say, why is the night
made longer in winter and shorter in summer? Why are the degrees of cold and
heat such as they are? Why is the body mortal? And ten thousand questions
besides I will ask you, and if you will, will never cease asking. And in one and

all you will surely be at a loss to answer. And thus is this of all things most
providential, that the reasons of things are kept secret from us. For surely, one
would have imagined man to be the cause of all things, were there not this to
humble our understanding.
"But such an one," you will say, "is poor, and poverty is an evil. And what
is it to be sick, and what is it to be crippled?" Oh, man, they are nothing. One
thing alone is evil, that is to sin; this is the only thing we ought to search to the
bottom. And yet we omit to search into the causes of what are really evils, and
busy ourselves about other things. Why is it that not one of us ever examines
why he has sinned? To sin—is it then in my power, or is it not in my power?
And why need I go round about me for a number of reasons? I will seek for the
matter within myself. Now then did I ever master my wrath? Did I ever master
my anger, either through shame, or through fear of man? Then whenever I
discover this done, I shall discover that to sin is in my own power. No one
examines these matters, no one busies himself about them. But only according to
Job, "Man in a way altogether different swims upon words." For why does it
concern you, if such an one is blind, or such an one poor? God has not
commanded you to look to this, but to what you yourself art doing. For if on the
one hand you doubt that there is any power superintending the world, you are of
all men the most senseless; but if you are persuaded of this, why doubt that it is
our duty to please God?
"Giving thanks always," he says, "for all things to God."
Go to the physician's, and you will see him, whenever a man is discovered
to have a wound, using the knife and the cautery. But no, in your case, I say not
so much as this; but go to the carpenter's. And yet thou dost not examine his
reasons, although you understand not one of the things which are done there, and
many things will appear to you to be difficulties; as, for instance, when he
hollows the wood, when he alters its outward shape. Nay, I would bring you to a
more intelligible craft still, for instance, that of the painter, and there your head
will swim. For tell me, does he not seem to be doing what he does, at random?