of virtues. And on what ground does he nowhere say my Lord such an one, my
Master this? It is because these encomiums were greater than those. For those
are mere titles of rank ([τιμἥς]), but these are of virtue. And this same honor he
paid them not at random, or as addressing several of inferior virtue with the high
and great characters. For so far as he is addressing, and that too one along with
another, and in the same letter, he honors them all alike. But by stating the
praises particularly to each, he sets before us the virtue peculiar to each; so as
neither to give birth to envy by honoring one and dishonoring another, nor to
work in them listlessness and confusion, by giving them all the same dignity,
though they did not deserve the same. See now how he again comes to the
admirable women. For after saying, "Salute them which are of Aristobulus'
household,"
Ver. 11. "Salute Herodion my kinsman; greet them which be of the
household of Narcissus;"
Who, it is likely, were not so worthy as the afore-mentioned, on which
account also he does not mention them all by name even, and after giving them
the encomium which was suited to them, that of being faithful, (and this the
meaning of,)
"Which are in the Lord."
He again reverts to the women, and says,
Ver. 12. "Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord."
And in regard to the former woman, he says that "she bestowed labor upon
you," but of these that they are still laboring. And this is no small encomium,
that they should be in work throughout, and should not only work, but labor
even. But Persis he calls beloved too, to show that she is greater than these.
For he says, "Salute my beloved Persis."
And of her great laborings he likewise bears testimony, and says, "which
labored much in the Lord."
So well does he know how to name each after his deserts, so making these
more eager by not depriving them of any of their dues, but commending even the

slightest preëminence, and making the others more virtuous, and inciting them to
the same zeal, by his encomiums upon these.
Ver. 12. "Salute Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine."
Here again the good things are without any drawback, since the son and the
mother are each of such a character, and the house is full of blessing, and the
root agrees with the fruit; for he would not have simply said, "his mother and
mine," unless he had been bearing testimony to the woman for great virtue.
Ver. 14. "Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the
brethren which are with them."
Here do not be looking to how he starts them without any encomium, but
how he did not reckon them, though far inferior, as it seems, to all, unworthy of
being addressed by him. Or rather even this is no slight praise that he even calls
them brethren, as also those that are after them he calls saints. For he says,
Ver. 15. "Salute Philologus, and Julius, and Nereus and his sister, and
Olympas, and all the saints which are with them;"
Which was the greatest dignity, and unspeakable height of honor. Then to
prevent any jealousy rising from his addressing one in one way and another in
another, and some by name and some with no distinction, and some with more
points of praise, and some with fewer, he again mingles them in the equality of
charity, and in the holy kiss, saying,
Ver. 16. "Salute one another with an holy kiss."
To cast out of them, by this salutation, all arguing that confused them, and
all grounds for little pride; that neither the great might despise the little, nor the
little grudge at the greater, but that haughtiness and envy might be more driven
away, when this kiss soothed down and levelled every one. And therefore he not
only bids them salute in this way, but sends in like manner to them the greeting
from the Churches. For "there salute you," he says, not this or that person
individually, but all of you in common,
"The Churches of Christ."
You see that they are no small gains that we earn from these addresses, and