wilt hear those words which are worth ten thousand blessings. Let us then not
neglect such a practice and occupation. For although we be not able to bring
them food, nor to help them by giving money, yet shall we be able to comfort
them by our words, and to raise up the drooping spirit, and to help them in many
other ways by conversing with those who cast them into prison, and by making
their keepers kinder, and we certainly shall effect either small or great good. But
if you say that the men there are neither men of condition, nor good, nor gentle,
but man-slayers, tomb-breakers, cut-purses, adulterers, intemperate, and full of
many wickednesses, by this again you show to me a pressing reason for
spending time there. For we are not commanded to take pity on the good and to
punish the evil, but to manifest this lovingkindness to all men. "Be," It says, "like
to My Father which is in heaven, for He makes His sun to rise on the evil and on
the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust." [Matthew 5:45] Do not
then accuse other men's faults bitterly, nor be a severe judge, but mild and
merciful. For we also, if we have not been adulterers, or tomb-breakers, or cutpurses, yet have we other transgressions which deserve infinite punishment.
Perchance we have called our brother "fool," which prepares for us the pit; we
have looked on women with unchastened eyes, which constitutes absolute
adultery; and what is more grievous than all, we partake not worthily of the
Mysteries, which makes us guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ. Let us then
not be bitter enquirers into the conduct of others, but consider our own state, so
shall we desist from this inhumanity and cruelty. Besides this, it may be said that
we shall there find many good men, and often men worth as much as all the city.
Since even that prison-house in which Joseph was had in it many evil men, yet
that just man had the care of them all, and was, with the rest, concealed as to his
real character; for he was worth as much as all the land of Egypt, yet still he
dwelt in the prison-house, and no one knew him of those that were within it.
Thus also even now it is likely that there are many good and virtuous men,
though they be not visible to all men, and the care you take of such as these
gives you a return for your exertions in favor of the whole. Or if there be none

such, still even in this case great is your recompense; for your Lord conversed
not with the just only, while He avoided the unclean, but received with kindness
both the Canaanitish woman, and her of Samaria, the abominable and impure;
another also who was a harlot, on whose account the Jews reproached Him, He
both received and healed, and allowed His feet to be washed by the tears of the
polluted one, teaching us to condescend to those that are in sin, for this most of
all is kindness. What do you say? Do robbers and tomb-breakers dwell in the
prison? And, tell me, are all they just men that dwell in the city? Nay, are there
not many worse even than these, robbing with greater shamelessness? For the
one sort, if there be no other excuse for them, at least put before themselves the
veil of solitude and darkness, and the doing these things clandestinely; but the
others throw away the mask and go after their wickedness with uncovered head,
being violent, grasping, and covetous. Hard it is to find a man pure from
injustice.
6. If we do not take by violence gold, or such and such a number of acres of
land, yet we bring about the same end by deceit and robbery in lesser matters,
and where we are able to do so. For when in making contracts, or when we must
buy or sell anything, we dispute and strive to pay less than the value, and use our
utmost endeavors to have it so, is not the action robbery? Is it not theft and
covetousness? Tell not me that you have not wrested away houses or slaves, for
injustice is judged not by the measure of the things taken, but by the intention of
those who commit the robbery. Since "just" and "unjust" have the same force in
great and in little things; and I call cut-purses alike the man who cuts through a
purse and takes the gold, and him who buying from any of the market people
deducts something from the proper price; nor is he the only house-breaker who
breaks through a wall and steals anything within, but that man also who corrupts
justice, and takes anything from his neighbor.
Let us not then pass by our own faults, and become judges of other men's;
nor let us, when it is time for lovingkindness, be searching out their wickedness;
but considering what our own state was once, let us now be gentle and kind.