He means the life yonder; and again, "Keep your tongue from evil and your lips
from speaking guile; de part from evil and do good, seek peace and pursue it."
[Psalm 34:13-14]
Do you know indeed who said these things, a prophet or a historian, or an
apostle, or an evangelist? For my own part I do not think you do, except a few.
Yea and these themselves again, if we bring forward a testimony from some
other place, will be in the same case as the rest of you. For see, I repeat the same
statement expressed in other words. "Wash ye, make you clean, put away your
wickedness from your souls before My eyes, learn to do well, seek out judgment.
Keep your tongue from evil, and do good: learn to do well." [Isaiah 1:16-17] You
see that virtue needs to be taught? For this one says, "I will teach you the fear of
the Lord," and the other, "Learn to do well."
Now then do you know where these words are? For myself I do not think
you do, except a few. And yet every week these things are read to you twice or
even three times: and the reader when he goes up [to the desk] first says whose
the book is, [the book] of such a prophet, and then says what he says, so that it
shall be more intelligible to you and you may not only know the contents of the
Book, but also the reason of the writings, and who spoke these things. But all in
vain; all to no purpose. For your zeal is spent on things of this life, and of things
spiritual no account is made. Therefore not even those matters turn out according
to your wishes, but there also are many difficulties. For Christ says, "Seek the
Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you." [Matthew 6:33]
These things He said, shall also be given in the way of addition: but we have
inverted the order and seek the earth and the good things which are in the earth,
as if those other [heavenly] things were to be given us in addition. Therefore we
have neither the one nor the other. Let us then at last wake up and become
coveters of the things which shall be hereafter; for so these also will follow. For
it is not possible that he who seeks the things that relate to God, should not also
attain human [blessings]. It is the declaration of the Truth itself which says this.
Let us not then act otherwise, but let us hold fast to the counsel of Christ, lest we

fail of all. But God is able to give you compunction and to make you better, in
Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost be
glory, power, honor, now and for ever and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 9 on Hebrews

Hebrews 6:1-3
" Therefore leaving the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on
unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works,
and of faith toward God; of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands;
and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. And this we will do, if
God permit."
1. You have heard how much Paul found fault with the Hebrews for wishing
to be always learning about the same things. And with good reason: "For when
for the time ye ought to be teachers, you have need again that some one teach
you the elements of the first principles of the oracles of God." [Hebrews 5:12]
I am afraid that this might fitly be said to you also, that "when for the time
ye ought to be teachers," ye do not maintain the rank of learners, but ever
hearing the same things, and on the same subjects, you are in the same condition
as if you heard no one. And if any man should question you, no one will be able
to answer, except a very few who may soon be counted.
But this is no trifling loss. For oftentimes when the teacher wishes to go on
further, and to touch on higher and more mysterious themes, the want of
attention in those who are to be taught prevents.
For just as in the case of a grammar-master, if a boy though hearing
continually the first elements does not master them, it will be necessary for him
to be continually dinning the same things into the boy, and he will not leave off
teaching, until the boy has been able to learn them accurately; for it is great folly
to lead him on to other things, without having put the first well into him; so too
in the Church, if while we constantly say the same things you learn nothing
more, we shall never cease saying the same things.