2 Corinthians 9:3
"For this cause have I sent the brethren that our glorying on your behalf
may not be made void."
Do you see that he is in anxiety and terror, lest he should seem to have said
what he said only for exhortation's sake? 'But because so it is,' says he, "I have
sent the brethren;" 'so earnest am I on your behalf,' "that our glorying may not
be made void." And he appears to make himself of the Corinthians' party
throughout, although caring for all alike. What he says is this; 'I am very proud
of you, I glory before all, I boasted even unto them , so that if you be found
wanting, I am partner in the shame.' And this indeed he says under limitation, for
he added,
"In this respect," not, in all points;
"That even as I said, you may be prepared." 'For I did not say, 'they are
purposing,' but 'all is ready; and nothing is now wanting on their part. This then,'
he says, 'I wish to be shown by your deeds.' Then he even heightens the anxiety,
saying,

2 Corinthians 9:4
"Lest by any means if there come with me any from Macedonia, we, (that we
say not ye,) should be put to shame in this confidence." The shame is greater
when the spectators he has arrayed against them are many, even those same
persons who had heard [his boasting.] And he did not say, 'for I am bringing with
me Macedonians.' 'for there are Macedonians coming with me;' lest he should
seem to do it on purpose; but how [said he?] "Lest by any means, if there come
with me any from Macedonia?" 'For this may happen,' he says, 'it is matter of
possibility.' For thus he also made what he said unsuspected, but had he
expressed himself in that other way, he would have even made them the more
contentious. See how he leads them on, not from spiritual motives only, but from
human ones as well. 'For,' says he, 'though you make no great account of me, and
reckon confidently on my excusing you, yet think of them of Macedonia,' "lest
by any means, if they come and find you;" and he did not say 'unwillingly,' but
"unprepared," not having got all completed. But if this be a disgrace, not to
contribute quickly; consider how great it were to contribute either not at all, or
less than behooved. Then he lays down what would thereupon follow, in terms at
once gentle and pungent, thus saying, "We, (that we say not ye,) should be put to
shame." And he tempers it again, saying, "in this confidence" not as making
them more listless, but as showing that they who were approved in all other
respects, ought in this one also to have great fearlessness.

2 Corinthians 9:5
2. "I thought it necessary therefore to entreat the brethren, that they would
make up beforehand this your bounty, that the same might be ready, as a matter
of bounty and not of extortion. "
Again, he resumed the subject in a different manner: and that he may not
seem to be saying these things without object, he asserts that the sole reason for
this journey was, that they might not be put to shame. Do you see how his
words, "It is superfluous for me to write," were the beginning of advising? You
see, at least, how many things he discourses concerning this ministering. And
along with this, one may further remark that, (lest he should seem to contradict
himself as having said, "It is superfluous," yet discoursing at length about it,) he
passed on unto discourse of quickness and largeness and forwardness [in
contributing,] by this means securing that point also. For these three things he
requires. And indeed he moved these three main points even at the first, for
when he says, "In much proof of affliction the abundance of their joy, and their
deep poverty, abounded unto the riches of their liberality," he says nothing else
than that they contributed both much and gladly and quickly; and that not only
did not giving much pain them, but not even being in trials, which is more
grievous than giving. And the words, "they gave themselves to us;" these also
show both their forwardness and the greatness of their faith. And here too again
he treats of those heads. For since these are opposed to [each other,] munificence
and forwardness, and one that has given much is often sorrowful, while another,
that he may not be sorry, gives less; observe how he takes care for each, and with
the wisdom which belongs to him. For he did not say, 'it is better to give a little
and of free choice, than much of necessity;' because he wished them to
contribute both much and of free choice; but how says he? that they might make
up beforehand this your bounty, that the same might be ready as a matter of