49:16] Then to show that the hand is One, He sometimes says that it is His own,
sometimes the Father's. But when you hear the word "hand," do not understand
anything material, but the power, the authority. Again, if it was on this account
that no one could pluck away the sheep, because the Father gave Him power, it
would have been superfluous to say what follows, "I and the Father are One."
Since were He inferior to Him, this would have been a very daring saying, for it
declares nothing else than an equality of power; of which the Jews were
conscious, and took up stones to cast at Him. [John 10:31] Yet not even so did
He remove this opinion and suspicion; though if their suspicion were erroneous,
He ought to have set them right, and to have said, "Wherefore do ye these
things? I spoke not thus to testify that my power and the Father's are equal"; but
now He does quite the contrary, and confirms their suspicion, and clenches it,
and that too when they were exasperated. For He makes no excuse for what had
been said, as though it had been said ill, but rebukes them for not entertaining a
right opinion concerning Him. For when they said,

John 10:33-36
"For a good work we stone you not, but for blasphemy; and because that thou
being a man makest yourself God"; hear His answer; "If the Scripture called
them gods unto whom the word of God came, how say ye that I blaspheme,
because I said, I am the Son of God?"
What He says is of this kind: "If those who have received this honor by
grace, are not found fault with for calling themselves gods, how can He who has
this by nature deserve to be rebuked?" Yet He spoke not so, but proved it at a
later time, having first relaxed and yielded somewhat in His discourse, and said,
"Whom the Father has sanctified and sent." And when He had softened their
anger, He brings forward the plain assertion. For a while, that His speech might
be received, He spoke in a humbler strain, but afterwards He raised it higher,
saying,

John 10:37-38
"If I do not the works of My Father, believe Me not; but if I do, though ye believe
not Me, believe the works."
Do you see how He proves what I said, that He is in nothing inferior to the
Father, but in every way equal to Him? For since it was impossible to see His
Essence, from the equality and sameness of the works He affords a proof of
unvaryingness as to Power. And what, tell me, shall we believe?
3. "That I am in the Father, and the Father in Me."
"For I am nothing other than what the Father is, yet still Son; He nothing
other than what I am, yet still Father. And if any man know Me, he knows the
Father, and if he knows the Father, he has learned also the Son." Now were the
power inferior, then also what relates to the knowledge would be false, for it is
not possible to become acquainted with one substance or power by means of
another.