need I reckon in detail all the indecency that is there? All there is laughter, all is
shame, all disgrace, revilings and mockings, all abandonment, all destruction.
See, I forewarn and charge you all. Let none of those who enjoy the blessings of
this table destroy his own soul by those pernicious spectacles. All that is said and
done there is a pageant of Satan. But you who have been initiated know what
manner of covenants you made with us, or rather you made with Christ when He
guided you into His mysteries, what you spoke to Him, what speech you had
with Him concerning Satan's pageant; how with Satan and his angels you
renounced this also, and promised that you would not so much as cast a glance
that way. There is then no slight ground for fear, lest, by becoming careless of
such promises, one should render himself unworthy of these mysteries.
7. Do you see not how in king's palaces it is not those who have offended,
but those who have been honorably distinguished, that are called to share special
favor, and are numbered among the king's friends. A messenger has come to us
from heaven, sent by God Himself, to speak with us on certain necessary
matters, and you leave hearing His will, and the message He sends to you, and
sit listening to stage-players. What thunderings, what bolts from heaven, does
not this conduct deserve! For as it is not meet to partake of the table of devils, so
neither is it of the listening to devils; nor to be present with filthy raiment at that
glorious Table, loaded with so many good things, which God Himself has
provided. Such is its power, that it can raise us at once to heaven, if only we
approach it with a sober mind. For it is not possible that he who is continually
under the influence of the words of God, can remain in this present low
condition, but he needs must presently take wing, and fly away to the land which
is above, and light on the infinite treasures of good things; which may it be that
we all attain to, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom and with whom be glory to the Father and the All-holy Spirit,
now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

Homily 2 on the Gospel of John
John 1:1
"In the beginning was the Word."
Were John about to converse with us, and to say to us words of his own, we
needs must describe his family, his country, and his education. But since it is not
he, but God by him, that speaks to mankind, it seems to me superfluous and
distracting to enquire into these matters. And yet even thus it is not superfluous,
but even very necessary. For when you have learned who he was, and from
whence, who his parents, and what his character, and then hear his voice and all
his heavenly wisdom, then you shall know right well that these (doctrines)
belong not to him, but to the Divine power stirring his soul.
From what country then was he? From no country; but from a poor village,
and from a land little esteemed, and producing no good thing. For the Scribes
speak evil of Galilee, saying, "Search and look, for out of Galilee arises no
prophet." [John 7:52] And "the Israelite indeed" speaks ill of it, saying, "Can
any good thing come out of Nazareth?" And being of this land, he was not even
of any remarkable place in it, but of one not even distinguished by name. Of this
he was, and his father a poor fisherman, so poor that he took his sons to the same
employment. Now you all know that no workman will choose to bring up his son
to succeed him in his trade, unless poverty press him very hard, especially where
the trade is a mean one. But nothing can be poorer, meaner, no, nor more
ignorant, than fishermen. Yet even among them there are some greater, some
less; and even there our Apostle occupied the lower rank, for he did not take his
prey from the sea, but passed his time on a certain little lake. And as he was
engaged by it with his father and his brother James, and they mending their
broken nets, a thing which of itself marked extreme poverty, so Christ called