houses, and draw about with us herds of all kinds of servants, and devise
different stewards, appointing managers of lands, of houses, of money, and
managers of those managers; but as to our desolate soul, we care nothing for
that. And what will be the limit to this? Is it not one belly that we fill, is it not
one body that we clothe? What is this great bustle of business? Why and
wherefore do we cut up and tear to pieces the one soul, which we have had
assigned to us, in attending to the service of such things, contriving for ourselves
a grievous slavery? For he who needs many things is the slave of many things,
although he seem to be their master. Since the lord is the slave even of his
domestics, and brings in another and a heavier mode of service; and in another
way also he is their slave, not daring without them to enter the agora, nor the
bath, nor the field, but they frequently go about in all directions without him. He
who seems to be master, dares not, if his slaves be not present, to go forth from
home, and if while unattended he do but put his head out of his house, he thinks
that he is laughed at. Perhaps some laugh at us when we say this, yet on this very
account they would be deserving of ten thousand tears. For to show that this is
slavery, I would gladly ask you, would you wish to need some one to put the
morsel to your mouth, and to apply the cup to your lips? Would you not deem
such a service worthy of tears? What if you required continually supporters to
enable you to walk, would you not think yourself pitiable, and in this respect
more wretched than any? So then you ought to be disposed now. For it matters
nothing whether one is so treated by irrational things, or by men.
Why, tell me, do not the Angels differ from us in this respect, that they do
not want so many things as we do? Therefore the less we need, the more we are
on our way to them; the more we need, the more we sink down to this perishable
life. And that you may learn that these things are so, ask those who have grown
old which life they deem happiest, that when they were helplessly mastered, or
now when they are masters of these things? We have mentioned these persons,
because those who are intoxicated with youth, do not even know the excess of
their slavery. For what of those in fever, do they call themselves happy when,

thirsting much, they drink much and need more, or when, having recovered their
health, they are free from the desire? Do you see that in every instance the
needing much is pitiable, and far apart from true wisdom, and an aggravation of
slavery and desire? Why then do we voluntarily increase to ourselves
wretchedness? For, tell me, if it were possible to live uninjured without roof or
walls, would you not prefer this; wherefore then do you increase the signs of
your weakness? Do we not for this call Adam happy, that he needed nothing, no
house, no clothes? "Yes," says some one, "but now we are in need of them." Why
then do we make our need greater? If many persons curtail many of the things
actually needed, (servants, I mean, and houses, and money,) what excuse can we
have if we overstep the need? The more you put about you, the more slavish do
you become; for by whatever proportion you require more, in that proportion
you have trenched upon your freedom. For absolute freedom is, to want nothing
at all; the next is, to want little; and this the Angels and their imitators especially
possess. But for men to succeed in this while tarrying in a mortal body, think
how great praise this has. This also Paul said, when writing to the Corinthians,
"But I spare you," and, "lest such should have trouble in the flesh." [1
Corinthians 7:28] Riches are called "usables," that we may "use" them rightly,
and not keep and bury them; for this is not to possess them, but to be possessed
by them. Since if we are going to make this our aim how to multiply them, not
that we may employ them rightly, the order is reversed, and they possess us, not
we them. Let us then free ourselves from this grievous bondage, and at last
become free. Why do we devise ten thousand different chains for ourselves? Is
not the bond of nature enough for you, and the necessity of life, and the crowd of
ten thousand affairs, but do you twine also other nets for yourself, and put them
about your feet? And when will you lay hold on heaven, and be able to stand on
that height? For a great thing, a great thing is it, that even having cut asunder all
these cords, you should be able to lay hold on the city which is above. So many
other hindrances are there; all which that we may conquer, let us keep to the
mean estate [and having put away superfluities, let us keep to what is necessary.]