THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.6.

received in a high degree both the gift of wisdom and the grace of
miracles and even of prophecy, just as Christ had them. But she did
not so receive them, as to put them and such like graces to every
use, as did Christ: but accordingly as it befitted her condition of life.
For she had the use of wisdom in contemplation, according to Lk.
2:19: "But Mary kept all these words, pondering them in her heart."
But she had not the use of wisdom as to teaching: since this befitted
not the female sex, according to 1 Tim. 2:12: "But I suffer not a
woman to teach." The use of miracles did not become her while she
lived: because at that time the Teaching of Christ was to be
confirmed by miracles, and therefore it was befitting that Christ
alone, and His disciples who were the bearers of His doctrine,
should work miracles. Hence of John the Baptist it is written (Jn.
10:41) that he "did no sign"; that is, in order that all might fix their
attention on Christ. As to the use of prophecy, it is clear that she had
it, from the canticle spoken by her: "My soul doth magnify the
Lord" (Lk. 1:46, etc.).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether after Christ, it was proper to the Blessed

Virgin to be sanctified in the womb?
Objection 1: It would seem that it was proper for the Blessed Virgin,
after Christ, to be sanctified in the womb. For it has been said
(Article 4) that the Blessed Virgin was sanctified in the womb, in
order that she might be worthy to be the mother of God. But this is
proper to her. Therefore she alone was sanctified in the womb.
Objection 2: Further, some men seem to have been more closely
connected with Christ than Jeremias and John the Baptist, who are
said to have been sanctified in the womb. For Christ is specially
called the Son of David and of Abraham, by reason of the promise
specially made to them concerning Christ. Isaias also prophesied of
Christ in the most express terms. And the apostles were in converse
with Christ Himself. And yet these are not mentioned as having been
sanctified in the womb. Therefore it was not befitting that either
Jeremias or John the Baptist should be sanctified in the womb.
Objection 3: Further, Job says of himself (Job 31:18): "From my
infancy mercy grew up with me; and it came out with me from [my
mother's] womb." Nevertheless we do not for this reason say that he
was sanctified in the womb. Neither therefore are we bound to say
that Jeremias and John the Baptist were sanctified in the womb.
On the contrary, It is written of Jeremias (Jer. 1:5): "Before thou
camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee." And of John the
Baptist it is written (Lk. 1:15): "He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost,
even from his mother's womb."
I answer that, Augustine (Ep. ad Dardan.) seems to speak dubiously
of their (Jeremias' and John the Baptist's) sanctification in the
womb. For the leaping of John in the womb "might," as he says,
"signify the great truth," viz. that the woman was the mother of God,
"which was to be made known to his elders, though as yet unknown
to the infant. Hence in the Gospel it is written, not that the infant in
her womb believed, but that it 'leaped': and our eyes are witness that
not only infants leap but also cattle. But this was unwonted because
it was in the womb. And therefore, just as other miracles are wont to
be done, this was done divinely, in the infant; not humanly by the
infant. Perhaps also in this child the use of reason and will was so