is indeed invincible, to this they betook them for refuge. They did not say,
"What? I, poor insignificant creature that I am, to pray for him!" for, as they
acted of love, they did not give these things a thought. And observe, it was
during the feast, that (their enemies) brought these trials upon them, that their
worth might be the more approved. "And when Herod," etc. [Acts 12:6] See
Peter sleeping, and not in distress or fear! That same night, after which he was to
be brought forth, he slept, having cast all upon God. "Between two soldiers,
bound with two chains." [cf. 1 Peter 5:7] Mark, how strict the ward! "And says,
Arise." [Acts 12:7] The guards were asleep with him, and therefore perceived
nothing of what was happening. "And a light shined." What was the light for? In
order that Peter might see as well as hear, and not imagine it to be all fancy. And
the command, "Arise quickly, " that he may not be remiss. He also smote him; so
deeply did he sleep. (a) "Rise," says he, "quickly:" this is not to hurry him
([θορυβοὕντος]) but to persuade him not to delay. (c) "And" immediately "his
chains fell off from his hands." (b) How? Answer me: where are the heretics?—
let them answer. "And the Angel said unto him," etc. [Acts 12:8] by this also
convincing him that it is no fancy: to this end he bids him gird himself and put
on his shoes, that he may shake off his sleep, and know that it is real. (a) (e)
"And he knew not that it was true that was done by the Angel, but thought he saw
a vision" [Acts 12:9]: (e) well he might, by reason of the excessive greatness ([ὑ]
[περβολὴν]) of the things taking place. Do you mark what a thing it is for a
miracle to be excessive ([ὑ] [περβολὴ σημείου])? How it amazes ([ἐ] [κπλήττει])
the beholder? How it will not let the thing be believed? For if Peter "thought he
saw a vision," though he had girded himself and put on his shoes, what would
have been the case with another? "And," it says, "when they had passed the first
and the second ward, they came to the iron gate, which opened unto them of its
own accord" [Acts 12:10]: and yet the things that had happened within (the
prison) were more marvellous: but this was now more after the manner of man.
"And having gone out, they went along one street and immediately (all 'until')
the Angel departed from him." [Acts 12:11] When there was no hindrance, then

the Angel departed. For Peter would not have gone along ([προἥλθεν]), there
being so many hindrances. "And when he came to himself:" for in very truth, it
was indeed an amazement ([ἔ] [κπληξις]). "Now," says he, "I know"— now, not
then, when I was in the prison—"that the Lord has sent His Angel, and has
delivered me out of the hand of Herod and from all the expectation of the people
of the Jews. And when he had considered" [Acts 12:12], it says: viz. where he
was, or, that he must not without more ado depart but requite his Benefactor: "he
came to the house of Mary the mother of John." Who is this John? Probably he
that was always with them: for this is why he adds his distinctive name ([τὸ
παράσημον]), "whose surname was Mark." But observe, "praying" in the night,
how much they got by it: what a good thing affliction is; how wakeful it made
them! Do you see how great the gain resulting from the death of Stephen? Do
you see how great the benefit accruing from this imprisonment? For it is not by
taking vengeance upon those who wronged them that God shows the greatness
of the Gospel: but in the wrong-doers themselves, without any harm happening
to those, he shows what a mighty thing the afflictions in themselves are, that we
may not seek in any wise deliverance from them, nor the avenging of our
wrongs. And mark how the very servant-girls were henceforth upon an equality
with them. "For joy," it says, "she opened not." (v. 13, 14.) This too is well done,
that they likewise may not be amazed by seeing him at once, and that they may
be incredulous, and their minds may be exercised. "But ran in," etc. just as we
are wont to do, she was eager to be herself the bringer of the good tidings, for
good news it was indeed. "And they said unto her, You are mad: but she
constantly affirmed that it was even so: then said they, It is his Angel." [Acts
12:15] This is a truth, that each man has an Angel. And what would the Angel?
It was from the time (of night) that they surmised this. But when he "continued
knocking, and when they had opened, and saw him, they were astonished. But he
beckoning to them with his hand" (v. 16, 17), made them keep quiet, to hear all
that had happened to him. He was now an object of more affectionate desire to
the disciples, not only in consequence of his being saved, but by his sudden