SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.2.

transcends the rule of human reason, according to Eph. 3:19: "The
charity of Christ, which surpasseth all knowledge." Hence it is not in
the reason, either as its subject, like prudence is, or as its rule, like
justice and temperance are, but only by a certain kinship of the will
to the reason.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated in the FP, Question 83, Article 4, the
free-will is not a distinct power from the will. Yet charity is not in the
will considered as free-will, the act of which is to choose. For choice
is of things directed to the end, whereas the will is of the end itself
(Ethic. iii, 2). Hence charity, whose object is the last end, should be
described as residing in the will rather than in the free-will.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.23, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether charity is caused in us by infusion?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not caused in us by
infusion. For that which is common to all creatures, is in man
naturally. Now, according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv), the "Divine
good", which is the object of charity, "is for all an object of dilection
and love." Therefore charity is in us naturally, and not by infusion.
Objection 2: Further, the more lovable a thing is the easier it is to
love it. Now God is supremely lovable, since He is supremely good.
Therefore it is easier to love Him than other things. But we need no
infused habit in order to love other things. Neither, therefore, do we
need one in order to love God.
Objection 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:5): "The end of the
commandment is charity from a pure heart, and a good conscience,
and an unfeigned faith." Now these three have reference to human
acts. Therefore charity is caused in us from preceding acts, and not
from infusion.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 5:5): "The charity of God is
poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, Who is given to us."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 23, Article 1), charity is a
friendship of man for God, founded upon the fellowship of
everlasting happiness. Now this fellowship is in respect, not of
natural, but of gratuitous gifts, for, according to Rm. 6:23, "the grace
of God is life everlasting": wherefore charity itself surpasses our
natural facilities. Now that which surpasses the faculty of nature,
cannot be natural or acquired by the natural powers, since a natural
effect does not transcend its cause.
Therefore charity can be in us neither naturally, nor through
acquisition by the natural powers, but by the infusion of the Holy
Ghost, Who is the love of the Father and the Son, and the
participation of Whom in us is created charity, as stated above
(Question 23, Article 2).
Reply to Objection 1: Dionysius is speaking of the love of God,
which is founded on the fellowship of natural goods, wherefore it is
in all naturally. On the other hand, charity is founded on a