any other time, save only how to overcome their enemies — and therefore it is
that they hold their assemblies each day, and appoint generals and soldiers, and
demand taxes and tributes; and that of all state affairs, the moving causes are
these two, the overcoming of those who make war upon them, and the
establishing of their subjects in peace— we have no mind for such themes as
this, nor ever even dream of conversing upon them: but how we may buy land,
or purchase slaves, and make our property greater, these are subjects we can talk
about every day, and never be tired of them: while concerning things in
ourselves and really our own, we neither wish to speak ourselves, nor so much as
dream of tolerating advice, nor of enduring to hear others speaking about them?
But answer me, what do you talk about? About dinner? Why that is a subject for
cooks. Of money? Nay, that is a theme for hucksters and merchants. Of
buildings? That belongs to carpenters and builders. Of land? That talk is for
husbandmen. But for us, there is no other proper business, save this, how we
may make wealth for the soul. Then let not the discourse be wearisome to you.
Why is it that none finds fault with the physician for always discoursing of the
healing art, nor with people of other crafts for talking about their peculiar arts? If
indeed the mastery over our passions were really achieved, so that there were no
need of putting us in mind, we might reasonably be taxed with ambition and
display: or rather, not then either. For even if it were gained, for all that, there
would be need of discoursing, that one might not relapse and remain
uncorrected: as in fact physicians discourse not only to the sick, but also to the
whole, and they have books on this subject, on the one part how to free from
disease, on the other how to preserve health. So that even if we are well, still we
must not give over, but must do all in order to the preserving of our health. And
when we are sick there is a twofold necessity for advice: first, that we may be
freed from the disease; secondly, that having been freed, we may not fall into it
again. Well then, we are discoursing now by the method of treating the sick, not
by the rules for the treatment of the healthy.
How then may one root out this evil passion? How subdue ([ὑ]

[ποσκελίσειε]) this violent fever? Let us see whence it had its birth, and let us
remove the cause. Whence is it wont to arise? From arrogance and much
haughtiness. This cause then let us remove, and the disease is removed together
with it. But what is arrogance? Whence does it arise? For perhaps we are likely
to have to go back to a still higher origin. But whatever course the reason of the
thing may point out, that let us take, that we may go to the bottom of the
mischief, and pluck it up by the roots. Whence then comes arrogance? From our
not looking into our own concerns, but instead of that, busying ourselves about
the nature of land, though we are not husbandmen, and the nature of gold,
though we are not merchants, and concerning clothing, and everything else:
while to ourselves and our own nature we never look at all. And who, you will
say, is ignorant of his own nature? Many: perhaps all, save a few: and if you will,
I will show the proof of it. For, tell me, what is man? If one were asked, will he
be able to answer outright to the questions, In what he differs from the brutes, in
what he is akin to the heavenly inhabitants, what can be made of man? For as in
the case of any other material, so also in this case: man is the subject-matter, but
of this can be made either an angel or a beast. Does not this seem a strange
saying? And yet you have often heard it in the Scriptures. For of certain human
beings it was said, "he is the angel of the Lord" [Malachi 2:7]: and "from his
lips," says it, "they shall seek judgment" [Malachi 3:1]: and again, "I send My
angel before Your face:" but of some, "Serpents, generation of vipers." [Matthew
12:34] So then, it all depends upon the use. Why do I say, an angel? The man
can become God, and a child of God. For we read, "I have said, You are gods,
and all of you are children of the Most High." [Psalm 82:6] And what is greater,
the power to become both God and angel and child of God is put into his own
hands. Yea, so it is, man can be the maker of an angel. Perchance this saying has
startled you? Hear however Christ saying: "In the Resurrection they neither
marry nor are given in marriage, but are like the angels." [Matthew 22:30] And
again, "He that is able to receive it, let him receive it." [Matthew 19:12] In a
word, it is virtue which makes angels: but this is in our power: therefore we are