THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.8.

Reply to Objection 1: As sanctifying grace is ordained to meritorious
acts both interior and exterior, so likewise gratuitous grace is
ordained to certain exterior acts manifestive of the faith, as the
working of miracles, and the like. Now of both these graces Christ
had the fulness. since inasmuch as His soul was united to the
Godhead, He had the perfect power of effecting all these acts. But
other saints who are moved by God as separated and not united
instruments, receive power in a particular manner in order to bring
about this or that act. And hence in other saints these graces are
divided, but not in Christ.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ is said to be the power of God and the
wisdom of God, inasmuch as He is the Eternal Son of God. But in
this respect it does not pertain to Him to have grace, but rather to be
the bestower of grace. but it pertains to Him in His human nature to
have grace.
Reply to Objection 3: The gift of tongues was bestowed on the
apostles, because they were sent to teach all nations; but Christ
wished to preach personally only in the one nation of the Jews, as
He Himself says (Mt. 15:24): "I was not sent but to the sheep that are
lost of the house of Israel"; and the Apostle says (Rm. 15:8): "I say
that Christ Jesus was minister of the circumcision." And hence it
was not necessary for Him to speak several languages. Yet was a
knowledge of all languages not wanting to Him, since even the
secrets of hearts, of which all words are signs, were not hidden from
Him, as will be shown (Question 10, Article 2). Nor was this
knowledge uselessly possessed. just as it is not useless to have a
habit, which we do not use when there is no occasion.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether in Christ there was the gift of prophecy?

Objection 1: It would seem that in Christ there was not the gift of
prophecy. For prophecy implies a certain obscure and imperfect
knowledge, according to Num. 12:6: "If there be among you a
prophet of the Lord, I will appear to him in a vision, or I will speak to
him in a dream." But Christ had full and unveiled knowledge, much
more than Moses, of whom it is subjoined that "plainly and not by
riddles and figures doth he see God" (Num. 6:8). Therefore we ought
not to admit prophecy in Christ.
Objection 2: Further, as faith has to do with what is not seen, and
hope with what is not possessed, so prophecy has to do with what is
not present, but distant; for a prophet means, as it were, a teller of
far-off things. But in Christ there could be neither faith nor hope, as
was said above (Articles 3,4). Hence prophecy also ought not to be
admitted in Christ.
Objection 3: Further, a prophet is in an inferior order to an angel;
hence Moses, who was the greatest of the prophets, as was said
above (SS, Question 174, Article 4) is said (Acts 7:38) to have spoken
with an angel in the desert. But Christ was "made lower than the
angels," not as to the knowledge of His soul, but only as regards the
sufferings of His body, as is shown Heb. 2:9. Therefore it seems that
Christ was not a prophet.
On the contrary, It is written of Him (Dt. 18:15): "Thy God will raise up
to thee a prophet of thy nation and of thy brethren," and He says of
Himself (Mt. 13:57; Jn. 4:44): "A prophet is not without honor, save in
his own country."
I answer that, A prophet means, as it were, a teller or seer of far-off
things, inasmuch as he knows and announces what things are far
from men's senses, as Augustine says (Contra Faust. xvi, 18). Now
we must bear in mind that no one can be called a prophet for
knowing and announcing what is distant from others, with whom he
is not. And this is clear in regard to place and time. For if anyone
living in France were to know and announce to others living in
France what things were transpiring in Syria, it would be prophetical,
as Eliseus told Giezi (4 Kgs. 5:26) how the man had leaped down
from his chariot to meet him. But if anyone living in Syria were to