temperance; against such there is no law." For who would lay any command on
him who has all things within himself, and who has love for the finished mistress
of philosophy? As horses, who are docile and do every thing of their own
accord, need not the lash, so neither does the soul, which by the Spirit has
attained to excellence, need the admonitions of the Law. Here too he completely
and strikingly casts out the Law, not as bad, but as inferior to the philosophy
given by the Spirit.
Ver. 24. "And they that are of Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with the
passions and the lusts thereof."
That they might not object, "And who is such a man as this?" he points out
by their works those who have attained to this perfection, here again giving the
name of the "flesh" to evil actions. He does not mean that they had destroyed
their flesh, otherwise how were they going to live? For that which is crucified is
dead and inoperative, but he indicates the perfect rule of life. For the desires,
although they are troublesome, rage in vain. Since then such is the power of the
Spirit, let us live therein and be content therewith, as he adds himself,
Ver. 25. "If we live by the Spirit, by the Spirit let us also walk,"
— being governed by His laws. For this is the force of the words "let us
walk," that is, let us be content with the power of the Spirit, and seek no help
from the Law. Then, signifying that those who would fain have introduced
circumcision were actuated by ambitious motives, he says,
Ver. 26. "Let us not be vainglorious," which is the cause of all evils,
"provoking one another" to contentions and strife, "envying one another," for
from vainglory comes envy and from envy all these countless evils.

## Homily 6 on Galatians

Verse 1
" Brethren, even if a man be overtaken in any trespass."
[Forasmuch] as under cover of a rebuke they gratified their private feelings,
and professing to do so for faults which had been committed, were advancing
their own ambition, he says, "Brethren, if a man be overtaken." He said not if a
man commit but if he be "overtaken" that is, if he be carried away.
"You which are spiritual restore such a one,"
He says not "chastise" nor "judge," but "set right." Nor does he stop here,
but in order to show that it behooved them to be very gentle towards those who
had lost their footing, he subjoins,
"In a spirit of meekness."
He says not, "in meekness," but, "in a spirit of meekness," signifying
thereby that this is acceptable to the Spirit, and that to be able to administer
correction with mildness is a spiritual gift. Then, to prevent the one being unduly
exalted by having to correct the other, puts him under the same fear, saying,
"Looking to yourself, lest you also be tempted."
For as rich men convey contributions to the indigent, that in case they
should be themselves involved in poverty they may receive the same bounty, so
ought we also to do. And therefore he states this cogent reason, in these words,
"looking to yourself, lest you also be tempted." He apologizes for the offender,
first, by saying "if you be overtaken;" next, by employing a term indicative of
great infirmity ; lastly, by the words "lest you also be tempted," thus arraigning
the malice of the devil rather than the remissness of the soul.
Ver. 2. "Bear one another's burdens."
It being impossible for man to be without failings, he exhorts them not to
scrutinize severely the offenses of others, but even to bear their failings, that