FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.4.

Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord explained the manner of fulfilling
those precepts which the Scribes and Pharisees did not rightly
understand: and this affected chiefly those precepts of the
decalogue. For they thought that the prohibition of adultery and
murder covered the external act only, and not the internal desire.
And they held this opinion about murder and adultery rather than
about theft and false witness, because the movement of anger
tending to murder, and the movement of desire tending to adultery,
seem to be in us from nature somewhat, but not the desire of
stealing or bearing false witness. They held a false opinion about
perjury, for they thought that perjury indeed was a sin; but that oaths
were of themselves to be desired and to be taken frequently, since
they seem to proceed from reverence to God. Hence Our Lord shows
that an oath is not desirable as a good thing; and that it is better to
speak without oaths, unless necessity forces us to have recourse to
them.
Reply to Objection 2: The Scribes and Pharisees erred about the
judicial precepts in two ways. First, because they considered certain
matters contained in the Law of Moses by way of permission, to be
right in themselves: namely, divorce of a wife, and the taking of
usury from strangers. Wherefore Our Lord forbade a man to divorce
his wife (Mt. 5:32); and to receive usury (Lk. 6:35), when He said:
"Lend, hoping for nothing thereby."
In another way they erred by thinking that certain things which the
Old Law commanded to be done for justice's sake, should be done
out of desire for revenge, or out of lust for temporal goods, or out of
hatred of one's enemies; and this in respect of three precepts. For
they thought that desire for revenge was lawful, on account of the
precept concerning punishment by retaliation: whereas this precept
was given that justice might be safeguarded, not that man might
seek revenge. Wherefore, in order to do away with this, Our Lord
teaches that man should be prepared in his mind to suffer yet more if
necessary. They thought that movements of covetousness were
lawful on account of those judicial precepts which prescribed
restitution of what had been purloined, together with something
added thereto, as stated above (Question 105, Article 2, ad 9);
whereas the Law commanded this to be done in order to safeguard
justice, not to encourage covetousness. Wherefore Our Lord teaches
that we should not demand our goods from motives of cupidity, and
that we should be ready to give yet more if necessary. They thought
that the movement of hatred was lawful, on account of the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.108, C.4.

commandments of the Law about the slaying of one's enemies:
whereas the Law ordered this for the fulfilment of justice, as stated
above (Question 105, Article 3, ad 4), not to satisfy hatred. Wherefore
Our Lord teaches us that we ought to love our enemies, and to be
ready to do good to them if necessary. For these precepts are to be
taken as binding "the mind to be prepared to fulfil them," as
Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 19).
Reply to Objection 3: The moral precepts necessarily retained their
force under the New Law, because they are of themselves essential
to virtue: whereas the judicial precepts did not necessarily continue
to bind in exactly the same way as had been fixed by the Law: this
was left to man to decide in one way or another. Hence Our Lord
directed us becomingly with regard to these two kinds of precepts.
On the other hand, the observance of the ceremonial precepts was
totally abolished by the advent of the reality; wherefore in regard to
these precepts He commanded nothing on this occasion when He
was giving the general points of His doctrine. Elsewhere, however,
He makes it clear that the entire bodily worship which was fixed by
the Law, was to be changed into spiritual worship: as is evident from
Jn. 4:21,23, where He says: "The hour cometh when you shall neither
on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem adore the Father . . . but . . . the
true adorers shall adore the Father in spirit and in truth."
Reply to Objection 4: All worldly goods may be reduced to three--honors, riches, and pleasures; according to 1 Jn. 2:16: "All that is in
the world is the concupiscence of the flesh," which refers to
pleasures of the flesh, "and the concupiscence of the eyes," which
refers to riches, "and the pride of life," which refers to ambition for
renown and honor. Now the Law did not promise an abundance of
carnal pleasures; on the contrary, it forbade them. But it did promise
exalted honors and abundant riches; for it is written in reference to
the former (Dt. 28:1): "If thou wilt hear the voice of the Lord thy
God . . . He will make thee higher than all the nations"; and in
reference to the latter, we read a little further on (Dt. 28:11): "He will
make thee abound with all goods." But the Jews so distorted the true
meaning of these promises, as to think that we ought to serve God,
with these things as the end in view. Wherefore Our Lord set this
aside by teaching, first of all, that works of virtue should not be done
for human glory. And He mentions three works, to which all others
may be reduced: since whatever a man does in order to curb his
desires, comes under the head of fasting; and whatever a man does
for the love of his neighbor, comes under the head of alms-deeds;