do them."
Having assumed here two objections, he in the first place removes them.
For what reason have you to say, he means, that you know not the things which
ought to be done? At best, even if you did not know, you are to blame in having
left God who instructs you. But as it is by many arguments we have shown that
you do know, and transgress willingly. But are you drawn by passion? Why then
do you both coöperate therewith and praise it? For they "not only do such
things," he says, "but have pleasure in them that do them." Having then put the
more grievous and the unpardonable sin first, that he might have done with it (Or
"convict you of it," [ἵ] [να ἑλῃ]); (for he that praises the sin is far worse than even
he that trespasses;) having then put this the first, he by this method grapples
more powerfully with him in the sequel, speaking on this wise,
Chap. ii. ver. 1. "Therefore you are inexcusable, O man; whosoever you are
that judgest; for wherein you judge another, you condemn yourself."
These things he says, with an aim at the rulers, inasmuch as that city then
had the rule of the world put into its hands. He anticipated them therefore by
saying, You are depriving yourself of defence, whoever you may be; for when
you condemn an adulterer, and yourself committest adultery, although no man
condemns you, in your judgment upon the guilty person you have also passed
sentence against yourself.
Ver. 2. "For we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth
against them who commit such things."
For lest any should say, until now I have escaped, to make him afraid, he
says, that it is not so with God as it is here. For here (Plato in Theæt. et Phædon.)
one is punished, and another escapes while doing the same thing. But hereafter it
is not so. That he that judges then knows the right, he has said: but whence he
knows it, he has not added; for it was superfluous. For in the case of
ungodliness, he shows both that the ungodly was so even with a knowledge of
God, and also whence he got that knowledge, namely, from the Creation. For
inasmuch as it was not plain to all, he gave the cause also; but here he passes it

over as a thing admitted. But when he says, "whosoever you are that judgest," he
is not addressing himself to the rulers only, but to private individuals and
subjects also. For all men, even if they have no chair of state, nor executioners,
nor stocks at command, yet even they judge those that offend, in conversations
and public meetings (Gr. [κοινοἵς συλλόγοις]) and by the vote of their
conscience. And no one would venture to say, that the adulterer does not deserve
punishment. But it is others, he says, they condemn, and not themselves. And for
this cause he stands forth vehemently against them, and says,
Ver. 3. "And do you think this" (4 manuscripts om. this), "O man, that
judgest those which do such things, and doest the same, that you shall escape the
judgment of God?"
For since he had shown the sin of the world to be great, from its doctrines,
from its doings, and that they did yet sin though wise, and though they had the
creation to lead them by the hand, and not by leaving God only, but also by
choosing the images of creeping things, and by their dishonoring virtue, and
deserting, in spite of nature's drawings back, to the service of vice even contrary
to nature: he goes on next to show, that they who do such things are punished
too. He did indeed at once point out a punishment by mentioning their very
practice. For "they received," he says, "in themselves that recompense of their
error which was meet." But as they do not perceive that, he mentions another
also, which they stood most in fear of. And indeed already he chiefly pointed at
this. For when he says, "That the judgment of God is according to truth," he is
speaking of no other than this. But he establishes the same again upon other
further grounds, saying thus, "And do you think this, O man, that judgest them
which do such things, and doest the same, that you shall escape the judgment of
God?" You have not been acquitted of your own judgment, and will you escape
through God's? Who indeed would say this? And yet you have judged yourself
(3 manuscripts "and not been acquitted"). But since the rigorousness of the
judgment-court was such, and thou were not able to spare even yourself, how
should not God, that cannot do amiss, and who is in the highest sense just, be