Therefore the position of the Christian and Catholic faith regarding the Trinity differs as much

from the position of Arius as does the error of the Gentiles, which, in calling creatures gods,
rendered to them the service of divine praise. This the Apostle (Rom. 1:25) criticizes when he
says, "They worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator."

#### Answers to objections

1. It may be said: As Augustine states in II De Trinitate, passages found in the Scriptures in
regard to the Father and the Son are threefold.

a) First, some show a certain unity of substance and equality of persons, as, "I and the Father are
one" (John 10:30).

b) Other passages show the Son to be less because of His having the form of a servant,
according as He made Himself less, as is said in Phil. 2:7, "He emptied Himself, taking the form
of a servant."

c) Certain things are also said that show Him to be neither less nor the equal of the Father, but
only that the Son is from the Father, as in John 5:26, "As the Father has life in Himself, so He
hath given to the Son also to have life in Himself."

The first authoritative passages are used by Catholics in making a defense of the truth. But those
of the second and third kind are employed by heretics in confirmation of their error, though in a
vain attempt. For the things that are stated of Christ according to His human nature should not be
referred to His divinity; otherwise it would follow that His death, which is recorded of Him
according to His humanity, would be according to His divinity. Likewise, neither is it shown that
the Son is less than the Father, although the Son is from the Father, because the Son has from the
Father all that the Father possesses, as is held in John 16, and Matthew 11. Wherefore no
inequality of divinity can be asserted because of the order of origin.

When, therefore, it is said, "The Father is greater than I," this is said of the Son according to His
human nature and not according to His divine nature, as Augustine maintains; or, as Hilary says,
according to His divine nature in such a way that "greater" does not imply inequality (because the
Son is not less than the Father, inasmuch as to Him is given a name above all names); but it
implies dignity of a principle inasmuch as it is from the Father that the Son possesses that by
which He is the equal of the Father.

2. It may be said: All things the Father not only subjected to the Son, but the Son Himself made
them subject to Himself, according to the saying of Phil. 3:21: "According to the operation
whereby also He is able to subdue all things unto Himself," i.e., according to the Divinity which
is equal in Him to that of the Father. Wherefore, when it is said that Christ will be subject, this
does not imply relation of the Son to the Father according to Divinity, but rather the relation of
the human nature of the Son to the Divinity of the Father, which Divinity is common to the
whole Trinity.