SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.8.

fasting, and the like, are directly ordained for the observance of the
vow of continence. And such religious observances as regard
human actions whereby a man is directed to the end of religion,
namely the love of God and his neighbor (such as reading, prayer,
visiting the sick, and the like), are comprised under the vow of
obedience that applies to the will, which directs its actions to the end
according to the ordering of another person. The distinction of habit
belongs to all three vows, as a sign of being bound by them:
wherefore the religious habit is given or blessed at the time of
profession.
Reply to Objection 3: By obedience a man offers to God his will, to
which though all human affairs are subject, yet some are subject to it
alone in a special manner, namely human actions, since passions
belong also to the sensitive appetite. Wherefore in order to restrain
the passions of carnal pleasures and of external objects of appetite,
which hinder the perfection of life, there was need for the vows of
continence and poverty; but for the ordering of one's own actions
accordingly as the state of perfection requires, there was need for
the vow of obedience.
Reply to Objection 4: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3), strictly
and truly speaking honor is not due save to virtue. Since, however,
external goods serve instrumentally for certain acts of virtue, the
consequence is that a certain honor is given to their excellence
especially by the common people who acknowledge none but
outward excellence. Therefore since religious tend to the perfection
of virtue it becomes them not to renounce the honor which God and
all holy men accord to virtue, according to Ps. 138:17, "But to me
Thy friends, O God, are made exceedingly honorable." On the other
hand, they renounce the honor that is given to outward excellence,
by the very fact that they withdraw from a worldly life: hence no
special vow is needed for this.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.185, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the vow of obedience is the chief of the

three religious vows?
Objection 1: It would seem that the vow of obedience is not the chief
of the three religious vows. For the perfection of the religious life
was inaugurated by Christ. Now Christ gave a special counsel of
poverty; whereas He is not stated to have given a special counsel of
obedience. Therefore the vow of poverty is greater than the vow of
obedience.
Objection 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 26:20) that "no price is
worthy of a continent soul." Now the vow of that which is more
worthy is itself more excellent. Therefore the vow of continence is
more excellent than the vow of obedience.
Objection 3: Further, the greater a vow the more indispensable it
would seem to be. Now the vows of poverty and continence "are so
inseparable from the monastic rule, that not even the Sovereign
Pontiff can allow them to be broken," according to a Decretal (De
Statu Monach., cap. Cum ad monasterium): yet he can dispense a
religious from obeying his superior. Therefore it would seem that the
vow of obedience is less than the vow of poverty and continence.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxv, 14): "Obedience is
rightly placed before victims, since by victims another's flesh, but by
obedience one's own will, is sacrificed." Now the religious vows are
holocausts, as stated above (Articles 1,3, ad 6). Therefore the vow of
obedience is the chief of all religious vows.
I answer that, The vow of obedience is the chief of the three religious
vows, and this for three reasons.
First, because by the vow of obedience man offers God something
greater, namely his own will; for this is of more account than his own
body, which he offers God by continence, and than external things,
which he offers God by the vow of poverty. Wherefore that which is
done out of obedience is more acceptable to God than that which is
done of one's own will, according to the saying of Jerome (Ep. cxxv
ad Rustic Monach.): "My words are intended to teach you not to rely
on your own judgment": and a little further on he says: "You may not
do what you will; you must eat what you are bidden to eat, you may