having left these, let us imitate the Patriarch, and glorify God as he gave Him
glory. And what does it mean, gave Him glory? He held in mind His majesty,
His boundless power. And having formed a just conception of Him, he was also
"fully persuaded" about His promises.
Let us then also glorify Him by faith as well as by works, that we may also
attain to the reward of being glorified by Him. "For them that glorify Me, I will
glorify" [1 Samuel 2:30], He says: and indeed, if there were no reward, the very
privilege of glorifying God were itself a glory. For if men take a pride in the
mere fact of speaking eulogies of kings, even if there be no other fruit of it;
consider how glorious it must be, that our Lord is glorified by us: as again, how
great a punishment to cause Him to be by our means blasphemed. And yet this
very being glorified, He wishes to be brought about for our sakes, since He does
not need it Himself. For what distance do you suppose to be between God and
man? As great as that between men and worms? Or as great as between Angels
and worms? But when I have mentioned a distance even thus great, I have not at
all expressed it: since to express its greatness is impossible. Would you, now,
wish to have a great and marked reputation among worms? Surely not. If then
thou that lovest glory, wouldest not wish for this, how should He Who is far
removed from this passion, and so much farther above us, stand in need of glory
from you? Nevertheless, free from the want of it as He is, still He says that He
desires it for your sake. For if He endured for your sake to become a slave, why
wonder that He upon the same ground lays claim to the other particulars also?
For He counts nothing unworthy of Himself which may be conducive to our
salvation. Since then we aware of this, let us shun sin altogether, because by
reason of it He is blasphemed. For it says, "flee from sin, as from the face of a
serpent: if you come too near unto it, it will bite you" [Sirach 21:2]: for it is not it
that comes to us, but we that desert to it. God has so ordered things that the
Devil should not prevail over us by compulsion (Gr. tyranny): since else none
would have stood against his might. And on this account He set him a distant
abode, as a kind of robber and tyrant. And unless he find a person unarmed and

solitary for his assaults, he does not venture to attack him. Except he see us
travelling by the desert, he has not the courage to come near us. But the desert
and place of the Devil is nothing else than sin. We then have need of the shield
of faith, the helmet of salvation, the sword of the Spirit, not only that we may not
get evil intreated, but that ever should he be minded to leap upon us, we may cut
off his head. Need we have of continual prayer that he may be bruised under our
feet, for he is shameless and full of hardihood, and this though he fights from
beneath. But yet even so he gets the victory: and the reason is, that we are not
earnestly set upon being above his blows. For he has not even the power to lift
himself very high, but he trails along upon the ground. And of this the serpent is
a type. But if God set him in that rank from the beginning, much more will He
now. But if you dost not know what fighting from beneath may be, I also will try
to explain to you the manner of this war. What then may this fighting "from
beneath" [John 8:23] be? It is standing upon the lower things of the world to
buffet us, such as pleasure and riches and all the goods of this life. And for this
reason, whoever he sees flying toward heaven, first, he will not even be able to
leap so far. Secondly, even if he should attempt he will speedily fall. For he has
no feet; be not afraid: he has no wings; fear not. He trails upon the earth, and the
things of the earth. Do thou then have naught in common with the earth, and you
will not need labor even. For he has not any knowledge of open fight: but as a
serpent he hides him in the thorns, nestling evermore in the "deceitfulness of
riches." [Matthew 13:22] And if you were to cut away the thorns, he will easily
be put to flight, being detected: and if you know how to charm him with the
inspired charms he will straightway be struck. For we have, we surely have,
spiritual charms, even the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ and the might of the
Cross. This charm will not only bring the serpent out of his lurking places, and
cast him into the fire [Acts 28:5], but even wounds it heals. But if some that have
said this Name have not been healed, it came of their own little faith, and was
not owing to any weakness in what they said. For some did throng Jesus and
press Him [Luke 8:44-45], and got no good therefrom. But the woman with an