FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.9.

one for whom the punishment is borne, while, in regard to the one
who is punished, it is merely medicinal (except accidentally, if he
consent to the other's sin), since it is intended for the good of his
soul, if he bears it patiently.
With regard to spiritual punishments, these are not merely medicinal,
because the good of the soul is not directed to a yet higher good.
Consequently no one suffers loss in the goods of the soul without
some fault of his own. Wherefore Augustine says (Ep. ad Avit.) [Ep.
ad Auxilium, ccl.], such like punishments are not inflicted on one for
another's sin, because, as regards the soul, the son is not the
father's property. Hence the Lord assigns the reason for this by
saying (Ezech. 18:4): "All souls are Mine."
Reply to Objection 1: Both the passages quoted should, seemingly,
be referred to temporal or bodily punishments, in so far as children
are the property of their parents, and posterity, of their forefathers.
Else, if they be referred to spiritual punishments, they must be
understood in reference to the imitation of sin, wherefore in Exodus
these words are added, "Of them that hate Me," and in the chapter
quoted from Matthew (verse 32) we read: "Fill ye up then the
measure of your fathers." The sins of the fathers are said to be
punished in their children, because the latter are the more prone to
sin through being brought up amid their parents' crimes, both by
becoming accustomed to them, and by imitating their parents'
example, conforming to their authority as it were. Moreover they
deserve heavier punishment if, seeing the punishment of their
parents, they fail to mend their ways. The text adds, "to the third and
fourth generation," because men are wont to live long enough to see
the third and fourth generation, so that both the children can witness
their parents' sins so as to imitate them, and the parents can see
their children's punishments so as to grieve for them.
Reply to Objection 2: The punishments which human justice inflicts
on one for another's sin are bodily and temporal. They are also
remedies or medicines against future sins, in order that either they
who are punished, or others may be restrained from similar faults.
Reply to Objection 3: Those who are near of kin are said to be
punished, rather than outsiders, for the sins of others, both because
the punishment of kindred redounds somewhat upon those who
sinned, as stated above, in so far as the child is the father's property,
and because the examples and the punishments that occur in one's

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.9.

own household are more moving. Consequently when a man is
brought up amid the sins of his parents, he is more eager to imitate
them, and if he is not deterred by their punishments, he would seem
to be the more obstinate, and, therefore, to deserve more severe
punishment.