being distinguished accordingly as the operation of the soul
transcends the operation of the corporeal nature in various ways; for
the whole corporeal nature is subject to the soul, and is related to it
as its matter and instrument. There exists, therefore, an operation of
the soul which so far exceeds the corporeal nature that it is not even
performed by any corporeal organ; and such is the operation of the
"rational soul." Below this, there is another operation of the soul,
which is indeed performed through a corporeal organ, but not
through a corporeal quality, and this is the operation of the
"sensitive soul"; for though hot and cold, wet and dry, and other
such corporeal qualities are required for the work of the senses, yet
they are not required in such a way that the operation of the senses
takes place by virtue of such qualities; but only for the proper
disposition of the organ. The lowest of the operations of the soul is
that which is performed by a corporeal organ, and by virtue of a
corporeal quality. Yet this transcends the operation of the corporeal
nature; because the movements of bodies are caused by an extrinsic
principle, while these operations are from an intrinsic principle; for
this is common to all the operations of the soul; since every animate
thing, in some way, moves itself. Such is the operation of the
"vegetative soul"; for digestion, and what follows, is caused
instrumentally by the action of heat, as the Philosopher says (De
Anima ii, 4).
Now the powers of the soul are distinguished generically by their
objects. For the higher a power is, the more universal is the object to
which it extends, as we have said above (Question 77, Article 3, ad
4). But the object of the soul's operation may be considered in a
triple order. For in the soul there is a power the object of which is
only the body that is united to that soul; the powers of this genus are
called "vegetative" for the vegetative power acts only on the body to
which the soul is united. There is another genus in the powers of the
soul, which genus regards a more universal object---namely, every
sensible body, not only the body to which the soul is united. And
there is yet another genus in the powers of the soul, which genus
regards a still more universal object---namely, not only the sensible
body, but all being in universal. Wherefore it is evident that the latter
two genera of the soul's powers have an operation in regard not
merely to that which is united to them, but also to something
extrinsic. Now, since whatever operates must in some way be united
to the object about which it operates, it follows of necessity that this
something extrinsic, which is the object of the soul's operation, must
be related to the soul in a twofold manner. First, inasmuch as this

something extrinsic has a natural aptitude to be united to the soul,
and to be by its likeness in the soul. In this way there are two kinds
of powers ---namely, the "sensitive" in regard to the less common
object---the sensible body; and the "intellectual," in regard to the
most common object---universal being. Secondly, forasmuch as the
soul itself has an inclination and tendency to the something
extrinsic. And in this way there are again two kinds of powers in the
soul: one---the "appetitive"---in respect of which the soul is referred
to something extrinsic as to an end, which is first in the intention;
the other---the "locomotive" power---in respect of which the soul is
referred to something extrinsic as to the term of its operation and
movement; for every animal is moved for the purpose of realizing its
desires and intentions.
The modes of living are distinguished according to the degrees of
living things. There are some living things in which there exists only
vegetative power, as the plants. There are others in which with the
vegetative there exists also the sensitive, but not the locomotive
power; such as immovable animals, as shellfish. There are others
which besides this have locomotive powers, as perfect animals,
which require many things for their life, and consequently movement
to seek necessaries of life from a distance. And there are some living
things which with these have intellectual power---namely, men. But
the appetitive power does not constitute a degree of living things;
because wherever there is sense there is also appetite (De Anima ii,
3).
Thus the first two objectives are hereby solved.
Reply to Objection 3: The "natural appetite" is that inclination which
each thing has, of its own nature, for something; wherefore by its
natural appetite each power desires something suitable to itself. But
the "animal appetite" results from the form apprehended; this sort of
appetite requires a special power of the soul---mere apprehension
does not suffice. For a thing is desired as it exists in its own nature,
whereas in the apprehensive power it exists not according to its own
nature, but according to its likeness. Whence it is clear that sight
desires naturally a visible object for the purpose of its act only--namely, for the purpose of seeing; but the animal by the appetitive
power desires the thing seen, not merely for the purpose of seeing it,
but also for other purposes. But if the soul did not require things
perceived by the senses, except on account of the actions of the
senses, that is, for the purpose of sensing them; there would be no