THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.34, C.5.

whereas to evil it is related as to a defect, and beside nature. Now, as
the Philosopher says (De Coelo ii, text. 18): "That which is beside
nature is subsequent to that which is according to nature; because
that which is beside nature is an exception to nature." Therefore the
free-will of a creature can be moved to good meritoriously in the first
instant of its creation, but not to evil sinfully; provided, however, its
nature be unimpaired.
Reply to Objection 2: That which man has at the first moment of his
creation, in the ordinary course of nature, is natural to him. but
nothing hinders a creature from receiving from God a gift of grace at
the very beginning of its creation. In this way did Christ's soul in the
first instant of its creation receive grace by which it could merit. And
for this reason is that grace, by way of a certain likeness, said to be
natural to this Man, as explained by Augustine (Enchiridion xl).
Reply to Objection 3: Nothing prevents the same thing belonging to
someone from several causes. And thus it is that Christ was able by
subsequent actions and sufferings to merit the glory of immortality,
which He also merited in the first instant of His conception: not,
indeed, so that it became thereby more due to Him than before, but
so that it was due to Him from more causes than before.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.34, C.6.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ was a perfect comprehensor in the

first instant of His conception?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was not a perfect
comprehensor in the first instant of His conception. For merit
precedes reward, as fault precedes punishment. But Christ merited
in the first instant of His conception, as stated above (Article 3).
Since, therefore, the state of comprehension is the principal reward,
it seems that Christ was not a comprehensor in the first instant of
His conception.
Objection 2: Further, our Lord said (Lk. 24:26): "Ought not Christ to
have suffered these things, and so to enter into His glory?" But glory
belongs to the state of comprehension. Therefore Christ was not in
the state of comprehension in the first instant of His conception,
when as yet He had not suffered.
Objection 3: Further, what befits neither man nor angel seems proper
to God; and therefore is not becoming to Christ as man. But to be
always in the state of beatitude befits neither man nor angel: for if
they had been created in beatitude, they would not have sinned
afterwards. Therefore Christ, as man, was not in the state of
beatitude in the first instant of His conception.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 64:5): "Blessed is he whom Thou
hast chosen, end taken to Thee"; which words, according to the
gloss, refer to Christ's human nature, which "was taken by the Word
of God unto the unity of Person." But human nature was taken by the
Word of God in the first instant of His conception. Therefore, in the
first instant of His conception, Christ, as man, was in the state of
beatitude; which is to be a comprehensor.
I answer that, As appears from what was said above (Article 3), it
was unbecoming that in His conception Christ should receive merely
habitual grace without the act. Now, He received grace "not by
measure" (Jn. 3:34), as stated above (Question 7, Article 11). But the
grace of the "wayfarer," being short of that of the "comprehensor," is
in less measure than that of the comprehensor. Wherefore it is
manifest that in the first instant of His conception Christ received not
only as much grace as comprehensors have, but also greater than
that which they all have. And because that grace was not without its