THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.76, C.2.

aforesaid conversion is terminated. For if any two things be really
united, then wherever the one is really, there must the other also be:
since things really united together are only distinguished by an
operation of the mind.
Reply to Objection 1: Because the change of the bread and wine is
not terminated at the Godhead or the soul of Christ, it follows as a
consequence that the Godhead or the soul of Christ is in this
sacrament not by the power of the sacrament, but from real
concomitance. For since the Godhead never set aside the assumed
body, wherever the body of Christ is, there, of necessity, must the
Godhead be; and therefore it is necessary for the Godhead to be in
this sacrament concomitantly with His body. Hence we read in the
profession of faith at Ephesus (P. I., chap. xxvi): "We are made
partakers of the body and blood of Christ, not as taking common
flesh, nor as of a holy man united to the Word in dignity, but the truly
life-giving flesh of the Word Himself."
On the other hand, His soul was truly separated from His body, as
stated above (Question 50, Article 5). And therefore had this
sacrament been celebrated during those three days when He was
dead, the soul of Christ would not have been there, neither by the
power of the sacrament, nor from real concomitance. But since
"Christ rising from the dead dieth now no more" (Rm. 6:9), His soul
is always really united with His body. And therefore in this
sacrament the body indeed of Christ is present by the power of the
sacrament, but His soul from real concomitance.
Reply to Objection 2: By the power of the sacrament there is
contained under it, as to the species of the bread, not only the flesh,
but the entire body of Christ, that is, the bones the nerves, and the
like. And this is apparent from the form of this sacrament, wherein it
is not said: "This is My flesh," but "This is My body." Accordingly,
when our Lord said (Jn. 6:56): "My flesh is meat indeed," there the
word flesh is put for the entire body, because according to human
custom it seems to be more adapted for eating, as men commonly
are fed on the flesh of animals, but not on the bones or the like.
Reply to Objection 3: As has been already stated (Question 75,
Article 5), after the consecration of the bread into the body of Christ,
or of the wine into His blood, the accidents of both remain. From
which it is evident that the dimensions of the bread or wine are not
changed into the dimensions of the body of Christ, but substance

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.76, C.2.

into substance. And so the substance of Christ's body or blood is
under this sacrament by the power of the sacrament, but not the
dimensions of Christ's body or blood. Hence it is clear that the body
of Christ is in this sacrament "by way of substance," and not by way
of quantity. But the proper totality of substance is contained
indifferently in a small or large quantity; as the whole nature of air in
a great or small amount of air, and the whole nature of a man in a big
or small individual. Wherefore, after the consecration, the whole
substance of Christ's body and blood is contained in this sacrament,
just as the whole substance of the bread and wine was contained
there before the consecration.