too for the sake of credit. But what is humility? It is when another reviles us, to
bear it, to acknowledge our fault, to endure evil speakings. And yet even this
would not be [a mark] of humility but of candor. But now we call ourselves
sinners, unworthy, and ten thousand other such names, but if another apply one
of them to us, we are vexed, we become savage. Do you see that this is not
confession, nor even candor? You said of yourself that you are such an one: be
not indignant if you hear it also said by others, and art reproved.
In this way your sins are made lighter for you, when others reproach you:
for they lay a burden on themselves indeed, but you they lead onwards into
philosophy. Hear what the blessed David says, when Shimei cursed him, "Let
him alone" (he says) "the Lord has bidden him, that He might look on my
humiliation" (he says): "And the Lord will requite me good for his cursing on
this day." [2 Samuel 16:11-12]
But thou while saying evil things of yourself, even in excess, if you hear not
from others the commendations that are due to the most righteous, art enraged.
Do you see that you are trifling with things that are no subjects for trifling? For
we even repudiate praises in our desire for other praises, that we may obtain yet
higher panegyrics, that we may be more admired. So that when we decline to
accept commendations, we do it that we may augment them. And all things are
done by us for credit, not for truth. Therefore all things are hollow, all
impracticable. Wherefore I beseech you now at any rate to withdraw from this
mother of evils, vainglory, and to live according to what is approved by God,
that so you may attain to the good things to come, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
whom to the Father be glory, together with His Holy and good Spirit, now and
ever and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 28 on Hebrews

Hebrews 11:37-40
" They wandered about in sheep-skins, and goat-skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented (of whom this world was not worthy); wandering in deserts,
and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth."
1. At all times indeed, but especially then when I reflect upon the
achievements of the saints, it comes over me to feel despondency concerning my
own condition, because we have not even in dreams experienced the things
among which those men spent their whole lives, not paying the penalty of sins,
but always doing rightly and yet always afflicted.
For consider, I beseech you, Elijah, to whom our discourse has come round
today, for he speaks of him in this passage, and in him his examples end: which
[example] was appropriate to their case. And having spoken of what befell the
Apostles, that "they were slain with the sword, were stoned," he goes back again
to Elijah, who suffered the same things with them. [See 2 Kings 1:8] For since it
was probable that they would not as yet hold the Apostles in so great estimation,
he brings his exhortation and consolation from him who had been taken up [into
Heaven] and who was held in special admiration.
For "they wandered about" (he says) "in sheep-skins, and goat-skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom this world was not worthy."
They had not even raiment, he says, through the excess of affliction, no city,
no house, no lodging-place; the same which Christ said, "but the Son of Man has
not where to lay His head." [Matthew 8:20] Why do I say "no lodging-place"?
No standing-place: for not even when they had gained the wilderness, were they
at rest. For he said not, They sat down in the wilderness, but even when they
were there, they fled, and were driven thence, not out of the inhabited world