SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.2.

God Himself: for it is written (Gn. 1:29,30): "Behold I have given you
every herb . . . and all trees . . . to be your meat, and to all beasts of
the earth": and again (Gn. 9:3): "Everything that moveth and liveth
shall be meat to you."
Reply to Objection 1: According to the Divine ordinance the life of
animals and plants is preserved not for themselves but for man.
Hence, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 20), "by a most just
ordinance of the Creator, both their life and their death are subject to
our use."
Reply to Objection 2: Dumb animals and plants are devoid of the life
of reason whereby to set themselves in motion; they are moved, as it
were by another, by a kind of natural impulse, a sign of which is that
they are naturally enslaved and accommodated to the uses of others.
Reply to Objection 3: He that kills another's ox, sins, not through
killing the ox, but through injuring another man in his property.
Wherefore this is not a species of the sin of murder but of the sin of
theft or robbery.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it is lawful to kill sinners?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to kill men who have sinned. For
our Lord in the parable (Mt. 13) forbade the uprooting of the cockle
which denotes wicked men according to a gloss. Now whatever is
forbidden by God is a sin. Therefore it is a sin to kill a sinner.
Objection 2: Further, human justice is conformed to Divine justice.
Now according to Divine justice sinners are kept back for
repentance, according to Ezech. 33:11, "I desire not the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live." Therefore it
seems altogether unjust to kill sinners.
Objection 3: Further, it is not lawful, for any good end whatever, to
do that which is evil in itself, according to Augustine (Contra
Mendac. vii) and the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 6). Now to kill a man is
evil in itself, since we are bound to have charity towards all men, and
"we wish our friends to live and to exist," according to Ethic. ix, 4.
Therefore it is nowise lawful to kill a man who has sinned.
On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 22:18): "Wizards thou shalt not
suffer to live"; and (Ps. 100:8): "In the morning I put to death all the
wicked of the land."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), it is lawful to kill dumb
animals, in so far as they are naturally directed to man's use, as the
imperfect is directed to the perfect. Now every part is directed to the
whole, as imperfect to perfect, wherefore every part is naturally for
the sake of the whole. For this reason we observe that if the health of
the whole body demands the excision of a member, through its
being decayed or infectious to the other members, it will be both
praiseworthy and advantageous to have it cut away. Now every
individual person is compared to the whole community, as part to
whole. Therefore if a man be dangerous and infectious to the
community, on account of some sin, it is praiseworthy and
advantageous that he be killed in order to safeguard the common
good, since "a little leaven corrupteth the whole lump" (1 Cor. 5:6).
Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord commanded them to forbear from
uprooting the cockle in order to spare the wheat, i.e. the good. This
occurs when the wicked cannot be slain without the good being