FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.4.

of the order whereby man's will is subject to God, the disorder will
be such as to be considered in itself, irreparable, although it is
possible to repair it by the power of God. Now the principle of this
order is the last end, to which man adheres by charity. Therefore
whatever sins turn man away from God, so as to destroy charity,
considered in themselves, incur a debt of eternal punishment.
Reply to Objection 1: Punishment is proportionate to sin in point of
severity, both in Divine and in human judgments. In no judgment,
however, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 11) is it requisite for
punishment to equal fault in point of duration. For the fact that
adultery or murder is committed in a moment does not call for a
momentary punishment: in fact they are punished sometimes by
imprisonment or banishment for life---sometimes even by death;
wherein account is not taken of the time occupied in killing, but
rather of the expediency of removing the murderer from the
fellowship of the living, so that this punishment, in its own way,
represents the eternity of punishment inflicted by God. Now
according to Gregory (Dial. iv, 44) it is just that he who has sinned
against God in his own eternity should be punished in God's
eternity. A man is said to have sinned in his own eternity, not only as
regards continual sinning throughout his whole life, but also
because, from the very fact that he fixes his end in sin, he has the
will to sin, everlastingly. Wherefore Gregory says (Dial. iv, 44) that
the "wicked would wish to live without end, that they might abide in
their sins for ever."
Reply to Objection 2: Even the punishment that is inflicted according
to human laws, is not always intended as a medicine for the one who
is punished, but sometimes only for others: thus when a thief is
hanged, this is not for his own amendment, but for the sake of
others, that at least they may be deterred from crime through fear of
the punishment, according to Prov. 19:25: "The wicked man being
scourged, the fool shall be wiser." Accordingly the eternal
punishments inflicted by God on the reprobate, are medicinal
punishments for those who refrain from sin through the thought of
those punishments, according to Ps. 59:6: "Thou hast given a
warning to them that fear Thee, that they may flee from before the
bow, that Thy beloved may be delivered."
Reply to Objection 3: God does not delight in punishments for their
own sake; but He does delight in the order of His justice, which
requires them.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.87, C.4.

Reply to Objection 4: Although punishment is related indirectly to
nature, nevertheless it is essentially related to the disturbance of the
order, and to God's justice. Wherefore, so long as the disturbance
lasts, the punishment endures.