attempt, strength failed her, and she became a suppliant of the Father. The other Æons, Nous in
particular, presented their supplications along with her. And hence they declare material substance
had its beginning from ignorance and grief, and fear and bewilderment.
4. The Father afterwards produces, in his own image, by means of Monogenes, the
above-mentioned Horos, without conjunction, masculo-feminine. For they maintain that sometimes
the Father acts in conjunction with Sige, but that at other times he shows himself independent both
of male and female. They term this Horos both Stauros and Lytrotes, and Carpistes, and Horothetes,
and Metagoges. And by this Horos they declare that Sophia was purified and established, while
she was also restored to her proper conjunction. For her enthymesis (or inborn idea) having been
taken away from her, along with its supervening passion, she herself certainly remained within the
Pleroma; but her enthymesis, with its passion, was separated from her by Horos, fenced off, and
expelled from that circle. This enthymesis was, no doubt, a spiritual substance, possessing some
of the natural tendencies of an Æon, but at the same time shapeless and without form, because it
had received nothing. And on this account they say that it was an imbecile and feminine
production.
5. After this substance had been placed outside of the Pleroma of the Æons, and its mother
restored to her proper conjunction, they tell us that Monogenes, acting in accordance with the
prudent forethought of the Father, gave origin to another conjugal pair, namely Christ and the Holy
Spirit (lest any of the Æons should fall into a calamity similar to that of Sophia), for the purpose
of fortifying and strengthening the Pleroma, and who at the same time completed the number of
the Æons. Christ then instructed them as to the nature of their conjunction, and taught them that
Sophia resulted in the formation of material substance."—Harvey.
the Father.
Carpistes, according to Grabe, means an Emancipator, according to Neander a Reaper; Horothetes is one that fixes boundaries;
and Metagoges is explained by Neander as being one that brings back, from the supposed function of Horos, to bring back all
that sought to wander from the special grade of being assigned them.
the ancient Latin version, "crucifixam."
in the divine nature, were co-eternal with it."

those who possessed a comprehension of the Unbegotten were sufficient for themselves. He also
announced among them what related to the knowledge of the Father,—namely, that he cannot be
understood or comprehended, nor so much as seen or heard, except in so far as he is known by
Monogenes only. And the reason why the rest of the Æons possess perpetual existence is found in
that part of the Father's nature which is incomprehensible; but the reason of their origin and formation
was situated in that which may be comprehended regarding him, that is, in the Son. Christ, then,
who had just been produced, effected these things among them.
6. But the Holy Spirit taught them to give thanks on being all rendered equal among
themselves, and led them to a state of true repose. Thus, then, they tell us that the Æons were
constituted equal to each other in form and sentiment, so that all became as Nous, and Logos, and
Anthropos, and Christus. The female Æons, too, became all as Aletheia, and Zoe, and Spiritus, and
Ecclesia. Everything, then, being thus established, and brought into a state of perfect rest, they next
tell us that these beings sang praises with great joy to the Propator, who himself shared in the
abounding exaltation. Then, out of gratitude for the great benefit which had been conferred on
them, the whole Pleroma of the Æons, with one design and desire, and with the concurrence of
Christ and the Holy Spirit, their Father also setting the seal of His approval on their conduct, brought
together whatever each one had in himself of the greatest beauty and preciousness; and uniting all
these contributions so as skilfully to blend the whole, they produced, to the honour and glory of
Bythus, a being of most perfect beauty, the very star of the Pleroma, and the perfect fruit [of it],
namely Jesus. Him they also speak of under the name of Saviour, and Christ, and patronymically,
Logos, and Everything, because He was formed from the contributions of all. And then we are told
that, by way of honour, angels of the same nature as Himself were simultaneously produced, to act
as His body-guard.