SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.83, C.2.

worship are employed in doing honor to men, either through
excessive humility, or through pernicious flattery; yet so that those
to whom these honors are given are recognized as being men to
whom we owe esteem and reverence and even adoration if they be
far above us. But who ever thought it his duty to sacrifice to any
other than one whom he either knew or deemed or pretended to be a
God?" Accordingly it was with the reverence due to an excellent
creature that Nathan adored David; while it was the reverence due to
God with which Mardochai refused to adore Aman fearing "lest he
should transfer the honor of his God to a man" (Esther 13:14).
Again with the reverence due to an excellent creature Abraham
adored the angels, as did also Josue (Jos. 5:15): though we may
understand them to have adored, with the adoration of latria, God
Who appeared and spoke to them in the guise of an angel. It was
with the reverence due to God that John was forbidden to adore the
angel (Apoc. 22:9), both to indicate the dignity which he had
acquired through Christ, whereby man is made equal to an angel:
wherefore the same text goes on: "I am thy fellow-servant and of thy
brethren"; as also to exclude any occasion of idolatry, wherefore the
text continues: "Adore God."
Reply to Objection 2: Every Divine excellency is included in His
majesty: to which it pertains that we should be made happy in Him
as in the sovereign good.
Reply to Objection 3: Since there is one excellence of the three
Divine Persons, one honor and reverence is due to them and
consequently one adoration. It is to represent this that where it is
related (Gn. 18:2) that three men appeared to Abraham, we are told
that he addressed one, saying: "Lord, if I have found favor in thy
sight," etc. The triple genuflection represents the Trinity of Persons,
not a difference of adoration.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.83, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether adoration denotes an action of the body?

Objection 1: It would seem that adoration does not denote an act of
the body. It is written (Jn. 4:23): "The true adorers shall adore the
Father in spirit and in truth." Now what is done in spirit has nothing
to do with an act of the body. Therefore adoration does not denote
an act of the body.
Objection 2: Further, the word adoration is taken from
"oratio" [prayer]. But prayer consists chiefly in an interior act,
according to 1 Cor. 14:15, "I will pray with the spirit, I will pray also
with the understanding." Therefore adoration denotes chiefly a
spiritual act.
Objection 3: Further, acts of the body pertain to sensible knowledge:
whereas we approach God not by bodily but by spiritual sense.
Therefore adoration does not denote an act of the body.
On the contrary, A gloss on Ex. 20:5, "Thou shalt not adore them, nor
serve them," says: "Thou shalt neither worship them in mind, nor
adore them outwardly."
I answer that, As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 12), since we are
composed of a twofold nature, intellectual and sensible, we offer
God a twofold adoration; namely, a spiritual adoration, consisting in
the internal devotion of the mind; and a bodily adoration, which
consists in an exterior humbling of the body. And since in all acts of
latria that which is without is referred to that which is within as being
of greater import, it follows that exterior adoration is offered on
account of interior adoration, in other words we exhibit signs of
humility in our bodies in order to incite our affections to submit to
God, since it is connatural to us to proceed from the sensible to the
intelligible.
Reply to Objection 1: Even bodily adoration is done in spirit, in so far
as it proceeds from and is directed to spiritual devotion.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as prayer is primarily in the mind, and
secondarily expressed in words, as stated above (Question 83,
Article 12), so too adoration consists chiefly in an interior reverence
of God, but secondarily in certain bodily signs of humility; thus when