the blood that was offered up was not poured out, but was collected
together, and men gathered round it to eat in honor of the idols.
Likewise it was burnt by fire, either because God appeared to Moses
in a fire, and the Law was given from the midst of fire; or to denote
that idolatry, together with all that was connected therewith, was to
be extirpated altogether; just as the cow was burnt "with her skin
and her flesh, her blood and dung being delivered to the flames." To
this burning were added "cedar-wood, and hyssop, and scarlet twice
dyed," to signify that just as cedar-wood is not liable to putrefaction,
and scarlet twice dyed does not easily lose its color, and hyssop
retains its odor after it has been dried; so also was this sacrifice for
the preservation of the whole people, and for their good behavior
and devotion. Hence it is said of the ashes of the cow: "That they
may be reserved for the multitude of the children of Israel." Or,
according to Josephus (Antiq. iii, 8,9,10), the four elements are
indicated here: for "cedar-wood" was added to the fire, to signify the
earth, on account of its earthiness; "hyssop," to signify the air, on
account of its smell; "scarlet twice dyed," to signify water, for the
same reason as purple, on account of the dyes which are taken out
of the water: thus denoting the fact that this sacrifice was offered to
the Creator of the four elements. And since this sacrifice was offered
for the sin of idolatry, both "he that burned her," and "he that
gathered up the ashes," and "he that sprinkled the water" in which
the ashes were placed, were deemed unclean in detestation of that
sin, in order to show that whatever was in any way connected with
idolatry should be cast aside as being unclean. From this
uncleanness they were purified by the mere washing of their clothes;
nor did they need to be sprinkled with the water on account of this
kind of uncleanness, because otherwise the process would have
been unending, since he that sprinkled the water became unclean,
so that if he were to sprinkle himself he would remain unclean; and if
another were to sprinkle him, that one would have become unclean,
and in like manner, whoever might sprinkle him, and so on
indefinitely.
The figurative reason of this sacrifice was that the red cow signified
Christ in respect his assumed weakness, denoted by the female sex;
while the color of the cow designated the blood of His Passion. And
the "red cow was of full age," because all Christ's works are perfect,
"in which there" was "no blemish"; "and which" had "not carried the
yoke," because Christ was innocent, nor did He carry the yoke of sin.
It was commanded to be taken to Moses, because they blamed Him
for transgressing the law of Moses by breaking the Sabbath. And it

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.