FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.6.

people. Now whatever laws are enacted for the special sanctification
of certain ones, are binding on them alone: thus clerics who are set
aside for the service of God are bound to certain obligations to
which the laity are not bound; likewise religious are bound by their
profession to certain works of perfection, to which people living in
the world are not bound. In like manner this people was bound to
certain special observances, to which other peoples were not bound.
Wherefore it is written (Dt. 18:13): "Thou shalt be perfect and without
spot before the Lord thy God": and for this reason they used a kind
of form of profession, as appears from Dt. 26:3: "I profess this day
before the Lord thy God," etc.
Reply to Objection 1: Whoever are subject to a king, are bound to
observe his law which he makes for all in general. But if he orders
certain things to be observed by the servants of his household,
others are not bound thereto.
Reply to Objection 2: The more a man is united to God, the better his
state becomes: wherefore the more the Jewish people were bound to
the worship of God, the greater their excellence over other peoples.
Hence it is written (Dt. 4:8): "What other nation is there so renowned
that hath ceremonies and just judgments, and all the law?" In like
manner, from this point of view, the state of clerics is better than that
of the laity, and the state of religious than that of folk living in the
world.
Reply to Objection 3: The Gentiles obtained salvation more perfectly
and more securely under the observances of the Law than under the
mere natural law: and for this reason they were admitted to them. So
too the laity are now admitted to the ranks of the clergy, and secular
persons to those of the religious, although they can be saved
without this.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.98, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the Old Law was suitably given at the

time of Moses?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law was not suitably given at
the time of Moses. Because the Old Law disposed man for the
salvation which was to come through Christ, as stated above
(Articles 2,3). But man needed this salutary remedy immediately after
he had sinned. Therefore the Law should have been given
immediately after sin.
Objection 2: Further, the Old Law was given for the sanctification of
those from whom Christ was to be born. Now the promise
concerning the "seed, which is Christ" (Gal. 3:16) was first made to
Abraham, as related in Gn. 12:7. Therefore the Law should have been
given at once at the time of Abraham.
Objection 3: Further, as Christ was born of those alone who
descended from Noe through Abraham, to whom the promise was
made; so was He born of no other of the descendants of Abraham
but David, to whom the promise was renewed, according to 2 Kgs.
23:1: "The man to whom it was appointed concerning the Christ of
the God of Jacob . . . said." Therefore the Old Law should have been
given after David, just as it was given after Abraham.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Gal. 3:19) that the Law "was set
because of transgressions, until the seed should come, to whom He
made the promise, being ordained by angels in the hand of a
Mediator": ordained, i.e. "given in orderly fashion," as the gloss
explains. Therefore it was fitting that the Old Law should be given in
this order of time.
I answer that, It was most fitting for the Law to be given at the time of
Moses. The reason for this may be taken from two things in respect
of which every law is imposed on two kinds of men. Because it is
imposed on some men who are hard-hearted and proud, whom the
law restrains and tames: and it is imposed on good men, who,
through being instructed by the law, are helped to fulfil what they
desire to do. Hence it was fitting that the Law should be given at
such a time as would be appropriate for the overcoming of man's
pride. For man was proud of two things, viz. of knowledge and of
power. He was proud of his knowledge, as though his natural reason