FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.2.

reputed as one body, and the whole community as one man. Indeed
Porphyry says (Praedic., De Specie) that "by sharing the same
species, many men are one man." Accordingly the multitude of men
born of Adam, are as so many members of one body. Now the action
of one member of the body, of the hand for instance, is voluntary not
by the will of that hand, but by the will of the soul, the first mover of
the members. Wherefore a murder which the hand commits would
not be imputed as a sin to the hand, considered by itself as apart
from the body, but is imputed to it as something belonging to man
and moved by man's first moving principle. In this way, then, the
disorder which is in this man born of Adam, is voluntary, not by his
will, but by the will of his first parent, who, by the movement of
generation, moves all who originate from him, even as the soul's will
moves all the members to their actions. Hence the sin which is thus
transmitted by the first parent to his descendants is called "original,"
just as the sin which flows from the soul into the bodily members is
called "actual." And just as the actual sin that is committed by a
member of the body, is not the sin of that member, except inasmuch
as that member is a part of the man, for which reason it is called a
"human sin"; so original sin is not the sin of this person, except
inasmuch as this person receives his nature from his first parent, for
which reason it is called the "sin of nature," according to Eph. 2:3:
"We . . . were by nature children of wrath."
Reply to Objection 1: The son is said not to bear the iniquity of his
father, because he is not punished for his father's sin, unless he
share in his guilt. It is thus in the case before us: because guilt is
transmitted by the way of origin from father to son, even as actual
sin is transmitted through being imitated.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the soul is not transmitted, because
the power in the semen is not able to cause the rational soul,
nevertheless the motion of the semen is a disposition to the
transmission of the rational soul: so that the semen by its own
power transmits the human nature from parent to child, and with that
nature, the stain which infects it: for he that is born is associated
with his first parent in his guilt, through the fact that he inherits his
nature from him by a kind of movement which is that of generation.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the guilt is not actually in the semen,
yet human nature is there virtually accompanied by that guilt.
Reply to Objection 4: The semen is the principle of generation, which

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.81, C.2.

is an act proper to nature, by helping it to propagate itself. Hence the
soul is more infected by the semen, than by the flesh which is
already perfect, and already affixed to a certain person.
Reply to Objection 5: A man is not blamed for that which he has from
his origin, if we consider the man born, in himself. But it we consider
him as referred to a principle, then he may be reproached for it: thus
a man may from his birth be under a family disgrace, on account of a
crime committed by one of his forbears.