Deut. x. 12.

for bondage, and for a sign to them, He cancelled by the new covenant of liberty. But He has
increased and widened those laws which are natural, and noble, and common to all, granting to
men largely and without grudging, by means of adoption, to know God the Father, and to love Him
with the whole heart, and to follow His word unswervingly, while they abstain not only from evil
deeds, but even from the desire after them. But He has also increased the feeling of reverence; for
sons should have more veneration than slaves, and greater love for their father. And therefore the
Lord says, "As to every idle word that men have spoken, they shall render an account for it in the
day of judgment." And, "he who has looked upon a woman to lust after her, hath committed
adultery with her already in his heart;" and, "he that is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment." [All this is declared,] that we may know that we shall give
account to God not of deeds only, as slaves, but even of words and thoughts, as those who have
truly received the power of liberty, in which [condition] a man is more severely tested, whether he
will reverence, and fear, and love the Lord. And for this reason Peter says "that we have not liberty
as a cloak of maliciousness," but as the means of testing and evidencing faith.

### Chapter XVII.—Proof that God did not appoint the Levitical dispensation for His own sake,
or as requiring such service; for He does, in fact, need nothing from men.
1. Moreover, the prophets indicate in the fullest manner that God stood in no need of their
slavish obedience, but that it was upon their own account that He enjoined certain observances in
the law. And again, that God needed not their oblation, but [merely demanded it], on account of
man himself who offers it, the Lord taught distinctly, as I have pointed out. For when He perceived
them neglecting righteousness, and abstaining from the love of God, and imagining that God was
to be propitiated by sacrifices and the other typical observances, Samuel did even thus speak to
them: "God does not desire whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices, but He will have His voice to be
hearkened to. Behold, a ready obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of
rams." David also says: "Sacrifice and oblation Thou didst not desire, but mine ears hast Thou

1 Pet. ii. 16.

perfected; burnt-offerings also for sin Thou hast not required." He thus teaches them that God
desires obedience, which renders them secure, rather than sacrifices and holocausts, which avail
them nothing towards righteousness; and [by this declaration] he prophesies the new covenant at
the same time. Still clearer, too, does he speak of these things in the fiftieth Psalm: "For if Thou
hadst desired sacrifice, then would I have given it: Thou wilt not delight in burnt-offerings. The
sacrifice of God is a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart the Lord will not despise." Because,
therefore, God stands in need of nothing, He declares in the preceding Psalm: "I will take no calves
out of thine house, nor he-goats out of thy fold. For Mine are all the beasts of the earth, the herds
and the oxen on the mountains: I know all the fowls of heaven, and the various tribes of the field
are Mine. If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is Mine, and the fulness thereof.
Shall I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?" Then, lest it might be supposed that
He refused these things in His anger, He continues, giving him (man) counsel: "Offer unto God
the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows to the Most High; and call upon Me in the day of thy
trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me;" rejecting, indeed, those things by
which sinners imagined they could propitiate God, and showing that He does Himself stand in need
of nothing; but He exhorts and advises them to those things by which man is justified and draws
nigh to God. This same declaration does Esaias make: "To what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices unto Me? saith the Lord. I am full." And when He had repudiated holocausts, and
sacrifices, and oblations, as likewise the new moons, and the sabbaths, and the festivals, and all
the rest of the services accompanying these, He continues, exhorting them to what pertained to
salvation: "Wash you, make you clean, take away wickedness from your hearts from before mine
eyes: cease from your evil ways, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow; and come, let us reason together, saith the Lord."
2. For it was not because He was angry, like a man, as many venture to say, that He rejected
their sacrifices; but out of compassion to their blindness, and with the view of suggesting to them
the true sacrifice, by offering which they shall appease God, that they may receive life from Him.
As He elsewhere declares: "The sacrifice to God is an afflicted heart: a sweet savour to God is a
Paul in Heb. x. 9. Harvey, however, is of opinion that the text of the old Latin translation was originally "perforasti;" indicating
thus an entire concurrence with the Hebrew, as now read in this passage. [Both readings illustrated by their apparent reference
to Ex. xxi. 6, compared with Heb. v. 7—9.]