But do thou mark this, I pray you; that the way of destruction is not one
only, but there are differing ones, and wide apart from one another. For they that
are like the wayside are the coarse-minded, and indifferent, and careless; but
those on the rock such as fail from weakness only.
For "that which is sown upon the stony places," says He, "the same is he
that hears the word, and anon with joy receives it. Yet has he not root in himself,
but endures for a while; but when tribulation or persecution arises because of
the word, by and by he is offended! When any one," so He says, "hears the word
of truth and understands it not, then comes the wicked one, and catches that
which was sown out of his heart. This is he that is sown by the wayside."
Now it is not the same thing for the doctrine to wither away, when no man
is evil entreating, or disturbing its foundations, as when temptations press upon
one. But they that are likened to the thorns, are much more inexcusable than
these.
6. In order then that none of these things may befall us, let us by zeal and
continual remembrance cover up the things that are told us. For though the devil
do catch them away, yet it rests with us, whether they be caught away; though
the plants wither, yet it is not from the heat this takes place (for He did not say,
because of the heat it withered, but, "because it had no root"); although His
sayings are choked, it is not because of the thorns, but of them who suffer them
to spring up. For there is a way, if you will, to check this evil growth, and to
make the right use of our wealth. Therefore He said not, "the world," but "the
care of the world;" nor "riches," but "the deceitfulness of riches."
Let us not then blame the things, but the corrupt mind. For it is possible to
be rich and not to be deceived; and to be in this world, and not to be choked with
its cares. For indeed riches have two contrary disadvantages; one, care, wearing
us out, and bringing a darkness over us; the other, luxury, making us effeminate.
And well has He said, "The deceitfulness of riches." For all that pertains to
riches is deceit; they are names only, not attached to things. For so pleasure and
glory, and splendid array, and all these things, are a sort of vain show, not a

reality.
Having therefore spoken of the ways of destruction, afterwards He
mentions the good ground, not suffering them to despair, but giving a hope of
repentance, and indicating that it is possible to change from the things before
mentioned into this.
And yet if both the land be good, and the Sower one, and the seed the same,
wherefore did one bear a hundred, one sixty, one thirty? Here again the
difference is from the nature of the ground, for even where the ground is good,
great even therein is the difference. Do you see, that not the husbandman is to be
blamed, nor the seed, but the land that receives it? Not for its nature, but for its
disposition. And herein too, great is His mercy to man, that He does not require
one measure of virtue, but while He receives the first, and casts not out the
second, He gives also a place to the third.
And these things He says, least they that followed Him should suppose that
hearing is sufficient for salvation. And wherefore, one may say, did He not put
the other vices also, such as lust, vainglory? In speaking of "the care of this
world, and the deceitfulness of riches," He set down all. Yea, both vainglory and
all the rest belong to this world, and to the deceitfulness of riches; such as
pleasure, and gluttony, and envy, and vainglory, and all the like.
But He added also the "way" and the "rock," signifying that it is not enough
to be freed from riches only, but we must cultivate also the other parts of virtue.
For what if you are free indeed from riches, yet are soft and unmanly? And what
if you are not indeed unmanly, but art remiss and careless about the hearing of
the word? Nay, no one part is sufficient for our salvation, but there is required
first a careful hearing, and a continual recollection; then fortitude, then contempt
of riches, and deliverance from all worldly things.
In fact, His reason for putting this before the other, is because the one is
first required (for "How shall they believe except they hear?" [Romans 10:14]
just as we too, except we mind what is said, shall not be able so much as to learn
what we ought to do): after that, fortitude, and the contempt of things present.