husband attempt it; no, although he had dragged on so long a period childless,
yet he chose never to become a father, rather than to grieve his wife. And yet
even after all this, what said Sarah? "The Lord judge between me and you."
[Genesis 16:5] Now, I say, had he been any one else would he not have been
moved to anger? Would he not also have stretched forth his hand, saying as it
were, "What do you mean? I had no desire to have anything to do with the
woman; it was all your own doing; and do you turn again and accuse me?"—
But no, he says nothing of the sort—but what? "Behold, your maid is in your
hand; do to her that which is good in your eyes." [Genesis 16:6] He delivered up
the partner of his bed, that he might not grieve Sarah. And yet surely is there
nothing greater than this for producing affection. For if partaking of the same
table produces unanimity even in robbers towards their foes, (and the Psalmist
says, "Who ate sweet food at the same table with me"); much more will the
becoming one flesh— for such is the being the partner of the bed— be effectual
to draw us together. Yet did none of these things avail to overcome him; but he
delivered Hagar up to his wife, to show that nothing had been done by his own
fault. Nay, and what is more, he sent her forth when with child. Who would not
have pitied one that had conceived a child by himself? Yet was the just man
unmoved, for he set before everything else the love he owed his wife.
Let us then imitate him ourselves. Let no one reproach his neighbor with his
poverty; let no one be in love with money; and then all difficulties will be at an
end.
Neither let a wife say to her husband, "Unmanly coward that you are, full of
sluggishness and dullness, and fast asleep! Here is such a one, a low man, and
of low parentage, who runs his risks, and makes his voyages, and has made a
good fortune; and his wife wears her jewels, and goes out with her pair of milkwhite mules; she rides about everywhere, she has troops of slaves, and a swarm
of eunuchs, but you have cowered down and livest to no purpose." Let not a wife
say these things, nor anything like them. For she is the body, not to dictate to the
head, but to submit herself and obey. "But how," some one will say, "is she to

endure poverty? Where is she to look for consolation?" Let her select and put
beside her those who are poorer still. Let her again consider how many noble
and high-born maidens have not only received nothing of their husbands, but
have even given dowries to them, and have spent their all upon them. Let her
reflect on the perils which arise from such riches, and she will cling to this quiet
life. In short, if she is affectionately disposed towards her husband, she will utter
nothing of the sort. No, she will rather choose to have him near her, though
gaining nothing, than gaining ten thousand talents of gold, accompanied with
that care and anxiety which always arise to wives from those distant voyages.
Neither, however, let the husband, when he hears these things, on the score
of his having the supreme authority, betake himself to revilings and to blows; but
let him exhort, let him admonish her, as being less perfect, let him persuade her
with arguments. Let him never once lift his hand—far be this from a noble spirit,
— no, nor give expression to insults, or taunts, or revilings; but let him regulate
and direct her as being wanting in wisdom. Yet how shall this be done? If she be
instructed in the true riches, in the heavenly philosophy, she will make no
complaints like these. Let him teach her then, that poverty is no evil. Let him
teach her, not by what he says only, but also by what he does. Let him teach her
to despise glory; and then his wife will speak of nothing, and will desire nothing
of the kind. Let him, as if he had an image given into his hands to mould, let
him, from that very evening on which he first receives her into the bridal
chamber, teach her temperance, gentleness, and how to live, casting down the
love of money at once from the outset, and from the very threshold. Let him
discipline her in wisdom, and advise her never to have bits of gold hanging at
her ears, and down her cheeks, and laid round about her neck, nor laid up about
the chamber, nor golden and costly garments stored up. But let her chamber be
handsome, still let not what is handsome degenerate into finery. No, leave these
things to the people of the stage. Adorn your house yourself with all possible
neatness, so as rather to breathe an air of soberness than much perfume. For
hence will arise two or three good results. First then, the bride will not be