What can the reason be, that at each temptation He adds this, "If Thou be
Son of God?" Much the same as he did in that former case, he does also at this
time. That is, as he then slandered God, saying, "In the day you eat, your eyes
shall be opened;" [Genesis 3:5] thereby intending to signify, that they were
beguiled and overreached, and had received no benefit; even so in this case also
he insinuates this same thing, saying, "in vain God has called You Son, and has
beguiled You by His gift; for, if this be not so, afford us some clear proof that You
are of that power." Then, because Christ had reasoned with him from Scripture,
he also brings in a testimony of the prophet.
How then does Christ? He is not indignant, nor provoked, but with that
extreme gentleness He reasons with him again from the Scriptures, saying, "You
shall not tempt the Lord your God:" [Matthew 4:7] teaching us that we must
overcome the devil, not by miracles, but by forbearance and long-suffering, and
that we should do nothing at all for display and vainglory.
But mark his folly, even by the very testimony which he produced. For
while the testimonies cited by the Lord were both of them spoken with
exceeding fitness: his, on the other hand, were chance and random sayings,
neither did he bring forward on his part that which applied to the matter in hand.
For that it is written, "He shall give His angels charge concerning You," this
surely is not advice to dash and toss one's self down headlong; and moreover,
this was not so much as spoken concerning the Lord. However, this for the time
He did not expose, although there was both insult in his manner of speech, and
great inconsistency. For of God's Son no man requires these things: but to cast
one's self down is the part of the devil, and of demons. Whereas God's part is to
raise up even them that are down. And if He ought to have displayed His own
power, it would not have been by casting and tossing Himself down at random,
but by saving others. But to cast ourselves down precipices, and into pits,
pertains properly to his troop. Thus, for example, the juggler among them does
everywhere.
But Christ, even when these things are said, does not yet reveal Himself,

but as man for a while discourses with him. For the sayings, "Man shall not live
by bread alone;" and, "You shall not tempt the Lord your God," suited one not
greatly revealing Himself, but representing Himself as one of the many.
But marvel not, if he in reasoning with Christ oftentimes turn himself about.
For as pugilists, when they have received deadly blows, reel about, drenched in
much blood, and blinded; even so he too, darkened by the first and the second
blow, speaks at random what comes uppermost: and proceeds to his third assault.
5. "And he leads Him up into a high mountain, and shows Him all the
kingdoms, and says, All these things will I give You, if You will fall down and
worship me. Then says He, Get behind me, Satan, for it is written, You shall
worship the Lord your God, and Him only shall you serve." [Matthew 4:8-10]
For since he was now come to sinning against the Father, saying, that all
that is the Father's was his, and was endeavoring to make himself out to be God,
as artificer of the universe; He then rebuked him: but not even then with
vehemence, but simply, "Get you hence, Satan;" which itself had in it something
of command rather than of rebuke. For as soon as He had said to him, "Get you
hence," He caused him to take to flight; since he brought not against Him any
other temptations.
And how says Luke, that "he ended all temptation." To me it seems that in
mentioning the chief of the temptations, he had spoken of all, as though the rest
too were included in these. For the things that form the substance of innumerable
evils are these: to be a slave to the belly, to do anything for vainglory, to be in
subjection to the madness of riches. Which accordingly that accursed one
considering, set last the most powerful of all, I mean the desire of more: and
though originally, and from the beginning, he was travailing to come to this, yet
he kept it for the last, as being of more force than the rest. For in fact this is the
manner of his wrestling, to apply those things last, which seem more likely to
overthrow. And this sort of thing he did with respect to Job likewise. Wherefore
in this instance too, having begun with the motives which seem to be viler and
weaker, he goes on to the more prevailing.