Matt. xxii. 1, etc.

clearly show all [these points, viz.,] that there is one King and Lord, the Father of all, of whom He
had previously said, "Neither shalt thou swear by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King;"
and that He had from the beginning prepared the marriage for His Son, and used, with the utmost
kindness, to call, by the instrumentality of His servants, the men of the former dispensation to the
wedding feast; and when they would not obey, He still invited them by sending out other servants,
yet that even then they did not obey Him, but even stoned and slew those who brought them the
message of invitation. He accordingly sent forth His armies and destroyed them, and burned down
their city; but He called together from all the highways, that is, from all nations, [guests] to the
marriage feast of His Son, as also He says by Jeremiah: "I have sent also unto you my servants the
prophets to say, Return ye now, every man, from his very evil way, and amend your doings."
And again He says by the same prophet: "I have also sent unto you my servants the prophets
throughout the day and before the light; yet they did not obey me, nor incline their ears unto me.
And thou shall speak this word to them: This is a people that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord,
nor receiveth correction; faith has perished from their mouth." The Lord, therefore, who has
called us everywhere by the apostles, is He who called those of old by the prophets, as appears by
the words of the Lord; and although they preached to various nations, the prophets were not from
one God, and the apostles from another; but, [proceeding] from one and the same, some of them
announced the Lord, others preached the Father, and others again foretold the advent of the Son of
God, while yet others declared Him as already present to those who then were afar off.
6. Still further did He also make it manifest, that we ought, after our calling, to be also adorned
with works of righteousness, so that the Spirit of God may rest upon us; for this is the wedding
garment, of which also the apostle speaks, "Not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon,
that mortality might be swallowed up by immortality." But those who have indeed been called
to God's supper, yet have not received the Holy Spirit, because of their wicked conduct "shall be,"
He declares, "cast into outer darkness." He thus clearly shows that the very same King who
gathered from all quarters the faithful to the marriage of His Son, and who grants them the
incorruptible banquet, [also] orders that man to be cast into outer darkness who has not on a wedding
garment, that is, one who despises it. For as in the former covenant, "with many of them was He
not well pleased;" so also is it the case here, that "many are called, but few chosen." It is not,
then, one God who judges, and another Father who calls us together to salvation; nor one, forsooth,
who confers eternal light, but another who orders those who have not on the wedding garment to