to me. So then am I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?"
Here he shows perplexity and amazement, and desires to learn of
themselves the reason of their change. Who, says he, has deceived you, and
caused a difference in your disposition towards me? Are you not the same who
attended and ministered to me, counting me more precious than your own eyes?
What then has happened? Whence this dislike? Whence this suspicion? Is it
because I have told you the truth? You ought on this very account to pay me
increased honor and attention; instead of which "I have become your enemy,
because I tell you the truth,"— for I can find no other reason but this. Observe
too what humbleness of mind appears in his defence of himself; he proves not by
his conduct to them, but by theirs to him that his language could not possibly
have proceeded from unkind feeling. For he says not; How is it supposable that
one, who has been scourged and driven about, and ill-treated a thousand things
for your sakes, should now have schemes against you? But he argues from what
they had reason to boast of, saying, How can one who has been honored by you,
and received as an Angel, repay you by conduct the very opposite?
Ver. 17. "They zealously seek you in no good way; nay, they desire to shut
you out that you may seek them."
It is a wholesome emulation which leads to an imitation of virtue, but an
evil one, which seduces from virtue him who is in the right path. And this is the
object of those persons, who would deprive you of perfect knowledge, and
impart to you that which is mutilated and spurious, and this for no other purpose
than that they may occupy the rank of teachers, and degrade you, who now stand
higher than themselves, to the position of disciples. For this is the meaning of the
words "that you may seek them." But I, says he, desire the reverse, that you may
become a model for them, and a pattern of a higher perfection: a thing which
actually happened when I was present with you. Wherefore he adds,
Ver. 18. "But it is good to be zealously sought in a good matter at all times,
and not only when I am present with you."
Here he hints that his absence had been the cause of this, and that the true

blessing was for disciples to hold right opinions not only in the presence but also
in the absence of their master. But as they had not arrived at this point of
perfection, he makes every effort to place them there.
Ver. 19. "My little children, of whom I am again in travail until Christ be
formed in you."
Observe his perplexity and perturbation, "Brethren, I beseech you:" "My
little children, of whom I am again in travail:" He resembles a mother trembling
for her children. "Until Christ be formed in you." Behold his paternal tenderness,
behold this despondency worthy of an Apostle. Observe what a wail he utters,
far more piercing than of a woman in travail—You have defaced the likeness,
you have destroyed the kinship, you have changed the form, you need another
regeneration and refashioning; nevertheless I call you children, abortions and
monsters though you be. However, he does not express himself in this way, but
spares them, unwilling to strike, and to inflict wound upon wound. Wise
physicians do not cure those who have fallen into a long sickness all at once, but
little by little, lest they should faint and die. And so is it with this blessed man;
for these pangs were more severe in proportion as the force of his affection was
stronger. And the offense was of no trivial kind. And as I have ever said and ever
will say, even a slight fault mars the appearance and distorts the figure of the
whole.
Ver. 20. "Yea, I could wish to be present with you now, and to change my
voice."
Observe his warmth, his inability to refrain himself, and to conceal these his
feelings; such is the nature of love; nor is he satisfied with words, but desires to
be present with them, and so, as he says, to change his voice, that is, to change to
lamentation, to shed tears, to turn every thing into mourning. For he could not by
letter show his tears or cries of grief, and therefore he ardently desires to be
present with them.
Ver. 20. "For I am perplexed about you." I know not, says he, what to say,
or what to think. How is it, that you who by dangers, which you endured for the