Homily 52 on the Gospel of John
John 7:45-46
"Then came the officers to the Chief Priests and Pharisees; and they said unto
them, Why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, Never man spoke
like this Man."
1. There is nothing clearer, nothing simpler than the truth, if we deal not
perversely; just as (on the other hand) if we deal perversely, nothing is more
difficult. For behold, the Scribes and Pharisees, who seemed forsooth to be wiser
than other men, being ever with Christ for the sake of plotting against Him, and
beholding His miracles, and reading the Scriptures, were nothing profited, but
were even harmed; while the officers, who could not claim one of these
privileges, were subdued by one single sermon, and they who had gone forth to
bind Him, came back bound themselves by wonder. We must not only marvel at
their understanding, that they needed not signs, but were taken by the teaching
alone; (for they said not, "Never man wrought miracles thus," but, "Never man
spoke thus";) we must not, I say, merely marvel at their understanding, but also
at their boldness, that they spoke thus to those that had sent them, to the
Pharisees, to His enemies, to men who were doing all with a view to gratify their
enmity. "The officers," says the Evangelist, "came, and the Pharisees said unto
them, Why have ye not brought him?" To "come" was a far greater deed than to
have remained, for in the latter case they would have been rid of the annoyance
of these men, but now they become heralds of the wisdom of Christ, and
manifested their boldness in greater degree. And they say not, "We could not
become of the multitude, for they gave heed unto Him as unto a prophet"; but
what? "Never man spoke as this Man." Yet they might have alleged that, but they
show their right feeling. For theirs was the saying not only of men admiring
Him, but blaming their masters, because they had sent them to bind Him whom

it behooved rather to hear. Yet they had not heard a sermon either, but a short
one; for when the long mind is impartial, there is no need of long arguments.
Such a thing is truth. What then say the Pharisees? When they ought to have
been pricked at the heart, they, on the contrary, retort a charge on the officers,
saying,

John 7:47
"Are ye also deceived?"
They still speak them fair, and do not express themselves harshly, dreading
lest the others should entirely separate themselves, yet nevertheless they give
signs of anger, and speak sparingly. For when they ought to have asked what He
spoke, and to have marveled at the words, they do not so, (knowing that they
might have been captivated,) but reason with them from a very foolish argument;

John 7:48
"Wherefore, has none of the rulers believed on Him?"
Do you then make this a charge against Christ, tell me, and not against the
unbelievers?