FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.9.

instance, a man intends to go to Rome, and encounters obstacles,
which prevent him from going. On the other hand, with regard to the
interior act of the will, this happens in only one way: because the
interior acts of the will are in our power, whereas the external actions
are not. But the will can will an object that is not proportionate to the
intended end: and thus the will that tends to that object considered
absolutely, is not so good as the intention. Yet because the intention
also belongs, in a way, to the act of the will, inasmuch, to wit, as it is
the reason thereof; it comes to pass that the quantity of goodness in
the intention redounds upon the act of the will; that is to say, in so
far as the will wills some great good for an end, although that by
which it wills to gain so great a good, is not proportionate to that
good.
But if we consider the quantity in the intention and in the act,
according to their respective intensity, then the intensity of the
intention redounds upon the interior act and the exterior act of the
will: since the intention stands in relation to them as a kind of form,
as is clear from what has been said above (Question 12, Article 4;
Question 18, Article 6). And yet considered materially, while the
intention is intense, the interior or exterior act may be not so intense,
materially speaking: for instance, when a man does not will with as
much intensity to take medicine as he wills to regain health.
Nevertheless the very fact of intending health intensely, redounds,
as a formal principle, upon the intense volition of medicine.
We must observe, however, that the intensity of the interior or
exterior act, may be referred to the intention as its object: as when a
man intends to will intensely, or to do something intensely. And yet
it does not follow that he wills or acts intensely; because the
quantity of goodness in the interior or exterior act does not depend
on the quantity of the good intended, as is shown above. And hence
it is that a man does not merit as much as he intends to merit:
because the quantity of merit is measured by the intensity of the act,
as we shall show later on (Question 20, Article 4; Question 114,
Article 4).
Reply to Objection 1: This gloss speaks of good as in the estimation
of God, Who considers principally the intention of the end.
Wherefore another gloss says on the same passage that "the
treasure of the heart is the intention, according to which God judges
our works." For the goodness of the intention, as stated above,
redounds, so to speak, upon the goodness of the will, which makes

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.19, C.9.

even the external act to be meritorious in God's sight.
Reply to Objection 2: The goodness of the intention is not the whole
cause of a good will. Hence the argument does not prove.
Reply to Objection 3: The mere malice of the intention suffices to
make the will evil: and therefore too, the will is as evil as the
intention is evil. But the same reasoning does not apply to
goodness, as stated above (ad 2).