repentance; but these in yet another way, by suffering them to gain no fruit from
repentance. For when he found not how he might destroy them by direct [attack,]
he came another road, heightening their toils, while robbing them of the fruits,
and persuading them, as if they had successfully accomplished all they had to
do, therefore to be neglectful of what remains.
That we may not then fruitlessly afflict ourselves, let us address a few
words to women of this character; for to women this disorder especially belongs.
Praiseworthy indeed is even that which now ye do, your fasting and lying on the
ground and ashes; but except the rest be added, these are of no avail. God has
showed how He remits sins. Why then forsaking that path, do ye carve another
for yourselves. In old time the Ninevites sinned, and they did the things which
you too now are doing. Let us see however what it was that availed them. For as
in the case of the sick, physicians apply many remedies; howbeit the man of
understanding regards not that the sick person has tried this and that, but what
was of service to him; such must be also our inquiry here. What then was it that
availed those barbarians? They applied fasting unto the wounds, yea applied
extreme fasting, lying on the ground too, putting on of sackcloth, and ashes, and
lamentations; they applied also a change of life. Let us then see which of these
things made them whole. And whence, says one, shall we know? If we come to
the Physician, if we ask Him: for He will not hide it from us, but will even
eagerly disclose it. Rather that none may be ignorant, nor need to ask, He has
even set down in writing the medicine that restored them. What then is this?
"God," says He, "saw that they turned every one from his evil way, and He
repented of the evil that He had said He would do unto them." [Jonah 3:10] He
said not, He saw [their] fasting and sackcloth and ashes. And I say not this to
overturn fasting, (God forbid!) but to exhort you that with fasting ye do that
which is better than fasting, the abstaining from all evil. David also sinned. [2
Samuel 12:17, etc.] Let us see then how he too repented. Three days he sat on
ashes. But this he did not for the sin's sake, but for the child's, being as yet
stupefied with that affliction. But the sin by other means did he wipe away, by

humbleness, contrition of heart, compunction of soul, by falling into the like no
more, by remembering it always, by bearing thankfully every thing that befalls
him, by sparing those that grieve him, by forbearing to requite those who
conspire against him; yea, even preventing those who desire to do this. For
instance, when Shimei was bespattering him with reproaches without number [2
Samuel 16:5-9] and the captain who was with him was greatly indignant, he
said, "Let him curse me, for the Lord has bidden him:" for he had a contrite and
humbled heart, and it was this especially which wiped away his sins. For this is
confession, this is repentance. But if while we fast we are proud, we have been
not only nothing profited but even injured.
7. Humble then your heart, thou too, that you may draw God unto you. "For
the Lord is near unto them that are of a contrite heart." [Psalm 33:19] Do you
see not in the gorgeous houses those who are in disgrace; how they answer not
again when even the lower servants insult them, but put up with it because of the
disgrace with which their fault has surrounded them? So do thou too: and if any
one revile you, wax not fierce, but groan, not for the insult, but for that sin which
cast you into disgrace. Groan when you have sinned, not because you are to be
punished, (for this is nothing,) but because you have offended your Master, one
so gentle, one so kind, one that so loves you and longs for your salvation as to
have given even His Son for you. For this groan, and do this continually: for this
is confession. Be not today cheerful, tomorrow of a sad countenance, then again
cheerful; but continue ever in mourning and self contrition. For, "Blessed," says
he, "are they that mourn," that is, that do this perpetually. Continue then to do
this perpetually, and to take heed to yourself, and to afflict your heart; as one
who had lost a beloved son might mourn. "Rend," says he, "your hearts, and not
your garments." [Joel 2:13] That which is rent will not lift itself on high; that
which has been broken cannot rise up again. Hence one says, "Rend," and
another, "a broken and a contrite heart God will not despise." [Psalm 51:17]
Yea, though thou be wise, or wealthy, or a ruler, rend your heart. Suffer it not to
have high thoughts nor to be inflated. For that which is rent is not inflated, and