great name for envy. I say a name, for wealth is a name only void of reality.
"Yet he that is rich," says he, "indulges and delights himself with this
notion." He delights himself in those things about which he ought to grieve. "To
grieve? Wherefore?" asks he. Because this renders him useless for all purposes,
and cowardly and unmanly both with regard to banishment and to death, for he
holds this double, longing more for money than for light. Such a one not even
Heaven delights, because it bears not gold; nor the sun, forasmuch as it puts not
forth golden beams.
But there are some, says he, who do enjoy what they possess, living in
luxury, in gluttony, in drunkenness, spending sumptuously. You are telling me of
persons worse than the first. For the last above all are the men, who have no
enjoyment. For the first at least abstains from other evils, being bound to one
love; but the others are worse than these, besides what we have said, bringing in
upon themselves a crowd of cruel masters, and doing service every day to the
belly, to lust, to drunkenness, to other kinds of intemperance, as to so many cruel
tyrants, keeping harlots, preparing expensive feasts, purchasing parasites,
flatterers, turning aside after unnatural lusts, involving their body and their soul
in a thousand diseases springing therefrom.
For neither is it on what they want they spend their goods, but on ruining
the body, and on ruining also the soul therewith; and they do the same, as if any
one, when adorning his person, were to think he was spending his money on his
own wants.
So that he alone enjoys pleasure and is master of his goods, who uses his
wealth for a proper object; but these are slaves and captives, for they aggravate
both the passions of the body and the diseases of the soul. What manner of
enjoyment is this, where is siege and war, and a storm worse than all the raging
of the sea? For if wealth find men fools, it renders them more foolish; if wanton,
more wanton.
And what is the use of understanding, you will say, to the poor man? As
might be expected you are ignorant; for neither does the blind man know what is

the advantage of light. Listen to Solomon, saying, "As far as light excels
darkness, so does wisdom excel folly." [Ecclesiastes 2:13]
But how shall we instruct him that is in darkness? For the love of money is
darkness, permitting nothing that is to appear as it is, but otherwise. For much as
one in darkness, though he should see a golden vessel, though a precious stone,
though purple garments, supposes them to be nothing, for he sees not their
beauty; so also he that is in covetousness, knows not as he ought the beauty of
those things that are worthy of our care. Disperse then I pray you the mist that
arises from this passion, and then will you see the nature of things.
But nowhere do these things so plainly appear as in poverty, nowhere are
those things so disproved which seem to be, and are not, as in self-denial.
4. But oh! Foolish men; who do even curse the poor, and say that both
houses and living are disgraced by poverty, confounding all things. For what is a
disgrace to a house? I pray you. It has no couch of ivory, nor silver vessels, but
all of earthenware and wood. Nay, this is the greatest glory and distinction to a
house. For to be indifferent about worldly things, often occasions all a man's
leisure to be spent in the care of his soul.
When therefore you see great care about outward things, then be ashamed
at the great unseemliness. For the houses of them that are rich most of all want
seemliness. For when you see tables covered with hangings, and couches inlaid
with silver, much as in the theatre, much as in the display of the stage, what can
be equal to this unseemliness? For what kind of house is most like the stage, and
the things on the stage? The rich man's or the poor man's? Is it not quite plain
that it is the rich man's? This therefore is full of unseemliness. What kind of
house is most like Paul's, or Abraham's? It is quite evident that it is the poor
man's. This therefore is most adorned, and to be approved. And that you may
learn that this is, above all, a house's adorning, enter into the house of Zacchæus,
and learn, when Christ was on the point of entering therein, how Zacchæus
adorned it. For he did not run to his neighbors begging curtains, and seats, and
chairs made of ivory, neither did he bring forth from his closets Laconian