for His reverence" (Heb. 5:7) said to Peter, on whose profession of
faith the Church was founded (Lk. 22:32): "I have prayed for thee that
thy faith fail not." Now the universal Church approves and grants
indulgences. Therefore indulgences have some value.
I answer that, All admit that indulgences have some value, for it
would be blasphemy to say that the Church does anything in vain.
But some say that they do not avail to free a man from the debt of
punishment which he has deserved in Purgatory according to God's
judgment, and that they merely serve to free him from the obligation
imposed on him by the priest as a punishment for his sins, or from
the canonical penalties he has incurred. But this opinion does not
seem to be true. First, because it is expressly opposed to the
privilege granted to Peter, to whom it was said (Mt. 16:19) that
whatsoever he should loose on earth should be loosed also in
heaven. Wherefore whatever remission is granted in the court of the
Church holds good in the court of God. Moreover the Church by
granting such indulgences would do more harm than good, since, by
remitting the punishment she had enjoined on a man, she would
deliver him to be punished more severely in Purgatory.
Hence we must say on the contrary that indulgences hold good both
in the Church's court and in the judgment of God, for the remission
of the punishment which remains after contrition, absolution, and
confession, whether this punishment be enjoined or not. The reason
why they so avail is the oneness of the mystical body in which many
have performed works of satisfaction exceeding the requirements of
their debts; in which, too, many have patiently borne unjust
tribulations whereby a multitude of punishments would have been
paid, had they been incurred. So great is the quantity of such merits
that it exceeds the entire debt of punishment due to those who are
living at this moment: and this is especially due to the merits of
Christ: for though He acts through the sacraments, yet His efficacy
is nowise restricted to them, but infinitely surpasses their efficacy.
Now one man can satisfy for another, as we have explained above
(Question 13, Article 2). And the saints in whom this superabundance of satisfactions is found, did not perform their good
works for this or that particular person, who needs the remission of
his punishment (else he would have received this remission without
any indulgence at all), but they performed them for the whole Church
in general, even as the Apostle declares that he fills up "those things
that are wanting of the sufferings of Christ . . . for His body, which is

the Church" to whom he wrote (Col. 1:24). These merits, then, are the
common property of the whole Church. Now those things which are
the common property of a number are distributed to the various
individuals according to the judgment of him who rules them all.
Hence, just as one man would obtain the remission of his
punishment if another were to satisfy for him, so would he too if
another's satisfactions be applied to him by one who has the power
to do so.
Reply to Objection 1: The remission which is granted by means of
indulgences does not destroy the proportion between punishment
and sin, since someone has spontaneously taken upon himself the
punishment due for another's guilt, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 2: He who gains an indulgence is not, strictly
speaking, absolved from the debt of punishment, but is given the
means whereby he may pay it.
Reply to Objection 3: The effect of sacramental absolution is the
removal of a man's guilt, an effect which is not produced by
indulgences. But he who grants indulgences pays the debt of
punishment which a man owes, out of the common stock of the
Church's goods, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 4: Grace affords a better remedy for the
avoidance of sin than does habituation to (good) works. And since
he who gains an indulgence is disposed to grace through the love
which he conceives for the cause for which the indulgence is
granted, it follows that indulgences provide a remedy against sin.
Consequently it is not harmful to grant indulgences unless this be
done without discretion. Nevertheless those who gain indulgences
should be advised, not, on this account, to omit the penitential works
imposed on them, so that they may derive a remedy from these also,
even though they may be quit of the debt of punishment; and all the
more, seeing that they are often more in debt than they think.