FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.2.

ignorance is the cause of a sin, but that alone which removes the
knowledge which would prevent the sinful act. Consequently if a
man's will be so disposed that he would not be restrained from the
act of parricide, even though he recognized his father, his ignorance
about his father is not the cause of his committing the sin, but is
concomitant with the sin: wherefore such a man sins, not "through
ignorance" but "in ignorance," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. iii,
1).
Reply to Objection 1: Non-being cannot be the direct cause of
anything: but it can be an accidental cause, as being the removal of
an impediment.
Reply to Objection 2: As knowledge, which is removed by ignorance,
regards sin as turning towards something, so too, ignorance of this
respect of a sin is the cause of that sin, as removing its impediment.
Reply to Objection 3: The will cannot turn to that which is absolutely
unknown: but if something be known in one respect, and unknown in
another, the will can will it. It is thus that ignorance is the cause of
sin: for instance, when a man knows that what he is killing is a man,
but not that it is his own father; or when one knows that a certain act
is pleasurable, but not that it is a sin.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.76, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether ignorance is a sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that ignorance is not a sin. For sin is "a
word, deed or desire contrary to God's law," as stated above
(Question 71, Article 5). Now ignorance does not denote an act,
either internal or external. Therefore ignorance is not a sin.
Objection 2: Further, sin is more directly opposed to grace than to
knowledge. Now privation of grace is not a sin, but a punishment
resulting from sin. Therefore ignorance which is privation of
knowledge is not a sin.
Objection 3: Further, if ignorance is a sin, this can only be in so far
as it is voluntary. But if ignorance is a sin, through being voluntary,
it seems that the sin will consist in the act itself of the will, rather
than in the ignorance. Therefore the ignorance will not be a sin, but
rather a result of sin.
Objection 4: Further, every sin is taken away by repentance, nor
does any sin, except only original sin, pass as to guilt, yet remain in
act. Now ignorance is not removed by repentance, but remains in
act, all its guilt being removed by repentance. Therefore ignorance is
not a sin, unless perchance it be original sin.
Objection 5: Further, if ignorance be a sin, then a man will be
sinning, as long as he remains in ignorance. But ignorance is
continual in the one who is ignorant. Therefore a person in
ignorance would be continually sinning, which is clearly false, else
ignorance would be a most grievous sin. Therefore ignorance is not
a sin.
On the contrary, Nothing but sin deserves punishment. But
ignorance deserves punishment, according to 1 Cor. 14:38: "If any
man know not, he shall not be known." Therefore ignorance is a sin.
I answer that, Ignorance differs from nescience, in that nescience
denotes mere absence of knowledge; wherefore whoever lacks
knowledge about anything, can be said to be nescient about it: in
which sense Dionysius puts nescience in the angels (Coel. Hier. vii).
On the other hand, ignorance denotes privation of knowledge, i.e.
lack of knowledge of those things that one has a natural aptitude to