accrued to the Levites from the people; what is the reason, I say, that He so
ordained? Was it not for the sake of laying a foundation beforehand of lowliness
and love? For inasmuch as the dignity of a teacher oftentimes elates him who
possesses it, He, in order to repress his spirit, has imposed on him the necessity
of requiring aid at the hands of his disciples. And to these in turn he has given
means of cultivating kindly feelings, by training them, through the kindness
required of them to their Teacher, in gentleness towards others also. By this
means no slight affection is generated on both sides. Were not the cause of this
what I have stated it to be, why should He, who fed the dull-minded Jews with
manna, have reduced the Apostles to the necessity of asking for aid? Is it not
manifest He aimed at the great benefits of humility and love, and that those who
were under teaching might not be ashamed of Teachers who were in appearance
despicable? To ask for aid bears the semblance of disgrace, but it ceased to be so,
when their Teachers with all boldness urged their claim, so that their disciples
derived from hence no small benefit, taught hereby to despise all appearances.
Wherefore he says, "But let him that is taught in the word communicate unto him
that teaches in all good things," that is, let him show to him all generosity; this
he implies by the words, "in all good things." Let the disciple, says he, keep
nothing to himself, but have every thing in common, for what he receives is
better than what he gives—as much better as heavenly are better than earthly
things. This he expresses in another place, "If we sowed unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things?" [1 Corinthians
9:11] Wherefore he gives the procedure the name of a "communication,"
showing that an interchange takes place. Hereby too love is greatly fostered and
confirmed. If the teacher asks merely for competency, he does not by receiving it
derogate from his own dignity. For this is praiseworthy, so assiduously to apply
to the Word, as to require the aid of others, and to be in manifold poverty, and to
be regardless of all the means of subsistence. But if he exceed the due measure,
he injures his dignity, not by mere receiving, but by receiving too much. Then,
lest the vice of the Teacher should render the disciple more remiss in this matter,

and he should frequently pass him by, though poor, on account of his conduct, he
proceeds to say,
Ver. 9. "And let us not be weary in well doing."
And here he points out the difference between ambition of this kind, and in
temporal affairs, by saying, "Be not deceived ; God is not mocked; for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that sows unto his own
flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that sows unto the Spirit shall of
the Spirit reap eternal life." As in the case of seeds, one who sows pulse cannot
reap grain, for what is sown and what is reaped must both be of one kind, so is it
in actions, he that plants in the flesh, wantonness, drunkenness, or inordinate
desire, shall reap the fruits of these things. And what are these fruits?
Punishment, retribution, shame, derision, destruction. For of sumptuous tables
and viands the end is no other than destruction; for they both perish themselves,
and destroy the body too. But the fruit of the Spirit is of a nature not similar but
contrary in all respects to these. For consider; have you sown almsgiving? The
treasures of heaven and eternal glory await you: have you sown temperance?
honor and reward, and the applause of Angels, and a crown from the Judge await
you.
Ver. 9, 10. "And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not. So then as we have opportunity, let us work that which
is good toward all men, especially toward them that are of the household of
faith."
Lest any one should suppose that their Teachers were to be cared for and
supported, but that others might be neglected, he makes his discourse general,
and opens the door of this charitable zeal to all; nay, he carries it to such a
height, as to command us to show mercy both to Jews and Greeks, in the proper
gradation indeed, but still to show mercy. And what is this gradation? It consists
in bestowing greater care upon the faithful. His endeavor here is the same as in
his other Epistles; he discourses not merely of showing mercy, but of doing it
with zeal and perseverance, for the expressions of "sowing" and of "not fainting"