FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: That sanctification of priests and their sons,
and of their apparel or of anything else belonging to them, by
sprinkling them with blood, had no other effect but to appoint them
to the divine worship, and to remove impediments from them, "to the
cleansing of the flesh," as the Apostle states (Heb. 9:13) in token of
that sanctification whereby "Jesus" sanctified "the people by His
own blood" (Heb. 13:12). Moreover, the expiation must be
understood as referring to the removal of these bodily
uncleannesses, not to the forgiveness of sin. Hence even the
sanctuary which could not be the subject of sin is stated to be
expiated.
Reply to Objection 2: The priests pleased God in the ceremonies by
their obedience and devotion, and by their faith in the reality
foreshadowed; not by reason of the things considered in
themselves.
Reply to Objection 3: Those ceremonies which were prescribed in
the cleansing of a leper, were not ordained for the purpose of taking
away the defilement of leprosy. This is clear from the fact that these
ceremonies were not applied to a man until he was already healed:
hence it is written (Lev. 14:3,4) that the priest, "going out of the
camp, when he shall find that the leprosy is cleansed, shall
command him that is to be purified to offer," etc.; whence it is
evident that the priest was appointed the judge of leprosy, not
before, but after cleansing. But these ceremonies were employed for
the purpose of taking away the uncleanness of irregularity. They do
say, however, that if a priest were to err in his judgment, the leper
would be cleansed miraculously by the power of God, but not in
virtue of the sacrifice. Thus also it was by miracle that the thigh of
the adulterous woman rotted, when she had drunk the water "on
which" the priest had "heaped curses," as stated in Num. 5:19-27.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.103, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the ceremonies of the Old Law ceased at

the coming of Christ?
Objection 1: It would seem that the ceremonies of the Old Law did
not cease at the coming of Christ. For it is written (Bar 4:1): "This is
the book of the commandments of God, and the law that is for ever."
But the legal ceremonies were part of the Law. Therefore the legal
ceremonies were to last for ever.
Objection 2: Further, the offering made by a leper after being
cleansed was a ceremony of the Law. But the Gospel commands the
leper, who has been cleansed, to make this offering (Mt. 8:4).
Therefore the ceremonies of the Old Law did not cease at Christ's
coming.
Objection 3: Further, as long as the cause remains, the effect
remains. But the ceremonies of the Old Law had certain reasonable
causes, inasmuch as they were ordained to the worship of God,
besides the fact that they were intended to be figures of Christ.
Therefore the ceremonies of the Old Law should not have ceased.
Objection 4: Further, circumcision was instituted as a sign of
Abraham's faith: the observance of the sabbath, to recall the
blessing of creation: and other solemnities, in memory of other
Divine favors, as state above (Question 102, Article 4, ad 10; Article
5, ad 1). But Abraham's faith is ever to be imitated even by us: and
the blessing of creation and other Divine favors should never be
forgotten. Therefore at least circumcision and the other legal
solemnities should not have ceased.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Col. 2:16,17): "Let no man . . .
judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of a festival day, or of the
new moon, or of the sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to
come": and (Heb. 8:13): "In saying a new (testament), he hath made
the former old: and that which decayeth and groweth old, is near its
end."
I answer that, All the ceremonial precepts of the Old Law were
ordained to the worship of God as stated above (Question 101,
Articles 1,2). Now external worship should be in proportion to the
internal worship, which consists in faith, hope and charity.