THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.24, C.2.

be---"Christ was predestinated to be made known as the Son of
God." But this is an improper signification of predestination. For a
person is properly said to be predestinated by reason of his being
directed to the end of beatitude: but the beatitude of Christ does not
depend on our knowledge thereof.
It is therefore better to say that the antecedence implied in the
participle "predestinated" is to be referred to the Person not in
Himself, but by reason of the human nature: since, although that
Person was the Son of God from eternity, it was not always true that
one subsisting in human nature was the Son of God. Hence
Augustine says (De Praedest. Sanct. xv): "Jesus was predestinated,
so that He Who according to the flesh was to be the son of David,
should be nevertheless Son of God in power."
Moreover, it must be observed that, although the participle
"predestinated," just as this participle "made," implies antecedence,
yet there is a difference. For "to be made" belongs to the thing in
itself: whereas "to be predestinated" belongs to someone as being in
the apprehension of one who pre-ordains. Now that which is the
subject of a form or nature in reality, can be apprehended either as
under that form or absolutely. And since it cannot be said absolutely
of the Person of Christ that He began to be the Son of God, yet this is
becoming to Him as understood or apprehended to exist in human
nature, because at one time it began to be true that one existing in
human nature was the Son of God; therefore this
proposition---"Christ was predestinated the Son of God"---is truer
than this---"Christ was made the Son of God."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.24, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether this proposition is false: "Christ as man

was predestinated to be the Son of God"?
Objection 1: It would seem that this proposition is false: "Christ as
man was predestinated to be the Son of God." For at some time a
man is that which he was predestinated to be: since God's
predestination does not fail. If, therefore, Christ as man was
predestinated the Son of God, it seems to follow that as man He is
the Son of God. But the latter is false. Therefore the former is false.
Objection 2: Further, what is befitting to Christ as man is befitting to
any man; since He belongs to the same species as other men. If,
therefore, Christ, as man, was predestinated the Son of God, it will
follow that this is befitting to any other man. But the latter is false.
Therefore the former is false.
Objection 3: Further, that is predestinated from eternity which is to
take place at some time. But this proposition, "The Son of God was
made man," is truer than this, "Man was made the Son of God."
Therefore this proposition, "Christ, as the Son of God, was
predestinated to be man," is truer than this, "Christ as Man was
predestinated to be the Son of God."
On the contrary, Augustine (De Praedest. Sanct. xv) says:
"Forasmuch as God the Son was made Man, we say that the Lord of
Glory was predestinated."
I answer that, Two things may be considered in predestination. One
on the part of eternal predestination itself: and in this respect it
implies a certain antecedence in regard to that which comes under
predestination. Secondly, predestination may be considered as
regards its temporal effect, which is some gratuitous gift of God.
Therefore from both points of view we must say that predestination
is ascribed to Christ by reason of His human nature alone: for
human nature was not always united to the Word; and by grace
bestowed an it was it united in Person to the Son of God.
Consequently, by reason of human nature alone can predestination
be attributed to Christ. Wherefore Augustine says (De Praedest.
Sanct. xv): "This human nature of ours was predestinated to be
raised to so great, so lofty, so exalted a position, that it would be
impossible to raise it higher." Now that is said to belong to anyone