It seems necessary to read "se quidem" instead of "si quidem," as in the mss.

the Æons [have been made perfect] through means of this, that He is unsearchable who was inquired
after by them.
4. Since, therefore, the Enthymesis herself could not exist separately, apart from the Æon, [it
is obvious that] they bring forward still greater falsehood concerning her passion, when they further
proceed to divide and separate it from her, while they declare that it was the substance of matter.
As if God were not light, and as if no Word existed who could convict them, and overthrow their
wickedness. For it is certainly true, that whatsoever the Æon thought, that she also suffered; and
what she suffered, that she also thought. And her Enthymesis was, according to them, nothing else
than the passion of one thinking how she might comprehend the incomprehensible. And thus
Enthymesis (thought) was the passion; for she was thinking of things impossible. How then could
affection and passion be separated and set apart from the Enthymesis, so as to become the substance
of so vast a material creation, when Enthymesis herself was the passion, and the passion Enthymesis?
Neither, therefore, can Enthymesis apart from the Æon, nor the affections apart from Enthymesis,
separately possess substance; and thus once more their system breaks down and is destroyed.
5. But how did it come to pass that the Æon was both dissolved [into her component parts], and
became subject to passion? She was undoubtedly of the same substance as the Pleroma; but the
entire Pleroma was of the Father. Now, any substance, when brought in contact with what is of a
similar nature, will not be dissolved into nothing, nor will be in danger of perishing, but will rather
continue and increase, such as fire in fire, spirit in spirit, and water in water; but those which are
of a contrary nature to each other do, [when they meet,] suffer and are changed and destroyed. And,
in like manner, if there had been a production of light, it would not suffer passion, or recur any
danger in light like itself, but would rather glow with the greater brightness, and increase, as the
day does from [the increasing brilliance of] the sun; for they maintain that Bythus [himself] was
the image of their father (Sophia). Whatever animals are alien [in habits] and strange to each
other, or are mutually opposed in nature, fall into danger [on meeting together], and are destroyed;
whereas, on the other hand, those who are accustomed to each other, and of a harmonious disposition,
suffer no peril from being together in the same place, but rather secure both safety and life by such
a fact. If, therefore, this Æon was produced by the Pleroma of the same substance as the whole of
it, she could never have undergone change, since she was consorting with beings similar to and
familiar with herself, a spiritual essence among those that were spiritual. For fear, terror, passion,
dissolution, and such like, may perhaps occur through the struggle of contraries among such beings
as we are, who are possessed of bodies; but among spiritual beings, and those that have the light
diffused among them, no such calamities can possibly happen. But these men appear to me to have
endowed their Æon with the [same sort of] passion as belongs to that character in the comic poet
Menander, who was himself deeply in love, but an object of hatred [to his beloved]. For those
of the Valentinians.