FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.4.

we take it for the faith whereby we believe in God, then man is
directed thereby to that which is above him, so that he subject his
intellect and, consequently, all that is his, to God.
Man is well disposed in respect of that which is below him, as
regards external action, by "modesty," whereby we observe the
"mode" in all our words and deeds: as regards internal desires, by
"contingency" and "chastity": whether these two differ because
chastity withdraws man from unlawful desires, contingency also
from lawful desires: or because the continent man is subject to
concupiscence, but is not led away; whereas the chaste man is
neither subject to, nor led away from them.
Reply to Objection 1: Sanctification is effected by all the virtues, by
which also sins are taken away. Consequently fruit is mentioned
there in the singular, on account of its being generically one, though
divided into many species which are spoken of as so many fruits.
Reply to Objection 2: The hundredfold, sixtyfold, and thirtyfold fruits
do not differ as various species of virtuous acts, but as various
degrees of perfection, even in the same virtue. Thus contingency of
the married state is said to be signified by the thirtyfold fruit; the
contingency of widowhood, by the sixtyfold; and virginal
contingency, by the hundredfold fruit. There are, moreover, other
ways in which holy men distinguish three evangelical fruits
according to the three degrees of virtue: and they speak of three
degrees, because the perfection of anything is considered with
respect to its beginning, its middle, and its end.
Reply to Objection 3: The fact of not being disturbed by painful
things is something to delight in. And as to faith, if we consider it as
the foundation, it has the aspect of being ultimate and delightful, in
as much as it contains certainty: hence a gloss expounds thus:
"Faith, which is certainly about the unseen."
Reply to Objection 4: As Augustine says on Gal. 5:22,23, "the
Apostle had no intention of teaching us how many [either works of
the flesh, or fruits of the Spirit] there are; but to show how the former
should be avoided, and the latter sought after." Hence either more or
fewer fruits might have been mentioned. Nevertheless, all the acts of
the gifts and virtues can be reduced to these by a certain kind of
fittingness, in so far as all the virtues and gifts must needs direct the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.70, C.4.

mind in one of the above-mentioned ways. Wherefore the acts of
wisdom and of any gifts directing to good, are reduced to charity, joy
and peace. The reason why he mentions these rather than others, is
that these imply either enjoyment of good things, or relief from evils,
which things seem to belong to the notion of fruit.