Jer. vii. 29, 30.

who planted the vineyard, who led forth the people, who sent the prophets, who sent His own Son,
and who gave the vineyard to those other husbandmen that render the fruits in their season.
3. And therefore did the Lord say to His disciples, to make us become good workmen: "Take
heed to yourselves, and watch continually upon every occasion, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day shall come upon
you unawares; for as a snare shall it come upon all dwelling upon the face of the earth." "Let
your loins, therefore, be girded about, and your lights burning, and ye like to men who wait for
their lord, when he shall return from the wedding." "For as it was in the days of Noe, they did
eat and drink, they bought and sold, they married and were given in marriage, and they knew not,
until Noe entered into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all; as also it was in the days
of Lot, they did eat and drink, they bought and sold, they planted and builded, until the time that
Lot went out of Sodom; it rained fire from heaven, and destroyed them all: so shall it also be at the
coming of the Son of man." "Watch ye therefore, for ye know not in what day your Lord shall
come." [In these passages] He declares one and the same Lord, who in the times of Noah brought
the deluge because of man's disobedience, and who also in the days of Lot rained fire from heaven
because of the multitude of sinners among the Sodomites, and who, on account of this same
disobedience and similar sins, will bring on the day of judgment at the end of time (in novissimo);
on which day He declares that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than for that city
and house which shall not receive the word of His apostles. "And thou, Capernaum," He said, "is
it that thou shalt be exalted to heaven?4366 Thou shalt go down to hell. For if the mighty works which
have been done in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day. Verily I
say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of judgment than for you."
4. Since the Son of God is always one and the same, He gives to those who believe on Him a
well of water [springing up] to eternal life, but He causes the unfruitful fig-tree immediately to
dry up; and in the days of Noah He justly brought on the deluge for the purpose of extinguishing
that most infamous race of men then existent, who could not bring forth fruit to God, since the
angels that sinned had commingled with them, and [acted as He did] in order that He might put a

John iv. 14.

check upon the sins of these men, but [that at the same time] He might preserve the archetype,
the formation of Adam. And it was He who rained fire and brimstone from heaven, in the days of
Lot, upon Sodom and Gomorrah, "an example of the righteous judgment of God," that all may
know, "that every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be cut down, and cast into the fire."
And it is He who uses [the words], that it will be more tolerable for Sodom in the general judgment
than for those who beheld His wonders, and did not believe on Him, nor receive His doctrine.
For as He gave by His advent a greater privilege to those who believed on Him, and who do His
will, so also did He point out that those who did not believe on Him should have a more severe
punishment in the judgment; thus extending equal justice to all, and being to exact more from those
to whom He gives the more; the more, however, not because He reveals the knowledge of another
Father, as I have shown so fully and so repeatedly, but because He has, by means of His advent,
poured upon the human race the greater gift of paternal grace.
5. If, however, what I have stated be insufficient to convince any one that the prophets were
sent from one and the same Father, from whom also our Lord was sent, let such a one, opening the
mouth of his heart, and calling upon the Master, Christ Jesus the Lord, listen to Him when He says,
"The kingdom of heaven is like unto a king who made a marriage for his son, and he sent forth his
servants to call them who were bidden to the marriage." And when they would not obey, He goes
on to say, "Again he sent other servants, saying, Tell them that are bidden, Come ye, I have prepared
my dinner; my oxen and all the fatlings are killed, and everything is ready; come unto the wedding.
But they made light of it, and went their way, some to their farm, and others to their merchandize;
but the remnant took his servants, and some they treated despitefully, while others they slew. But
when the king heard this, he was wroth, and sent his armies and destroyed these murderers, and
burned up their city, and said to his servants, The wedding is indeed ready, but they which were
bidden were not worthy. Go out therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, gather
in to the marriage. So the servants went out, and collected together as many as they found, bad and
good, and the wedding was furnished with guests. But when the king came in to see the guests, he
saw there a man not having on a wedding garment; and he said unto him, Friend, how camest thou
hither, not having on a wedding garment? But he was speechless. Then said the king to his servants,
Take him away, hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. For many are called, but few are chosen." Now, by these words of His, does the Lord
arcæ, and he thinks the passage to have a reference to 1 Pet. iii. 20. Irenæus, in common with the other ancient Fathers, believed
that the fallen angels were the "sons of God" who commingled with "the daughters of men," and thus produced a race of spurious
men. [Gen. vi. 1, 2, 3, and Josephus.]