ourselves, an occasion of obtaining most abundant pardon; and giving a little, we
shall receive much. Why then exact with violence, it being meet, though the
other were minded to pay, for you of your accord to excuse him, that you may
receive the whole of God? But now you do all things, and art violent, and
contentious, to have none of your debts forgiven you; and while you are thinking
to do despite unto your neighbor, you are thrusting the sword into yourself, so
increasing your punishment in hell: whereas if you will show a little selfcommand here, you make your own accounts easy. For indeed God therefore
wills us to take the lead in that kind of bounty, that He may take occasion to
repay us with increase.
As many therefore as stand indebted to you, either for money, or for
trespasses, let them all go free, and require of God the recompense of such your
magnanimity. For so long as they continue indebted to you, you can not have
God your debtor. But if you let them go free, you will be able to detain your
God, and to require of Him the recompense of so great self-restraint in bountiful
measure. For suppose a man had come up and seeing you arresting your debtor,
had called upon you to let him go free, and transfer to himself your account with
the other: he would not choose to be unfair after such remission, seeing he had
passed the whole demand to himself: how then shall God fail to repay us
manifold, yea, ten thousand fold, when for His commandment's sake, if any be
indebted to us, we urge no complaint against them, great or small, but let them
go exempt from all liability? Let us not then think of the temporary pleasure that
springs up in us by exacting of our debtors, but of the loss, rather, how great!
Which we shall thereby sustain hereafter, grievously injuring ourselves in the
things which are eternal. Rising accordingly above all, let us forgive those who
must give account to us, both their debts and their offenses; that we may make
our own accounts prove indulgent, and that what we could not reach by all virtue
besides, this we may obtain by not bearing malice against our neighbors; and
thus enjoy the eternal blessings, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might now and always, even forever and

ever. Amen.

## Homily 16 on Matthew

Matt. V. 17.
"Think not that I have come to destroy the Law or the Prophets."
Why, who suspected this? Or who accused Him, that He should make a
defense against this charge? Since surely from what had gone before no such
suspicion was generated. For to command men to be meek, and gentle, and
merciful, and pure in heart, and to strive for righteousness, indicated no such
design, but rather altogether the contrary.
Wherefore then can He have said this? Not at random, nor vainly: but
inasmuch as He was proceeding to ordain commandments greater than those of
old, saying, "It was said to them of old time, You shall not kill; but I say unto
you, Be not even angry;" and to mark out a way for a kind of divine and
heavenly conversation; in order that the strangeness thereof might not disturb the
souls of the hearers, nor dispose them quite to mutiny against what He said He
used this means of setting them right beforehand.
For although they fulfilled not the law, yet nevertheless they were possessed
with much conscientious regard to it; and while they were annulling it every day
by their deeds, the letters thereof they would have remain unmoved, and that no
one should add anything more to them. Or rather, they bore with their rulers
adding thereto, not however for the better, but for the worse. For so they used to
set aside the honor due to our parents by additions of their own, and very many
others also of the matters enjoined them, they would free themselves of by these
unseasonable additions.
Therefore, since Christ in the first place was not of the sacredotal tribe, and
next, the things which He was about to introduce were a sort of addition, not
however lessening, but enhancing virtue; He knowing beforehand that both these
circumstances would trouble them, before He wrote in their mind those