brothers who come of the same labor with ourselves, but those who display the
same zeal. In this way Christ gives men the name of children of God, and so on
the other hand children of the devil, and so too children of disobedience, of hell,
and of perdition likewise. So Timothy was Paul's son from goodness and was
called "my own son" [1 Timothy 1:2]: but of his sister's son we do not know even
the name. And yet the one was by nature related to him, and still that availed him
not. But the other being both by nature and country far removed from him (as
being a native of Lystra), still became most nearly related. Let us then also
become the sons of the Saints, or rather let us become even God's sons. For that
it is possible to become sons of God, hear what he says, "Be therefore perfect, as
your father which is in Heaven." [Matthew 5:48] This is why we call Him Father
in prayer, and that not only to remind ourselves of the grace, but also of virtue,
that we may not do anything unworthy of such a relationship. And how it may be
said is it possible to be a son of God? By being free from all passions, and
showing gentleness to them that affront and wrong us. For your Father is so to
them that blaspheme Him. Wherefore, though He says various things at various
times, yet in no case does He say that you may be like your Father, but when He
says, "Pray for them that despitefully use you, do good to them that hate you"
[Matthew 5:44], then He brings in this as the reward. For there is nothing that
brings us so near to God, and makes us so like Him, as this well-doing.
Therefore Paul also, when he says, "Be followers of God" [Ephesians 5:1],
means them to be so in this respect. For we have need of all good deeds, chiefly
however of love to man and gentleness, since we need so much of His love to
man ourselves. For we commit many transgressions every day. Wherefore also
we have need to show much mercy. But much and little is not measured by the
quantity of things given, but by the amount of the givers' means. Let not then the
rich be high-minded, nor the poor dejected as giving so little, for the latter often
gives more than the former. We must not then make ourselves miserable because
we are poor, since it makes almsgiving the easier for us. For he that has got
much together is seized with haughtiness, as well as a greater affection to that (or

"lust beyond that") he has. But he that has but a little is quit of either of these
domineering passions: hence he finds more occasions for doing well. For this
man will go cheerfully into a prison-house, and will visit the sick, and will give a
cup of cold water. But the other will not take upon him any office of this sort, as
pampered up ([φλεγμαίνων]) by his riches. Be not then out of heart at your
poverty. For your poverty makes your traffic for heaven the easier to you. And if
you have nothing, but have a compassionating soul, even this will be laid up as a
reward for you. Hence too Paul bade us "weep with them that weep" [Romans
12:15], and exhorted us to be to prisoners as though bound with them. [Hebrews
13:3] For it is not to them that weep only that it yields some solace that there be
many that compassionate them, but to them who are in other afflicting
circumstances. For there are cases where conversation has as much power to
recover him that is cast down as money. For this then God exhorts us to give
money to them that ask, not merely with a view to relieve their poverty, but that
He may teach us to compassionate the misfortunes of our neighbors. For this
also the covetous man is odious, in that he not only disregards men in a beggared
state, but because he gets himself trained ([ἀ] [λείφεται]) for cruelty and great
inhumanity. And so he that, for their sakes, thinks little of money, is even on this
account an object of love, that he is merciful and kind to man. And Christ, when
He blesses the merciful, blesses and praises not those only that give the alms of
money, but those also who have the will to do so. Let us then be so inclinable to
mercy, and all other blessings will follow, for he that has a spirit of love and
mercy, if he have money, will give it away, or if he see any in distress, will weep
and bewail it; if he fall in with a person wronged, will stand up for him; if he
sees one spitefully entreated, will reach out his hand to him. For as he has that
treasure-house of blessings, a loving and merciful soul, he will make it a
fountain for all his brethren's needs, and will enjoy all the rewards that are laid
up with God (Field with 4 manuscripts [τᾥ θεᾥ]). That we then may attain to
these, let us of all things frame our souls accordingly. For so, while in this world,
we shall do good deeds without number, and shall enjoy the crowns to come. To