evident; but wherefore he gave not her genealogy, but Joseph's, requires
explanation. For what cause was it then? It was not the law among the Jews that
the genealogy of women should be traced. In order then that he might keep the
custom, and not seem to be making alterations from the beginning, and yet might
make the Virgin known to us, for this cause he has passed over her ancestors in
silence, and traced the genealogy of Joseph. For if he had done this with respect
to the Virgin, he would have seemed to be introducing novelties; and if he had
passed over Joseph in silence, we should not have known the Virgin's
forefathers. In order therefore that we might learn, touching Mary, who she was,
and of what origin, and that the laws might remain undisturbed, he has traced the
genealogy of her espoused husband, and shown him to be of the house of David.
For when this has been clearly proved, that other fact is demonstrated with it,
namely, that the Virgin likewise is sprung from thence, by reason that this
righteous man, even as I have already said, would not have endured to take a
wife from another race.
There is also another reason, which one might mention, of a more mystical
nature, because of which the Virgin's forefathers were passed over in silence; but
this it were not seasonable now to declare, because so much has been already
said.
9. Wherefore let us stay at this point our discourse concerning the
questions, and in the meanwhile let us retain with accuracy what has been
revealed to us; as, for instance, why he mentioned David first; wherefore he
called the book, "a book of the generation;" on what account he said, "of Jesus
Christ;" how the birth is common and not common; whence it was that Mary
was shown to be from David; and wherefore Joseph's genealogy is traced, while
her ancestors are passed over in silence.
For if you retain these things, you will the more encourage us with respect
to what is to come; but if you reject and cast them from your mind, we shall be
the more backward as to the rest. Just as no husbandman would care to pay
attention to a soil which had destroyed the former seed.

Wherefore I entreat you to revolve these things. For from taking thought
concerning such matters, there springs in the soul some great good, tending unto
salvation. For by these meditations we shall be able to please God Himself; and
our mouths will be pure from insults, and filthy talking, and reviling, while they
are exercising themselves in spiritual sayings; and we shall be formidable to the
devils, while arming our tongue with such words; and we shall draw unto
ourselves God's grace the more, and it will render our eye more piercing. For
indeed both eyes and mouth and hearing He set in us to this intent, that all our
members may serve Him, that we may speak His words, and do His deeds, that
we may sing unto Him continual hymns, that we may offer up sacrifices of
thanksgiving, and by these may thoroughly purify our consciences.
For as a body will be more in health when enjoying the benefits of a pure
air, even so will a soul be more endued with practical wisdom when nourished in
such exercises as these. Do you see not even the eyes of the body, that when they
abide in smoke they are always weeping; but when they are in clear air, and in a
meadow, and in fountains and gardens, they become more quicksighted and
more healthy? Like this is the soul's eye also, for should it feed in the meadow of
spiritual oracles, it will be clear and piercing, and quick of sight; but should it
depart into the smoke of the things of this life, it will weep without end, and wail
both now and hereafter. For indeed the things of this life are like smoke. On this
account also one has said, "My days have failed like smoke." He indeed was
referring to their shortness of duration, and to their unsubstantial nature, but I
would say that we should take what is said, not in this sense alone, but also as to
their turbid character.
For nothing does so hurt and dim the eye of the soul as the crowd of
worldly anxieties and the swarm of desires. For these are the wood that feeds
this smoke. And as fire, when it lays hold of any damp and saturated fuel,
kindles much smoke; so likewise this desire, so vehement and burning, when it
lays hold of a soul that is (so to speak) damp and dissolute, produces also in its
way abundance of smoke. For this cause there is need of the dew of the Spirit,