why, when the mind loves itself, it should not seem also to have begotten
the love of itself? For it was lovable to itself even before it loved itself,
since it could love itself; just as it was knowable to itself even before it
knew itself, since it could know itself. For if it were not knowable to itself,
it never could have known itself; and so, if it were not lovable to itself, it
never could have loved itself. Why therefore may it not be said by loving
itself to have begotten its own love, as by knowing itself it has begotten its
own knowledge? Is it because it is thereby indeed plainly shown that this
is the principle of love, whence it proceeds? for it proceeds from the mind
itself, which is lovable to itself before it loves itself, and so is the principle
of its own love by which it loves itself: but that this love is not therefore
rightly said to be begotten by the mind, as is the knowledge of itself by
which the mind knows itself, because in the case of knowledge the thing
has been found already, which is what we call brought forth or
discovered; and this is commonly preceded by an inquiry such as to find
rest when that end is attained. For inquiry is the desire of finding, or,
what is the same thing, of discovering.2 But those things which are
discovered are as it were brought forth, whence they are like offspring;
but wherein, except in the case itself of knowledge? For in that case they
are as it were uttered and fashioned. For although the things existed
already which we found by seeking, yet the knowledge of them did not
exist, which knowledge we regard as an offspring that is born. Further,
the desire (appetitus) which there is in seeking proceeds from him who
seeks, and is in some way in suspense, and does not rest in the end
whither it is directed, except that which is sought be found and conjoined
with him who seeks. And this desire, that is, inquiry,—although it does
not seem to be love, by which that which is known is loved, for in this case
we are still striving to know,—yet it is something of the same kind. For it
can be called will (voluntas), since every one who seeks wills (vult) to
find; and if that is sought which belongs to knowledge, every one who
seeks wills to know. But if he wills ardently and earnestly, he is said to
study (studere): a word that is most commonly employed in the case of
pursuing and obtaining any branches of learning. Therefore, the bringing
forth of the mind is preceded by some desire, by which, through seeking
and finding what we wish to know, the offspring, viz. knowledge itself, is
born. And for this reason, that desire by which knowledge is conceived
and brought forth, cannot rightly be called the bringing forth and the

offspring; and the same desire which led us to long for the knowing of the
thing, becomes the love of the thing when known, while it holds and
embraces its accepted offspring, that is, knowledge, and unites it to its
begetter. And so there is a kind of image of the Trinity in the mind itself,
and the knowledge of it, which is its offspring and its word concerning
itself, and love as a third, and these three are one, and one substance.
Neither is the offspring less, since the mind knows itself according to the
measure of its own being; nor is the love less, since it loves itself
according to the measure both of its own knowledge and of its own being.