"They were cut" (to the heart). Truly this makes good that proverb, "Evil do, evil
fare:" as we may see in this case. Here were these men in bonds, set at the bar of
judgment, and the men that sit in judgment upon them were in distress and
helpless perplexity. For as he who strikes a blow upon the adamant, gets the
shock of the blow himself, so it was with these men. But they saw that not only
was their boldness of speech not stopped, but rather their preaching increased the
more, and that they discoursed without a thought of fear, and afforded them no
handles against them.
Let us imitate these, my beloved: let us be undaunted in all our dangers.
There is nothing dreadful to him that fears God; but all that is dreadful is for
others. For when a man is delivered from his passions, and regards all present
things as a shadow, say, from whom shall he suffer anything dreadful? Whom
shall he have to fear? Whom shall he need plead to? Let us flee to this Rock
which cannot be shaken. If any one were to build for us a city, and throw up a
wall around it, and remove us to a land uninhabited, where there were none to
disturb us, and there supply us with abundance of everything, and not suffer us
to have anything to trouble us with anybody, he would not set us in such perfect
safety, as Christ has done now. Be it a city made of brass, if you will, surrounded
on all sides with a wall, lofty and impregnable, let there be no enemy near it; let
it have land plentiful and rich, let there be added abundance of other things, let
the citizens too be mild and gentle, and no evil-doer there, neither robber, nor
thief, no informer, no court of justice, but merely agreements ([συναλλάλματα]);
and let us dwell in this city: not even thus would it be possible to live in security.
Wherefore? Because there could not but be differences with servants, with
wives, with children, to be a groundwork of much discomfort. But here was
nothing of the kind; for here was nothing at all to pain them or cause any
discomfort. Nay, what is more wonderful to say, the very things which are
thought to cause discomfort, became matter of all joy and gladness. For tell me,
what was there for them to be annoyed at? What to take amiss? Shall we cite a
particular case for comparison with them? Well, let there be one of consular

dignity, let him be possessed of much wealth, let him dwell in the imperial city,
let him have no troublesome business with anybody, but only live in delight, and
have nothing else but this to do, seated at the very summit of wealth and honor
and power: and let us set against him a Peter, in bonds if you will, in evils
without number: and we shall find that he is the man that lives the most
delightfully. For when there is such excess of joy, as to be delighted when in
bonds, think what must be the greatness of that joy! For like as those who are
high in office, whatsoever evils may happen, are not sensible of them, but
continue in enjoyment: so did these the more rejoice on account of these very
evils. For it is impossible, impossible in words to express how great pleasure
falls to their lot, who suffer for Christ's sake: for they rejoice in their sufferings,
rather than in their good things. Whoso loves Christ, knows what I say.— But
what as regards safety? And who, I ask, if he were ever so rich, could have
escaped so many perils, going about among so many different nations, for the
sole purpose of bringing about a reformation in their manner of life? For it was
just as if by royal mandate that they carried all before them, nay, far more easily,
for never mandate could have been so effectual, as their words were. For the
royal edict compels by necessity, but these drew men willingly and
spontaneously, yea, and with hearts above measure thankful. What royal edict, I
ask, would ever have persuaded men to part with all their property and their
lives; to despise home, country, kindred, yea, even self-preservation? Yet the
voices of fishermen and tent-makers availed for this. So that they were both
happy, and more powerful and strong than all others. "Yes," say you, "those of
course were, for they wrought miracles." (supra, p. 83, note 4.) But I ask what
miracles did those who believed work, the three thousand, and the five thousand;
and yet these, we read, passed their time in gladness? And well they might: for
that which is the groundwork of all discomforts, the possession of riches, was
done away with. For that, that, I say, was ever the cause both of wars and
fighting, and grief, and discomfort, and all evils: the thing which makes life full
of labor and troubles, it is that. And indeed it would be found that many more