And if the angels had matter, not even then could there be several
angels of one species. For it would be necessary for matter to be the
principle of distinction of one from the other, not, indeed, according
to the division of quantity, since they are incorporeal, but according
to the diversity of their powers; and such diversity of matter causes
diversity not merely of species, but of genus.
Reply to Objection 1: "Difference" is nobler than "genus," as the
determined is more noble than the undetermined, and the proper
than the common, but not as one nature is nobler than another;
otherwise it would be necessary that all irrational animals be of the
same species; or that there should be in them some form which is
higher than the sensible soul. Therefore irrational animals differ in
species according to the various determined degrees of sensitive
nature; and in like manner all the angels differ in species according
to the diverse degrees of intellectual nature.
Reply to Objection 2: More and less change the species, not
according as they are caused by the intensity or remissness of one
form, but according as they are caused by forms of diverse degrees;
for instance, if we say that fire is more perfect than air: and in this
way the angels are diversified according to more or less.
Reply to Objection 3: The good of the species preponderates over
the good of the individual. Hence it is much better for the species to
be multiplied in the angels than for individuals to be multiplied in the
one species.
Reply to Objection 4: Numerical multiplication, since it can be drawn
out infinitely, is not intended by the agent, but only specific
multiplication, as was said above (Question 47, Article 3). Hence the
perfection of the angelic nature calls for the multiplying of species,
but not for the multiplying of individuals in one species.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the angels are incorruptible?

Objection 1: It would seem that the angels are not incorruptible; for
Damascene, speaking of the angel, says (De Fide Orth. ii, 3) that he
is "an intellectual substance, partaking of immortality by favor, and
not by nature."
Objection 2: Further, Plato says in the Timaeus: "O gods of gods,
whose maker and father am I: You are indeed my works, dissoluble
by nature, yet indissoluble because I so will it." But gods such as
these can only be understood to be the angels. Therefore the angels
are corruptible by their nature
Objection 3: Further, according to Gregory (Moral. xvi), "all things
would tend towards nothing, unless the hand of the Almighty
preserved them." But what can be brought to nothing is corruptible.
Therefore, since the angels were made by God, it would appear that
they are corruptible of their own nature.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that the intellectual
substances "have unfailing life, being free from all corruption, death,
matter, and generation."
I answer that, It must necessarily be maintained that the angels are
incorruptible of their own nature. The reason for this is, that nothing
is corrupted except by its form being separated from the matter.
Hence, since an angel is a subsisting form, as is clear from what was
said above (Article 2), it is impossible for its substance to be
corruptible. For what belongs to anything considered in itself can
never be separated from it; but what belongs to a thing, considered
in relation to something else, can be separated, when that something
else is taken away, in view of which it belonged to it. Roundness can
never be taken from the circle, because it belongs to it of itself; but a
bronze circle can lose roundness, if the bronze be deprived of its
circular shape. Now to be belongs to a form considered in itself; for
everything is an actual being according to its form: whereas matter
is an actual being by the form. Consequently a subject composed of
matter and form ceases to be actually when the form is separated
from the matter. But if the form subsists in its own being, as
happens in the angels, as was said above (Article 2), it cannot lose
its being. Therefore, the angel's immateriality is the cause why it is