deadly plague, and found no deliverance from the ills under which they lay)—
the men of them called their prophets, and gathered an assembly, and sought to
discover an escape from this divine scourge. Then, when their prophets said that
they should yoke to the ark heifers untamed, and having their first calves, and let
them go their way, with no man to guide them, for so it would be evident
whether the plague was from God or whether it was any accident which brought
the disease—("for if," it is said, "they break the yoke in pieces for want of
practice, or turn where their calves are lowing, 'it is a chance that has
happened;' [1 Samuel 6:9] but if they go on right, and err not from the way, and
neither the lowing of their young, nor their ignorance of the way, have any effect
on them, it is quite plain that it is the hand of God that has visited those cities:")
— when, I say, on these words of their prophets the inhabitants of those cities
obeyed and did as they were commanded, God also followed up the counsel of
the prophets, showing condescension in that instance also, and counted it not
unworthy of Himself to bring to effect the prediction of the prophets, and to
make them seem trustworthy in what they had then said. For so the good
achieved was greater, in that His very enemies themselves bore witness to the
power of God; yea, their own teachers gave their voice concerning Him. And
one may see many other such things brought about by God. For what took place
with respect to the witch, [1 Samuel xxviii] is again like this sort of dispensation;
which circumstance also you will now be able to explain from what has been
said.
With respect to the star, we have said these things, and yet more perhaps
may be said by you; for, it is said, "Give occasion to a wise man, and he will be
yet wiser:" [Proverbs 9:9] but we must now come to the beginning of what has
been read.
5. And what is the beginning? "When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of
Judæa, in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east
to Jerusalem." While wise men followed under the auspices of a star, these
believed not, with prophets even sounding in their ears. But wherefore does he

mention to us both the time and the place, saying, "in Bethlehem," and "in the
days of Herod the king?" And for what reason does he add his rank also? His
rank, because there was also another Herod, he who slew John: but that was a
tetrarch, this a king. And the place likewise, and the time, he puts down, to bring
to our remembrance ancient prophecies; whereof one was uttered by Micah,
saying, "And thou, Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, art by no means the least
among the princes of Judah;" [Micah 5:2] and the other by the patriarch Jacob,
distinctly marking out to us the time, and setting forth the great sign of His
coming. For, "A ruler," says he, "shall not fail out of Judah, nor a leader out of
his loins, until He come for whom it is appointed, and He is the expectation of
the Gentiles." [Genesis 49:10]
And this again is worth inquiry, whence it was that they came to entertain
such a thought, and who it was that stirred them up to this. For it does not seem
to me to be the work of the star only, but also of God, who moved their soul;
which same kind of thing He did also in the case of Cyrus, disposing him to let
the Jews go. He did not however so do this as to destroy their free will, since
even when He called Paul from above by a voice, He manifested both His own
grace and Paul's obedience.
And wherefore, one may ask, did He not reveal this to all the wise men of
the East? Because all would not have believed, but these were better prepared
than the rest; since also there were countless nations that perished, but it was to
the Ninevites only that the prophet was sent; and there were two thieves on the
cross, but one only was saved. See at least the virtue of these men, not only by
their coming, but also by their boldness of speech. For so that they may not seem
to be a sort of impostors, they tell who showed them the way, and the length of
their journey; and having come, they had boldness of speech: "for we have
come," that is their statement, "to worship Him:" and they were afraid neither of
the people's anger, nor of the tyranny of the king. Whence to me at least they
seem to have been at home also teachers of their countrymen. For they who here
did not shrink from saying this, much more would they speak boldly in their own