fall back again into sloth, or become relaxed by this respite; and lest one should
have reason to say of us too, "When He slew them, then they sought Him, and
returned, and enquired early after God." Wherefore also Moses admonished the
Jews, saying, "When you shall have eaten, and drunk, and art full, remember the
Lord your God." [Deuteronomy 6:11-12] The goodness of your disposition will
now be rendered manifest, if you continue in the practice of the same piety. For
at that time, many imputed your earnestness to fear, and the approach of
calamity; but now, it will be purely your own achievement, if you still persevere
in maintaining this earnestness. Since with a boy too, as long as he is guided by
some tutor whom he fears, if he lives with sobriety and meekness, there is
nothing to admire, for all persons ascribe the sobriety of the stripling to his fear
of the tutor. But when he remains in the same seemly behaviour, after the
restraint from that quarter is done away with, all persons give him credit too for
the sobriety that was seen in his earlier age. Thus also let us act; let us continue
in the same state of godly fear, in order that for our former diligence too we may
gain much praise from God.
3. We had expected innumerable woes; that our property would be
plundered, that the houses would have been burnt together with their inmates,
that the city would have been plucked up from the midst of the world, that its
very fragments would have been utterly destroyed, and that its soil would have
been placed under the plough! But, lo! All these things existed only in
expectation, and did not come into operation. And this is not the only wonder,
that God has removed so great a danger, but that He has also greatly blessed us,
and adorned our city; and by this trial and calamity has made us more approved!
But how, I will state. When those who were sent by the Emperor erected that
fearful tribunal for making inquisition into the events which had taken place, and
summoned every one to give account of the deeds which they had perpetrated,
and various anticipations of death pervaded the minds of all, then the monks who
dwelt on the mountain-tops showed their own true philosophy. For although they
had been shut up so many years in their cells, yet at no one's entreaty, by no

one's counsel, when they beheld such a cloud overhanging the city, they left their
caves and huts, and flocked together in every direction, as if they had been so
many angels arriving from heaven. Then might one see the city likened to
heaven, while these saints appeared everywhere; by their mere aspect consoling
the mourners, and leading them to an utter disregard of the calamity. For who on
beholding these would not deride death, would not despise life. And not only
was this wonderful, but that when they drew near to the magistrates themselves,
they spoke to them with boldness on behalf of the accused, and were all ready to
shed their blood, and to lay down their heads, so that they might snatch the
captured from the terrible events which they expected. They also declared that
they would not depart until the judges should spare the population of the city, or
send them themselves together with the accused to the Emperor. "He," said they,
"who rules over our portion of the world is a godly man, a believer, one who
lives in the practice of piety. We therefore shall assuredly reconcile him. We will
not give you leave, nor permit you to embrue the sword, or take off a head. But if
you do not desist, we also are quite resolved to die with them. We confess that the
crimes committed are very heinous; but the iniquity of those deeds does not
surpass the humanity of the Emperor." One of them is also reported to have
uttered another saying, full of wisdom, to this effect: "The Statues which have
been thrown down are again set up, and have resumed their proper appearance;
and the mischief was speedily rectified; but if you put to death the image of God,
how will you be again able to revoke the deed! Or how to reanimate those who
are deprived of life, and to restore their souls to their bodies?" Many things too
they said to them of the Judgment.
4. Who could but be astonished? Who could but admire the moral wisdom
of these men? When the mother of one of the accused, uncovering her head, and
exposing her grey hairs, laid hold of the horse of the judge by the bridle, and
running beside him through the forum, thus entered with him the place of justice,
we were all struck with astonishment, we all admired that exceeding tenderness
and magnanimity. Ought we not, then, to have been much more impressed with