to offer a gift? To fulfill the law here again. [Leviticus 14:1-32] For neither did
He in every instance set it aside, nor in every instance keep it, but sometimes He
did the one, sometimes the other; by the one making way for the high rule of life
that was to come, by the other checking for a while the insolent speech of the
Jews, and condescending to their infirmity. And why marvel, if just at the
beginning He Himself did this, when even the very apostles, after they were
commanded to depart unto the Gentiles, after the doors were opened for their
teaching throughout the world, and the law shut up, and the commandments
made new, and all the ancient things had ceased, are found sometimes observing
the law, sometimes neglecting it?
But what, it may be said, does this saying, "Show yourself to the priest,"
contribute to the keeping of the law? No little. Because it was an ancient law,
that the leper when cleansed should not entrust to himself the judgment of his
cleansing, but should show himself to the priest, and present the demonstration
thereof to his eyes, and by that sentence be numbered among the clean. For if the
priest said not "The leper is cleansed," he remained still with the unclean without
the camp. Wherefore he says, "Show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that
Moses commanded." He said not, "which I command," but for a time remits him
to the law, by every means stopping their mouths. Thus, lest they should say, He
had seized upon the priests' honor; though He performed the work Himself, yet
the approving it He entrusted to them, and made them sit as judges of His own
miracles. "Why, I am so far," He says, "from striving either with Moses or with
the priests, that I guide the objects of my favor to submit themselves unto them."
But what is, "for a testimony unto them"? For reproof, for demonstration,
for accusation, if they be unthankful. For since they said, as a deceiver and
impostor we persecute Him, as an adversary of God, and a transgressor of the
law; "You shall bear me witness," says He, "at that time, that I am not a
transgressor of the law. Nay, for having healed you, I remit you to the law, and to
the approval of the priests;" which was the act of one honoring the law, and
admiring Moses, and not setting himself in opposition to the ancient doctrines.

And if they were not in fact to be the better, hereby most of all one may
perceive His respect for the law, that although He foreknew they would reap no
benefit, He fulfilled all His part. For this very thing He did indeed foreknow, and
foretold it: not saying, "for their correction," neither, "for their instruction," but,
"for a testimony unto them," that is, for accusation, and for reproof, and for a
witness that all has been done on my part; and though I foreknew they would
continue incorrigible, not even so did I omit what ought to be done; only they
continued keeping up to the end their own wickedness.
This, we may observe, He says elsewhere also; "This gospel shall be
preached in all the world for a testimony to all the nations, and then shall the
end come;" [Matthew 24:14] to the nations, to them that obey not, to them that
believe not. Thus, lest any one should say, "And wherefore preach to all, if all
are not to believe?"— it is that I may be found to have done all my own part,
and that no man may hereafter be able to find fault, as though he had not heard.
For the very preaching shall bear witness against them, and they will not be able
hereafter to say, "We heard not;" for the word of godliness "has gone out unto
the ends of the world."
4. Therefore bearing these things in mind, let us also fulfill all our duties to
our neighbor, and to God let us give thanks continually. For it is too monstrous,
enjoying as we do His bounty in deed every day, not so much as in word to
acknowledge the favor; and this, though the acknowledgment again yield all its
profit to us. Since He needs not, be sure, anything of ours: but we stand in need
of all things from Him. Thus thanksgiving itself adds nothing to Him, but causes
us to be nearer to Him. For if men's bounties, when we call them to memory, do
the more warm us with their proper love-charm; much more when we are
continually bringing to mind the noble acts of our Lord towards us, shall we be
more diligent in regard of His commandments.
For this cause Paul also said, "Be thankful." [Colossians 3:15] For the best
preservative of any benefit is the remembrance of the benefit, and a continual
thanksgiving.