happened to them from nothing else but pride, and wickedness, and unkindness.
2. For in what, O most foolish of men, are you injured by the care bestowed
on others? How are your blessings made less through having others to share the
same? But of a truth wickedness is blind, and cannot readily perceive anything
that it ought. Being therefore stung by the prospect of having others to share the
same confidence, they thrust a sword against themselves, and cast themselves
out from the lovingkindness of God. And with good reason. For He says,
"Friend, I do you no wrong, I will give to 'these also' even as unto you."
[Matthew 20:14] Or rather, these Jews are not deserving even of these words.
For the man in the parable if he was discontented, could yet speak of the labors
and weariness, the heat and sweat, of a whole day. But what could these men
have to tell? Nothing like this, but slothfulness and profligacy and ten thousand
evil things of which all the prophets continued ever to accuse them, and by
which they like the Gentiles had offended against God. And Paul declaring this
says, "For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek: For all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God: being justified freely by His grace."
[Romans 10:12; Romans 3:22-24] And on this head he treats profitably and very
wisely throughout that Epistle. But in a former part of it he proves that they are
worthy of still greater punishment. "For as many as have sinned in the law shall
be judged by the law" [Romans 2:12]; that is to say, more severely, as having for
their accuser the law as well as nature. And not for this only, but for that they
have been the cause that God is blasphemed among the Gentiles: "My Name,"
He says, "is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you." [Romans 2:24; Isaiah
52:5]
Since now this it was that stung them most, (for the thing appeared
incredible even to those of the circumcision who believed, and therefore they
brought it as a charge against Peter, when he had come up to them from Cesarea,
that he "went in to men uncircumcised, and did eat with them" [Acts 11:3]; and
after that they had learned the dispensation of God, even so still they wondered
how "on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost" [Acts

10:45]: showing by their astonishment that they could never have expected so
incredible a thing,) since then he knew that this touched them nearest, see how
he has emptied their pride and relaxed their highly swelling insolence. For after
having discoursed on the case of the heathen, and shown that they had not from
any quarter any excuse, or hope of salvation, and after having definitely charged
them both with the perversion of their doctrines and the uncleanness of their
lives, he shifts his argument to the Jews; and after recounting all the expressions
of the Prophet, in which he had said that they were polluted, treacherous,
hypocritical persons, and had "altogether become unprofitable," that there was
"none" among them "that seeks after God," that they had "all gone out of the
way" [Romans 3:12], and the like, he adds, "Now we know that what things
soever the law says, it says to them who are under the law: that every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God." [Romans 3:19]
"For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." [Romans 3:23]
Why then exaltest you yourself, O Jew? Why are you high minded? For
your mouth also is stopped, your boldness also is taken away, you also with all
the world have become guilty, and, like others, are placed in need of being
justified freely. You ought surely even if you had stood upright and had had great
boldness with God, not even so to have envied those who should be pitied and
saved through His lovingkindness. This is the extreme of wickedness, to pine at
the blessings of others; especially when this was to be effected without any loss
of yours. If indeed the salvation of others had been prejudicial to your
advantages, your grieving might have been reasonable; though not even then
would it have been so to one who had learned true wisdom. But if your reward is
not increased by the punishment of another, nor diminished by his welfare, why
do you bewail yourself because that other is freely saved? As I said, you ought
not, even were thou (one) of the approved, to be pained at the salvation which
comes to the Gentiles through grace. But when you, who are guilty before your
Lord of the same things as they, and have yourself offended, are displeased at the
good of others, and think great things, as if you alone ought to be partaker of the