215. There are other weak and defenceless beings who are frequently at the mercy of economic
interests or indiscriminate exploitation. I am speaking of creation as a whole. We human beings
are not only the beneficiaries but also the stewards of other creatures. Thanks to our bodies, God
has joined us so closely to the world around us that we can feel the desertification of the soil
almost as a physical ailment, and the extinction of a species as a painful disfigurement. Let us not
leave in our wake a swath of destruction and death which will affect our own lives and those of
future generations. Here I would make my own the touching and prophetic lament voiced
some years ago by the bishops of the Philippines: “An incredible variety of insects lived in the
forest and were busy with all kinds of tasks… Birds flew through the air, their bright plumes and
varying calls adding color and song to the green of the forests… God intended this land for us, his
special creatures, but not so that we might destroy it and turn it into a wasteland… After a single
night’s rain, look at the chocolate brown rivers in your locality and remember that they are carrying
the life blood of the land into the sea… How can fish swim in sewers like the Pasig and so many
more rivers which we have polluted? Who has turned the wonderworld of the seas into underwater
cemeteries bereft of color and life?”

216. Small yet strong in the love of God, like Saint Francis of Assisi, all of us, as Christians, are
called to watch over and protect the fragile world in which we live, and all its peoples.

### III. The common good and peace in society

217. We have spoken at length about joy and love, but the word of God also speaks about the fruit
of peace (cf. Gal 5:22).

218. Peace in society cannot be understood as pacification or the mere absence of violence
resulting from the domination of one part of society over others. Nor does true peace act as a
pretext for justifying a social structure which silences or appeases the poor, so that the more
affluent can placidly support their lifestyle while others have to make do as they can. Demands
involving the distribution of wealth, concern for the poor and human rights cannot be suppressed
under the guise of creating a consensus on paper or a transient peace for a contented minority.
The dignity of the human person and the common good rank higher than the comfort of those who
refuse to renounce their privileges. When these values are threatened, a prophetic voice must be
raised.

219. Nor is peace “simply the absence of warfare, based on a precarious balance of power; it is
fashioned by efforts directed day after day towards the establishment of the ordered universe
willed by God, with a more perfect justice among men”. In the end, a peace which is not the
result of integral development will be doomed; it will always spawn new conflicts and various forms
of violence.