SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.39, C.3.

Reply to Objection 2: Prelates and clerics may, by the authority of
their superiors, take part in wars, not indeed by taking up arms
themselves, but by affording spiritual help to those who fight justly,
by exhorting and absolving them, and by other like spiritual helps.
Thus in the Old Testament (Joshua 6:4) the priests were commanded
to sound the sacred trumpets in the battle. It was for this purpose
that bishops or clerics were first allowed to go to the front: and it is
an abuse of this permission, if any of them take up arms themselves.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 23, Article 4, ad 2)
every power, art or virtue that regards the end, has to dispose that
which is directed to the end. Now, among the faithful, carnal wars
should be considered as having for their end the Divine spiritual
good to which clerics are deputed. Wherefore it is the duty of clerics
to dispose and counsel other men to engage in just wars. For they
are forbidden to take up arms, not as though it were a sin, but
because such an occupation is unbecoming their personality.
Reply to Objection 4: Although it is meritorious to wage a just war,
nevertheless it is rendered unlawful for clerics, by reason of their
being deputed to works more meritorious still. Thus the marriage act
may be meritorious; and yet it becomes reprehensible in those who
have vowed virginity, because they are bound to a yet greater good.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.39, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is lawful to lay ambushes in war?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is unlawful to lay ambushes in war.
For it is written (Dt. 16:20): "Thou shalt follow justly after that which
is just." But ambushes, since they are a kind of deception, seem to
pertain to injustice. Therefore it is unlawful to lay ambushes even in
a just war.
Objection 2: Further, ambushes and deception seem to be opposed
to faithfulness even as lies are. But since we are bound to keep faith
with all men, it is wrong to lie to anyone, as Augustine states (Contra
Mend. xv). Therefore, as one is bound to keep faith with one's
enemy, as Augustine states (Ep. ad Bonif. clxxxix), it seems that it is
unlawful to lay ambushes for one's enemies.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Mt. 7:12): "Whatsoever you would
that men should do to you, do you also to them": and we ought to
observe this in all our dealings with our neighbor. Now our enemy is
our neighbor. Therefore, since no man wishes ambushes or
deceptions to be prepared for himself, it seems that no one ought to
carry on war by laying ambushes.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Questions. in Hept. qu. x super
Jos): "Provided the war be just, it is no concern of justice whether it
be carried on openly or by ambushes": and he proves this by the
authority of the Lord, Who commanded Joshua to lay ambushes for
the city of Hai (Joshua 8:2).
I answer that, The object of laying ambushes is in order to deceive
the enemy. Now a man may be deceived by another's word or deed
in two ways. First, through being told something false, or through
the breaking of a promise, and this is always unlawful. No one ought
to deceive the enemy in this way, for there are certain "rights of war
and covenants, which ought to be observed even among enemies,"
as Ambrose states (De Officiis i).
Secondly, a man may be deceived by what we say or do, because we
do not declare our purpose or meaning to him. Now we are not
always bound to do this, since even in the Sacred Doctrine many
things have to be concealed, especially from unbelievers, lest they
deride it, according to Mt. 7:6: "Give not that which is holy, to dogs."