[Psalm 139:21-22]
Now, in the first place, not all things spoken in the Psalms by David, are
spoken in the person of David. For it is he himself who says, "I have dwelt in the
tents of Kedar;" [Psalm 120:5] and, "By the waters of Babylon, there we sat
down and wept:" [Psalm 137:1] yet he neither saw Babylon, nor the tents of
Kedar.
But besides this, we require now a completer self-command. Wherefore
also when the disciples besought that fire might come down, even as in the case
of Elias, "You know not," says Christ, what manner of spirit you are of. [Luke
9:55] For at that time not the ungodliness only, but also the ungodly themselves,
they were commanded to hate, in order that their friendship might not prove an
occasion of transgression unto them. Therefore he severed their connections,
both by blood and marriage, and on every side he fenced them off.
But now because he has brought us to a more entire self-command and set
us on high above that mischief, he bids us rather admit and soothe them. For we
get no harm from them, but they get good by us. What then does he say? We
must not hate, but pity. Since if you shall hate, how will you easily convert him
that is in error? How will you pray for the unbeliever? For that one ought to pray,
hear what Paul says: "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayer,
intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men." [1 Timothy 2:1] But that all
were not then believers, is, I suppose, evident unto every one. And again, "for
kings and all that are in high place." But that these were ungodly and
transgressors, this also is equally manifest. Further, mentioning also the reason
for the prayer, he adds, "for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Saviour; who wills that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the truth." Therefore, if he find a Gentile wife consorting with a believer, he
dissolves not the marriage. Yet what is more closely joined than a man to his
wife? "For they two shall be one flesh," [Genesis 2:24] and great in that instance
is the charm, and ardent the desire. But if we are to hate ungodly and lawless
men, we shall go on to hate also sinners; and thus in regular process you will be

broken off from the most even of your brethren, or rather from all: for there is
not one, no, not one, without sin. For if it be our duty to hate the enemies of
God, one must not hate the ungodly only, but also sinners: and thus we shall be
worse than wild beasts, shunning all, and puffed up with pride; even as that
Pharisee. But not thus did Paul command us, but how? "Admonish the
disorderly, encourage the faint-hearted, support the weak, be long suffering
toward all." [1 Thessalonians 5:14]
6. What then does he mean when he says, "If any obeys not our word by this
epistle, note that man, that you have no company with him?" [2 Thessalonians
3:14] In the first place, he says this of brethren, however not even so without
limitation, but this too with gentleness. For do not thou cut off what follows, but
subjoin also the next clause: how, having said, "keep no company," he added,
"yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother." Do you see
how he bade us hate the deed that is evil, and not the man? For indeed it is the
work of the devil to tear us asunder from one another, and he has ever used great
diligence to take away love that he may cut off the way of correction, and may
retain him in error and you in enmity, and thus block up the way of his salvation.
For when both the physician hates the sick man and flies from him, and the sick
man turns away from the physician, when will the distempered person be
restored, seeing that neither the one will call in the other's aid, nor will the other
go to him?
But wherefore, tell me, do you at all turn away from him and avoid him?
Because he is ungodly? Truly for this cause ought thou to welcome and attend
him, that you may raise him up in his sickness. But if he be incurably sick, still
you have been bidden to do your part. Since Judas also was incurably diseased,
yet God left not off attending upon him. Wherefore, neither do thou grow weary.
For even if after much labor thou fail to deliver him from his ungodliness, yet
shall you receive the deliverer's reward, and wilt cause him to wonder at your
gentleness, and so all this praise will pass on to God. For though you should
work wonders, and raise the dead, and whatsoever work you do, the Heathen