from my head. For it is not possible for one in such a position to escape notice
when he is so conspicuously placed, but everything then is detected, and as the
fire tests the material of metals, so too the trial of the clerical office searches the
souls of mortal men; and if any one be passionate or mean, or ambitious of fame,
if he be boastful, or anything else of the kind, it unveils all; and speedily lays
bare his defects, and not only lays them bare, but increases their painfulness and
strength. For the wounds of the body, if they are galled, become harder to heal,
and the emotions of the mind when chafed and irritated, are naturally more
exasperated, and those who possess them are driven to commit greater sins. For
they excite him who does not restrain them, to love of glory, and to boastfulness,
and to desire for this world's goods, and draw him downwards, both to luxury
and laxity of life, and to laziness, and, little by little, to evils worse than these
which result from them. For many are the circumstances in society which have
the power to upset the balance of the mind, and to hinder its straightforward
course; and first of all is his social intercourse with women. For it is not possible
for the Bishop, and one who is concerned with the whole flock, to have a care
for the male portion of it, but to pass over the female, which needs more
particular forethought, because of its propensity to sins. But the man who is
appointed to the administration of a Bishopric must have a care for the moral
health of these, if not in a greater, at least in no less a degree than the others. For
it is necessary to visit them when they are sick, to comfort them when they are
sorrowful, and to reprove them when they are idle, and to help them when they
are distressed; and in such cases the evil one would find many opportunities of
approach, if a man did not fortify himself with a very strict guard. For the eye,
not only of the unchaste, but of the modest woman pierces and disturbs the mind.
Flatteries enervate it, and favors enslave it, and fervent love— the spring one
may say of all good— becomes the cause of countless evils to those who do not
make a right use of it. Constant cares too have ere now blunted the edge of the
understanding, and have made that which was buoyant heavier than lead, while
anger has burst in like smoke, and taken possession of all the inner man.

9. Why should any one speak of the injuries that result from grief, the
insults, the abuse, the censure from superiors, from inferiors, from the wise, and
from fools; for the class who are wanting in right judgment are particularly fond
of censuring, and will never readily allow any excuse. But the truly excellent
Bishop ought neither to think lightly of these, but to clear himself with all men
of the charges which they bring against him, with great forbearance and
meekness, pardoning their unreasonable fault-finding, rather than being
indignant and angry about it. For if St. Paul feared lest he should incur a
suspicion of theft, among his disciples, and therefore procured others for the
management of the money, that "no one" he says, "should blame us in this
abundance which is administered by us," [2 Corinthians 8:20] how ought we not
to do all so as to remove evil suspicions, even if they happen to be false, and
most unreasonable, and very foreign to our thought? For we are not so utterly
removed from any sin as St. Paul from theft; notwithstanding, though so far from
this evil practice, he did not, therefore, slight the suspicion of the world,
although it was very absurd, and even insane. For it was madness to have any
such suspicion about that blessed and admirable character. But none the less
does he remove far off the causes of this suspicion, unreasonable though it was,
and such as no one who was in his senses would entertain, and he neither
disdained the folly of the multitudes, nor did he say, "To whose mind did it ever
occur to suspect such things of us, after the signs which I have wrought, and the
forbearance which has marked my life, and when you all revered and admired
us?" Quite the contrary: he foresaw and expected this base suspicion, and pulled
it up by the roots, or rather did not suffer it to grow at all. Why? "Because," says
he, "we provide things honest not only before the Lord, but before all men." So
great, yea and far greater zeal must we use, to uproot and prevent floating reports
which are not good, but to see beforehand from afar whence they come, and to
remove beforehand the causes from which they are produced, not to wait till they
are established and are the common topics in every one's mouth. For then it is
not easy in the future to destroy them, but very difficult, perhaps impossible, and