2 Corinthians 12:19
2. "Again, think ye that we are excusing ourselves unto you?"
Do you see how he is continually in fear, lest he should incur the suspicion
of flattery? Do you see an Apostle's prudence, how constantly he mentions this?
For he said before, "We commend not ourselves again, but give you occasion to
glory;" [2 Corinthians 5:12] and in the commencement of the Epistle, "Do we
need letters of commendation?" [2 Corinthians 3:1]
"But all things are for your edifying." Again he is soothing them. And he
does not here either say clearly, 'on this account we receive not, because of your
weakness;' but, 'in order that we may edify you;' speaking out indeed more
clearly than he did before, and revealing that wherewith he travailed; but yet
without severity. For he did not say, 'because of your weakness;' but, 'that you
may be edified.'

2 Corinthians 12:20
"For I fear, lest by any means when I come, I should not find you such as I
would, and should myself be found of you such as you would not."
He is going to say something great and offensive. And therefore he also
inserts this excuse [for it], both by saying, "All things are for your edifying," and
by adding, "I fear," softening the harshness of what was presently going to be
said. For it was not here out of arrogance nor the authority of a teacher, but out
of a father's tender concern, when he is more fearful and trembling than the
sinners themselves at that which is likely to reform them. And not even so does
he run them down or make an absolute assertion; but says doubtingly, "lest by
any means when I come, I should not find you such as I would." He did not say,
'not virtuous,' but "not such as I would," everywhere employing the terms of
affection. And the words, "I should find," are of one who would express what is
out of natural expectation, as are also those, "I shall be found by you." For the
thing is not of deliberate choice, but of a necessity originating with you.
Wherefore he says, "I should be found such as you would not." He said not here,
"such as I would not," but, with more severity, "such as you wish not." For it
would in that case become his own will, not indeed what he would first have
willed, but his will nevertheless. For he might indeed have said again, 'such as I
would not,' and so have showed his love: but he wishes not to relax his hearer.
Yea rather, his words would in that case have been even harsher; but now he has
at once dealt them a smarter blow and showed himself more gentle. For this is
the characteristic of his wisdom; cutting more deeply, to strike more gently.
Then, because he had spoken obscurely, he unveils his meaning, saying,
"Lest there be strife, jealousy, wraths, backbitings, whisperings, swellings."
And what he might well put first, that he puts last: for they were very proud
against him. Therefore, that he may not seem principally to be seeking his own,