On the contrary, It is stated (Gal. 3:19) that the Law "was set because
of transgressors," namely in order to prohibit them. Now the Old Law
mentions plurality of wives without any prohibition thereof, as
appears from Dt. 21:15, "If a man have two wives," etc. Therefore
they were not transgressors through having two wives; and so it was
lawful.
Further, this is confirmed by the example of the holy patriarchs, who
are stated to have had several wives, and yet were most pleasing to
God, for instance Jacob, David, and several others. Therefore at one
time it was lawful.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1, ad 7,8), plurality of wives is
said to be against the natural law, not as regards its first precepts,
but as regards the secondary precepts, which like conclusions are
drawn from its first precepts. Since, however, human acts must
needs vary according to the various conditions of persons, times,
and other circumstances, the aforesaid conclusions do not proceed
from the first precepts of the natural law, so as to be binding in all
cases, but only in the majority. for such is the entire matter of Ethics
according to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 3,7). Hence, when they cease
to be binding, it is lawful to disregard them. But because it is not
easy to determine the above variations, it belongs exclusively to him
from whose authority he derives its binding force to permit the nonobservance of the law in those cases to which the force of the law
ought not to extend, and this permission is called a dispensation.
Now the law prescribing the one wife was framed not by man but by
God, nor was it ever given by word or in writing, but was imprinted
on the heart, like other things belonging in any way to the natural
law. Consequently a dispensation in this matter could be granted by
God alone through an inward inspiration, vouchsafed originally to
the holy patriarchs, and by their example continued to others, at a
time when it behooved the aforesaid precept not to be observed, in
order to ensure the multiplication of the offspring to be brought up in
the worship of God. For the principal end is ever to be borne in mind
before the secondary end. Wherefore, since the good of the offspring
is the principal end of marriage, it behooved to disregard for a time
the impediment that might arise to the secondary ends, when it was
necessary for the offspring to be multiplied; because it was for the
removal of this impediment that the precept forbidding a plurality of
wives was framed, as stated above (Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: The natural law, considered in itself, has the

same force at all times and places; but accidentally on account of
some impediment it may vary at certain times and places, as the
Philosopher (Ethic. i, 3,7) instances in the case of other natural
things. For at all times and places the right hand is better than the
left according to nature, but it may happen accidentally that a person
is ambidextrous, because our nature is variable; and the same
applies to the natural, just as the Philosopher states (Ethic. i, 3,7).
Reply to Objection 2: In a Decretal (De divortiis, cap. Gaudemus) it is
asserted that is was never lawful to have several wives without
having a dispensation received through Divine inspiration. Nor is the
dispensation thus granted a contradiction to the principles which
God has implanted in nature, but an exception to them, because
those principles are not intended to apply to all cases but to the
majority, as stated. Even so it is not contrary to nature when certain
occurrences take place in natural things miraculously, by way of
exception to more frequent occurrences.
Reply to Objection 3: Dispensation from a law should follow the
quality of the law. Wherefore, since the law of nature is imprinted on
the heart, it was not necessary for a dispensation from things
pertaining to the natural law to be given under the form of a written
law but by internal inspiration.
Reply to Objection 4: When Christ came it was the time of the
fulness of the grace of Christ, whereby the worship of God was
spread abroad among all nations by a spiritual propagation. Hence
there is not the same reason for a dispensation as before Christ's
coming, when the worship of God was spread and safeguarded by a
carnal propagation.
Reply to Objection 5: The offspring, considered as one of the
marriage goods, includes the keeping of faith with God, because the
reason why it is reckoned a marriage good is because it is awaited
with a view to its being brought up in the worship of God. Now the
faith to be kept with God is of greater import than the faith to be kept
with a wife, which is reckoned a marriage good, and than the
signification which pertains to the sacrament, since the signification
is subordinate to the knowledge of faith. Hence it is not unfitting if
something is taken from the two other goods for the sake of the
good of the offspring. Nor are they entirely done away, since there
remains faith towards several wives; and the sacrament remains
after a fashion, for though it did not signify the union of Christ with