substance, whereby it is led to a knowledge of God, is an effect inadequate to the power
of the cause that created it. Hence not all things that God understands in Himself can be
grasped by the natural knowledge of an angel; nor is human reason competent to take
in all that an angel understands of his own natural ability. As therefore it would be the
height of madness in a `plain man' to declare a philosopher's propositions false,
because he could not understand them, so and much more would a man show
exceeding folly if he suspected of falsehood a divine revelation given by the ministry of
angels, on the mere ground that it was beyond the investigation of reason.
The same thing manifestly appears from the incapacity which we daily experience in the
observation of nature. We are ignorant of very many properties of the things of sense;
and of the properties that our senses do apprehend, in most cases we cannot perfectly
discover the reason. Much more is it beyond the competence of human reason to
investigate all the points of intelligibility in that supreme excellent and transcendent
substance of God. Consonant with this is the saying of the Philosopher, that "as the
eyes of bats are to the light of the sun, so is the intelligence of our soul to the things
most manifest by nature" (Aristotle, Metaphysics I, min. l).
To this truth Holy Scripture also bears testimony. For it is said: Perchance thou wilt
seize upon the traces of God, and fully discover the Almighty (Job xi, 7). And, Lo, God is
great, and surpassing our knowledge (Job xxxvi, 26). And, We know in part (I Cor. xiii,
9). Not everything, therefore, that is said of God, even though it be beyond the power of
reason to investigate, is at once to be rejected as false.

unknowableness of God needs to be brought home to the modern mind, but the fact
that anything can be known with certainty about God at all.

## CHAPTER IV--That it is an advantage for the Truths of God, known by Natural Reason,
to be proposed to men to be believed on faith
IF a truth of this nature were left to the sole enquiry of reason, three disadvantages
would follow. One is that the knowledge of God would be confined to few. The discovery
of truth is the fruit of studious enquiry. From this very many are hindered. Some are
hindered by a constitutional unfitness, their natures being ill-disposed to the acquisition
of knowledge. They could never arrive by study to the highest grade of human
knowledge, which consists in the knowledge of God. Others are hindered by the needs
of business and the ties of the management of property. There must be in human
society some men devoted to temporal affairs. These could not possibly spend time
enough in the learned lessons of speculative enquiry to arrive at the highest point of
human enquiry, the knowledge of God. Some again are hindered by sloth. The
knowledge of the truths that reason can investigate concerning God presupposes much
previous knowledge. Indeed almost the entire study of philosophy is directed to the
knowledge of God. Hence, of all parts of philosophy, that part stands over to be learnt
last, which consists of metaphysics dealing with points of Divinity. Thus, only with
great labour of study is it possible to arrive at the searching out of the aforesaid truth;
and this labour few are willing to undergo for sheer love of knowledge.
Another disadvantage is that such as did arrive at the knowledge or discovery of the
aforesaid truth would take a long time over it, on account of the profundity of such truth,
and the many prerequisites to the study, and also because in youth and early manhood,
the soul, tossed to and fro on the waves of passion, is not fit for the study of such high
truth: only in settled age does the soul become prudent and scientific, as the
Philosopher says. Thus, if the only way open to the knowledge of God were the way of
reason, the human race would dwell long in thick darkness of ignorance: as the
knowledge of God, the best instrument for making men perfect and good, would accrue
only to a few, and to those few after a considerable lapse of time.
A third disadvantage is that, owing to the infirmity of our judgement and the perturbing
force of imagination, there is some admixture of error in most of the investigations of
human reason. This would be a reason to many for continuing to doubt even of the most
accurate demonstrations, not perceiving the force of the demonstration, and seeing the
divers judgements of divers persons who have the name of being wise men. Besides, in
the midst of much demonstrated truth there is sometimes an element of error, not
demonstrated but asserted on the strength of some plausible and sophistic reasoning
that is taken for a demonstration. And therefore it was necessary for the real truth
concerning divine things to be presented to men with fixed certainty by way of faith.
Wholesome therefore is the arrangement of divine clemency, whereby things even that
reason can investigate are commanded to be held on faith, so that all might easily be
partakers of the knowledge of God, and that without doubt and error.
Hence it is said: Now ye walk not as the Gentiles walk in the vanity of their own notions,
having the understanding darkened (Eph. iv, 17, 18); and, I will make all thy sons taught
of the Lord (Isa. liv, 1, 5).