and angry, and reviling, and lusting wrongly, and full of vainglory, and at strife,
and dragged down to the earth, and torn by so many wild beasts, we neglect to
drive away the passions from her, and are careful about house and servants. And
while if a bear has escaped by stealth, we shut up our houses, and run along by
the narrow passages, so as not to fall in with the wild beast; now while not one
wild beast, but many such thoughts are tearing in pieces the soul, we have not so
much as a feeling of it. And in the city we take so much care, as to shut up the
wild beasts in solitary places and in cages, and neither at the senate house of the
city, nor at the courts of justice, nor at the king's palace, but far off somewhere at
a distance do we keep them chained; but in the case of the soul, where the senate
house is, where the King's palace, where the court of justice is, the wild beasts
are let loose, crying and making a tumult about the mind itself and the royal
throne. Therefore all things are turned upside down, and all is full of disturbance,
the things within, the things without, and we are in nothing different from a city
thrown into confusion from being overrun by barbarians; and what takes place in
us is as though a serpent were setting on a brood of sparrows, and the sparrows,
with their feeble cries, were flying about every way affrighted, and full of
trouble, without having any place whither to go and end their consternation.
7. Wherefore I entreat, let us kill the serpent, let us shut up the wild beasts,
let us stifle them, let us slay them, and these wicked thoughts let us give over to
the sword of the Spirit, lest the prophet threaten us also with such things as he
threatened Judea, that "The wild asses shall dance there, and porcupines, and
serpents."
For there are, there are even men worse than wild asses, living as it were in
the wilderness, and kicking; yea the more part of the youth among us is like this.
For indeed having wild lusts they thus leap, they kick, going about unbridled,
and spend their diligence on no becoming object.
And the fathers are to blame, who while they constrain the horsebreakers to
discipline their horses with much attention, and suffer not the youth of the colt to
go on long untamed, but put upon it both a rein, and all the rest, from the

beginning; but their own young ones they overlook, going about for a long
season unbridled, and without temperance; disgracing themselves, by
fornications, and gamings, and continuings in the wicked theatres, when they
ought before fornication to give him to a wife, to a wife chaste, and highly
endued with wisdom; for she will both bring off her husband from his most
disorderly course of life, and will be instead of a rein to the colt.
For indeed fornications and adulteries come not from any other cause, than
from young men's being unrestrained. For if he have a prudent wife, he will take
care of house and honor and character. "But he is young," you say. I know it too.
For if Isaac was forty years old when he took his bride, passing all that time of
his life in virginity, much more ought young men under grace to practise this
self-restraint. But oh what grief! You do not endure to take care of their chastity,
but you overlook their disgracing, defiling themselves, becoming accursed; as
though ye knew not that the profit of marriage is to preserve the body pure, and
if this be not so, there is no advantage of marriage. But ye do the contrary; when
they are filled with countless stains, then ye bring them to marriage without
purpose and without fruit.
"Why I must wait," you will say, "that he may become approved, that he
may distinguish himself in the affairs of the state;" but of the soul you have no
consideration, but you overlook it as a cast-away. For this reason all things are
full of confusion, and disorder, and trouble, because this is made a secondary
matter, because necessary things are neglected, but the unimportant obtain much
forethought.
Do you not know, that you can do no such kindness to the youth, as to keep
him pure from whorish uncleannness? For nothing is equal to the soul. Because,
"What is a man profited," says He, "if he shall gain the whole world, but lose his
own soul." [Matthew 16:26] But because the love of money has overturned and
cast down all, and has thrust aside the strict fear of God, having seized upon the
souls of men, like some rebel chief upon a citadel; therefore we are careless both
of our children's salvation, and of our own, looking to one object only, that