FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.15, C.2.

Reply to Objection 2: Sense, properly speaking, belongs to the
apprehensive faculty; but by way of similitude, in so far as it implies
seeking acquaintance, it belongs to the appetitive power, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 3: "Assentire" [to assent] is, to speak, "ad aliud
sentire" [to feel towards something]; and thus it implies a certain
distance from that to which assent is given. But "consentire" [to
consent] is "to feel with," and this implies a certain union to the
object of consent. Hence the will, to which it belongs to tend to the
thing itself, is more properly said to consent: whereas the intellect,
whose act does not consist in a movement towards the thing, but
rather the reverse, as we have stated in the FP, Question 16, Article
1; FP, Question 27, Article 4; FP, Question 59, Article 2, is more
properly said to assent: although one word is wont to be used for the
other. We may also say that the intellect assents, in so far as it is
moved by the will.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.15, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether consent is to be found in irrational

animals?
Objection 1: It would seem that consent is to be found in irrational
animals. For consent implies a determination of the appetite to one
thing. But the appetite of irrational animals is determinate to one
thing. Therefore consent is to be found in irrational animals.
Objection 2: Further, if you remove what is first, you remove what
follows. But consent precedes the accomplished act. If therefore
there were no consent in irrational animals, there would be no act
accomplished; which is clearly false.
Objection 3: Further, men are sometimes said to consent to do
something, through some passion; desire, for instance, or anger. But
irrational animals act through passion. Therefore they consent.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 22) that "after
judging, man approves and embraces the judgment of his
counselling, and this is called the sentence," i.e. consent. But
counsel is not in irrational animals. Therefore neither is consent.
I answer that, Consent, properly speaking, is not in irrational
animals. The reason of this is that consent implies an application of
the appetitive movement to something as to be done. Now to apply
the appetitive movement to the doing of something, belongs to the
subject in whose power it is to move the appetite: thus to touch a
stone is an action suitable to a stick, but to apply the stick so that it
touch the stone, belongs to one who has the power of moving the
stick. But irrational animals have not the command of the appetitive
movement; for this is in them through natural instinct. Hence in the
irrational animal, there is indeed the movement of the appetite, but it
does not apply that movement to some particular thing. And hence it
is that the irrational animal is not properly said to consent: this is
proper to the rational nature, which has the command of the
appetitive movement, and is able to apply or not to apply it to this or
that thing.
Reply to Objection 1: In irrational animals the determination of the
appetite to a particular thing is merely passive: whereas consent
implies a determination of the appetite, which is active rather than