even enter into second marriages? Sure enough! It is the former husbands that
they long for. But let us not direct our discourse to them, but to those who
preserve a kind affection towards the departed. Why do you lament your child?
Why your husband? The former, because I had not enjoyed him, you say; the
latter, because I expected that I should have enjoyed him longer. And this very
thing, what want of faith does it argue, to suppose that your husband or your son
constitutes your safety, and not God! How do you not think to provoke Him? For
often on this account He takes them away, that you may not be so bound to them,
so that it may withdraw your hopes from them. For God is jealous, and wills to
be loved by us most of all things: and that, because He loves us exceedingly. For
you know that this is the custom of those who love to distraction. They are
excessively jealous, and would choose rather to throw away their life, than to be
surpassed in esteem by any of their rival lovers. On this account also God has
taken him because of these words.
For, tell me, on what account were there not in old times widowhoods, and
untimely orphanhoods? Wherefore did He permit Abraham and Isaac to live a
long time? Because even when he was living he preferred God before him. He
said indeed, slay; and he slew him. Why did he bring Sarah to so great an age?
Because, even while she was living, he listened to God rather than to her. For
this reason God said to him, "Hear Sarah your wife." [From Genesis 21:12] No
one then either from love to husband or wife, or on account of the protection of a
child, provoked God to anger. But now because we are declining downwards,
and have exceedingly fallen off, we men love our wives more than God, and we
women honor our husbands more than God. It is on this account that He draws
us even against our will to the love of Himself. Love not your husband more
than God, and you shall not ever experience widowhood. Or rather, even if it
should happen, you shall not have the feeling of it. Why? Because you have an
immortal Protector who loves you better. If you love God more, mourn not: for
He who is more beloved is immortal, and does not suffer you to feel the loss of
him who is less beloved. This I will make manifest to you by an example. Tell

me, if you have a husband, complying with you in all things, one that is
respected, and that makes you honorable everywhere, and not to be despised,
one respected among all, intelligent and wise, and loving you, thou being
esteemed happy on his account, and in conjunction with him should you also
bring forth a child, and then before it has arrived at the age of maturity, that child
should depart; will you then feel the affliction? By no means. For he that is more
beloved makes it disappear. And now if you love God more than your husband,
assuredly He will not soon take him away. But even if He should take him, you
will not be sensible of the affliction. For this reason the blessed Job felt no
severe suffering, when he heard of the death of his children all at once, because
he loved God more than them. And while He whom he loved was living, those
things would not be able to afflict him.
What do you say, O woman? Your husband or your son was your protector?
But does not your God spare you? Who gave you your very husband? Was it not
He? And who made you? Was it not He? He surely who brought you out of
nothing into being, and breathed into you a soul, and put in you a mind, and
vouchsafed to favor you with the knowledge of Himself, and for your sake
spared not His only-begotten Son, does not He spare you? And does your fellowservant spare you? What wrath is due to these words! What of this kind have you
had from your husband? You can not say anything. For if he has even done you
any kindness, it was after he had received kindness, you having previously
begun. But in the case of God no one can say any such thing. For it is not as
having received any favors from us that God benefits us, but being incapable of
want, from His goodness alone He does good to mankind. He has promised you
a kingdom, He has given immortal life, glory, brotherhood, adoption. He has
made you fellow-heir with His Only-Begotten. And do you after so great
benefits remember your husband? What has he bestowed of this kind? He has
made His sun to shine, He has given rain, He sustains you with yearly
nourishment. Woe to us for our great ingratitude!
For this reason He takes your husband, that you may not seek him. But do