we then said, and let us show how almsgiving is an art, and better than all arts.
For if the peculiarity of art is to issue in something useful, and nothing is more
useful than almsgiving, very evidently this is both an art, and better than all arts.
For it makes for us not shoes, nor does it weave garments, nor build houses that
are of clay; but it procures life everlasting, and snatches us from the hands of
death, and in either life shows us glorious, and builds the mansions that are in
Heaven, and those eternal tabernacles.
This suffers not our lamps to go out, nor that we should appear at the
marriage having filthy garments, but washes them, and renders them purer than
snow. "For though your sins be as scarlet, I will make them white as snow." not
send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way.

## Homily 53 on Matthew

MATT. XV. 32. 'But Jesus called His disciples unto Him, and said, I have
compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days,
and have nothing to eat: and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in
the way.'
Both above, when going to do this miracle, He first healed them that were
maimed in body, and here He does the self-same thing; from the healing of the
blind and the lame, He goes on to this again.
But why might it be, that then His disciples said, "Send away the
multitude," but now they said not so; and this, though three days had past? Either
being themselves improved by this time, or seeing that the people had no great
sense of hunger; for they were glorifying God for the things that were done.
But see how in this instance too He does not proceed at once to the miracle,
but calls them forth thereunto. For the multitudes indeed who had come out for
healing dared not ask for the loaves; but He, the benevolent and provident one,
gives even to them that ask not, and says unto His disciples, "I have compassion,
and will not send them away fasting."
For lest they should say that they came having provisions for the way, He
says, "They continue with me now three days;" so that even if they came having
any, it is all spent. For therefore He Himself did not this on the first and second
day, but when all had been consumed by them, in order that having first been in
want, they might more eagerly accept His work.
Therefore He says, "Lest they faint in the way;" implying both their
distance to be great, and that they had nothing left.
"Then, if you are not willing to send them away fasting, wherefore do you
not work the miracle?" That by this question and by their answer He might make
the disciples more heedful, and that they might show forth their faith, coming

unto Him, and saying, "Make loaves."
But not even so did they understand the motive of His question; wherefore
afterwards He says to them, as Mark relates, "Are your hearts so hardened?
Having eyes, see ye not? And having ears, hear ye not?" [Mark 8:17-18]
Since, if this were not so, wherefore does He speak to the disciples, and
signify the multitude's worthiness to receive a benefit, and add also the pity He
Himself feels?
But Matthew says, that after this He also rebuked them, saying, "O you of
little faith, do ye not yet understand, nor remember the five loaves of the five
thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? Nor the seven loaves of the four
thousand, and how many baskets ye took up?" [Matthew 16:8-10] So completely
do the evangelists harmonize one with another.
What then say the disciples? Still they creep on the ground, although He
had done so very many things in order that that miracle might be kept in
memory; as by His question, and by the answer, and by making them minister
herein, and by distributing the baskets; but their state of mind was yet rather
imperfect.
Wherefore also they say to Him, "Whence should we have so many loaves
in the wilderness?"
Both before this, and now, they make mention of the wilderness;
themselves in a weak way of argument so speaking, yet even hereby putting the
miracle above suspicion. That is, lest any should affirm (as I have indeed already
said), that they obtained it from some neighboring village, the place is
acknowledged, that the miracle may be believed. With this view, both the former
miracle and this He works in a wilderness, at a great distance from the villages.
The disciples, considering none of all this, said, "Whence should we have so
many loaves in a wilderness?" For they thought verily He had said it as
purposing next to enjoin them to feed the people; most foolishly; since with this
intent He had said, and that lately, "Give ye them to eat," [Matthew 14:16] that
He might bring them to an urgent need of entreating Him.