SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether spiritual goods should be foregone on

account of scandal?
Objection 1: It would seem that spiritual goods ought to be foregone
on account of scandal. For Augustine (Contra Ep. Parmen. iii, 2)
teaches that "punishment for sin should cease, when the peril of
schism is feared." But punishment of sins is a spiritual good, since it
is an act of justice. Therefore a spiritual good is to be foregone on
account of scandal.
Objection 2: Further, the Sacred Doctrine is a most spiritual thing.
Yet one ought to desist therefrom on account of scandal, according
to Mt. 7:6: "Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine lest . . . turning upon you, they tear you."
Therefore a spiritual good should be foregone on account of
scandal.
Objection 3: Further, since fraternal correction is an act of charity, it
is a spiritual good. Yet sometimes it is omitted out of charity, in
order to avoid giving scandal to others, as Augustine observes (De
Civ. Dei i, 9). Therefore a spiritual good should be foregone on
account of scandal.
Objection 4: Further, Jerome [Hugh de S. Cher., In Matth. xviii; in
Luc. xvii, 2] says that in order to avoid scandal we should forego
whatever it is possible to omit without prejudice to the threefold
truth, i.e. "the truth of life, of justice and of doctrine." Now the
observance of the counsels, and the bestowal of alms may often be
omitted without prejudice to the aforesaid threefold truth, else
whoever omitted them would always be guilty of sin, and yet such
things are the greatest of spiritual works. Therefore spiritual works
should be omitted on account of scandal.
Objection 5: Further, the avoidance of any sin is a spiritual good,
since any sin brings spiritual harm to the sinner. Now it seems that
one ought sometimes to commit a venial sin in order to avoid
scandalizing one's neighbor, for instance, when by sinning venially,
one would prevent someone else from committing a mortal sin:
because one is bound to hinder the damnation of one's neighbor as
much as one can without prejudice to one's own salvation, which is
not precluded by a venial sin. Therefore one ought to forego a

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.42, C.8.

spiritual good in order to avoid scandal.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. Super Ezech. vii): "If people are
scandalized at the truth, it is better to allow the birth of scandal, than
to abandon the truth." Now spiritual goods belong, above all others,
to the truth. Therefore spiritual goods are not to be foregone on
account of scandal.
I answer that, Whereas scandal is twofold, active and passive, the
present question does not apply to active scandal, for since active
scandal is "something said or done less rightly," nothing ought to be
done that implies active scandal. The question does, however, apply
to passive scandal, and accordingly we have to see what ought to be
foregone in order to avoid scandal. Now a distinction must be made
in spiritual goods. For some of them are necessary for salvation, and
cannot be foregone without mortal sin: and it is evident that no man
ought to commit a mortal sin, in order to prevent another from
sinning, because according to the order of charity, a man ought to
love his own spiritual welfare more than another's. Therefore one
ought not to forego that which is necessary for salvation, in order to
avoid giving scandal.
Again a distinction seems necessary among spiritual things which
are not necessary for salvation: because the scandal which arises
from such things sometimes proceeds from malice, for instance
when a man wishes to hinder those spiritual goods by stirring up
scandal. This is the "scandal of the Pharisees," who were
scandalized at Our Lord's teaching: and Our Lord teaches (Mt. 15:14)
that we ought to treat such like scandal with contempt. Sometimes
scandal proceeds from weakness or ignorance, and such is the
"scandal of little ones." In order to avoid this kind of scandal,
spiritual goods ought to be either concealed, or sometimes even
deferred (if this can be done without incurring immediate danger),
until the matter being explained the scandal cease. If, however, the
scandal continue after the matter has been explained, it would seem
to be due to malice, and then it would no longer be right to forego
that spiritual good in order to avoid such like scandal.
Reply to Objection 1: In the infliction of punishment it is not the
punishment itself that is the end in view, but its medicinal properties
in checking sin; wherefore punishment partakes of the nature of
justice, in so far as it checks sin. But if it is evident that the infliction
of punishment will result in more numerous and more grievous sins