But wherefore can it have been that He did not hire all at once? As far as
concerned Him, He did hire all; but if all did not hearken at once, the difference
was made by the disposition of them that were called. For this cause, some are
called early in the morning, some at the third hour, some at the sixth, some at the
ninth, some at the eleventh, when they would obey.
This Paul also declared when he said, "When it pleased Him, who separated
me from my mother's womb." [Galatians 1:15] When did it please Him? When he
was ready to obey. For He willed it even from the beginning, but because he
would not have yielded, then it pleased Him, when Paul also was ready to obey.
Thus also did He call the thief, although He was able to have called him even
before, but he would not have obeyed. For if Paul at the beginning would not
have obeyed, much more the thief.
And if they say, "No man has hired us," in the first place as I said we must
not be curious about all the points in the parables; but here neither is the good
man of the house represented to say this, but they; but he does not convict them,
that he might drive them to perplexity, but might win them over. For that He
called all, as far as lay in Him, from the first even the parable shows, saying, that
"He went out early in the morning to hire."
4. From everything then it is manifest to us, that the parable is spoken with
reference to them who from earliest youth, and those who in old age and more
tardily, lay hold on virtue; to the former, that they may not be proud, neither
reproach those called at the eleventh hour; to the latter, that they may learn that it
is possible even in a short time to recover all.
For since He had been speaking about earnestness, and the casting away of
riches, and contempt of all one's possessions, but this needed much vigor of
mind and youthful ardor; in order to kindle in them a fire of love, and to give
vigor to their will, He shows that it is possible even for men coming later to
receive the hire of the whole day.
But He does not say it thus, lest again He should make them proud, but he
shows that the whole is of His love to man, and because of this they shall not

fail, but shall themselves enjoy the unspeakable blessings.
And this chiefly is what it is His will to establish by this parable. And if He
adds, that, "So the last shall be first and the first last; for many are called, but
few chosen," marvel not. For not as inferring it from the parable does He say
this, but His meaning is this, that like as this came to pass, so shall that come to
pass. For here indeed the first did not become last, but all received the same
contrary to hope and expectation. But as this result took place contrary to hope
and contrary to expectation, and they that came before were equalled by them
that followed, so shall that also come to pass which is more than this, and more
strange, I mean, that the last should come to be even before the first, and that the
first should be after these. So that that is one thing, and this another.
But He seems to me to say these things, darkly hinting at the Jews, and
among the believers at those who at first shone forth, but afterwards neglected
virtue, and fell back; and those others again that have risen from vice, and have
shot beyond many. For we see such changes taking place both with respect to
faith and practice.
Wherefore I entreat you let us use much diligence both to stand in the right
faith, and to show forth an excellent life. For unless we add also a life suitable to
our faith, we shall suffer the extremest punishment.
And this the blessed Paul showed even from times of old, when he said, that
"They did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
drink:" and added, that they were not saved; "for they were overthrown in the
wilderness." And Christ declared it even in the evangelists, when He brought in
some that had cast out devils and prophesied, and are led away to punishment.
And all His parables also, as that of the virgins, that of the net, that of the thorns,
that of the tree not bringing forth fruit, demand virtue in our works. For
concerning doctrines He discourses seldom, for neither does the subject need
labor, but of life often or rather everywhere, for the war about this is continual,
wherefore also so is the labor.
And why do I speak of the whole code. For even a part of it overlooked