THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.3.

the guilt connected with it.
Reply to Objection 3: Penance regards every kind of sin in a way, but
not each in the same way. Because Penance regards actual mortal
sin properly and chiefly; properly, since, properly speaking, we are
said to repent of what we have done of our own will; chiefly, since
this sacrament was instituted chiefly for the blotting out of mortal
sin. Penance regards venial sins, properly speaking indeed, in so far
as they are committed of our own will, but this was not the chief
purpose of its institution. But as to original sin, Penance regards it
neither chiefly, since Baptism, and not Penance, is ordained against
original sin, nor properly, because original sin is not done of our
own will, except in so far as Adam's will is looked upon as ours, in
which sense the Apostle says (Rm. 5:12): "In whom all have sinned."
Nevertheless, Penance may be said to regard original sin, if we take
it in a wide sense for any detestation of something past: in which
sense Augustine uses the term in his book De Poenitentia (Serm.
cccli).

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.84, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the form of this sacrament is: "I absolve

thee"?
Objection 1: It would seem that the form of this sacrament is not: "I
absolve thee." Because the forms of the sacraments are received
from Christ's institution and the Church's custom. But we do not
read that Christ instituted this form. Nor is it in common use; in fact
in certain absolutions which are given publicly in church (e.g. at
Prime and Compline and on Maundy Thursday), absolution is given
not in the indicative form by saying: "I absolve thee," but In the
deprecatory form, by saying: "May Almighty God have mercy on
you," or: "May Almighty God grant you absolution and forgiveness."
Therefore the form of this sacrament is not: "I absolve thee."
Objection 2: Further, Pope Leo says (Ep. cviii) that God's forgiveness
cannot be obtained without the priestly supplications: and he is
speaking there of God's forgiveness granted to the penitent.
Therefore the form of this sacrament should be deprecatory.
Objection 3: Further, to absolve from sin is the same as to remit sin.
But God alone remits sin, for He alone cleanses man inwardly from
sin, as Augustine says (Contra Donatist. v, 21). Therefore it seems
that God alone absolves from sin. Therefore the priest should say
not: "I absolve thee," as neither does he say: "I remit thy sins."
Objection 4: Further, just as our Lord gave His disciples the power to
absolve from sins, so also did He give them the power "to heal
infirmities," "to cast out devils," and "to cure diseases" (Mt. 10:1; Lk.
9:1). Now the apostles, in healing the sick, did not use the words: "I
heal thee," but: "The Lord Jesus Christ heal thee," as Peter said to
the palsied man (Acts 9:34). Therefore since priests have the power
which Christ gave His apostles, it seems that they should not use the
form: "I absolve thee," but: "May Christ absolve thee."
Objection 5: Further, some explain this form by stating that when
they say: "I absolve thee," they mean "I declare you to be absolved."
But neither can this be done by a priest unless it be revealed to him
by God, wherefore, as we read in Mt. 16:19 before it was said to
Peter: "Whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth," etc., it was said to
him (Mt. 16:17): "Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Jona: because flesh
and blood have not revealed it to thee, but My Father Who is in