need of guarding the people from the danger of idolatry: since the
lights are proved not to be gods, by the fact that they were not from
the beginning.
Reply to Objection 2: No difficulty exists if we follow Augustine in
holding the light made on the first day to be spiritual, and that made
on this day to be corporeal. If, however, the light made on the first
day is understood to be itself corporeal, then it must be held to have
been produced on that day merely as light in general; and that on the
fourth day the lights received a definite power to produce
determinate effects. Thus we observe that the rays of the sun have
one effect, those of the moon another, and so forth. Hence, speaking
of such a determination of power, Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv) says that
the sun's light which previously was without form, was formed on
the fourth day.
Reply to Objection 3: According to Ptolemy the heavenly luminaries
are not fixed in the spheres, but have their own movement distinct
from the movement of the spheres. Wherefore Chrysostom says
(Hom. vi in Gen.) that He is said to have set them in the firmament,
not because He fixed them there immovably, but because He bade
them to be there, even as He placed man in Paradise, to be there. In
the opinion of Aristotle, however, the stars are fixed in their orbits,
and in reality have no other movement but that of the spheres; and
yet our senses perceive the movement of the luminaries and not that
of the spheres (De Coel. ii, text. 43). But Moses describes what is
obvious to sense, out of condescension to popular ignorance, as we
have already said (Question 67, Article 4; Question 68, Article 3). The
objection, however, falls to the ground if we regard the firmament
made on the second day as having a natural distinction from that in
which the stars are placed, even though the distinction is not
apparent to the senses, the testimony of which Moses follows, as
stated above (De Coel. ii, text. 43). For although to the senses there
appears but one firmament; if we admit a higher and a lower
firmament, the lower will be that which was made on the second day,
and on the fourth the stars were fixed in the higher firmament.
Reply to Objection 4: In the words of Basil (Hom. v in Hexaem.),
plants were recorded as produced before the sun and moon, to
prevent idolatry, since those who believe the heavenly bodies to be
gods, hold that plants originate primarily from these bodies.
Although as Chrysostom remarks (Hom. vi in Gen.), the sun, moon,
and stars cooperate in the work of production by their movements,

as the husbandman cooperates by his labor.
Reply to Objection 5: As Chrysostom says, the two lights are called
great, not so much with regard to their dimensions as to their
influence and power. For though the stars be of greater bulk than the
moon, yet the influence of the moon is more perceptible to the
senses in this lower world. Moreover, as far as the senses are
concerned, its apparent size is greater.