shall be a very great gainer, both rendering her more obedient and becoming
yourself more gentle thereby. It is said, for instance, that one of the heathen
philosophers , who had a bad wife, a trifler and a brawler, when asked, "Why,
having such an one, he endured her;" made reply, "That he might have in his
house a school and training-place of philosophy. For I shall be to all the rest
meeker," says he, "being here disciplined every day." Did you utter a great shout?
Why, I at this moment am greatly mourning, when heathens prove better lovers
of wisdom than we; we who are commanded to imitate angels, nay rather who
are commanded to follow God Himself in respect of gentleness.
But to proceed: it is said that for this reason the philosopher having a bad
wife, cast her not out; and some say that this very thing was the reason of his
marrying her. But I, because many men have dispositions not exactly reasonable,
advise that at first they do all they can, and be careful that they take a suitable
partner and one full of all virtue. Should it happen, however, that they miss their
end, and she whom they have brought into the house prove no good or tolerable
bride, then I would have them at any rate try to be like this philosopher, and train
her in every way, and consider nothing more important than this. Since neither
will a merchant, until he have made a compact with his partner capable of
procuring peace, launch the vessel into the deep, nor apply himself to the rest of
the transaction. And let us then use every effort that she who is partner with us in
the business of life and in this our vessel, may be kept in all peace within. For
thus shall our other affairs too be all in calm, and with tranquility shall we run
our course through the ocean of the present life. Compared with this, let house,
and slaves, and money, and lands, and the business itself of the state, be less in
our account. And let it be more valuable than all in our eyes that she who with us
sits at the oars should not be in mutiny and disunion with us. For so shall our
other matters proceed with a favoring tide, and in spiritual things also we shall
find ourselves much the freer from hindrance, drawing this yoke with one
accord; and having done all things well, we shall obtain the blessings laid up in
store; unto which may we all attain, through the grace and mercy of our Lord

Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power,
and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 27 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 11:17
But in giving you this charge, I praise you not, that you come together not
for the better, but for the worse.
It is necessary in considering the present charge to state also first the
occasion of it. For thus again will our discourse be more intelligible. What then
is this occasion?
As in the case of the three thousand who believed in the beginning, all had
eaten their meals in common and had all things common; such also was the
practice at the time when the Apostle wrote this: not such indeed exactly; but as
it were a certain outflowing of that communion which abode among them
descended also to them that came after. And because of course some were poor,
but others rich, they laid not down all their goods in the midst, but made the
tables open on stated days, as it should seem; and when the solemn service was
completed, after the communion of the Mysteries, they all went to a common
entertainment, the rich bringing their provisions with them, and the poor and
destitute being invited by them, and all feasting in common. But afterward this
custom also became corrupt. And the reason was, their being divided and
addicting themselves, some to this party, and others to that, and saying, "I am of
such a one," and "I of such a one;" which thing also to correct he said in the
beginning of the Epistle, "For it has been signified unto me concerning you, my
brethren, by them which are of the household of Chloe, that there are contentions
among you. Now this I mean, that each one of you says, I am of Paul; and I of
Apollos; and I of Cephas." Not that Paul was the person to whom they were
attaching themselves; for he would not have borne it: but wishing by concession
to tear up this custom from the root, he introduced himself, indicating that if any