He "not been made after the order of Aaron"?
And the [saying] "what further need" has much emphasis. For if Christ had
been "after the order of Melchisedec" according to the flesh, and then afterwards
the law had been introduced, and all that pertained to Aaron, one might
reasonably say that the latter as being more perfect, annulled the former, seeing
that it had come in after it. But if Christ comes later, and takes a different type,
as that of His priesthood, it is evident that it is because those were imperfect. For
(he would say) let us suppose for argument's sake, that all has been fulfilled, and
that there is nothing imperfect in the priesthood. "What need" was there in that
case that He should be called "after the order of Melchisedec and not after the
order of Aaron"? Why did He set aside Aaron, and introduce a different
priesthood, that of Melchisedec? "If then perfection," that is the perfection of the
things themselves, of the doctrines, of life, "had been by the Levitical
priesthood."
And observe how he goes forward on his path. He had said that [He was]
"after the order of Melchisedec," implying that the [priesthood] "after the order
of Melchisedec" is superior: for [he was] far superior. Afterwards he shows this
from the time also, in that He was after Aaron; evidently as being better.
2. And what is the meaning of what follows? "For" (he says) under [or
"upon"] it the people have received the Law [or "have been legislated for"].
What is "under it" [&c.]? Orders itself by it; through it does all things. You
cannot say that it was given to others, "the people under it have received the
law," that is, have used it, and did use it. You cannot say indeed that it was
perfect, it did not govern the people; "they have been legislated for upon it," that
is, they used it.
What need was there then of another priesthood? "For the priesthood being
changed, there is of necessity a change of the law also." But if there must be
another priest, or rather another priesthood, there must needs be also another law.
This is for those who say, What need was there of a new Covenant? For he could
indeed have alleged a testimony from prophecy also. "This is the covenant which

I made with your fathers" [&c.]. [Hebrews 8:10] But for the present he contends
on the ground of the priesthood. And observe, how he says this from the first. He
said, "According to the order of Melchisedec." By this he excluded the order of
Aaron. For he would not have said "After the order of Melchisedec," if the other
had been better. If therefore another priesthood has been brought in, there must
be also [another] Covenant; for neither is it possible that there should be a priest,
without a covenant and laws and ordinances, nor that having received a different
priesthood He should use the former [covenant].
In the next place, as to the ground of objection: "How could He be a priest
if He were not a Levite?" Having overthrown this by what had been said above,
he does not even think it worth answering, but introduces it in passing. I said (he
means) that the priesthood was changed, therefore also the Covenant is. And it
was changed not only in its character, or in its ordinances, but also in its tribe.
For of necessity [it must be changed] in its tribe also. How? For the priesthood
being changed [or "transferred "], from tribe to tribe, from the sacerdotal to the
regal [tribe], that the same might be both regal and sacerdotal.
And observe the mystery. First it was royal, and then it has become
sacerdotal: so therefore also in regard to Christ: for King indeed He always was,
but has become Priest from the time that He assumed the Flesh, that He offered
the sacrifice. You see the change, and the very things which were ground of
objection these he introduces, as though the natural order of things required
them. "For" (he says) "He of whom these things are spoken pertained to another
tribe." I myself also say it, I know that this tribe [of Judah] had nothing of
priesthood. For there is a transferring.
3. Yea and I am showing another difference also (he would say): not only
from the tribe, nor yet only from the Person, nor from the character [of the
Priesthood], nor from the covenant, but also from the type itself. [Hebrews 7:16]
Who was made ["became" so], not according to the law of a carnal
commandment, but according to the power of an endless life. He became (he
says) "a priest not according to the law of a carnal commandment": for that law