a laughing stock, he would be building for his enemies, and would the more
effectually invite them on; and so then, if we be in our senses, neither shall we.
The present life is nothing else than a march and an encampment.
Wherefore, I beseech you, let us do all we can, so as to lay up no treasure
here; for if the thief should come, we must in a moment arise and depart.
"Watch," says He, "for you know not at what hour the thief comes" [Matthew
24:42-43], thus naming death. O then, before he comes, let us send away
everything before us to our native country; but here let us be "well girded," that
we may be enabled to overcome our enemies, whom God grant that we may
overcome, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom together with the Holy Ghost, be unto the Father glory, strength, honor
forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 24 on Ephesians

Ephesians 6:14-17
"Stand therefore, having girded your loins with truth, and having on the
breastplate of righteousness; and having shod your feet with the preparation of
the gospel of peace; withal taking up the shield of faith, wherewith you shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one. And take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God."
"Having girded your loins," says he, "with truth." What can be the meaning
of this? I have stated in the preceding discourse, that he ought to be lightly
accoutered, in order that there should be no impediment whatever to his running.
"And having on," he continues, "the breastplate of righteousness." As the
breastplate is impenetrable, so also is righteousness, and by righteousness here
he means a life of universal virtue. Such a life no one shall ever be able to
overthrow; it is true, many wound him, but no one cuts through him, no, not the
devil himself. It is as though one were to say, "having righteous deeds fixed in
the breast"; of these it is that Christ says, "Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled." [Matthew 5:6] Thus is he firm
and strong like a breastplate. Such a man will never be put out of temper.
"And having shod your feet with the preparation of the gospel of peace." It
is more uncertain in what sense this was said. What then is its meaning? They
are noble greaves, doubtless, with which he invests us. Either then he means this,
that we should be prepared for the gospel, and should make use of our feet for
this, and should prepare and make ready its way before it; or if not this, at least
that we ourselves should be prepared for our departure. "The preparation," then,
"of the gospel of peace," is nothing else than a most virtuous life; according to
what the Prophet says. "You will prepare their heart, you will cause your ear to
hear." [Psalm 10:17] "Of the gospel," he says, "of peace," and with reason; for