THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.50, C.4.

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): "Although
Christ died as man, and His holy soul was separated from His
spotless body, nevertheless His Godhead remained unseparated
from both---from the soul, I mean, and from the body."
I answer that, The soul is united with the Word of God more
immediately and more primarily than the body is, because it is
through the soul that the body is united with the Word of God, as
stated above (Question 6, Article 1). Since, then, the Word of God
was not separated from the body at Christ's death, much less was He
separated from the soul. Accordingly, since what regards the body
severed from the soul is affirmed of the Son of God---namely, that "it
was buried"---so is it said of Him in the Creed that "He descended
into hell," because His soul when separated from the body did go
down into hell.
Reply to Objection 1: Augustine (Tract. xlvii in Joan.), in commenting
on the text of John, asks, since Christ is Word and soul and body,
"whether He putteth down His soul, for that He is the Word? Or, for
that He is a soul?" Or, again, "for that He is flesh?" And he says that,
"should we say that the Word of God laid down His soul" . . . it would
follow that "there was a time when that soul was severed from the
Word"---which is untrue. "For death severed the body and soul . . .
but that the soul was severed from the Word I do not affirm . . . But
should we say that the soul laid itself down," it follows "that it is
severed from itself: which is most absurd." It remains, therefore, that
"the flesh itself layeth down its soul and taketh it again, not by its
own power, but by the power of the Word dwelling in the flesh":
because, as stated above (Article 2), the Godhead of the Word was
not severed from the flesh in death.
Reply to Objection 2: In those words Athanasius never meant to say
that the whole man was reassumed---that is, as to all his parts---as if
the Word of God had laid aside the parts of human nature by His
death; but that the totality of the assumed nature was restored once
more in the resurrection by the resumed union of soul and body.
Reply to Objection 2: Through being united to human nature, the
Word of God is not on that account called human nature: but He is
called a man---that is, one having human nature. Now the soul and
the body are essential parts of human nature. Hence it does not
follow that the Word is a soul or a body through being united with

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.50, C.4.

both, but that He is one possessing a soul or a body.
Reply to Objection 4: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii): "In
Christ's death the soul was separated from the flesh: not one
hypostasis divided into two: because both soul and body in the
same respect had their existence from the beginning in the
hypostasis of the Word; and in death, though severed from one
another, each one continued to have the one same hypostasis of the
Word. Wherefore the one hypostasis of the Word was the hypostasis
of the Word, of the soul, and of the body. For neither soul nor body
ever had an hypostasis of its own, besides the hypostasis of the
Word: for there was always one hypostasis of the Word, and never
two."