SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.2.

and consequently a mean between objects of touch: and this was
impossible, were it not composed of contraries, as the Philosopher
states (De Anima ii, 11). On the other hand, this condition is not
attached to the adaptability of matter to form because, if it were
possible, since the form is incorruptible, its matter should rather be
incorruptible. In the same way a saw needs to be of iron, this being
suitable to its form and action, so that its hardness may make it fit
for cutting. But that it be liable to rust is a necessary result of such a
matter and is not according to the agent's choice; for, if the
craftsman were able, of the iron he would make a saw that would not
rust. Now God Who is the author of man is all-powerful, wherefore
when He first made man, He conferred on him the favor of being
exempt from the necessity resulting from such a matter: which favor,
however, was withdrawn through the sin of our first parents.
Accordingly death is both natural on account of a condition
attaching to matter, and penal on account of the loss of the Divine
favor preserving man from death [FS, Question 85, Article 6].
Reply to Objection 2: This likeness of man to other animals regards a
condition attaching to matter, namely the body being composed of
contraries. But it does not regard the form, for man's soul is
immortal, whereas the souls of dumb animals are mortal.
Reply to Objection 3: Our first parents were made by God not only as
particular individuals, but also as principles of the whole human
nature to be transmitted by them to their posterity, together with the
Divine favor preserving them from death. Hence through their sin the
entire human nature, being deprived of that favor in their posterity,
incurred death.
Reply to Objection 4: A twofold defect arises from sin. One is by way
of a punishment appointed by a judge: and such a defect should be
equal in those to whom the sin pertains equally. The other defect is
that which results accidentally from this punishment; for instance,
that one who has been deprived of his sight for a sin he has
committed, should fall down in the road. Such a defect is not
proportionate to the sin, nor does a human judge take it into
account, since he cannot foresee chance happenings. Accordingly,
the punishment appointed for the first sin and proportionately
corresponding thereto, was the withdrawal of the Divine favor
whereby the rectitude and integrity of human nature was maintained.
But the defects resulting from this withdrawal are death and other
penalties of the present life. Wherefore these punishments need not

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.163, C.2.

be equal in those to whom the first sin equally appertains.
Nevertheless, since God foreknows all future events, Divine
providence has so disposed that these penalties are apportioned in
different ways to various people. This is not on account of any
merits or demerits previous to this life, as Origen held [Peri Archon
ii, 9]: for this is contrary to the words of Rm. 9:11, "When they . . .
had not done any good or evil"; and also contrary to statements
made in the FP, Question 90, Article 4; FP, Question 118, Article 3,
namely that the soul is not created before the body: but either in
punishment of their parents' sins, inasmuch as the child is
something belonging to the father, wherefore parents are often
punished in their children; or again it is for a remedy intended for the
spiritual welfare of the person who suffers these penalties, to wit that
he may thus be turned away from his sins, or lest he take pride in his
virtues, and that he may be crowned for his patience.
Reply to Objection 5: Death may be considered in two ways. First, as
an evil of human nature, and thus it is not of God, but is a defect
befalling man through his fault. Secondly, as having an aspect of
good, namely as being a just punishment, and thus it is from God.
Wherefore Augustine says (Retract. i, 21) that God is not the author
of death, except in so far as it is a punishment.
Reply to Objection 6: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiii, 5), "just as
the wicked abuse not only evil but also good things, so do the
righteous make good use not only of good but also of evil things.
Hence it is that both evil men make evil use of the law, though the
law is good, while good men die well, although death is an evil."
Wherefore inasmuch as holy men make good use of death, their
death is to them meritorious.
Reply to Objection 7: Death may be considered in two ways. First, as
the privation of life, and thus death cannot be felt, since it is the
privation of sense and life. In this way it involves not pain of sense
but pain of loss. Secondly, it may be considered as denoting the
corruption which ends in the aforesaid privation. Now we may speak
of corruption even as of generation in two ways: in one way as being
the term of alteration, and thus in the first instant in which life
departs, death is said to be present. In this way also death has no
pain of sense. In another way corruption may be taken as including
the previous alteration: thus a person is said to die, when he is in
motion towards death; just as a thing is said to be engendered, while
in motion towards the state of having been engendered: and thus