sweat, so did shame, and cowardice, and want of confidence. But on that day
there was no grief, nor pain, nor lamentation. But he abode not in that dignity.
What then, says one, am I to do? Must I perish on his account? I reply, first,
It is not on his account: for neither have you remained without sin: though it be
not the same sin, at least there is some other which you have committed. And
again, you have not been injured by his punishment, but rather have been a
gainer. For if you had been to remain altogether mortal, perchance what is said
would have had some reason in it. But now you are immortal, and if you will,
you may shine brighter than the sun itself.
5. "But," says one, "had I not received a mortal body, I had not sinned."
Tell me then, had he a mortal body when he sinned? Surely not: for if it had been
mortal before, it would not have undergone death as a punishment afterwards.
And that a mortal body is no hindrance to virtue, but that it keeps men in order
and is of the greatest service, is plain from what follows. If the expectation of
immortality alone so lifted up Adam; had he been even immortal in reality, to
what a pitch of arrogance would he not have proceeded? And as things are, after
sinning you may do away with your sins, the body being abject, falling away,
and subject to dissolution: for these thoughts are sufficient to sober a man. But if
you had sinned in an immortal body, your sins were likely to have been more
lasting.
Mortality then is not the cause of sin: accuse it not: but the wicked will is
the root of all the mischief. For why was not Abel at all the worse for his body?
Why are the devils not at all the better for being incorporeal? Will you hear why
the body's becoming mortal, so far from hurting, has been positively useful?
Mark how much you gain thereby, if you are sober. It drags you back and pulls
you off from wickedness, by griefs and pains and labors and other such things.
"But it tempts men to uncleanness," perhaps you will say. Not the body, but
incontinence, does this. For all these things which I was mentioning certainly do
belong to the body: on which account it is impossible that a man who has
entered into this life should escape disease and pain and lowness of spirits: but

that he commit no uncleanness is possible. Thus it appears that if the affections
of vice were part of the nature of the body they would be universal: since all
things natural are so; but to commit fornication is not so. Pain indeed comes of
nature: but to commit fornication proceeds from deliberate purpose.
Blame not the body then; let not the Devil take away your honor, which
God has given you. For if we choose, the body is an excellent bridle to curb the
wanton sallies of the soul, to pull down haughtiness, to repress arrogance, to
minister to us in the greatest achievements of virtue. For tell me not of those who
have lost their senses; since we often see horses, after they have thrown out their
drivers, dashing with their reins over the precipices, and yet we do not blame the
rein. For it is not the breaking of that which caused it all, but the driver not
holding them in was the ruin of every thing. Just so do thou reason in this case.
If you see a young person living in orphanhood and doing innumerable evil
things, blame not the body, but the charioteer who is dragged on, I mean, the
man's faculty of reasoning. For as the reins give no trouble to the charioteer, but
the charioteer is the cruise of all the mischief through his not holding them
properly: (and therefore do they often exact a penalty of him, entangling
themselves with him, and dragging him on, and compelling him to partake in
their own mishap:) so is it also in the case before us. "I," say the reins, "made
bloody the horse's mouth as long as you held me: but since you threw me away, I
require satisfaction for your contempt, and I entwine myself about you, and drag
you along, so as not to incur the same usage again." Let no one then blame the
reins, but himself and his own corrupt mind. For over us too is a charioteer, even
reason: and the reins are the body, connecting the horses with the charioteer; if
then these be in good condition, you will suffer no harm: but if you let them go,
you have annihilated and ruined every thing. Let us be temperate then, and lay
all blame not on the body, but on the evil mind. For this is the Devil's special
work, to make foolish men accuse the body and God and their neighbor, rather
than their own perverted minds; lest, having discovered the cause, they get free
from the root of the evils.