helpmate in relation to the offspring, whereas the man was not made
for this purpose. Wherefore the mother has a closer relation to the
nature of marriage than the father has.
Reply to Objection 2: Sometimes essentials are known by
accidentals, wherefore some things can be named even after their
accidentals, since a name is given to a thing for the purpose that it
may become known.
Reply to Objection 3: Sometimes a species is named after something
pertaining to the genus on account of an imperfection in the species,
when namely it has the generic nature completely, yet adds nothing
pertaining to dignity; thus the accidental property retains the name
of property, which is common to it and to the definition. Sometimes,
however, it is on account of a perfection, when we find the generic
nature completely in one species and not in another; thus animal is
named from soul [anima], and this belongs to an animate body,
which is the genus of animal; yet animation is not found perfectly in
those animate beings that are not animals. It is thus with the case in
point. for the joining of husband and wife by matrimony is the
greatest of all joinings, since it is a joining of soul and body,
wherefore it is called a "conjugal" union.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether matrimony is fittingly defined in the text?

Objection 1: It would seem that matrimony is unfittingly defined in
the text (Sent. iv, D, 27). ["Marriage is the marital union of man and
woman involving living together in undivided partnership."] For it is
necessary to mention matrimony in defining a husband, since it is
the husband who is joined to the woman in matrimony. Now "marital
union" is put in the definition of matrimony. Therefore in these
definitions there would seem to be a vicious circle.
Objection 2: Further, matrimony makes the woman the man's wife no
less than it makes the man the woman's husband. Therefore it
should not be described as a "marital union" rather than an uxorial
union.
Objection 3: Further, habit [consuetudo] pertains to morals. Yet it
often happens that married persons differ very much in habit.
Therefore the words "involving their living together [consuetudinem]
in undivided partnership" should have no place in the definition of
matrimony.
Objection 4: Further, we find other definitions given of matrimony,
for according to Hugh (Sum. Sent. vii, 6), "matrimony is the lawful
consent of two apt persons to be joined together." Also, according to
some, "matrimony is the fellowship of a common life and a
community regulated by Divine and human law"; and we ask how
these definitions differ.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 2), three things are to be
considered in matrimony, namely its cause, its essence, and its
effect; and accordingly we find three definitions given of matrimony.
For the definition of Hugh indicates the cause, namely the consent,
and this definition is self-evident. The definition given in the text
indicates the essence of matrimony, namely the "union," and adds
determinate subjects by the words "between lawful persons." It also
points to the difference of the contracting parties in reference to the
species, by the word "marital," for since matrimony is a joining
together for the purpose of some one thing, this joining together is
specified by the purpose to which it is directed, and this is what
pertains to the husband [maritum]. It also indicates the force of this
joining---for it is indissoluble---by the words "involving," etc.