superintendence. Yet it was for this that from of old all men came to an
agreement that governors should be maintained by us, because to the neglect of
their own affairs, they take charge of the public, and on this they spend their
whole leisure, whereby our goods also are kept safe. After saying then what the
external goods are, he again averts to the former line of argument (for in this
way he was more likely to attract the believer to him), and he shows again that
this is God's decree, and on it he makes his advice rest finally, in these words,
"they are God's ministers." Then to show the pains they take, and their hard life,
he proceeds,
"Waiting continually upon this very thing."
For this is their life, this their business, that you may enjoy peace.
Wherefore in another Epistle, he bids them not only be subject, but also "pray"
in their behalf. And as showing there too that the advantage was common to all,
he adds, "that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all things." [1 Timothy
2:1-2] For it is in no small degree that they contribute to the settled state of the
present life, by keeping guard, beating off enemies, hindering those who are for
sedition in the cities, putting an end to differences among any. For do not tell me
of some one who makes an ill use of the thing, but look to the good order that is
in the institution itself, and you will see the great wisdom of Him who enacted
this law from the first.
Ver. 7, 8. "Render therefore to all their dues; tribute to whom tribute,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Owe (or ye
owe) no man anything, but to love one another."
He still keeps upon the same line, bidding them pay them not money only,
but honor and fear. And how is it when he said above, "Will you not be afraid of
the power? Do that which is good;" that he here says "render fear?" He does it
meaning exceeding honor, and not the fear which comes from a bad conscience,
which he alluded to before. And it is not "give," that he says, but "render" (or
"give back," [ἀ] [πόδοτε]), and then adds to it, the "dues." For it is not a favor
that you confer by so doing, since the thing is matter of due. And if you do it not,

you will be punished as obstinate. Do not suppose that you are lowering
yourself, and detracting from the dignity of your own philosophy, if you rise up
at the presence of a ruler, or if you uncover your head. For if he laid these laws
down at that time, when the rulers were Gentiles, much more ought this to be
done with them now they are believers. But if you mean to say, that you are
entrusted with greater privileges, be informed that this is not your time. For you
are a stranger and a sojourner. A time will be when you shall appear brighter
than all. Now your "life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ shall appear,
then shall you also appear with Him in glory" [Colossians 3:3-4] Seek not then
in this life of accidents your change, but even if you have to be with fear in a
ruler's presence, do not think that this is unworthy your noble birth. For so God
wills, that the ruler who has his place marked by Him, should have his own
power. And when he who is conscious of no evil in himself, stands with fear in
the judge's presence, much more will he who does evil things be affrighted, and
thou in this way will be the more respected. For it is not from honoring that the
lowering of self comes but from dishonoring him. And the ruler will treat you
with greater respect, and he will glorify your Master owing to this, even if he be
an unbeliever. "Owe no man anything, but to love one another." Again he has
recourse to the mother of good deeds, and the instructress of the things spoken
of, who is also productive of every virtue, and says that this is a debt also, not
however such as the tribute or the custom, but a continuous one. For he does not
wish it ever to be paid off, or rather he would have it always rendered, yet never
fully so, but to be always owing. For this is the character of the debt, that one
keeps giving and owing always. Having said then how he ought to love, he also
shows the gain of it, saying,
"For he that loves another has fulfilled the Law."
And do not, pray, consider even this a favor; for this too is a debt. For you
owe love to your brother, through your spiritual relationship. And not for this
only, but also because "we are members one of another." And if love leave us,
the whole body is rent in pieces. Love therefore your brother. For if from his