FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.9.

insensibility is hatred of the same. Therefore these sins not only
differ specifically, but are contrary to one another.
Reply to Objection 1: Although "more" and "less" do not cause
diversity of species, yet they are sometimes consequent to specific
difference, in so far as they are the result of diversity of form; thus
we may say that fire is lighter than air. Hence the Philosopher says
(Ethic. viii, 1) that "those who held that there are no different species
of friendship, by reason of its admitting of degree, were led by
insufficient proof." In this way to exceed reason or to fall short
thereof belongs to sins specifically different, in so far as they result
from different motives.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not the sinner's intention to depart from
reason; and so sins of excess and deficiency do not become of one
kind through departing from the one rectitude of reason. On the
other hand, sometimes he who utters a falsehood, intends to hide
the truth, wherefore in this respect, it matters not whether he tells
more or less. If, however, departure from the truth be not outside the
intention, it is evident that then one is moved by different causes to
tell more or less; and in this respect there are different kinds of
falsehood, as is evident of the "boaster," who exceeds in telling
untruths for the sake of fame, and the "cheat," who tells less than
the truth, in order to escape from paying his debts. This also
explains how some false opinions are contrary to one another.
Reply to Objection 3: One may be prodigal and illiberal with regard to
different objects: for instance one may be illiberal [SS, Question 119,
Article 1, ad 1] in taking what one ought not: and nothing hinders
contraries from being in the same subject, in different respects.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.72, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether sins differ specifically in respect of

different circumstances?
Objection 1: It would seem that vices and sins differ in respect of
different circumstances. For, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv), "evil
results from each single defect." Now individual defects are
corruptions of individual circumstances. Therefore from the
corruption of each circumstance there results a corresponding
species of sin.
Objection 2: Further, sins are human acts. But human acts
sometimes take their species from circumstances, as stated above
(Question 18, Article 10). Therefore sins differ specifically according
as different circumstances are corrupted.
Objection 3: Further, diverse species are assigned to gluttony,
according to the words contained in the following verse:
'Hastily, sumptuously, too much, greedily, daintily.' Now these
pertain to various circumstances, for "hastily" means sooner than is
right; "too much," more than is right, and so on with the others.
Therefore the species of sin is diversified according to the various
circumstances.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 7; iv, 1) that "every
vice sins by doing more than one ought, and when one ought not";
and in like manner as to the other circumstances. Therefore the
species of sins are not diversified in this respect.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 8), wherever there is a special
motive for sinning, there is a different species of sin, because the
motive for sinning is the end and object of sin. Now it happens
sometimes that although different circumstances are corrupted,
there is but one motive: thus the illiberal man, for the same motive,
takes when he ought not, where he ought not, and more than he
ought, and so on with the circumstances, since he does this through
an inordinate desire of hoarding money: and in such cases the
corruption of different circumstances does not diversify the species
of sins, but belongs to one and the same species.
Sometimes, however, the corruption of different circumstances