Rom. ix. 25.

with all manner of evil, preaching that repentance which should call them back from their evil
doings, said, "O generation of vipers, who hath shown you to flee from the wrath to come? Bring
forth therefore fruit meet for repentance. And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham
[to our] father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto
Abraham." He preached to them, therefore, the repentance from wickedness, but he did not
declare to them another God, besides Him who made the promise to Abraham; he, the forerunner
of Christ, of whom Matthew again says, and Luke likewise, "For this is he that was spoken of from
the Lord by the prophet, The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make straight the paths of our God. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill brought
low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough into smooth ways; and all flesh shall
see the salvation of God." There is therefore one and the same God, the Father of our Lord, who
also promised, through the prophets, that He would send His forerunner; and His salvation—that
is, His Word —He caused to be made visible to all flesh, [the Word] Himself being made incarnate,
that in all things their King might become manifest. For it is necessary that those [beings] which
are judged do see the judge, and know Him from whom they receive judgment; and it is also proper,
that those which follow on to glory should know Him who bestows upon them the gift of glory.
2. Then again Matthew, when speaking of the angel, says, "The angel of the Lord appeared to
Joseph in sleep." Of what Lord he does himself interpret: "That it may be fulfilled which was
spoken of the Lord by the prophet, Out of Egypt have I called my son." "Behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel; which is, being
interpreted, God with us." David likewise speaks of Him who, from the virgin, is Emmanuel:
"Turn not away the face of Thine anointed. The Lord hath sworn a truth to David, and will not turn
from him. Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy seat." And again: "In Judea is God known;
His place has been made in peace, and His dwelling in Zion." Therefore there is one and the
same God, who was proclaimed by the prophets and announced by the Gospel; and His Son, who
was of the fruit of David's body, that is, of the virgin of [the house of] David, and Emmanuel;
whose star also Balaam thus prophesied: "There shall come a star out of Jacob, and a leader shall
rise in Israel." But Matthew says that the Magi, coming from the east, exclaimed "For we have
Matt. iii. 3.

Ps. cxxxii. 11.

seen His star in the east, and are come to worship Him;" and that, having been led by the star
into the house of Jacob to Emmanuel, they showed, by these gifts which they offered, who it was
that was worshipped; myrrh, because it was He who should die and be buried for the mortal human
race; gold, because He was a King, "of whose kingdom is no end;" and frankincense, because
He was God, who also "was made known in Judea," and was "declared to those who sought
Him not."
3. And then, [speaking of His] baptism, Matthew says, "The heavens were opened, and He saw
the Spirit of God, as a dove, coming upon Him: and lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." For Christ did not at that time descend upon Jesus,
neither was Christ one and Jesus another: but the Word of God—who is the Saviour of all, and the
ruler of heaven and earth, who is Jesus, as I have already pointed out, who did also take upon Him
flesh, and was anointed by the Spirit from the Father—was made Jesus Christ, as Esaias also says,
"There shall come forth a rod from the root of Jesse, and a flower shall rise from his root; and the
Spirit of God shall rest upon Him: the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
might, the spirit of knowledge and piety, and the spirit of the fear of God, shall fill Him. He shall
not judge according to glory, nor reprove after the manner of speech; but He shall dispense
judgment to the humble man, and reprove the haughty ones of the earth." And again Esaias,
pointing out beforehand His unction, and the reason why he was anointed, does himself say, "The
Spirit of God is upon Me, because He hath anointed Me: He hath sent Me to preach the Gospel to
the lowly, to heal the broken up in heart, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and sight to the blind;
to announce the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance; to comfort all that mourn."
For inasmuch as the Word of God was man from the root of Jesse, and son of Abraham, in this
respect did the Spirit of God rest upon Him, and anoint Him to preach the Gospel to the lowly. But
inasmuch as He was God, He did not judge according to glory, nor reprove after the manner of
speech. For "He needed not that any should testify to Him of man, for He Himself knew what