Therefore I say, are we weak and easy to be overcome both by men, and by
the devil, because we seek the opposite to this, and lock not our shields one with
another, neither are fortified with godly love, but seek for ourselves other
motives of friendship, some from relationship, some from long acquaintance,
some from community of interest, some from neighborhood; and from every
cause rather are we friends, than from godliness, when one's friendships ought to
be formed upon this only. But now the contrary is done; with Jews and with
Greeks we sometimes become friends, rather than with the children of the
church.
6. Yes, says he, because the one is worthless, but the other kind and gentle.
What do you say? Do you call your brother worthless, who art commanded not
to call him so much as Raca? And are you not ashamed, neither do you blush, at
exposing your brother, your fellow member, him that has shared in the same
birth with you, that has partaken of the same table?
But if you have any brother after the flesh, if he should perpetrate ten
thousand evil deeds, you labor to conceal him, and accountest yourself also to
partake of the shame, when he is disgraced; but as to your spiritual brother, when
you ought to free him from calumny, thou dost rather encompass him with ten
thousand charges against him?
"Why he is worthless and insufferable," you may say. Nay then for this
reason become his friend, that you may put an end to his being such a one, that
you may convert him, that you may lead him back to virtue.— "But he obeys
not," you will say, "neither does he bear advice."— Whence do you know it?
What, have you admonished him, and attempted to amend him?— "I have
admonished him often," you will say. How many times?— Oftentimes, both
once, and a second time.— Oh! Is this often? Why, if you had done this
throughout all the time, ought thou to grow weary, and to give it up? Do you see
not how God is always admonishing us, by the prophets, by the apostles, by the
evangelists? What then? Have we performed all? And have we been obedient in
all things? By no means. Did He then cease admonishing? Did He hold His

peace? Does He not say each day, "You cannot serve God, and mammon"
[Matthew 6:24] and with many, the superfluity and the tyranny of wealth yet
increases? Does He not cry aloud each day, "Forgive, and you shall have
forgiveness," [Luke 6:37] and we become wild beasts more and more? Does He
not continually admonish to restrain desire, and to keep the mastery over wicked
lust, and many wallow worse than swine in this sin? But nevertheless, He ceases
not speaking.
Wherefore then do we not consider these things with ourselves, and say that
even with us God reasons, and abstains not from doing this, although we disobey
Him in many things?
Therefore He said that, "Few are the saved." For if virtue in ourselves
suffices not for our salvation, but we must take with us others too when we
depart; when we have saved neither ourselves, nor others, what shall we suffer?
Whence shall we have any more a hope of salvation?
But why do I blame for these things, when not even of them that dwell with
us do we take any account, of wife, and children, and servants, but we have care
of one thing instead of another, like drunken men, that our servants may be more
in number, and may serve us with much diligence, and that our children may
receive from us a large inheritance, and that our wife may have ornaments of
gold, and costly garments, and wealth; and we care not at all for themselves, but
for the things that belong to them. For neither do we care for our own wife, nor
provide for her, but for the things that belong to the wife; neither for the child,
but for the things of the child.
And we do the same as if any one seeing a house in a bad state, and the
walls giving way, were to neglect to raise up these, and to make up great fences
round it without; or when a body was diseased, were not to take care of this, but
were to weave for it gilded garments; or when the mistress was ill, were to give
heed to the maidservants, and the looms, and the vessels in the house, and mind
other things, leaving her to lie and moan.
For this is done even now, and when our soul is in evil and wretched case,