THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.8.

thereof. Consequently, then, the adding of water is not essential to
the sacrament.
Reply to Objection 1: Cyprian's expression is to be taken in the same
sense in which we say that a thing cannot be, which cannot be
suitably. And so the comparison refers to what ought to be done, not
to what is essential to be done; since water is of the essence of
bread, but not of the essence of wine.
Reply to Objection 2: The shedding of the blood belonged directly to
Christ's Passion: for it is natural for blood to flow from a wounded
human body. But the flowing of the water was not necessary for the
Passion; but merely to show its effect, which is to wash away sins,
and to refresh us from the heat of concupiscence. And therefore the
water is not offered apart from the wine in this sacrament, as the
wine is offered apart from the bread; but the water is offered mixed
with the wine to show that the wine belongs of itself to this
sacrament, as of its very essence; but the water as something added
to the wine.
Reply to Objection 3: Since the mixing of water with the wine is not
necessary for the sacrament, it does not matter, as to the essence of
the sacrament, what kind of water is added to the wine, whether
natural water, or artificial, as rose-water, although, as to the
propriety of the sacrament, he would sin who mixes any other than
natural and true water, because true water flowed from the side of
Christ hanging on the cross, and not phlegm, as some have said, in
order to show that Christ's body was truly composed of the four
elements; as by the flowing blood, it was shown to be composed of
the four humors, as Pope Innocent III says in a certain Decree. But
because the mixing of water with flour is essential to this sacrament,
as making the composition of bread, if rose-water, or any other
liquor besides true water, be mixed with the flour, the sacrament
would not be valid, because it would not be true bread.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.74, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether water should be added in great quantity?

Objection 1: It seems that water ought to be added in great quantity,
because as blood flowed sensibly from Christ's side, so did water:
hence it is written (Jn. 19:35): "He that saw it, hath given testimony."
But water could not be sensibly present in this sacrament except it
were used in great quantity. Consequently it seems that water ought
to be added in great quantity.
Objection 2: Further, a little water mixed with much wine is
corrupted. But what is corrupted no longer exists. Therefore, it is the
same thing to add a little water in this sacrament as to add none. But
it is not lawful to add none. Therefore, neither is it lawful to add a
little.
Objection 3: Further, if it sufficed to add a little, then as a
consequence it would suffice to throw one drop of water into an
entire cask. But this seems ridiculous. Therefore it does not suffice
for a small quantity to be added.
On the contrary, It is said in the Decretals (Extra, De Celeb. Miss.):
"The pernicious abuse has prevailed in your country of adding water
in greater quantity than the wine, in the sacrifice, where according to
the reasonable custom of the entire Church more wine than water
ought to be employed."
I answer that, There is a threefold opinion regarding the water added
to the wine, as Pope Innocent III says in a certain Decretal. For some
say that the water remains by itself when the wine is changed into
blood: but such an opinion cannot stand, because in the sacrament
of the altar after the consecration there is nothing else save the body
and the blood of Christ. Because, as Ambrose says in De Officiis (De
Mysteriis ix): "Before the blessing it is another species that is
named, after the blessing the Body is signified; otherwise it would
not be adored with adoration of latria." And therefore others have
said that as the wine is changed into blood, so the water is changed
into the water which flowed from Christ's side. But this cannot be
maintained reasonably, because according to this the water would
be consecrated apart from the wine, as the wine is from the bread.
And therefore as he (Innocent III, Decretals, Extra, De Celeb. Miss.)