Or, "all those who were in the way of David"—omnes qui erant in vi‰ David, in dolore animæ cognoverunt suum regem.

service; whereas to scoffers, and to those not subject to God, but who follow outward purifications
for the praise of men (which observances had been given as a type of future things,—the law
typifying, as it were, certain things in a shadow, and delineating eternal things by temporal, celestial
by terrestrial), and to those who pretend that they do themselves observe more than what has been
prescribed, as if preferring their own zeal to God Himself, while within they are full of hypocrisy,
and covetousness, and all wickedness,— [to such] has He assigned everlasting perdition by cutting
them off from life.

### Chapter XII.—It clearly appears that there was but one author of both the old and the new
law, from the fact that Christ condemned traditions and customs repugnant to the former,
while He confirmed its most important precepts, and taught that He was Himself the end of
the Mosaic law.
1. For the tradition of the elders themselves, which they pretended to observe from the law,
was contrary to the law given by Moses. Wherefore also Esaias declares: "Thy dealers mix the
wine with water," showing that the elders were in the habit of mingling a watered tradition with
the simple command of God; that is, they set up a spurious law, and one contrary to the [true] law;
as also the Lord made plain, when He said to them, "Why do ye transgress the commandment of
God, for the sake of your tradition?" For not only by actual transgression did they set the law of
God at nought, mingling the wine with water; but they also set up their own law in opposition to
it, which is termed, even to the present day, the pharisaical. In this [law] they suppress certain
things, add others, and interpret others, again, as they think proper, which their teachers use, each
one in particular; and desiring to uphold these traditions, they were unwilling to be subject to the
law of God, which prepares them for the coming of Christ. But they did even blame the Lord for
healing on the Sabbath-days, which, as I have already observed, the law did not prohibit. For they
did themselves, in one sense, perform acts of healing upon the Sabbath-day, when they circumcised
a man [on that day]; but they did not blame themselves for transgressing the command of God
through tradition and the aforesaid pharisaical law, and for not keeping the commandment of the
law, which is the love of God.
2. But that this is the first and greatest commandment, and that the next [has respect to love]
towards our neighbour, the Lord has taught, when He says that the entire law and the prophets hang
upon these two commandments. Moreover, He did not Himself bring down [from heaven] any
other commandment greater than this one, but renewed this very same one to His disciples, when
He enjoined them to love God with all their heart, and others as themselves. But if He had descended
from another Father, He never would have made use of the first and greatest commandment of the