money the cause of evils. O that heathen cruelty! They wished the girl to be still
a demoniac, that they might make money by her. "They caught Paul and Silas,"
it says, "and dragged them into the marketplace unto the rulers, and brought
them unto the magistrates, saying, These men, being Jews, do exceedingly
trouble our city!" [Acts 16:20]: by doing what? Then why did you not drag them
(hither) before this? "Being Jews:" the name was in bad odor. "And teach
customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being
Romans." [Acts 16:21] They made a charge of treason of it ([εἰς καθοσίωσιν
ἤγαγον]). (e) Why did they not say, Because they cast out the demon, they were
guilty of impiety against God? For this was a defeat to them: but instead of that,
they have recourse to a charge of treason ([ἐ] [πὶ καθοσίωσιν]): like the Jews
when they said, "We have no king but Cæsar: whoso makes himself a king
speaks against Cæsar." [John 19:14] (c) "And the multitude rose up together
against them: and the magistrates rent off their clothes, and commanded to beat
them." [Acts 16:22] O the irrational conduct! They did not examine, did not
allow them to speak. And yet, such a miracle having taken place, you ought to
have worshipped them, ought to have held them as saviors and benefactors. For
if money was what ye wished, why, having found so great wealth, did ye not run
to it? This makes you more famous, the having power to cast out demons than
the obeying them. Lo, even miracles, and yet love of money was mightier. (f)
"And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison."—
great was their wrath— "charging the jailer to keep them safely" [Acts 16:23]:
"who, having received such a charge, thrust them into the inner prison, and
made their feet fast in the stocks." [Acts 16:24] Observe, he also again thrust
them into the "inner" prison: and this too was done providentially, because there
was to be a great miracle.
(Recapitulation.) "Out of the city." [Acts 16:13] The place was convenient
for hearing the word, aloof from troubles and dangers. (b) "On the sabbath." As
there was no work going on, they were more attentive to what was spoken. (a)
"And a certain woman, named Lydia, a seller of purple" [Acts 16:14]: observe

how the writer of the history is not ashamed of the occupations (of the converts):
(c) moreover neither was this city of the Philippians a great one. Having learned
these things, let us also be ashamed of no man. Peter abides with a tanner [Acts
9:43]: (Paul) with a woman who was a seller of purple, and a foreigner. Where is
pride? "Whose heart the Lord opened." Therefore we need God, to open the
heart: but God opens the hearts that are willing: for there are hardened hearts to
be seen. "So that she attended to the things which were spoken of Paul." The
opening, then, was God's work, the attending was hers: so that it was both God's
doing and man's. And she was baptized [Acts 16:15], and receives the Apostles
with such earnestness of entreaty; with more than that used by Abraham. And
she speaks of no other token than that whereby she was saved [Genesis 18:3]:
she says not, "If you have judged me" a great, a devout woman; but what?
"faithful to the Lord:" if to the Lord, much more to you. "If you have judged
me:" if you do not doubt it. And she says not, Abide with me, but, "Come into
my house and abide:" with great earnestness (she says it). Indeed a faithful
woman!— "A certain damsel possessed with a spirit of Python." [Acts 16:16]
Say, what is this demon? The god, as they call him, Python: from the place he is
so called. Do you mark that Apollo also is a demon? And (the demon) wished to
bring them into temptation: (therefore) to provoke them, "the same followed
Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God,
which show unto us the way of salvation." [Acts 16:17] O thou accursed, thou
execrable one! If then you know that it is "His way of salvation" that "they
show," why do you not come out freely? But just what Simon wished, when he
said, "Give me, that on whomsoever I lay my hands, he may receive the Holy
Ghost" [Acts 8:19], the same did this demon: since he saw them becoming
famous, here also he plays the hypocrite: by this means he thought to be allowed
to remain in the body, if he should preach the same things. But if Christ "receive
not testimony from man," [John 5:34], meaning John, much less from a demon.
"Praise is not comely in the mouth of a sinner" [Sirach 15:9], much less from a
demon. For that they preach is not of men, but of the Holy Ghost. Because they