SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.5.

there is not the just simply, but a kind of just, called "paternal." In
like manner neither is there the just simply, between master and
servant, but that which is called "dominative." A wife, though she is
something belonging to the husband, since she stands related to
him as to her own body, as the Apostle declares (Eph. 5:28), is
nevertheless more distinct from her husband, than a son from his
father, or a slave from his master: for she is received into a kind of
social life, that of matrimony, wherefore according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. v, 6) there is more scope for justice between
husband and wife than between father and son, or master and slave,
because, as husband and wife have an immediate relation to the
community of the household, as stated in Polit. i, 2,5, it follows that
between them there is "domestic justice" rather than "civic."
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to justice to render to each one his
right, the distinction between individuals being presupposed: for if a
man gives himself his due, this is not strictly called "just." And since
what belongs to the son is his father's, and what belongs to the slave
is his master's, it follows that properly speaking there is not justice
of father to son, or of master to slave.
Reply to Objection 2: A son, as such, belongs to his father, and a
slave, as such, belongs to his master; yet each, considered as a
man, is something having separate existence and distinct from
others. Hence in so far as each of them is a man, there is justice
towards them in a way: and for this reason too there are certain laws
regulating the relations of father to his son, and of a master to his
slave; but in so far as each is something belonging to another, the
perfect idea of "right" or "just" is wanting to them.
Reply to Objection 3: All other differences between one person and
another in a state, have an immediate relation to the community of
the state and to its ruler, wherefore there is just towards them in the
perfect sense of justice. This "just" however is distinguished
according to various offices, hence when we speak of "military," or
"magisterial," or "priestly" right, it is not as though such rights fell
short of the simply right, as when we speak of "paternal" right, or
right of "dominion," but for the reason that something proper is due
to each class of person in respect of his particular office.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.56, C.5.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.57, C.1.

## QUESTION 58 — OF JUSTICE

Prologue
We must now consider justice. Under this head there are twelve
points of inquiry:
(1) What is justice?
(2) Whether justice is always towards another?
(3) Whether it is a virtue?
(4) Whether it is in the will as its subject?
(5) Whether it is a general virtue?
(6) Whether, as a general virtue, it is essentially the same as every
virtue?
(7) Whether there is a particular justice?
(8) Whether particular justice has a matter of its own?
(9) Whether it is about passions, or about operations only?
(10) Whether the mean of justice is the real mean?
(11) Whether the act of justice is to render to everyone his own?
(12) Whether justice is the chief of the moral virtues?