be imperfect, cannot be absolutely primal; but must be preceded by
something perfect. For seed, though it be the principle of animal life
reproduced through seed, has previous to it, the animal or plant from
which is came. Because, previous to that which is potential, must be
that which is actual; since a potential being can only be reduced into
act by some being already actual.
Reply to Objection 3: Existence is the most perfect of all things, for it
is compared to all things as that by which they are made actual; for
nothing has actuality except so far as it exists. Hence existence is
that which actuates all things, even their forms. Therefore it is not
compared to other things as the receiver is to the received; but
rather as the received to the receiver. When therefore I speak of the
existence of man, or horse, or anything else, existence is considered
a formal principle, and as something received; and not as that which
exists.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the perfections of all things are in God?

Objection 1: It seems that the perfections of all things are not in God.
For God is simple, as shown above (Question 3, Article 7); whereas
the perfections of things are many and diverse. Therefore the
perfections of all things are not in God.
Objection 2: Further, opposites cannot coexist. Now the perfections
of things are opposed to each other, for each thing is perfected by
its specific difference. But the differences by which "genera" are
divided, and "species" constituted, are opposed to each other.
Therefore because opposites cannot coexist in the same subject, it
seems that the perfections of all things are not in God.
Objection 3: Further, a living thing is more perfect than what merely
exists; and an intelligent thing than what merely lives. Therefore life
is more perfect than existence; and knowledge than life. But the
essence of God is existence itself. Therefore He has not the
perfections of life, and knowledge, and other similar perfections.
On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. v) that "God in His one
existence prepossesses all things."
I answer that, All created perfections are in God. Hence He is spoken
of as universally perfect, because He lacks not (says the
Commentator, Metaph. v) any excellence which may be found in any
genus. This may be seen from two considerations. First, because
whatever perfection exists in an effect must be found in the effective
cause: either in the same formality, if it is a univocal agent---as when
man reproduces man; or in a more eminent degree, if it is an
equivocal agent---thus in the sun is the likeness of whatever is
generated by the sun's power. Now it is plain that the effect preexists virtually in the efficient cause: and although to pre-exist in the
potentiality of a material cause is to pre-exist in a more imperfect
way, since matter as such is imperfect, and an agent as such is
perfect; still to pre-exist virtually in the efficient cause is to pre-exist
not in a more imperfect, but in a more perfect way. Since therefore
God is the first effective cause of things, the perfections of all things
must pre-exist in God in a more eminent way. Dionysius implies the
same line of argument by saying of God (Div. Nom. v): "It is not that
He is this and not that, but that He is all, as the cause of all."