Moved by charity, therefore, Mary goes to the house of her kinswoman. When Mary
enters, Elizabeth replies to her greeting and feels the child leap in her womb, and being
"filled with the Holy Spirit" she greets Mary with a loud cry: "Blessed are you among
women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb!" (cf. Lk. 1:40-42) Elizabeth's exclamation
or acclamation was subsequently to become part of the Hail Mary, as a continuation of
the angel's greeting, thus becoming one of the Church's most frequently used prayers. But
still more significant are the words of Elizabeth in the question which follows: "And why
is this granted me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?" (Lk. 1:43) Elizabeth
bears witness to Mary: she recognizes and proclaims that before her stands the Mother of
the Lord, the Mother of the Messiah. The son whom Elizabeth is carrying in her womb
also shares in this witness: "The babe in my womb leaped for joy" (Lk. 1:44). This child
is the future John the Baptist, who at the Jordan will point out Jesus as the Messiah.

While every word of Elizabeth's greeting is filled with meaning, her final words would
seem to have fundamental importance: "And blessed is she who believed that there would
be a fulfillment of what was spoken to her from the Lord" (Lk. 1:45). These words can
be linked with the little "full of grace" of the angel's greeting. Both of these texts reveal
an essential Mariological content, namely the truth about Mary, who has become really
present in the mystery of Christ precisely because she "has believed." The fullness of

grace announced by the angel means the gift of God himself. Mary's faith, proclaimed by
Elizabeth at the Visitation, indicates how the Virgin of Nazareth responded to this gift.

13. As the Council teaches, "'The obedience of faith' (Rom. 16:26; cf. Rom. 1:5; 2 Cor.
10:5-6) must be given to God who reveals, an obedience by which man entrusts his whole
self freely to God." This description of faith found perfect realization in Mary. The
"decisive" moment was the Annunciation, and the very words of Elizabeth: "And blessed
is she who believed" refer primarily to that very moment.

Indeed, at the Annunciation Mary entrusted herself to God completely, with the "full
submission of intellect and will," manifesting "the obedience of faith" to him who spoke
to her through his messenger. She responded, therefore, with all her human and
feminine "I," and this response of faith included both perfect cooperation with "the grace
of God that precedes and assists" and perfect openness to the action of the Holy Spirit,
who "constantly brings faith to completion by his gifts."

The word of the living God, announced to Mary by the angel, referred to her: "And
behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son" (Lk. 1:31). By accepting this
announcement, Mary was to become the "Mother of the Lord," and the divine mystery of
the Incarnation was to be accomplished in her: "The Father of mercies willed that the
consent of the predestined Mother should precede the Incarnation." And Mary gives
this consent, after she has heard everything the messenger has to say. She says: "Behold,
I am the handmaid of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word" (Lk. 1:38). This
fiat of Mary-"let it be to me"-was decisive, on the human level, for the accomplishment
of the divine mystery. There is a complete harmony with the words of the Son, who,
according to the Letter to the Hebrews, says to the Father as he comes into the world:
"Sacrifices and offering you have not desired, but a body you have prepared for me.... Lo,
I have come to do your will, O God" (Heb. 10:5-7). The mystery of the Incarnation was
accomplished when Mary uttered her fiat: "Let it be to me according to your word,"
which made possible, as far as it depended upon her in the divine plan, the granting of her
Son's desire.