induce women to engage in a second marriage. Some there are who do not
choose to unite themselves to men by the law of marriage, but do so secretly and
clandestinely. And they act thus in order to enjoy the praise of widowhood; thus
it is a state which seems to be not reproached, but admired and deemed worthy
of honour among men, not only among us who believe, but even among
unbelievers also. For once when I was still a young man I know that the sophist
who taught me (and he exceeded all men in his reverence for the gods) expressed
admiration for my mother before a large company. For enquiring, as was his
wont, of those who sat beside him who I was, and some one having said that I
was the son of a woman who was a widow, he asked of me the age of my mother
and the duration of her widowhood, and when I told him that she was forty years
of age of which twenty had elapsed since she lost my father he was astonished
and uttered a loud exclamation, and turning to those present "Heavens!" cried he
"what women there are among the Christians." So great is the admiration and
praise enjoyed by widowhood not only among ourselves, but also a among those
who are outside the Church. And being aware of all this the blessed Paul said
"Let not a widow be enrolled under threescore years of age." And even after this
great qualification of age he does not permit her to be ranked in this sacred
society but mentions some additional requisites "well reported of for good
works, if she have brought up children if she have lodged strangers if she have
washed the saints feet if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently
followed every good work." [1 Timothy 5:10] Heavens! What testing and
scrutiny! How much virtue does he demand from the widow, and how precisely
does he define it! Which he would not have done, had he not intended to entrust
to her a position of honour and dignity. And "the younger widows" he says
"refuse;" and then he adds the reason: "for when they have waxed wanton
against Christ they will marry." [1 Timothy 5:11] By this expression he gives us
to understand that they who have lost their husbands are wedded to Christ in
their stead. Observe how he asserts this by way of indicating the mild and easy
nature of this union; I refer to the passage "when they have waxed wanton

against Christ they will marry," as if He were some gentle husband who did not
exercise authority over them, but suffered them to live in freedom. Neither did
Paul confine his discourse on the subject to these remarks, but also in another
place again he has manifested great anxiety about it where he says "Now she
who lives in pleasure is dead while she lives; but she who is a widow indeed and
desolate has set her hope in God, and continues in prayers and supplications
day and night." [1 Timothy 5:6, 5] And writing to the Corinthians he says "But
she is more blessed if she abide thus." [1 Corinthians 7:40] You see what great
praise is bestowed upon widowhood, and this in the New Testament, when the
beauty of virginity also was clearly brought to light. Nevertheless even the lustre
of this state could not obscure the glories of widowhood, which shines on
brightly all the same, keeping its own value. When then we make mention of
widowhood from time to time, do not be cast down, nor consider the matter a
reproach; for if this be a matter of reproach, far more so is virginity. But this is
not the case; no! God forbid. For inasmuch as we all admire and welcome
women who live continently while their husbands are yet alive must we not be
delighted with those who manifest the same good feeling concerning their
husbands when they have departed this, life, and praise them accordingly? As I
was saying then, as long as you lived with the blessed Therasius you enjoyed
honour and consideration such as is natural for a wife to receive from a husband;
but now in his place you have God who is the Lord of all, who has of old been
your protector and will be so now still more and with yet greater earnestness;
and as I have already said He has displayed no slight token of his providential
care by having preserved you whole and unharmed in the midst of such a furnace
of anxiety and sorrow, and not suffering you to undergo anything undesirable.
Now if He has not permitted any shipwreck to take place in the midst of so much
rough water, much more will He preserve your soul in calm weather and lighten
the burden of your widowhood, and the consequences of it which seem to be so
terrible.
3. Now if it is not the name of widow which distresses you, but the loss of