name: or rather, though I should mention the name, not even so need there be
any fear: for who ever fears a dead man? Seeing that whatever one may do, he
continues dead, and the dead cannot injure the living either little or much.
Let us then behold their head bound up. For indeed, when they are for ever
drunken, even as the dead by their many wrappers and grave-clothes, so are all
their organs of sense closed and bound up. And if you will look at their hands
too, you shall see these again bound to their belly, like those of the dead, and
fastened about not with grave-clothes, but what is far more grievous, with the
bands of covetousness: obtaining as they do no leave from her to be stretched out
for almsgiving, or for any other of such like good deeds; rather she renders them
more useless than those of the dead. Would you also see their feet bound
together? See them again fastened about with cares, and for this cause never able
to run unto the house of God.
Have you seen the dead? Behold also the embalmer. Who then is the
embalmer of these? The devil, who carefully fastens them about, and suffers not
the man any longer to appear a man, but a dry stock. For where there is no eye,
nor hands, nor feet, nor any other such thing, how can such an one appear a
man? Even so may we see their soul also swaddled up, and rather an image than
a soul.
Forasmuch then as they are in a sort of senseless state, being turned to dead
men, let us in their behalf draw near unto Jesus, let us entreat Him to raise them
up, let us take away the stone, let us loosen the grave clothes. For if you take
away the stone, that is, their insensibility to their own miseries, you will quickly
be able to bring them also out of the tomb; and having brought them out, you
will more easily rid them of their bonds. Then shall Christ know you, when you
are risen, when unbound; then will He call you even unto His own supper. As
many therefore of you as are friends of Christ, as many as are disciples, as many
as love him that is gone, draw near unto Jesus, and pray. For even though his ill
savor abound and be ever so intense, nevertheless not even so should we, his
friends, forsake him, but so much the rather draw near; even as the sisters of

Lazarus then did; neither should we leave interceding, beseeching, entreating,
until we have received him alive.
For if we thus order our own affairs, and those of our neighbors, we shall
also attain speedily unto the life to come; unto which may we all attain, by the
grace and love to man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and
ever. Amen.

## Homily 28 on Matthew

Matthew 8:23-24.
"And when He was entered into a ship, His disciples followed Him. And,
behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was
covered with the waves, but He was asleep."
Now Luke, [Luke 8:22] to free himself from having the order of time
required of him, says thus, "And it came to pass on a certain day that He went
into a ship with His disciples;" and Mark in like manner. But this evangelist not
so, but he maintains the order in this place also. For they did not all of them
write all things in this way. And these things I have mentioned before, lest any
one from the omission should suppose there was a discordance.
The multitudes then He sent on, but the disciples He took with Himself: for
the others mention this too. And He took them with Him, not for nought, nor at
hazard, but in order to make them spectators of the miracle that was to take
place. For like a most excellent trainer, He was anointing them with a view to
both objects; as well to be undismayed in dangers, as to be modest in honors.
Thus, that they might not be high minded, because having sent away the rest, He
retained them, He suffers them to be tossed with the tempest; at once correcting
this, and disciplining them to bear trials nobly.
For great indeed were the former miracles too, but this contained also in it a
kind of discipline, and that no inconsiderable one, and was a sign akin to that of
old. For this cause He takes the disciples only with Himself. For as, when there
was a display of miracles, He suffers the people also to be present; so when trial
and terrors were rising up against Him, then He takes with Him none but the
champions of the whole world, whom He was to discipline.
And while Matthew merely mentioned that "He was asleep," Luke says that
it was "on a pillow;" signifying both His freedom from pride, and to teach us