Now, since the truth of the intellect results from its conformity with reality, it is clear that in this
second operation the intellect cannot truthfully abstract what is united in reality, because the
abstraction would signify a separation with regard to the very being of the thing. For example, if
I abstract man from whiteness by saying, "Man is not white," I signify that there is a separation
in reality. So if in reality man and whiteness are not separate, the intellect will be false. Through
this operation, then, the intellect can truthfully abstract only those things that are separate in
reality, as when we say, "Man is not an ass."

Through the first operation, however, we can abstract things that are not separate in reality; not
all, it is true, but some. For, since everything is intelligible insofar as it is in act, as the
Metaphysics says, we must understand the nature itself or the quiddity of a thing either inasmuch
as it is a certain act (as happens in the case of forms themselves and simple substances); or
through that which is its act (as we know composite substances through their forms); or through
that which takes the place of act in it (as we know prime matter through its relation to form, and a
vacuum through the absence of a body in place). And it is from this that each nature is given its
definition.

Therefore, when the nature itself is related to, and depends on something else, with regard to that
which forms the definition (ratio) of the nature, and through which the nature itself is
understood, clearly we cannot know the nature without that other thing. This is true whether they
are connected as a part is united to a whole (as we cannot know foot without knowing animal,
because that whereby foot has the nature of foot depends on that whereby animal is animal); or
whether they are connected as form is united to matter, or as one part to another part, or as
accident to subject (as we cannot know snub without nose); or even whether they are separated
in reality (as we cannot know father without knowing son, although these relationships are
found in different things). But if one thing does not depend on another with regard to that which
forms the definition of the nature, then the intellect can abstract the one from the other so as to
know it without the other. This is true not only if they are separated in reality, like man and
stone, but also if they are united in reality, whether they are joined as part and whole (as letter
can be understood without syllable, but not vice versa, and animal without foot, but not

conversely); or even if they are joined as form is united to matter and accident to subject (as
whiteness can be understood without man and vice versa).

Accordingly, through its various operations the intellect distinguishes one thing from another in
different ways. Through the operation by which it composes and divides, it distinguishes one
thing from another by understanding that the one does not exist in the other. Through the
operation, however, by which it understands what a thing is, it distinguishes one thing from
another by knowing what one is without knowing anything of the other, either that it is united to
it or separated from it. So this distinction is not properly called separation, but only the first. lt is
correctly called abstraction, but only when the objects, one of which is known without the other,
are one in reality. For if we consider animal without considering stone, we do not say that we
abstract animal from stone.