shows whence the sanctification was. Whence then was the sanctification? From
Love. For after saying, "beloved," then he proceeds, "called to be saints,"
showing that it is from this that the fount of all blessings is. But saints he calls all
the faithful. "Grace unto you and peace."
Oh address, that brings countless blessings to us! This also Christ bade the
Apostles to use as their first word when entering into houses. [Luke 10:5]
Wherefore it is from this that Paul also in all places takes his beginning, from
grace and peace; for it was no small war which Christ put an end to, but indeed
one varying and of every kind and of a long season ([τοικίλον καὶ ταντοδαπὸν]);
and this not from our labors, but through His grace. Since then love presented us
with grace, and grace with peace, having set them down in the due order of an
address, he prays over them that they may abide perpetual and unmoved, so that
no other war may again be blown into flame, and beseeches Him that gave, to
keep these things firmly settled, saying as follows, "Grace be unto you and
peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ." See in this passage, the
"from" is common to the Son and the Father, and this is equivalent to "of whom."
For he did not say, Grace be unto you and peace from God the Father, "through"
our Lord Jesus Christ; but, "from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ."
Strange! How mighty is the love of God! We which were enemies and disgraced,
have all at once become saints and sons. For when he calls Him Father, he shows
them to be sons; and when he says sons, he has unveiled the whole treasure of
blessings.
Let us then keep showing a conversation worthy of the gift, and hold on in
peace and holiness. For other dignities are but for a time, and are brought to an
end along with this life present, and may be bought with money (whence one
might say they are not dignities at all but names of dignities only, having their
strength in the investiture of fine array and the servility of attendants), but this as
having been given of God, the gift of sanctification and adoption, is not broken
through even by death, but even here makes men conspicuous, and also departs
with us upon our journey to the life to come. For he that holds on in the

adoption, and keeps an exact watch upon his holiness, is much brighter and more
happy even than he that is arrayed with the diadem itself, and has the purple; and
has the delight of abundant peace in the present life and is nurtured up with
goodly hopes, and has no ground for worry and disturbance, but enjoys constant
pleasure; for as for good spirits and joy, it is not greatness of power, not
abundance of wealth, not pomp of authority, not strength of body, not
sumptuousness of the table, not the adorning of dresses, nor any other of the
things in man's reach that ordinarily produces them, but spiritual success, and a
good conscience alone. And he that has this cleansed, even though he be clad in
rags and struggling with famine, is of better spirits than they that live so softly.
So too he that is conscious of wicked deeds, even though he may gather to
himself all men's goods, is the most wretched of all men. For this cause Paul,
living in continual hunger and nakedness, and being scourged every day was
joyful, and went more softly than they that were then emperors. But Ahab
though a king, and indulging in a sumptuous luxury, when he had done that one
sin, groaned and was out of spirits, and his countenance was fallen both before
the sin and after the sin. If then we wish to enjoy pleasure, above all things else
let us shun wickedness, and follow after virtue; since it is not in the nature of
things for one to have a share thereof on any other terms, even if we were
mounted upon the king's throne itself. Wherefore also Paul says, "But the fruit of
the Spirit is love, joy, peace." [Galatians 5:22] This fruit then let us keep growing
by us, that we may be in the fruition of joy here, and may obtain the kingdom to
come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, through
Whom and with Whom, be glory to the Father, and to the Holy Spirit, now and
always, even unto all ages. Amen.