habit, he has not only gained this point, but a habit of piety in other respects will
have been brought in. For no one, I suppose, averse to swearing would easily
consent to do any other wicked act; he will feel a reverence for the virtue already
acquired. Just as the man who wears a beautiful robe, will blush to roll himself
in the mire; so is it also here. From this beginning he will come to learn not to be
angry, not to strike, not to insult. For if once he has come right in little matters,
the whole affair is done. Often, however, something of this sort takes place, that
a person has once reformed, and then again through carelessness falls back into
the old sins but too readily, so that the case becomes irremediable. For instance,
we have made it a law to ourselves not to swear; we have got on well, for some
three, or even four days; after that being hard put to it, we scattered away the
whole of our collected gain; we then fall into indolence and recklessness. Still it
is not right to give over; one must set to work zealously again. For it is said, he
that has built up a house, and then sees his building pulled down, will have less
spirit for building again. Yes, but for all this, one must not be dispirited, but must
once more set to work zealously.
Let us then lay down daily laws for ourselves. For a time let us begin with
the easier. Let us retrench all that superfluity of paths, and put a bridle on our
tongues; let no one swear by God. Here is no outlay, here is no fatigue, here is no
cost of time. It is sufficient to will, and all is done. It is a matter of habit. I
beseech and entreat you, let us contribute thus much of zeal. Tell me, if I had bid
you contribute your money, would not each one of you readily cast in according
to his ability? If you saw me in extreme danger, would you not, if it had been
possible, have cut off your own flesh to give me? Well, I am in danger now, and
in great danger, such indeed that, were I withal confined to a dungeon, or had I
received ten thousand stripes, or were a convict in the mines, I could not suffer
more. Reach me then the hand. Consider how great is the danger, that I should
not have been able to reform this which is least: I say "least" in regard to the
labor required. What shall I have to say hereafter, when thus called to account?
"Why did you not remonstrate? Why did you not enjoin? Why did you not lay the

law before them? Why did you not check the disobedient?" It will not be enough
for me to say, that I did admonish. It will be answered, "You ought to have used
more vehement rebuke; since Eli also admonished." [1 Samuel 2:24] But God
forbid I should compare you with Eli's sons. Indeed, he did admonish them and
say, "Nay, my sons, do not so; evil is the report that I hear of you." [1 Samuel
3:13] But subsequently the Scripture says, that he did not admonish his sons:
since he did not admonish them severely, or with threats. For is it not strange
indeed, that in the synagogues of the Jews the laws are in such force, and
whatever the teacher enjoins is performed; while here we are thus despised and
rejected? It is not my own glory that I care for (my glory is your good report),
but it is for your salvation. Every day we lift up our voice, and shout in your
ears. But there is none to hear. Still we take no strong measures. I fear we shall
have to give an account at the coming Day of this excessive and unseasonable
leniency.
Wherefore, with a loud and clear voice, I proclaim to all and testify, that
those who are notorious for this transgression, who utter words which come "of
the evil one," [Matthew 5:37] (for such is swearing,) shall not step over the
threshold of the Church. Let this present month be the time allowed you for
reforming in this matter. Talk not to me, "Necessity of business compels me to
use oaths, else people do not believe me." To begin with this, retrench those
oaths which come merely of habit. I know many will laugh, but it is better to be
laughed at now, than wept for hereafter. They will laugh, who are mad. For who,
I ask, in his right mind would laugh at the keeping of the commandment? But
suppose they do; why, it will not be at us, but at Christ, that such men will laugh.
You shudder at the word! I knew you would. Now if this law were of my
making, at me would be the laughing; but if Another be the Lawgiver, the jeering
passes over to Him. Yes, and Christ was once spit upon, and smitten with the
palm, smitten upon the face. Now also He bears with this, and it is no wonder
([οὐδὲν ἀπεικὸς])! For this, hell is prepared; for this, the worm that dies not.
Behold, again I say and testify; let him laugh that will, let him scoff that lists.