did he not desire to put us to shame by that means, but with a strange name? Yea
because he knew clearly, that to be called by what belongs to Christ, is a great
ornament not only to men, but to angels, and to the powers above. On this
account he set everything in motion, so as to strip us of this ornament, and put a
stop to the preaching of it. But this was impossible, O wretched and miserable
man! As it was impossible to destroy the heaven and to quench the sun, and to
shake and cast down the foundations of the earth, and those things Christ
foretold, thus saying: "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not
pass away." [Matthew 24:35]
Well, thou dost not submit to Christ's words; accept therefore the utterance
which thus his deeds give. For I indeed having been privileged to know what the
declaration of God is, how strong, how invincible a thing, have believed that is
more trustworthy than the order of nature, and than experience in all matters. But
do thou still creeping on the ground, and agitated with the investigations of
human reasoning, receive the witness of the deeds. I gainsay nothing. I strive
not.
2. What then do the deeds say? Christ said that it was easier for heaven and
earth to be destroyed, than for any of his words to fail. [Luke 16:17] The
emperor contradicted these words, and threatened to destroy his decrees. Where
then is the emperor who threatened these things? He is perished and is corrupted,
and is now in Hades, awaiting the inevitable punishment. But where is Christ
who uttered these decrees? In Heaven, on the right hand of the Father, occupying
the highest throne of glory; where are the blasphemous words of the Emperor,
and his unchastened tongue? They have become ashes, and dust and the food of
worms. Where is the sentence of Christ? It shines forth by the very truth of the
deed, receiving its lustre from the issue of the events, as from a golden column.
And yet the emperor left nothing undone, when about to raise war against us, but
used to call prophets together, and summon sorcerers, and everything was full of
demons and evil spirits.
What then was the return for this worship? The overturning of cities, the

bitterest famine of all famines. For you know doubtless, and remember, how
empty indeed the market place was of wares, and the workshops full of
confusion, when everyone strove to snatch up what came first and to depart. And
why do I speak of famine, when the very fountains of waters were failing,
fountains which by the abundance of their stream, used to eclipse the rivers. But
since I have mentioned the fountains, come, immediately, let us go up to
Daphne, and conduct our discourse to the noble deeds of the martyr. Although
you desire me still to parade the indecencies of the Greeks, although I too desire
this, let us abstain; for wherever the commemoration of a martyr is, there
certainly also is the shame of the Greeks. This emperor then, going up to Daphne
used to weary Apollo, praying, supplicating, entreating, so that the events of the
future might be foretold to him. What then did the prophet, the great God of the
Greeks? "The dead prevent me from uttering," says he, "but break open the
graves, dig up the bones, move the dead." What could be more impious than
these commands? The Demon of grave-robbing, introduces strange laws and
devises new methods of expelling strangers. Who ever heard of the dead being
driven forth? Who ever saw lifeless bodies ordered to be moved as he
commanded, overturning from their foundations the common laws of nature. For
the laws of nature are common to all men, that he who departs this life should be
hidden in the earth, and delivered over for burial, and be covered up in the
bosom of the earth the mother of all; and these laws, neither Greek, barbarian,
Scythian, nor if there be any more savage than they, ever changed, but all
reverence them, and keep them, and thus they are sacred and venerated by all.
But the Demon raises his mask, and with bare head, resists the common laws of
nature. For the dead, he says, are a pollution. The dead are not a pollution, a
most wicked demon, but a wicked intention is an abomination. But if one must
say something startling, the bodies of the living full of evil, are more polluting
than those of the dead. For the one minister to the behests of the mind, but the
other lie unmoved. Now that which is unmoved, and destitute of all perception
would be free from all accusation. Not that I even would say that the bodies of