from separate substances. For since the intellect in act is somewhat
one with the intelligible object in act, it would seem difficult to
understand how the created intellect is made to be an uncreated
essence. Wherefore Chrysostom says (Hom. xiv in Joan.): "How can
the creature see the uncreated?" Those who hold the passive
intellect to be the subject of generation and corruption, as being a
power dependent on the body, encounter a still greater difficulty not
only as regards the vision of God but also as regards the vision of
any separate substances. But this opinion is altogether untenable.
First, because it is in contradiction to the authority of canonical
scripture, as Augustine declares (De Videndo Deo: Ep. cxlvii).
Secondly, because, since understanding is an operation most proper
to man, it follows that his happiness must be held to consist in that
operation when perfected in him. Now since the perfection of an
intelligent being as such is the intelligible object, if in the most
perfect operation of his intellect man does not attain to the vision of
the Divine essence, but to something else, we shall be forced to
conclude that something other than God is the object of man's
happiness: and since the ultimate perfection of a thing consists in its
being united to its principle, it follows that something other than God
is the effective principle of man, which is absurd, according to us,
and also according to the philosophers who maintain that our souls
emanate from the separate substances, so that finally we may be
able to understand these substances. Consequently, according to
us, it must be asserted that our intellect will at length attain to the
vision of the Divine essence, and according to the philosophers, that
it will attain to the vision of separate substances.
It remains, then, to examine how this may come about. For some,
like Alfarabius and Avempace, held that from the very fact that our
intellect understands any intelligible objects whatever, it attains to
the vision of a separate substance. To prove this they employ two
arguments. The first is that just as the specific nature is not
diversified in various individuals, except as united to various
individuating principles, so the idea understood is not diversified in
me and you, except in so far as it is united to various imaginary
forms: and consequently when the intellect separates the idea
understood from the imaginary forms, there remains a quiddity
understood, which is one and the same in the various persons
understanding it, and such is the quiddity of a separate substance.
Hence, when our intellect attains to the supreme abstraction of any
intelligible quiddity, it thereby understands the quiddity of the
separate substance that is similar to it. The second argument is that

our intellect has a natural aptitude to abstract the quiddity from all
intelligible objects having a quiddity. If, then, the quiddity which it
abstracts from some particular individual be a quiddity without a
quiddity, the intellect by understanding it understands the quiddity
of the separate substance which has a like disposition, since
separate substances are subsisting quiddities without quiddities; for
the quiddity of a simple thing is the simple thing itself, as Avicenna
says (Met. iii). On the other hand if the quiddity abstracted from this
particular sensible be a quiddity that has a quiddity, it follows that
the intellect has a natural aptitude to abstract this quiddity, and
consequently since we cannot go on indefinitely, we shall come to
some quiddity without a quiddity, and this is what we understand by
a separate quiddity [FP, Question 88, Article 2].
But this reasoning is seemingly inconclusive. First, because the
quiddity of the material substance, which the intellect abstracts, is
not of the same nature as the quiddity of the separate substances,
and consequently from the fact that our intellect abstracts the
quiddities of material substances and knows them, it does not follow
that it knows the quiddity of a separate substance, especially of the
Divine essence, which more than any other is of a different nature
from any created quiddity. Secondly, because granted that it be of
the same nature, nevertheless the knowledge of a composite thing
would not lead to the knowledge of a separate substance, except in
the point of the most remote genus, namely substance: and such a
knowledge is imperfect unless it reach to the properties of a thing.
For to know a man only as an animal is to know him only in a
restricted sense and potentially: and much less is it to know only the
nature of substance in him. Hence to know God thus, or other
separate substances, is not to see the essence of God or the
quiddity of a separate substance, but to know Him in His effect and
in a mirror as it were. For this reason Avicenna in his Metaphysics.
propounds another way of understanding separate substances, to
wit that separate substances are understood by us by means of
intentions of their quiddities, such intentions being images of their
substances, not indeed abstracted therefrom, since they are
immaterial, but impressed thereby on our souls. But this way also
seems inadequate to the Divine vision which we seek. For it is
agreed that "whatever is received into any thing is therein after the
mode of the recipient": and consequently the likeness of the Divine
essence impressed on our intellect will be according to the mode of
our intellect: and the mode of our intellect falls short of a perfect
reception of the Divine likeness. Now the lack of perfect likeness