that theirs is no office bearing on such a development. It follows that the formation of the
body, particularly of its earliest and principal parts, does not proceed from the
engendered soul, nor from any formative power acting in virtue thereof, but from a
formative power acting in virtue of the generative soul of the father, the work of which is
to make another like in species to the progenitor. This formative power therefore
remains the same in the subject aforesaid from the beginning of the formation
even to the end. But the appearance of the being under formation does not remain the
same: for first it has the appearance of semen, afterwards of blood, and so on until it
arrives at its final completeness.
Nor need we be uneasy in admitting the generation of an intermediate product, the
existence of which is presently after broken off, because such transitional links are not
complete in their species, but are on the way to a perfect species; and therefore they
are not engendered to endure, but as stages of being, leading up to finality in the order
of generation. The higher a form is in the scale of being, and the further it is removed
from a mere material form, the more intermediate forms and intermediate generation
must be passed through before the finally perfect form is reached. Therefore in the
generation of animal and man, -- these having the most perfect form, -- there occur
many intermediate forms and generations, and consequently destructions, because the
generation of one being is the destruction of another. The vegetative soul therefore,
which is first in the embryo, while it lives the life of a plant, is destroyed, and there
succeeds a more perfect soul, which is at one nutrient and sentient, and for that time
the embryo lives the life of an animal: upon the destruction of this, there succeeds the
rational soul, infused from without, whereas the preceding two owed their existence to
the virtue of the male semen.
With these principles recognised, it is easy to answer the objections.
Arg. 1. Man being an animal by the possession of a sentient soul, and the notion of
`animal' befitting man in the same sense as it befits other animals, it appears that the
sentient soul of man is of the same kind as the souls of other animals. But things of the
same kind have the same manner of coming to be. Therefore the sentient soul of man,
as of other animals, comes to be by the active power that is in the male semen. But the
sentient and the intelligent soul in man is one in substance (Chap.LVIII). It
appears then that even the intelligent soul is produced by the active power of the
semen.
Reply. Though sensitive soul in man and brute agree generically, yet they differ
specifically. As the animal, man, differs specifically from other animals by being rational,
so the sentient soul of a man differs specifically from the sentient soul of a brute by
being also intelligent. The soul therefore of a brute has sentient attributes only, and
consequently neither its being nor its activity rises above the order of the body: hence it
must be generated with the generation of the body, and perish with its destruction. But
the sentient soul in man, over and above its sentient nature, has intellectual power:
hence the very substance of this soul must be raised above the bodily order both in