the night descend upon our lusts and upon all heat and fever of the soul, and do
not let it be affected in any such way. But if it do not enjoy the benefit of that
dew, it will be burnt up in the daytime. But God forbid (it should be so )! Rather,
may we all, being refreshed, and enjoying the mercy of God, be freed from the
burden of our sins, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father together with the Holy Spirit be glory, might, honor, now
and ever, world without end. Amen.

Homily 27 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XII. 18, 19
"Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers,
what was become of Peter. And when Herod had sought for him, and found him
not, he examined the keepers, and commanded that they should be put to death.
And he went down from Judea to Cæsarea, and there abode."
Some persons, it is likely, are at a loss how to explain it, that God should
quietly look on while (His) champions are put to death, and now again the
soldiers on account of Peter: and yet it was possible for Him after (delivering)
Peter to rescue them also. But it was not yet the time of judgment, so as to render
to each according to his deserts. And besides, it was not Peter that put them into
his hands. For the thing that most annoyed him was the being mocked; just as in
the case of his grandfather when he was deceived by the wise men, that was
what made him (feel) cut to the heart— the being (eluded and) made ridiculous.
"And having put them to the question," it says, "he ordered them to be led away
to execution." [Matthew 2:16] And yet he had heard from them— for he had put
them to the question— both that the chains had been left, and that he had taken
his sandals, and that until that night he was with them. "Having put them to the
question:" but what did they conceal? Why then did they not themselves also
flee? "He ordered them to be led away to execution:" and yet he ought to have
marvelled, ought to have been astonished at this. The consequence is, by the
death of these men (the thing), is made manifest to all: both his wickedness is
exposed to view, and (it is made clear that) the wonder (is) of God. "And he went
down from Judea to Cæsarea, and there abode: and Herod was highly
displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon: but they came with one accord to him,
and, having made Blastus the king's chamberlain their friend, desired peace;
because their country was nourished by the king's country. And upon a set day

Herod, arrayed in royal apparel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto
them. And the people gave a shout, saying, 'It is the voice of a god, and not of a
man,' And immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not
God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost." [Acts
12:20:23] * * But see how (the writer) here does not hide these things. Why does
he mention this history? Say, what has it to do with the Gospel, that Herod is
incensed with the Tyrians and Sidonians? It is not a small matter, even this, how
immediately justice seized him; although not because of Peter, but because of his
arrogant speaking. And yet, it may be said, if those shouted, what is that to him?
Because he accepted the acclamation, because he accounted himself to be
worthy of the adoration. Through him those most receive a lesson, who so
thoughtlessly flattered him (al. [οἱ κολακεύοντες]). Observe again, while both
parties deserve punishment, this man is punished. For this is not the time of
judgment, but He punishes him that had most to answer for, leaving the others to
profit by this man's fate. "And the word of God," it says, "grew," i.e. in
consequence of this, "and multiplied." [Acts 12:24] Do you mark God's
providential management? "But Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem,
when they had fulfilled their ministry, and took with them John, whose surname
was Mark." [Acts 12:25] "Now there were in the Church that was at Antioch,
certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger,
and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaën, which had been brought up with Herod the
tetrarch, and Saul." [Acts 13:1] He still mentions Barnabas first: for Paul was
not yet famous, he had not yet wrought any sign. "As they ministered to the Lord,
and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid
their hands on them, they sent them away." (v. 2, 3.) What means, "Ministering?"
Preaching. "Separate for Me," it says, "Barnabas and Saul." What means,
"Separate for Me?" For the work, for the Apostleship. See again by what
persons he is ordained ([γυμνοτέρα] . Cat. [σεμνοτέρα], "more awful.") By
Lucius the Cyrenean and Manaën, or rather, by the Spirit. The less the persons,