adding them where before they were not; all which things, being blemishes
arising from the infirmity of our nature, He by correcting showed His power.
But when He said, "That the glory of God might be manifested," He spoke
of Himself, not of the Father; His glory was already manifest. For since they had
heard that God made man, taking the dust of the earth, so also Christ made clay.
To have said, "I am He who took the dust of the earth, and made man," would
have seemed a hard thing to His hearers; but this when shown by actual working,
no longer stood in their way. So that He by taking earth, and mixing it with
spittle, showed forth His hidden glory; for no small glory was it that He should
be deemed the Architect of the creation.
And after this the rest also followed; from the part, the whole was proved,
since the belief of the greater also confirmed the less. For man is more honorable
than any created thing, and of our members the most honorable is the eye. This
is the cause that He fashioned the eyes, not in a common manner, but in the way
that He did. For though that member be small in size, yet it is more necessary
than any part of the body. And this Paul showed when he said, "If the ear shall
say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the
body?" [1 Corinthians 12:16] For all indeed that is in us is a manifestation of the
wisdom of God, but much more the eye; this it is that guides the whole body, this
gives beauty to it all, this adorns the countenance, this is the light of all the
limbs. What the sun is in the world, that the eye is in the body; quench the sun,
and you destroy and confound all things; quench the eyes, and the feet, the
hands, the soul, are useless. When these are disabled, even knowledge is gone,
since by means of these we know God. "For the invisible things of Him from the
creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made." [Romans 1:20] Wherefore the eye is not only a light to the body, but
beyond the body to the soul also. On which account it is established as in a royal
fortress, obtaining the higher condition, and presiding over the other senses. This
then Christ forms.
And that you may not deem that He needs matter when He works, and that

you may learn that He had not need at all of clay, (for He who brought into being
the greater existences when as yet they were not, would much more have made
this without matter,) that I say you may learn that He did not this through
necessity, but to show that He was the Creator at the beginning, when He had
spread on the clay He says, "Go, wash," "that you may know that I need not clay
to create eyes, but that My glory may be manifested hereby." For to show that He
spoke of Himself when He said, "That the glory of God may be manifested," He
added,