discerned even in slavery, not releasing from slavery, but while men continue
slaves, exhibiting them more honorable than freemen; which is much more than
giving them freedom: not making the poor man rich, but while he continues
poor, exhibiting him wealthier than the rich.
But if you would work miracles also, be rid of transgressions, and you have
quite accomplished it. Yea, for sin is a great demon, beloved; and if you
exterminate this, you have wrought a greater thing than they who drive out ten
thousand demons. Do thou listen to Paul, how he speaks, and prefers virtue to
miracles. "But covet earnestly," says he, "the best gifts: and yet show I unto you
a more excellent way." [1 Corinthians 12:31] And when he was to declare this
"way," he spoke not of raising the dead, not of cleansing of lepers, not of any
other such thing; but in place of all these he set charity. Hearken also unto Christ,
saying, "Rejoice not that the demons obey you, but that your names are written
in Heaven." [Luke 10:20] And again before this, "Many will say to me in that
day, Have we not prophesied in Your name, and cast out devils, and done many
mighty works, and then I will profess unto them, I know you not."
[Matthew 7:22-23] And when He was about to be crucified, He called His
disciples, and said unto them, "By this shall all men know that you are my
disciples," not "if you cast out devils," but "if you have love one to another."
[John 13:35] And again, "Hereby shall all men know that You have sent me;" not
"if these men raise the dead," but, "if they be one."
For, as to miracles, they oftentimes, while they profited another, have
injured him who had the power, by lifting him up to pride and vainglory, or
haply in some other way: but in our works there is no place for any such
suspicion, but they profit both such as follow them, and many others.
These then let us perform with much diligence. For if you change from
inhumanity to almsgiving, you have stretched forth the hand that was withered.
If you withdraw from theatres and go to the church, you have cured the lame
foot. If you draw back your eyes from an harlot, and from beauty not your own,
you have opened them when they were blind. If instead of satanical songs, you

have learned spiritual psalms, being dumb, you have spoken.
These are the greatest miracles, these the wonderful signs. If we go on
working these signs, we shall both ourselves be a great and admirable sort of
persons through these, and shall win over all the wicked unto virtue, and shall
enjoy the life to come; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might forever and
ever. Amen.

## Homily 33 on Matthew

Matt. X. 16.
"Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves."
Having made them feel confident about their necessary food, and opened
unto them all men's houses, and having invested their entrance with an
appearance to attract veneration, charging them not to come in as wanderers, and
beggars, but as much more venerable than those who received them (for this He
signifies by His saying, "the workman is worthy of his hire;" and by His
commanding them to inquire, who was worthy, and there to remain, and
enjoining them to salute such as receive them; and by His threatening such as
receive them not with those incurable evils): having I say, in this way cast out
their anxiety, and armed them with the display of miracles, and made them as it
were all iron and adamant, by delivering them from all worldly things, and
enfranchising them from all temporal care: He speaks in what follows of the
evils also that were to befall them; not only those that were to happen soon after,
but those too that were to be in long course of time; from the first, even long
beforehand, preparing them for the war against the devil. Yea, and many
advantages were hence secured; and first, that they learned the power of His
foreknowledge; secondly, that no one should suspect, that through weakness of
their Master came these evils upon them; thirdly, that such as undergo these
things should not be dismayed by their falling out unexpectedly, and against
hope; fourthly, that they might not at the very time of the cross be troubled on
hearing these things. For indeed, they were just so affected at that time; when
also He upbraided them, saying, "Because I have said these things unto you,
sorrow has filled your hearts; and none of you asks me, where are You going?"
[John 16:6, 5] And yet He had said nothing as yet touching Himself, as that He