respect suffer harm, since they have brought a noble purpose to these wrestlings.
The season then already calls us to discourse of the mighty works of this saint.
But our reckoning is disturbed and confused, not knowing what to say first, what
second, what third, so great a multitude of things calling for eulogy surrounds us,
on every side; and we experience the same thing as if any one went into a
meadow, and seeing many a rosebush and many a violet, and an abundance of
lilies, and other spring flowers manifold and varied, should be in doubt what he
should look at first, what second, since each of those he saw invites him to
bestow his glances on itself. For we too, coming to this spiritual meadow of the
mighty works of Ignatius, and beholding not the flowers of spring, but the
manifold and varied fruit of the spirit in the soul of this man, are confused and in
perplexity, not knowing to which we are first to give our consideration, as each
of the things we see draws us away from its neighbours, and entices the eye of
the soul to the sight of its own beauty. For see, he presided over the Church
among us nobly, and with such carefulness as Christ desires. For that which
Christ declared to be the highest standard and rule of the Episcopal office, did
this man display by his deeds. For having heard Christ saying, the good shepherd
lays down his life for the sheep, [John 10:11] with all courage he did lay it down
for the sheep.
He held true converse with the apostles and drank of spiritual fountains.
What kind of person then is it likely that he was who had been reared, and who
had everywhere held converse with them, and had shared with them truths both
lawful and unlawful to utter, and who seemed to them worthy of so great a
dignity? The time again came on, which demanded courage; and a soul which
despised all things present, glowed with Divine love, and valued things unseen
before the things which are seen; and he lay aside the flesh with as much ease as
one would put off a garment. What then shall we speak of first? The teaching of
the apostles which he gave proof of throughout, or his indifference to this
present life, or the strictness of his virtue, with which he administered his rule
over the Church; which shall we first call to mind? The martyr or the bishop or

the apostle. For the grace of the spirit having woven a threefold crown, thus
bound it on his holy head, yea rather a manifold crown. For if any one will
consider them carefully, he will find each of the crowns, blossoming with other
crowns for us.
2. And if you will, let us come first to the praise of his episcopate. Does this
seem to be one crown alone? Come, then, let us unfold it in speech, and you will
see both two, and three, and more produced from it. For I do not wonder at the
man alone that he seemed to be worthy of so great an office, but that he obtained
this office from those saints, and that the hands of the blessed apostles touched
his sacred head. For not even is this a slight thing to be said in his praise, nor
because he won greater grace from above, nor only because they caused more
abundant energy of the Spirit to come upon him, but because they bore witness
that every virtue possessed by man was in him. Now how this is, I tell you. Paul
writing to Titus once on a time— and when I say Paul, I do not speak of him
alone, but also of Peter and James and John, and the whole band of them; for as
in one lyre, the strings are different strings, but the harmony is one, so also in the
band of the apostles the persons are different, but the teaching is one, since the
artificer is one, I mean the Holy Spirit, who moves their souls, and Paul showing
this said, "Whether therefore they, or I, so we preach." [1 Corinthians 15:11]
This man, then, writing to Titus, and showing what kind of man the bishop ought
to be, says, "For the bishop must be blameless as God's steward; not self-willed,
not soon angry, no brawler, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but given to
hospitality, a lover of good, sober-minded, just, holy, temperate, holding to the
faithful word, which is according to the teaching, that he may be able both to
exhort in the sound doctrine, and to convict the gainsayers;" [Titus 1:7-9] and to
Timothy again, when writing upon this subject, he says somewhat like this: If a
man seeks the office of a bishop, he desires a good work. The bishop, therefore,
must be without reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, sober-minded,
orderly, given to hospitality, apt to teach, no brawler, no striker, but gentle, not
contentious, no lover of money. Do you see what strictness of virtue he demands