## Homily 10 on Colossians

[Colossians 3:18-25]
" Wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them. Children, obey your
parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing in the Lord. Fathers, provoke not
your children, that they be not discouraged. Servants, obey in all things them
that are your masters according to the flesh; not with eyeservice, as
menpleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing the Lord: whatsoever ye do,
work heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto men; knowing that from the Lord
you shall receive the recompense of the inheritance: ye serve the Lord Christ.
For he that does wrong shall receive again for the wrong that he has done: and
there is no respect of persons with God. [Colossians 4:1] Masters, render unto
your servants that which is just and equal; knowing that you also have a Master
in heaven."
Why does he not give these commands everywhere, and in all the Epistles,
but only here, and in that to the Ephesians, and that to Timothy, and that to
Titus? Because probably there were dissensions in these cities; or probably they
were correct in other respects, so that it was expedient they should hear about
these things. Rather, however, what he says to these, he says to all. Now in these
things also this Epistle bears great resemblance to that to the Ephesians, either
because it was not fitting to write about these things to men now at peace, who
needed to be instructed in high doctrines as yet lacking to them, or because that
for persons who had been comforted under trials, it were superfluous to hear on
these subjects. So that I conjecture, that in this place the Church was now wellgrounded, and that these things are said as in finishing.
Ver. 18. "Wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord."
That is, be subject for God's sake, because this adorns you, he says, not

them. For I mean not that subjection which is due to a master, nor yet that alone
which is of nature, but that for God's sake.
Ver. 19. "Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against them."
See how again he has exhorted to reciprocity. As in the other case he
enjoins fear and love, so also does he here. For it is possible for one who loves
even, to be bitter. What he says then is this. Fight not; for nothing is more bitter
than this fighting, when it takes place on the part of the husband toward the wife.
For the fightings which happen between beloved persons, these are bitter; and he
shows that it arises from great bitterness, when, says he, any one is at variance
with his own member. To love therefore is the husband's part, to yield pertains to
the other side. If then each one contributes his own part, all stands firm. From
being loved, the wife too becomes loving; and from her being submissive, the
husband becomes yielding. And see how in nature also it has been so ordered,
that the one should love, the other obey. For when the party governing loves the
governed, then everything stands fast. Love from the governed is not so
requisite, as from the governing towards the governed; for from the other
obedience is due. For that the woman has beauty, and the man desire, shows
nothing else than that for the sake of love it has been made so. Do not therefore,
because your wife is subject to you, act the despot; nor because your husband
loves you, be thou puffed up. Let neither the husband's love elate the wife, nor
the wife's subjection puff up the husband. For this cause has He subjected her to
you, that she may be loved the more. For this cause He has made you to be
loved, O wife, that you may easily bear your subjection. Fear not in being a
subject; for subjection to one that loves you has no hardship. Fear not in loving,
for you have her yielding. In no other way then could a bond have been. You
have then your authority of necessity, proceeding from nature; maintain also the
bond that proceeds from love, for this allows the weaker to be endurable.
Ver. 20. "Children, obey your parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing
in the Lord."
Again he has put that, "in the Lord," at once laying down the laws of