were confusedly. A thing thus imperfectly known, is known partly in
act and partly in potentiality, and hence the Philosopher says (Phys.
i, 1), that "what is manifest and certain is known to us at first
confusedly; afterwards we know it by distinguishing its principles
and elements." Now it is evident that to know an object that
comprises many things, without proper knowledge of each thing
contained in it, is to know that thing confusedly. In this way we can
have knowledge not only of the universal whole, which contains
parts potentially, but also of the integral whole; for each whole can
be known confusedly, without its parts being known. But to know
distinctly what is contained in the universal whole is to know the
less common, as to "animal" indistinctly is to know it as "animal";
whereas to know "animal" distinctly is know it as "rational" or
"irrational animal," that is, to know a man or a lion: therefore our
intellect knows "animal" before it knows man; and the same reason
holds in comparing any more universal idea with the less universal.
Moreover, as sense, like the intellect, proceeds from potentiality to
act, the same order of knowledge appears in the senses. For by
sense we judge of the more common before the less common, in
reference both to place and time; in reference to place, when a thing
is seen afar off it is seen to be a body before it is seen to be an
animal; and to be an animal before it is seen to be a man, and to be a
man before it seen to be Socrates or Plato; and the same is true as
regards time, for a child can distinguish man from not man before he
distinguishes this man from that, and therefore "children at first call
men fathers, and later on distinguish each one from the
others" (Phys. i, 1). The reason of this is clear: because he who
knows a thing indistinctly is in a state of potentiality as regards its
principle of distinction; as he who knows "genus" is in a state of
potentiality as regards "difference." Thus it is evident that indistinct
knowledge is midway between potentiality and act.
We must therefore conclude that knowledge of the singular and
individual is prior, as regards us, to the knowledge of the universal;
as sensible knowledge is prior to intellectual knowledge. But in both
sense and intellect the knowledge of the more common precedes the
knowledge of the less common.
Reply to Objection 1: The universal can be considered in two ways.
First, the universal nature may be considered together with the
intention of universality. And since the intention of universality---viz.
the relation of one and the same to many---is due to intellectual

abstraction, the universal thus considered is a secondary
consideration. Hence it is said (De Anima i, 1) that the "universal
animal is either nothing or something secondary." But according to
Plato, who held that universals are subsistent, the universal
considered thus would be prior to the particular, for the latter,
according to him, are mere participations of the subsistent
universals which he called ideas.
Secondly, the universal can be considered in the nature itself---for
instance, animality or humanity as existing in the individual. And
thus we must distinguish two orders of nature: one, by way of
generation and time; and thus the imperfect and the potential come
first. In this way the more common comes first in the order of nature;
as appears clearly in the generation of man and animal; for "the
animal is generated before man," as the Philosopher says (De Gener.
Animal ii, 3). The other order is the order of perfection or of the
intention of nature: for instance, act considered absolutely is
naturally prior to potentiality, and the perfect to the imperfect: thus
the less common comes naturally before the more common; as man
comes before animal. For the intention of nature does not stop at the
generation of animal but goes on to the generation of man.
Reply to Objection 2: The more common universal may be compared
to the less common, as the whole, and as the part. As the whole,
considering that in the more universal is potentially contained not
only the less universal, but also other things, as in "animal" is
contained not only "man" but also "horse." As part, considering that
the less common contains in its idea not only the more common, but
also more; as "man" contains not only "animal" but also "rational."
Therefore "animal" in itself comes into our knowledge before "man";
but "man" comes before "animal" considered as part of the same
idea.
Reply to Objection 3: A part can be known in two ways. First,
absolutely considered in itself; and thus nothing prevents the parts
being known before the whole, as stones are known before a house
is known. Secondly as belonging to a certain whole; and thus we
must needs know the whole before its parts. For we know a house
vaguely before we know its different parts. So likewise principles of
definition are known before the thing defined is known; otherwise
the thing defined would not be known at all. But as parts of the
definition they are known after. For we know man vaguely as man
before we know how to distinguish all that belongs to human nature.