thousands have not yet reached to the one. "Desire not a multitude of
unprofitable children." [Sirach 16:1] Such bring more blasphemy against God,
than if they were not Christians. What need have I of a multitude? It is (only)
more food for the fire. This one might see even in the body, that better is
moderate food with health, than a (fatted) calf with damage. This is more food
than the other: this is food, but that is disease. This too one may see in war: that
better are ten expert and brave men, than ten thousand of no experience. These
latter, besides that they do no work, hinder also those that do work. The same too
one may see to be the case in a ship, viz. that better are two experienced
mariners, than ever so great a number of unskilful ones: for these will sink the
ship. These things I say, not as looking with an evil eye upon your numbers, but
wishing that all of you should be approved men, and not trust in your numbers.
Many more in number are they who go down into hell: but greater than it is the
Kingdom, however few it contain. As the sand of the sea was the multitude of
the people (Israel) yet one man saved them. Moses was but one, and yet he
availed more than they all: Joshua was one and he was enabled to do more than
the six hundred thousand. Let us not make this our study merely, that (the
people) may be many, but rather, that they may be excellent; when this shall
have been effected, then will that other follow also. No one wishes at the outset
to make a spacious house, but he first makes it strong and sure, then spacious: no
one lays the foundations so that he may be laughed at. Let us first aim at this,
and then at the other. Where this is, that also will be easy: but where this is not,
the other, though it be, is to no profit. For if there be those who are able to shine
in the Church, there will soon be also numbers: but where these are not, the
numbers will never be good for anything. How many, suppose you, may there be
in our city who are likely to be saved ([τοὺς σωζομένους])? It is disagreeable,
what I am going to say, but I will say it nevertheless. Among all these myriads,
there are not to be found one hundred likely to be saved: nay, even as to these, I
question it. For think, what wickedness there is in the young, what supineness in
the aged! None makes it his duty to look after his own boy, none is moved by

anything to be seen in his elder, to be emulous of imitating such an one. The
patterns are defaced, and therefore it is that neither do the young become
admirable in conduct. Tell not me, "We are a goodly multitude:" this is the
speech of men who talk without thought or feeling ([ψυχρὥν].) In the concerns
of men indeed, this might be said with some show of reason: but where God is
concerned, (to say this with regard to Him) as having need of us, can never be
allowed. Nay, let me tell you, even in the former case, this is a senseless speech
([ψυχρόν]). Listen. A person that has a great number of domestics, if they be a
corrupt set what a wretched time will he have of it! For him who has none, the
hardship, it seems, amounts to this, that he is not waited on: but where a person
has bad servants, the evil is, that he is ruining himself withal, and the damage is
greater (the more there are of them.) For it is far worse than having to be one's
own servant, to have to fight with others, and take up a (continual) warfare.
These things I say, that none may admire the Church because of its numbers, but
that we may study to make the multitude proof-worthy; that each may be earnest
for his own share of the duty— not for his friends only, nor his kindred as I am
always saying, nor for his neighbors, but that he may attract the strangers also.
For example, Prayer is going on; there they lie (on bended knees), all the young,
stupidly unconcerned ([ψυχροὶ]), (yes,) and old too: filthy nuisances rather than
young men; giggling, laughing outright, talking— for I have heard even this
going on— and jeering one another as they lie along on their knees: and there
stand you, young man or elder: rebuke them, if you see them (behaving thus): if
any will not refrain, chide him more severely: call the deacon, threaten, do what
is in your power to do: and if he dare do anything to you, assuredly you shall
have all to help you. For who is so irrational, as, when he sees you chiding for
such conduct, and them chidden not to take your part? Depart, having received
your reward from the Prayer.— In a master's house, we count those his bestdisposed servants, who cannot bear to see any part of his furniture in disorder.
Answer me; if at home you should see the silver plate lie tossed out of doors,
though it is not your business, you will pick it up and bring it into the house: if