into a visible creature, then the Son would be so understood to be sent by
the Father, that He would be found to be only sent; not also, with the
Father, sending. But since He so took the form of a servant, as that the
unchangeable form of God remained, it is clear that that which became
apparent in the Son was done by the Father and the Son not being
apparent; that is, that by the invisible Father, with the invisible Son, the
same Son Himself was sent so as to be visible. Why, therefore, does He
say, "Neither came I of myself?" This, we may now say, is said according
to the form of a servant, in the same way as it is said, "I judge no man.". If, therefore, He is said to be sent, in so far as He appeared outwardly
in the bodily creature, who inwardly in His spiritual nature is always
hidden from the eyes of mortals, it is now easy to understand also of the
Holy Spirit why He too is said to be sent. For in due time a certain
outward appearance of the creature was wrought, wherein the Holy Spirit
might be visibly shown; whether when He descended upon the Lord
Himself in a bodily shape as a dove, or when, ten days having past since
His ascension, on the day of Pentecost a sound came suddenly from
heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and cloven tongues like as of fire
were seen upon them, and it sat upon each of them.2 This operation,
visibly exhibited, and presented to mortal eyes, is called the sending of
the Holy Spirit; not that His very substance appeared, in which He
himself also is invisible and unchangeable, like the Father and the Son,
but that the hearts of men, touched by things seen outwardly, might be
turned from the manifestation in time of Him as coming to His hidden
eternity as ever present.

### CHAP. 6.—THE CREATURE IS NOT SO TAKEN BY THE HOLY SPIRIT AS FLESH IS BY THE WORD.

11. It is, then, for this reason nowhere written, that the Father is greater
than the Holy Spirit, or that the Holy Spirit is less than God the Father,
because the creature in which the Holy Spirit was to appear was not taken
in the same way as the Son of man was taken, as the form in which the
person of the Word of God Himself should be set forth; not that He might
possess the word of God, as other holy and wise men have possessed it,
but "above His fellows;" not certainly that He possessed the word more
than they, so as to be of more surpassing wisdom than the rest were, but

that He was the very Word Himself. For the word in the flesh is one thing,
and the Word made flesh is another; i.e. the word in man is one thing, the
Word that is man is another. For flesh is put for man, where it is said,
"The Word was made flesh;" and again, "And all flesh shall see the
salvation of God." For it does not mean flesh without soul and without
mind; but "all flesh," is the same as if it were said, every man. The
creature, then, in which the Holy Spirit should appear, was not so taken,
as that flesh and human form were taken, of the Virgin Mary. For the
Spirit did not beatify the dove, or the wind, or the fire, and join them for
ever to Himself and to His person in unity and "fashion." Nor, again, is
the nature of the Holy Spirit mutable and changeable; so that these things
were not made of the creature, but He himself was turned and changed
first into one and then into another, as water is changed into ice. But
these things appeared at the seasons at which they ought to have
appeared, the creature serving the Creator, and being changed and
converted at the command of Him who remains immutably in Himself, in
order to signify and manifest Him in such way as it was fit He should be
signified and manifested to mortal men. Accordingly, although that dove
is called the Spirit:7 and in speaking of that fire, "There appeared unto
them," he says, "cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of
them; and they began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave
them utterance; in order to show that the Spirit was manifested by that
fire, as by the dove; yet we cannot call the Holy Spirit both God and a
dove, or both God and fire, in the same way as we call the Son both God
and man; nor as we call the Son the Lamb of God; which not only John
the Baptist says, "Behold the Lamb of God," but also John the Evangelist
sees the Lamb slain in the Apocalypse. For that prophetic vision was not
shown to bodily eyes through bodily forms, but in the spirit through
spiritual images of bodily things. But whosoever saw that dove and that
fire, saw them with their eyes. Although it may perhaps be disputed
concerning the fire, whether it was seen by the eyes or in the spirit, on
account of the form of the sentence. For the text does not say, They saw
cloven tongues like fire, but, "There appeared to them." But we are not
wont to say with the same meaning, It appeared to me; as we say, I saw.
And in those spiritual visions of corporeal images the usual expressions
are, both, It appeared to me; and, I saw: but in those things which are
shown to the eyes through express corporeal forms, the common