SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.4.

they are the fruits of things owned by another man and consequently
are due to him.
Reply to Objection 1: The root has not only the character of matter,
as money made by usury has; but has also somewhat the character
of an active cause, in so far as it administers nourishment. Hence the
comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 2: Further, Property acquired from usury does not
belong to the person who paid usury, but to the person who bought
it. Yet he that paid usury has a certain claim on that property just as
he has on the other goods of the usurer. Hence it is not prescribed
that such property should be assigned to the persons who paid
usury, since the property is perhaps worth more than what they paid
in usury, but it is commanded that the property be sold, and the
price be restored, of course according to the amount taken in usury.
Reply to Objection 3: The proceeds of money taken in usury are due
to the person who acquired them not by reason of the usurious
money as instrumental cause, but on account of his own industry as
principal cause. Wherefore he has more right to the goods acquired
with usurious money than to the usurious money itself.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether it is lawful to borrow money under a

condition of usury?
Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful to borrow money
under a condition of usury. For the Apostle says (Rm. 1:32) that they
"are worthy of death . . . not only they that do" these sins, "but they
also that consent to them that do them." Now he that borrows money
under a condition of usury consents in the sin of the usurer, and
gives him an occasion of sin. Therefore he sins also.
Objection 2: Further, for no temporal advantage ought one to give
another an occasion of committing a sin: for this pertains to active
scandal, which is always sinful, as stated above (Question 43, Article
2). Now he that seeks to borrow from a usurer gives him an occasion
of sin. Therefore he is not to be excused on account of any temporal
advantage.
Objection 3: Further, it seems no less necessary sometimes to
deposit one's money with a usurer than to borrow from him. Now it
seems altogether unlawful to deposit one's money with a usurer,
even as it would be unlawful to deposit one's sword with a madman,
a maiden with a libertine, or food with a glutton. Neither therefore is
it lawful to borrow from a usurer.
On the contrary, He that suffers injury does not sin, according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. v, 11), wherefore justice is not a mean between
two vices, as stated in the same book (ch. 5). Now a usurer sins by
doing an injury to the person who borrows from him under a
condition of usury. Therefore he that accepts a loan under a
condition of usury does not sin.
I answer that, It is by no means lawful to induce a man to sin, yet it is
lawful to make use of another's sin for a good end, since even God
uses all sin for some good, since He draws some good from every
evil as stated in the Enchiridion (xi). Hence when Publicola asked
whether it were lawful to make use of an oath taken by a man
swearing by false gods (which is a manifest sin, for he gives Divine
honor to them) Augustine (Ep. xlvii) answered that he who uses, not
for a bad but for a good purpose, the oath of a man that swears by
false gods, is a party, not to his sin of swearing by demons, but to
his good compact whereby he kept his word. If however he were to