punishment, you declare your decision on these matters, and therefore whether
God shall or shall not remember, rests with you. For which cause Paul bids us
"forgive, if any One has cause of complaint against any" [Colossians 3:13], and
not simply forgive, but so that not even any remnants be left behind. Since Christ
not only did not publish our transgressions, but did not put us the transgressors
in mind of them, nor say, "in such and such things have you offended," but
remitted and blotted out the handwriting, not reckoning our offenses, as Paul has
also declared. [Colossians 2:14] Let us too do this; let us wipe away all
[trespasses against us] from our minds; and if any good thing has been done to
us by him that has grieved us, let us only reckon that; but if anything grievous
and hard to bear, let us cast it forth and blot it out, so that not even a vestige of it
remain. And if no good has been done us by him, so much the greater
recompense and higher credit will be ours if we forgive. Others by watching, by
making the earth their bed, by ten thousand hardships, wipe away their sins, but
thou by an easier way, I mean by not remembering wrongs, may cause all your
trespasses to disappear. Why then do you thrust the sword against yourself, as do
mad and frantic men, and banishest yourself from the life which is to come,
when you ought to use every means to attain unto it? For if this present life be so
desirable, what can one say of that other from which pain, and grief, and
mourning, have fled away? There it needs not to fear death, nor imagine any end
to those good things. Blessed, thrice blessed, yea, and this many times over, are
they who enjoy that blessed rest, while they are miserable, thrice miserable, yea,
ten thousand times miserable, who have cast themselves forth from that
blessedness. "And what," says some one, "is it that makes us to enjoy that life?"
Hear the Judge Himself conversing with a certain young man on this matter.
When the young man said, "What shall I do to inherit eternal life?" [Matthew
19:16] Christ, after repeating to him the other commandments, ended with the
love of his neighbor. Perhaps like that rich man some of my hearers will say,
"that we also have kept these, for we neither have robbed, nor killed, nor
committed adultery"; yet assuredly you will not be able to say this, that you have

loved your neighbor as you ought to have loved him. For if a man has envied or
spoken evil of another, if he has not helped him when injured, or not imparted to
him of his substance, then neither has he loved him. Now Christ has commanded
not only this, but something besides. What then is this? "Sell," he says, "that you
have, and give to the poor; and come, follow Me" [Matthew 19:21]: terming the
imitating Him in our actions "following" Him. What learn we hence? First, that
he who has not all these things cannot attain unto the chief places in "that" rest.
For after the young man had said, "All these things have I done," Christ, as
though some great thing were wanting to his being perfectly approved, replied,
"If you will be perfect, sell that you have, and give to the poor: and come, follow
Me." First then we may learn this; secondly, that Christ rebuked the man for his
vain boast; for one who lived in such superfluity, and regarded not others living
in poverty, how could he love his neighbor? So that neither in this matter did he
speak truly. But let us do both the one and the other of these things; let us be
eager to empty out our substance, and to purchase heaven. Since if for worldly
honor men have often expended their whole possessions, an honor which was to
stay here below, and even here not to stay by us long, (for many even much
before their deaths have been stripped of their supremacy, and others because of
it have often lost their lives, and yet, although aware of this, they expend all for
its sake;) if now they do so much for this kind of honor, what can be more
wretched than we if for the sake of that honor which abides and which cannot be
taken from us we will not give up even a little, nor supply to others those things
which in a short time while yet here we shall leave? What madness must it be,
when it is in our power voluntarily to give to others, and so to take with us those
things of which we shall even against our will be deprived, to refuse to do so?
Yet if a man were being led to death, and it were proposed to him to give up all
his goods and so go free, we should think a favor was conferred upon him; and
shall we, who are being led on the way to the pit, shall we, when it is allowed us
to give up half and be free, prefer to be punished, and uselessly to retain what is
not ours even to the losing what is so? What excuse shall we have, what claim