Accordingly he shaved his head, and observed all the Jewish ceremonies; for
where the Gospel was not affected, he was the humblest of all men. But where
by such humility he saw any injured, he gave up that undue exercise of it, for
that was no longer to be humble but to outrage and destroy the disciples.
Ver. 18. "And tarried with him fifteen days."
To take a journey on account of him was a mark of respect; but to remain so
many days, of friendship and the most earnest affection.
Ver. 19. "But other of the Apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord's
brother."
See what great friends he was with Peter especially; on his account he left
his home, and with him he tarried. This I frequently repeat, and desire you to
remember, that no one, when he hears what this Apostle seems to have spoken
against Peter, may conceive a suspicion of him. He premises this, that when he
says, "I resisted Peter," no one may suppose that these words imply enmity and
contention; for he honored and loved his person more than all and took this
journey for his sake only, not for any of the others. "But other of the Apostles
saw I none, save James." "I saw him merely, I did not learn from him," he means.
But observe how honorably he mentions him, he says not "James" merely, but
adds this illustrious title, so free is he from all envy. Had he only wished to point
out whom he meant, he might have shown this by another appellation, and called
him the son of Cleophas, as the Evangelist does. But as he considered that he
had a share in the august titles of the Apostles, he exalts himself by honoring
James; and this he does by calling him "the Lord's brother," although he was not
by birth His brother, but only so reputed. Yet this did not deter him from giving
the title; and in many other instances he displays towards all the Apostles that
noble disposition, which beseemed him.
Ver. 20. "Now touching the things which I write unto you, behold, before
God, I lie not."
Observe throughout the transparent humility of this holy soul; his
earnestness in his own vindication is as great as if he had to render an account of

his deeds, and was pleading for his life in a court of justice.
Ver. 21. "Then I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia."
After his interview with Peter, he resumes his preaching and the task which
lay before him, avoiding Judæa, both because of his mission being to the
Gentiles, and of his unwillingness to "build upon another man's foundation."
Wherefore there was not even a chance meeting, as appears from what follows.
Ver. 22, 23. "And I was still unknown by face unto the Churches of Judæa;
but they only heard say, he that once persecuted us now preaches the faith of
which he once made havoc."
What modesty in thus again mentioning the facts of his persecuting and
laying waste the Church, and in thus making infamous his former life, while he
passes over the illustrious deeds he was about to achieve! He might have told,
had he wished it, all his successes, but he mentions none of these and stepping
with one word over a vast expanse, he says merely, "I came into the regions of
Syria and Cilicia;" and, "they had heard, that he, which once persecuted us, now
preaches the faith of which he once made havoc." The purpose of the words, "I
was unknown to the Churches of Judæa," is to show, that so far from preaching
to them the necessity of circumcision, he was not known to them even by sight.
Ver. 24. "And they glorified God in me." See here again how accurately he
observes the rule of his humility; he says not, they admired me, they applauded
or were astonished at me, but ascribes all to Divine grace by the words, "they
glorified God in me."