SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.172, C.2.

this is altogether impossible. For God is the object of bliss in His
very essence, according to the saying of Augustine (Confess. v, 4):
"Happy whoso knoweth Thee, though he know not these," i.e.
creatures. Now it is not possible to see the types of creatures in the
very essence of God without seeing It, both because the Divine
essence is Itself the type of all things that are made---the ideal type
adding nothing to the Divine essence save only a relationship to the
creature---and because knowledge of a thing in itself---and such is
the knowledge of God as the object of heavenly bliss---precedes
knowledge of that thing in its relation to something else---and such
is the knowledge of God as containing the types of things.
Consequently it is impossible for prophets to see God as containing
the types of creatures, and yet not as the object of bliss. Therefore
we must conclude that the prophetic vision is not the vision of the
very essence of God, and that the prophets do not see in the Divine
essence Itself the things they do see, but that they see them in
certain images, according as they are enlightened by the Divine light.
Wherefore Dionysius (Coel. Hier. iv), in speaking of prophetic
visions, says that "the wise theologian calls that vision divine which
is effected by images of things lacking a bodily form through the
seer being rapt in divine things." And these images illumined by the
Divine light have more of the nature of a mirror than the Divine
essence: since in a mirror images are formed from other things, and
this cannot be said of God. Yet the prophet's mind thus enlightened
may be called a mirror, in so far as a likeness of the truth of the
Divine foreknowledge is formed therein, for which reason it is called
the "mirror of eternity," as representing God's foreknowledge, for
God in His eternity sees all things as present before Him, as stated
above (Question 172, Article 1).
Reply to Objection 1: The prophets are said to read the book of
God's foreknowledge, inasmuch as the truth is reflected from God's
foreknowledge on the prophet's mind.
Reply to Objection 2: Man is said to see in the First Truth the type of
his existence, in so far as the image of the First Truth shines forth on
man's mind, so that he is able to know himself.
Reply to Objection 3: From the very fact that future contingencies
are in God according to unalterable truth, it follows that God can
impress a like knowledge on the prophet's mind without the prophet
seeing God in His essence.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.172, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.172, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether, in prophetic revelation, new species of

things are impressed on the prophet's mind, or merely a new
light?
Objection 1: It would seem that in prophetic revelation no new
species of things are impressed on the prophet's mind, but only a
new light. For a gloss of Jerome on Amos 1:2 says that "prophets
draw comparisons from things with which they are conversant." But
if prophetic vision were effected by means of species newly
impressed, the prophet's previous experience of things would be
inoperative. Therefore no new species are impressed on the
prophet's soul, but only the prophetic light.
Objection 2: Further, according to Augustine (Gen. ad lit. xii, 9), "it is
not imaginative but intellective vision that makes the prophet";
wherefore it is declared (Dan. 10:1) that "there is need of
understanding in a vision." Now intellective vision, as stated in the
same book (Gen. ad lit. xii, 6) is not effected by means of images, but
by the very truth of things. Therefore it would seem that prophetic
revelation is not effected by impressing species on the soul.
Objection 3: Further, by the gift of prophecy the Holy Ghost endows
man with something that surpasses the faculty of nature. Now man
can by his natural faculties form all kinds of species of things.
Therefore it would seem that in prophetic revelation no new species
of things are impressed, but merely an intellectual light.
On the contrary, It is written (Osee 12:10): "I have multiplied" their
"visions, and I have used similitudes, by the ministry of the
prophets." Now multiplicity of visions results, not from a diversity of
intellectual light, which is common to every prophetic vision, but
from a diversity of species, whence similitudes also result. Therefore
it seems that in prophetic revelation new species of things are
impressed, and not merely an intellectual light.
I answer that, As Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 9), "prophetic
knowledge pertains most of all to the intellect." Now two things have
to be considered in connection with the knowledge possessed by
the human mind, namely the acceptance or representation of things,
and the judgment of the things represented. Now things are
represented to the human mind under the form of species: and