FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.3.

In order to make the matter clear we must take note that hope of
future happiness may be in us for two reasons. First, by reason of
our having a preparation for, or a disposition to future happiness;
and this is by way of merit; secondly, by a kind of imperfect
inchoation of future happiness in holy men, even in this life. For it is
one thing to hope that the tree will bear fruit, when the leaves begin
to appear, and another, when we see the first signs of the fruit.
Accordingly, those things which are set down as merits in the
beatitudes, are a kind of preparation for, or disposition to happiness,
either perfect or inchoate: while those that are assigned as rewards,
may be either perfect happiness, so as to refer to the future life, or
some beginning of happiness, such as is found in those who have
attained perfection, in which case they refer to the present life.
Because when a man begins to make progress in the acts of the
virtues and gifts, it is to be hoped that he will arrive at perfection,
both as a wayfarer, and as a citizen of the heavenly kingdom.
Reply to Objection 1: Hope regards future happiness as the last end:
yet it may also regard the assistance of grace as that which leads to
that end, according to Ps. 27:7: "In Him hath my heart hoped, and I
have been helped."
Reply to Objection 2: Although sometimes the wicked do not
undergo temporal punishment in this life, yet they suffer spiritual
punishment. Hence Augustine says (Confess. i): "Thou hast decreed,
and it is so, Lord---that the disordered mind should be its own
punishment." The Philosopher, too, says of the wicked (Ethic. ix, 4)
that "their soul is divided against itself . . . one part pulls this way,
another that"; and afterwards he concludes, saying: "If wickedness
makes a man so miserable, he should strain every nerve to avoid
vice." In like manner, although, on the other hand, the good
sometimes do not receive material rewards in this life, yet they never
lack spiritual rewards, even in this life, according to Mt. 19:29, and
Mk. 10:30: "Ye shall receive a hundred times as much" even "in this
time."
Reply to Objection 3: All these rewards will be fully consummated in
the life to come: but meanwhile they are, in a manner, begun, even in
this life. Because the "kingdom of heaven," as Augustine says (De
Civ. Dei xiv; Cf. De Serm. Dom. in Monte, i, 1), can denote the
beginning of perfect wisdom, in so far as "the spirit" begins to reign
in men. The "possession" of the land denotes the well-ordered

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.3.

affections of the soul that rests, by its desire, on the solid foundation
of the eternal inheritance, signified by "the land." They are
"comforted" in this life, by receiving the Holy Ghost, Who is called
the "Paraclete," i.e. the Comforter. They "have their fill," even in this
life, of that food of which Our Lord said (Jn. 4:34): "My meat is to do
the will of Him that sent Me." Again, in this life, men "obtain" God's
"Mercy." Again, the eye being cleansed by the gift of understanding,
we can, so to speak, "see God." Likewise, in this life, those who are
the "peacemakers" of their own movements, approach to likeness to
God, and are called "the children of God." Nevertheless these things
will be more perfectly fulfilled in heaven.