But in natural things there is no such principle, endowed with
freedom to follow or not to follow the impressions produced by
heavenly agents. Wherefore it seems that in such things at least,
everything happens of necessity; according to the reasoning of
some of the ancients who supposing that everything that is, has a
cause; and that, given the cause, the effect follows of necessity;
concluded that all things happen of necessity. This opinion is
refuted by Aristotle (Metaph. vi, Did. v, 3) as to this double
supposition.
For in the first place it is not true that, given any cause whatever, the
effect must follow of necessity. For some causes are so ordered to
their effects, as to produce them, not of necessity, but in the majority
of cases, and in the minority to fail in producing them. But that such
cases do fail in the minority of cases is due to some hindering
cause; consequently the above-mentioned difficulty seems not to be
avoided, since the cause in question is hindered of necessity.
Therefore we must say, in the second place, that everything that is a
being "per se," has a cause; but what is accidentally, has not a
cause, because it is not truly a being, since it is not truly one. For
(that a thing is) "white" has a cause, likewise (that a man is)
"musical" has not a cause, but (that a being is) "white-musical" has
not a cause, because it is not truly a being, nor truly one. Now it is
manifest that a cause which hinders the action of a cause so ordered
to its effect as to produce it in the majority of cases, clashes
sometimes with this cause by accident: and the clashing of these
two causes, inasmuch as it is accidental, has no cause.
Consequently what results from this clashing of causes is not to be
reduced to a further pre-existing cause, from which it follows of
necessity. For instance, that some terrestrial body take fire in the
higher regions of the air and fall to the earth, is caused by some
heavenly power: again, that there be on the surface of the earth
some combustible matter, is reducible to some heavenly principle.
But that the burning body should alight on this matter and set fire to
it, is not caused by a heavenly body, but is accidental. Consequently
not all the effects of heavenly bodies result of necessity.
Reply to Objection 1: The heavenly bodies are causes of effects that
take place here below, through the means of particular inferior
causes, which can fail in their effects in the minority of cases.

Reply to Objection 2: The power of a heavenly body is not infinite.
Wherefore it requires a determinate disposition in matter, both as to
local distance and as to other conditions, in order to produce its
effect. Therefore as local distance hinders the effect of a heavenly
body (for the sun has not the same effect in heat in Dacia as in
Ethiopia); so the grossness of matter, its low or high temperature or
other such disposition, can hinder the effect of a heavenly body.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the cause that hinders the effect of
another cause can be reduced to a heavenly body as its cause;
nevertheless the clashing of two causes, being accidental, is not
reduced to the causality of a heavenly body, as stated above.