too when the Son is dishonored, the Father is dishonored also. If this be so with
us, where the difference is great between fathers and sons, much more in respect
of God, where there is no difference, does honor and insult pass on to Him. If the
world be subjected to the Son, this is glory to the Father. And so when we say
that He is perfect, wanting nothing, and not inferior to the Father, this is glory to
the Father, that he begot such a one. This is a great proof of His power also, and
goodness, and wisdom, that He begot one no whit inferior, neither in wisdom nor
in goodness. When I say that He is wise as the Father, and no whit inferior, this
is a proof of the great wisdom of the Father; when I say that He is powerful as
the Father, this is a proof of the Father's power. When I say that He is good as
the Father, this is the greatest evidence of His goodness, that He begot such (a
Son), in no whit less or inferior to Himself. When I say that He begot Him not
inferior in substance but equal, and not of another substance, in this I again
wonder at God, His power, and goodness, and wisdom, that He has manifested to
us another, of Himself, such as Himself, except in His not being the Father. Thus
whatsoever great things I say of the Son, pass on to the Father. Now if this small
and light matter (for it is but a light thing to God's glory that the world should
worship Him) is to the glory of God, how much more so are all those other
things?
Let us then believe to His glory, let us live to His glory, for one is no use
without the other; when we glorify Him rightly, but live not rightly, then do we
especially insult Him, because we are enrolled under Him as a Master and
Teacher, and yet despise Him, and stand in no dread of that fearful judgment
seat. It is no wonder that the heathen live impurely; this merits not such
condemnation. But that Christians, who partake in such great mysteries, who
enjoy so great glory, that they should live thus impurely, this is worst of all, and
unbearable. For tell me; He was obedient to the uttermost, wherefore He
received the honor which is on high. He became a servant, wherefore He is Lord
of all, both of Angels, and of all other. Let us too not suppose then that we
descend from what is our due, when we humble ourselves. For thus may we be

more highly exalted; and with reason; then do we especially become admirable.
For that the lofty man is really low, and that the lowly man is exalted, the
sentence of Christ sufficiently declares. Let us however examine the matter
itself. What is it to be humbled? Is it not to be blamed, to be accused, and
calumniated? What is it to be exalted? It is to be honored, to be praised, to be
glorified. Well. Let us see how the matter is. Satan was an angel, he exalted
himself. What then? Was he not humbled beyond all other? Has he not the earth
as his place? Is he not condemned and accused by all? Paul was a man, and
humbled himself. What then? Is he not admired? Is he not praised? Is he not
lauded? Is he not the friend of Christ? Wrought he not greater things than Christ?
Did he not ofttimes command the devil as a captive slave? Did he not carry him
about as an executioner? did he not hold him up to scorn? Held he not his head
bruised under his feet? Did he not with much boldness beg of God that others
too might do the same? Why am I saying? Absalom exalted himself, David
humbled himself; which of the two was raised up, which became glorious? For
what could be a more evident proof of humility than these words which that
blessed Prophet spoke of Shimei, "Let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him."
[2 Samuel 16:11] And if you please, we will examine the very cases themselves.
The Publican humbled himself, although the case can hardly be called humility;
but how? He answered in a right-minded manner. The Pharisee exalted himself.
What then? Let us also examine the matters. Let there be two men, both rich, and
highly honored, and elevated by wisdom and power, and other worldly
advantages; then let one of them seek honor from all, let him be angry if he
receive it not, let him require more than is due and exalt himself; let the other
despise the whole matter, bear himself unkindly towards no one on this account,
and evade honor when offered to him. For it is not possible to obtain glory any
other way than by fleeing from glory, for as long as we pursue it, it flies from us,
but when we flee from it, then it pursues us. If you would be glorious, do not
desire glory. If you would be lofty, do not make yourself lofty. And further, all
honor him who does not grasp at honor, but spurn him who seeks it. For the