FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.

account of the greatness of the sin, because a greater sin, other
things being equal, deserves a greater punishment. Secondly, on
account of a habitual sin, since men are not easily cured of habitual
sin except by severe punishments. Thirdly, on account of a great
desire for or a great pleasure in the sin: for men are not easily
deterred from such sins unless they be severely punished. Fourthly,
on account of the facility of committing a sin and of concealing it: for
such like sins, when discovered, should be more severely punished
in order to deter others from committing them.
Again, with regard to the greatness of a sin, four degrees may be
observed, even in respect of one single deed. The first is when a sin
is committed unwillingly; because then, if the sin be altogether
involuntary, man is altogether excused from punishment; for it is
written (Dt. 22:25, seqq.) that a damsel who suffers violence in a field
is not guilty of death, because "she cried, and there was no man to
help her." But if a man sinned in any way voluntarily, and yet through
weakness, as for instance when a man sins from passion, the sin is
diminished: and the punishment, according to true judgment, should
be diminished also; unless perchance the common weal requires
that the sin be severely punished in order to deter others from
committing such sins, as stated above. The second degree is when a
man sins through ignorance: and then he was held to be guilty to a
certain extent, on account of his negligence in acquiring knowledge:
yet he was not punished by the judges but expiated his sin by
sacrifices. Hence it is written (Lev. 4:2): "The soul that sinneth
through ignorance," etc. This is, however, to be taken as applying to
ignorance of fact; and not to ignorance of the Divine precept, which
all were bound to know. The third degree was when a man sinned
from pride, i.e. through deliberate choice or malice: and then he was
punished according to the greatness of the sin [Dt. 25:2]. The fourth
degree was when a man sinned from stubbornness or obstinacy:
and then he was to be utterly cut off as a rebel and a destroyer of the
commandment of the Law [Num. 15:30,31].
Accordingly we must say that, in appointing the punishment for
theft, the Law considered what would be likely to happen most
frequently (Ex. 22:1-9): wherefore, as regards theft of other things
which can easily be safeguarded from a thief, the thief restored only
twice their value. But sheep cannot be easily safeguarded from a
thief, because they graze in the fields: wherefore it happened more
frequently that sheep were stolen in the fields. Consequently the Law
inflicted a heavier penalty, by ordering four sheep to be restored for

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.105, C.3.