receiving testimony from all, both from those belonging to it, since they are its friends, and by those
having no connection with it, though they are its enemies. For that evidence is true, and cannot be
gainsaid, which elicits even from its adversaries striking testimonies in its behalf; they being
convinced with respect to the matter in hand by their own plain contemplation of it, and bearing
testimony to it, as well as declaring it. But after a while they break forth into enmity, and become
accusers [of what they had approved], and are desirous that their own testimony should not be
[regarded as] true. He, therefore, who was known, was not a different being from Him who declared
"No man knoweth the Father," but one and the same, the Father making all things subject to Him;
while He received testimony from all that He was very man, and that He was very God, from the
Father, from the Spirit, from angels, from the creation itself, from men, from apostate spirits and
demons, from the enemy, and last of all, from death itself. But the Son, administering all things for
the Father, works from the beginning even to the end, and without Him no man can attain the
knowledge of God. For the Son is the knowledge of the Father; but the knowledge of the Son is in
the Father, and has been revealed through the Son; and this was the reason why the Lord declared:
"No man knoweth the Son, but the Father; nor the Father, save the Son, and those to whomsoever
the Son shall reveal [Him]." For "shall reveal" was said not with reference to the future alone,
as if then [only] the Word had begun to manifest the Father when He was born of Mary, but it
applies indifferently throughout all time. For the Son, being present with His own handiwork from
the beginning, reveals the Father to all; to whom He wills, and when He wills, and as the Father
wills. Wherefore, then, in all things, and through all things, there is one God, the Father, and one
Word, and one Son, and one Spirit, and one salvation to all who believe in Him.

### Chapter VII.—Recapitulation of the foregoing argument, showing that Abraham, through
the revelation of the Word, knew the Father, and the coming of the Son of God. For this cause,
he rejoiced to see the day of Christ, when the promises made to him should be fulfilled. The
fruit of this rejoicing has flowed to posterity, viz., to those who are partakers in the faith of
Abraham, but not to the Jews who reject the Word of God.
1. Therefore Abraham also, knowing the Father through the Word, who made heaven and earth,
confessed Him to be God; and having learned, by an announcement [made to him], that the Son of
uses the single verb revelaverit, but says pointedly that it was so written by the venerable author." It is probable, therefore, that
the previous passage has been made to harmonize with the received text by a later hand; with which, however, the Syriac form
agrees.