SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.6.

I answer that, As stated above (Article 2, ad 1), the religious vow is
twofold. One is the simple vow consisting in a mere promise made to
God, and proceeding from the interior deliberation of the mind. Such
a vow derives its efficacy from the divine law. Nevertheless it may
encounter a twofold obstacle. First, through lack of deliberation, as
in the case of the insane, whose vows are not binding [Extra, De
Regular. et Transeunt. ad Relig., cap. Sicut tenor]. The same applies
to children who have not reached the required use of reason, so as
to be capable of guile, which use boys attain, as a rule, at about the
age of fourteen, and girls at the age of twelve, this being what is
called "the age of puberty," although in some it comes earlier and in
others it is delayed, according to the various dispositions of nature.
Secondly, the efficacy of a simple vow encounters an obstacle, if the
person who makes a vow to God is not his own master; for instance,
if a slave, though having the use of reason, vows to enter religion, or
even is ordained, without the knowledge of his master: for his
master can annul this, as stated in the Decretals (Dist. LIV, cap. Si
servus). And since boys and girls under the age of puberty are
naturally in their father's power as regards the disposal of their
manner of life, their father may either cancel or approve their vow, if
it please him to do so, as it is expressly said with regard to a woman
(Num. 30:4).
Accordingly if before reaching the age of puberty a child makes a
simple vow, not yet having full use of reason, he is not bound in
virtue of the vow; but if he has the use of reason before reaching the
age of puberty, he is bound, so far as he is concerned, by his vow;
yet this obligation may be removed by his father's authority, under
whose control he still remains, because the ordinance of the law
whereby one man is subject to another considers what happens in
the majority of cases. If, however, the
child has passed the age of puberty, his vow cannot be annulled by
the authority of his parents; though if he has not the full use of
reason, he would not be bound in the sight of God.
The other is the solemn vow which makes a man a monk or a
religious. Such a vow is subject to the ordinance of the Church, on
account of the solemnity attached to it. And since the Church
considers what happens in the majority of cases, a profession made
before the age of puberty, however much the person who makes
profession may have the use of reason, or be capable of guile, does
not take effect so as to make him a religious (Extra, De Regular., etc.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.6.

cap. Significatum est.).
Nevertheless, although they cannot be professed before the age of
puberty, they can, with the consent of their parents, be received into
religion to be educated there: thus it is related of John the Baptist
(Lk. 1:80) that "the child grew and was strengthened in spirit, and
was in the deserts." Hence, as Gregory states (Dial. ii, 3), "the Roman
nobles began to give their sons to the blessed Benedict to be
nurtured for Almighty God"; and this is most fitting, according to
Lam. 3:27, "It is good for a man when he has borne the yoke from his
youth." It is for this reason that by common custom children are
made to apply themselves to those duties or arts with which they are
to pass their lives.
Reply to Objection 1: The legal age for receiving the tonsure and
taking the solemn vow of religion is the age of puberty, when a man
is able to make use of his own will; but before the age of puberty it is
possible to have reached the lawful age to receive the tonsure and
be educated in a religious house.
Reply to Objection 2: The religious state is chiefly directed to the
attachment of perfection, as stated above (Question 186, Article 1, ad
4); and accordingly it is becoming to children, who are easily drawn
to it. But as a consequence it is called a state of repentance,
inasmuch as occasions of sin are removed by religious
observances, as stated above (Question 186, Article 1, ad 4).
Reply to Objection 3: Even as children are not bound to take oaths
(as the canon states), so are they not bound to take vows. If,
however, they bind themselves by vow or oath to do something, they
are bound in God's sight, if they have the use of reason, but they are
not bound in the sight of the Church before reaching the age of
fourteen.
Reply to Objection 4: A woman who has not reached the age of
puberty is not rebuked (Num. 30:4) for taking a vow without her
parents' consent: but the vow can be made void by her parents.
Hence it is evident that she does not sin in vowing. But we are given
to understand that she binds herself by vow, so far as she may,
without prejudice to her parents' authority.