SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.2.

itself of unbelief in respect of its proximate object, but by reason of
its cause, which is either the desire of an undue end in which way it
arises from pride or covetousness, as stated in the second
objection, or some illusion of the imagination (which gives rise to
error, as the Philosopher states in Metaph. iv; Ed. Did. iii, 5), for this
faculty has a certain connection with the flesh, in as much as its act
is independent on a bodily organ.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether heresy is properly about matters of faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that heresy is not properly about matters
of faith. For just as there are heresies and sects among Christians,
so were there among the Jews, and Pharisees, as Isidore observes
(Etym. viii, 3,4,5). Now their dissensions were not about matters of
faith. Therefore heresy is not about matters of faith, as though they
were its proper matter.
Objection 2: Further, the matter of faith is the thing believed. Now
heresy is not only about things, but also about works, and about
interpretations of Holy Writ. For Jerome says on Gal. 5:20 that
"whoever expounds the Scriptures in any sense but that of the Holy
Ghost by Whom they were written, may be called a heretic, though
he may not have left the Church": and elsewhere he says that
"heresies spring up from words spoken amiss." Therefore heresy is
not properly about the matter of faith.
Objection 3: Further, we find the holy doctors differing even about
matters pertaining to the faith, for example Augustine and Jerome,
on the question about the cessation of the legal observances: and
yet this was without any heresy on their part. Therefore heresy is not
properly about the matter of faith.
On the contrary, Augustine says against the Manichees [De Civ. Dei
xviii, 51]: "In Christ's Church, those are heretics, who hold
mischievous and erroneous opinions, and when rebuked that they
may think soundly and rightly, offer a stubborn resistance, and,
refusing to mend their pernicious and deadly doctrines, persist in
defending them." Now pernicious and deadly doctrines are none but
those which are contrary to the dogmas of faith, whereby "the just
man liveth" (Rm. 1:17). Therefore heresy is about matters of faith, as
about its proper matter.
I answer that, We are speaking of heresy now as denoting a
corruption of the Christian faith. Now it does not imply a corruption
of the Christian faith, if a man has a false opinion in matters that are
not of faith, for instance, in questions of geometry and so forth,
which cannot belong to the faith by any means; but only when a
person has a false opinion about things belonging to the faith.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.3.

Now a thing may be of the faith in two ways, as stated above (FP,
Question 32, Article 4; FS, Question 1, Article 6, ad 1; FS, Question 2,
Article 5), in one way, directly and principally, e.g. the articles of
faith; in another way, indirectly and secondarily, e.g. those matters,
the denial of which leads to the corruption of some article of faith;
and there may be heresy in either way, even as there can be faith.
Reply to Objection 1: Just as the heresies of the Jews and Pharisees
were about opinions relating to Judaism or Pharisaism, so also
heresies among Christians are about matter touching the Christian
faith.
Reply to Objection 2: A man is said to expound Holy Writ in another
sense than that required by the Holy Ghost, when he so distorts the
meaning of Holy Writ, that it is contrary to what the Holy Ghost has
revealed. Hence it is written (Ezech. 13:6) about the false prophets:
"They have persisted to confirm what they have said," viz. by false
interpretations of Scripture. Moreover a man professes his faith by
the words that he utters, since confession is an act of faith, as stated
above (Question 3, Article 1). Wherefore inordinate words about
matters of faith may lead to corruption of the faith; and hence it is
that Pope Leo says in a letter to Proterius, Bishop of Alexandria:
"The enemies of Christ's cross lie in wait for our every deed and
word, so that, if we but give them the slightest pretext, they may
accuse us mendaciously of agreeing with Nestorius."
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (Ep. xliii) and we find it
stated in the Decretals (xxiv, qu. 3, can. Dixit Apostolus): "By no
means should we accuse of heresy those who, however false and
perverse their opinion may be, defend it without obstinate fervor,
and seek the truth with careful anxiety, ready to mend their opinion,
when they have found the truth," because, to wit, they do not make a
choice in contradiction to the doctrine of the Church. Accordingly,
certain doctors seem to have differed either in matters the holding of
which in this or that way is of no consequence, so far as faith is
concerned, or even in matters of faith, which were not as yet defined
by the Church; although if anyone were obstinately to deny them
after they had been defined by the authority of the universal Church,
he would be deemed a heretic. This authority resides chiefly in the
Sovereign Pontiff. For we read [Decret. xxiv, qu. 1, can. Quoties]:
"Whenever a question of faith is in dispute, I think, that all our
brethren and fellow bishops ought to refer the matter to none other
than Peter, as being the source of their name and honor, against