a large place: why then do they pass seven days in it? Perhaps it was large as
regarded the number of believers. And after he had passed seven days there, on
the following day he spent the night in teaching: so hard did he find it to tear
himself away from them, and they from him. "And when we came together" it
says, "to break bread." [Acts 20:7-12] At the very time (of breaking bread) the
discourse having taken its commencement,* extended: as representing that they
were hungry, and it was not unseasonable: for the principal object (which
brought them together) was not teaching, but they came together "to break
bread;" discourse however having come up, he prolonged the teaching. See how
all partook also at Paul's table. It seems to me, that he discoursed while even
sitting at table, teaching us to consider all other things as subordinate to this.
Picture to yourselves, I beseech you, that house with its lights, with its crowd,
with Paul in the midst, discoursing, with even the windows occupied by many:
what a thing it was to see, and to hear that trumpet, and behold that gracious
countenance! But why did he discourse during night time? Since "he was about
to depart," it says, and was to see them no more: though this indeed he does not
tell them, they being too weak (to bear it), but he did tell it to the others. At the
same time too the miracle which took place would make them evermore to
remember that evening; so that the fall turned out to the advantage of the teacher.
Great was the delight of the hearers, and even when interrupted it was the more
increased. That (young man) was to rebuke all that are careless (of the word), he
whose death was caused by nothing else than this, that he wished to hear Paul.
"And we went before to ship," etc. [Acts 20:13] Wherefore does the writer say
where they came, and where they went to? To show in the first place that he was
making the voyage more leisurely— and this upon human grounds— and sailing
past (some): also (for the same reason he tells) where he made a stay, and what
parts he sailed past; (namely,) "that he might not have to spend the time in Asia."
[Acts 20:16] Since had he come there, he could not have sailed by; he did not
like to pain those who would have begged him to remain. "For he hasted," it
says, "if it were possible for him to keep the day of Pentecost in Jerusalem:" and

(this) was not possible (if he stayed). Observe, how he is also moved like other
men. For therefore it is that all this is done, that we may not fancy that he was
above human nature: (therefore) you see him desiring (something), and hasting,
and in many instances not obtaining (his object): for those great and holy men
were partakers of the same nature with us; it was in the will and purpose that
they differed, and so it was that also they attracted upon themselves the great
grace they did. See, for instance, how many things they order by an economy of
their own. "That we give not offense" [2 Corinthians 6:3] to those who wish (to
take offense), and, "That our ministry be not blamed." Behold, both an
irreproachable life and on the other hand condescension. This is (indeed to be)
called economy, to the (very) summit and height (of it). For he that went beyond
the commandments of Christ, was on the other hand more humble than all. "I am
made all things to all men," he says, "that I might gain all." [1 Corinthians 9:22]
He cast himself also upon dangers, as he says in another place; "In much
patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments."
[2 Corinthians 6:4-5] And great was his love for Christ. For if there be not this,
all else is superfluous, both the economy (of condescending accommodation),
and the irreproachable life, and the exposing himself to dangers. "Who is weak,"
he says, "and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not?" [2 Corinthians
11:29] These words let us imitate, and let us cast ourselves upon dangers for our
brethren's sake. Whether it be fire, or the sword, cast yourself on it, beloved, that
you may rescue (him that is) your member: cast yourself, be not afraid. You are a
disciple of Christ, Who laid down His life for His brethren: a fellow disciple
with Paul, who chose to suffer numberless ills for his enemies, for men that were
warring against him; be thou filled with zeal, imitate Moses. He saw one
suffering wrong, and avenged him; he despised royal luxury, and for the sake of
those who were afflicted he became a fugitive, a wanderer, lonely and deserted;
he passed his days in a foreign land; and yet he blamed not himself, nor said,
"What is this? I despised royalty, with all that honor and glory: I chose to
avenge those who were wronged, and God has overlooked me: and not only has