full, and not one fears. Oh, henceforth let us take the alarm. God is accustomed
to punish the righteous also with the wicked; such was the case with Daniel, and
with the three holy Children, such has been the case with ten thousand others,
such is the case in the wars that are taking place even at the present day. For the
one indeed, whatever burden of sins they have upon them, by this means lay
aside even that; but not so the other.
On account of all these things, let us take heed to ourselves. Do ye not see
these wars? Do ye not hear of these disasters? Do ye learn no lesson from these
things? Nations and whole cities are swallowed up and destroyed, and myriads
as many again are enslaved to the barbarians.
If hell bring us not to our senses, yet let these things. What, are these too
mere threats, are they not facts that have already taken place? Great is the
punishment they have suffered, yet a greater still shall we suffer, who are not
brought to our senses even by their fate. Is this discourse wearing? I am aware it
is myself, but if we attend to it, it has its advantage; because this it has not, the
quality of an address to please—nay more, nor ever shall have, but ever those
topics which may avail to humble and to chasten the soul. For these will be to us
the ground-work of those blessings to come hereafter, to which God grant that
we may all attain, in Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to the Father, together
with the Holy Ghost be glory and might and honor, now and henceforth, and
forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 7 on Ephesians

Chapter III. Verses 8-11
" Unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, was this grace given, to
preach unto the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make all men
see what is the dispensation of the mystery, which from all ages has been hid in
God, who created all things: to the intent that now unto the principalities and the
powers in the heavenly places might be made known through the Church the
manifold wisdom of God, according to the eternal purpose, which He purposed
in Christ Jesus our Lord."
They who go to the physician's have not merely to go there and nothing
further; they have to learn how to treat themselves, and to apply remedies. And
so with us then who come here, we must not do this and nothing else, we must
learn our lesson, the surpassing lowliness of Paul. What? When he was about to
speak of the vastness of the grace of God, hear what he says, "Unto me, who am
less than the least of all saints, was this grace given." Lowliness indeed it was
even to bewail his former sins, although blotted out, and to make mention of
them, and to hold himself within his true measure as where he calls himself "a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious;" [1 Timothy 1:13] yet nothing was
equal to this: for "formerly," says he, such was I; and again he calls himself, "one
born out of due time." [1 Corinthians 15:8] But that after so many great and good
deeds and at that time he should thus humble himself, and call himself "less than
the least of all," this is indeed great and surpassing moderation. "To one who am
less than the least of all saints;" he says not, "than the Apostles." So that that
expression is less strong than this before us. There his words are, "I am not meet
to be called an Apostle." [1 Corinthians 15:9] Here he says that he is even "less
than the least of all saints;" "to me," says he, "who am less than the least of all
saints was this grace given." What grace? "To preach unto the Gentiles the