Reply to Objection 2: As the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text 14),
being is twofold. In one way it is considered as signifying the entity
of a thing, as divisible by the ten "predicaments"; and in that sense it
is convertible with thing, and thus no privation is a being, and
neither therefore is evil a being. In another sense being conveys the
truth of a proposition which unites together subject and attribute by
a copula, notified by this word "is"; and in this sense being is what
answers to the question, "Does it exist?" and thus we speak of
blindness as being in the eye; or of any other privation. In this way
even evil can be called a being. Through ignorance of this distinction
some, considering that things may be evil, or that evil is said to be in
things, believed that evil was a positive thing in itself.
Reply to Objection 3: God and nature and any other agent make what
is best in the whole, but not what is best in every single part, except
in order to the whole, as was said above (Question 47, Article 2). And
the whole itself, which is the universe of creatures, is all the better
and more perfect if some things in it can fail in goodness, and do
sometimes fail, God not preventing this. This happens, firstly,
because "it belongs to Providence not to destroy, but to save
nature," as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv); but it belongs to nature
that what may fail should sometimes fail; secondly, because, as
Augustine says (Enchir. 11), "God is so powerful that He can even
make good out of evil." Hence many good things would be taken
away if God permitted no evil to exist; for fire would not be
generated if air was not corrupted, nor would the life of a lion be
preserved unless the ass were killed. Neither would avenging justice
nor the patience of a sufferer be praised if there were no injustice.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether evil is in good as in its subject?

Objection 1: It would seem that evil is not in good as its subject. For
good is something that exists. But Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv, 4)
that "evil does not exist, nor is it in that which exists." Therefore, evil
is not in good as its subject.
Objection 2: Further, evil is not a being; whereas good is a being.
But "non-being" does not require being as its subject. Therefore,
neither does evil require good as its subject.
Objection 3: Further, one contrary is not the subject of another. But
good and evil are contraries. Therefore, evil is not in good as in its
subject.
Objection 4: Further, the subject of whiteness is called white.
Therefore also the subject of evil is evil. If, therefore, evil is in good
as in its subject, it follows that good is evil, against what is said (Is.
5:20): "Woe to you who call evil good, and good evil!"
On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchiridion 14) that "evil exists
only in good."
I answer that, As was said above (Article 1), evil imports the absence
of good. But not every absence of good is evil. For absence of good
can be taken in a privative and in a negative sense. Absence of good,
taken negatively, is not evil; otherwise, it would follow that what
does not exist is evil, and also that everything would be evil, through
not having the good belonging to something else; for instance, a
man would be evil who had not the swiftness of the roe, or the
strength of a lion. But the absence of good, taken in a privative
sense, is an evil; as, for instance, the privation of sight is called
blindness.
Now, the subject of privation and of form is one and the same---viz.
being in potentiality, whether it be being in absolute potentiality, as
primary matter, which is the subject of the substantial form, and of
privation of the opposite form; or whether it be being in relative
potentiality, and absolute actuality, as in the case of a transparent
body, which is the subject both of darkness and light. It is, however,
manifest that the form which makes a thing actual is a perfection and