said, "we are a sweet savor, even in them that perish," lest you should think that
these too are acceptable, he added,

2 Corinthians 2:16
"To the one a savor from death unto death, to the other a savor from life
unto life."
For this sweet savor some so receive that they are saved, others so that they
perish. So that should any one be lost, the fault is from himself: for both
ointment is said to suffocate swine, and light (as I before observed,) to blind the
weak. And such is the nature of good things; they not only correct what is akin
to them, but also destroy the opposite: and in this way is their power most
displayed. For so both fire, not only when it gives light and when it purifies gold,
but even when it consumes thorns, does very greatly display its proper power,
and so show itself to be fire: and Christ too herein also does discover His own
majesty when He "shall consume" Antichrist "with the breath of His mouth, and
bring him to nought with the manifestation of His coming." [2 Thessalonians 2:8]
"And who is sufficient for these things?"
Seeing he had uttered great things, that 'we are a sacrifice of Christ and a
sweet savor, and are every where made to triumph,' he again uses moderation,
referring all to God. Whence also he says, "and who is sufficient for these
things?" 'for all,' says he, 'is Christ's, nothing our own.' Do you see how opposite
his language to the false Apostles'? For they indeed glory, as contributing
somewhat from themselves unto the message: he, on the contrary, says, he
therefore glories, because he says that nothing is his own. "For our glorying is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that not in fleshly wisdom, but in the grace
of God, we behaved ourselves in the world." And that which they considered it a
glory to acquire, I mean the wisdom from without, he makes it his to take away.
Whence also he here says, "And who is sufficient for these things?" But if none
are sufficient, that which is done is of grace.

2 Corinthians 2:17
"For we are not as the rest, which corrupt the word of God."
'For even if we use great sounding words, yet we declared nothing to be our
own that we achieved, but all Christ's. For we will not imitate the false apostles;
the men who say that most is of themselves.' For this is "to corrupt," when one
adulterates the wine; when one sells for money what he ought to give freely. For
he seems to me to be here both taunting them in respect to money, and again
hinting at the very thing I have said, as that they mingle their own things with
God's; which is the charge Isaiah brings when he said, "Your vintners mingle
wine with water:" [Isaiah 1:22, Septuagint] for even if this was said of wine, yet
one would not err in expounding it of doctrine too. 'But we,' says he, 'do not so:
but such as we have been entrusted with, such do we offer you, pouring out the
word undiluted.' Whence he added, "But as of sincerity, but as of God, in the
sight of God speak we in Christ."
'We do not,' says he 'beguile you and so preach, as conferring a gift on you,
or as bringing in and mingling somewhat from ourselves, "but as of God;" that
is, we do not say that we confer any thing of our own, but that God has given
all.' For "of God" means this; To glory in nothing as if we had it of our own, but
to refer every thing to Him. "Speak we in Christ."
Not by our own wisdom, but instructed by the power that comes from Him.
Those who glory speak not in this way, but as bringing in something from
themselves. Whence he elsewhere also turns them into ridicule , saying, "For
what have you that thou did not receive? But if you received it, why do you glory
as if you had not received it." [1 Corinthians 4:7] This is the highest virtue, to
refer every thing to God, to consider nothing to be our own, to do nothing out of
regard to men's opinion, but to what God wills. For He it is that requires the
account. Now however this order is reversed: and of Him that shall sit upon the