Name" [Acts 5:41]: and again he says, "Now I rejoice in my sufferings for you"
[Colossians 1:24]: and again, "For our light affliction, which is but for the
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." [2
Corinthians 4:17]. These things, however, he says, by way of making the least of
his merits ([μετριάζων]). But there he show his fortitude, not so much of daring,
as of enduring: "I," says he, "have been evil entreated, but it was with you: and
what is indeed the grievous part of the business, at the hands of Jews." Observe,
he puts here both love and fortitude. Mark, here, I pray you, a character of
teaching: "I kept back nothing," he says, ungrudging fullness, unshrinking
promptness— "of what was profitable unto you:" because there were things
which they did not need to learn. For as the hiding some things would have been
like grudging, so the saying all things would be folly. This is why he adds, "that
was profitable unto you. But have showed you, and have taught you:" have not
only said, but also taught: not doing this either as a mere matter of form. For that
this is what he means, observe what he says: "publicly, and from house to
house:" thereby representing the exceeding toil, the great earnestness and
endurance. "Both Jews, and Greeks." Not (addressing myself) to you alone.
"Testifying:" here, the boldness of speech: and that, even though we do no good,
yet we must speak: for this is the meaning of "testifying," when we speak to
those who do not pay attention: and so the word [διαμαρτύρασθαι] is for the
most part used. "I call heaven and earth to witness" [Deuteronomy 4:26],
[διαμαρτύρομαι], Moses says: and now Paul himself, [Διαμαρτυρόμενος] "both
to Jews and Greeks repentance toward God." What do you testify? That they
should be careful about their manner of life: that they should repent, and draw
near to God. "Both to Jews and Greeks"— for neither did the Jews know Him—
both by reason of their works, he says, "repentance towards God," and, by
reason that they knew not the Son, he adds, "and faith in the Lord Jesus." To
what end, then, do you say these things? To what end do you put them in mind of
them? What has come of it? Have you anything to lay to their charge? Having
first alarmed their feeling, then he adds, "And now, behold, I go bound in the

Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shall befall me there: save
that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions
abide me. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto
myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God." [Acts
20:22-24]. Wherefore says he this? By way of preparing them to be always ready
to meet dangers, whether seen or unseen, and in all things to obey the Spirit. He
shows that it is for great objects that he is led away from them. "Save that the
Holy Ghost," he says, "in every city witnesses to me saying"— to show that he
departs willingly; that (see Hom. xlv. p. 273) you may not imagine it any bond or
necessity, when he says, "bound in the Spirit— that in every city bonds and
afflictions await me." Then also he adds this, "I count not my life dear, until I
shall have fulfilled my course and the ministry, which I received of the Lord
Jesus." Until I shall have finished my course, says he, with joy. Do you mark
how (clearly) these were the words not of one lamenting, but of one who forbore
to make the most (of his troubles) ([μετριάζοντος]), of one who would instruct
those (whom he addressed), and sympathize with them in the things which were
befalling He says not, "I grieve indeed, but one must needs bear it:" "but," says
he, "of none of those things do I make account, neither do I have," i.e. account
"my life dear to me." Why this again? Not to extol himself, but to teach them, as
by the former words, humility, so by these, fortitude and boldness: "I have it not
precious," i.e. "I love it not before this: I account it more precious to finish my
course, to testify." And he says not, "to preach," "to teach"— but what says he?
"to testify ([διαμαρτύρασθαι])— the Gospel of the grace of God." He is about to
say something more uncomfortable ([φορτικώτερον]), namely, "I am pure from
the blood of all men (because on my part) there is nothing lacking:" he is about
to lay upon them the whole weight and burden: so he first mollifies their feelings
by saying, "And now behold I know that you shall see my face no more." The
consolation is twofold: both that "my face you shall see no more," for in heart I
am with you: and that it was not they alone (who should see him no more): for,