in a different manner, says, "The latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to
unloose." [Luke 3:16] Again, that the phrase, "is before me," does not refer to
His coming into Being, is plain from the sequel; for had he meant to say this,
what follows, "for He was before me," would be superfluous. For who so dull
and foolish as not to know that He who "was born before" him "was before"
him? Or if the words refer to His subsistence before the ages, what is said is
nothing else than that "He who comes after me came into being before me."
Besides, such a thing as this is unintelligible, and the cause is thrown in
needlessly; for he ought to have said the contrary, if he had wished to declare
this, "that He who comes after me was before me, since also He was born before
me." For one might with reason assign this, (the "being born before") as the
cause of "being before," but not the "being before," as the cause of "being born."
While what we assert is very reasonable. Since you all at least know this, that
they are always things uncertain not things evident, that require their causes to
be assigned. Now if the argument related to the production of substance, it could
not have been uncertain that he who "was born" first must needs "be" first; but
because he is speaking concerning honor, he with reason explains what seems to
be a difficulty. For many might well enquire, whence and on what pretext He
who came after, became before, that is, appeared with great honor; in reply to
this question therefore, he immediately assigns the reason; and the reason is, His
Being first. He does not say, that "by some kind of advancement he cast me who
has been first behind him, and so became before me," but that "he was before
me," even though he arrives after me.
But how, says one, if the Evangelist refers to His manifestation to men, and
to the glory which was to attend Him from them, does he speak of what was not
yet accomplished, as having already taken place? For he does not say, "shall be,"
but "was." Because this is a custom among the prophets of old, to speak of the
future as of the past. Thus Isaiah speaking of His slaughter does not say, "He
shall be led (which would have denoted futurity) as a sheep to the slaughter";
but "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter" [Isaiah 53:7]; yet He was not yet

Incarnate, but the Prophet speaks of what should be as if it had come to pass. So
David, pointing to the Crucifixion, said not, "They shall pierce My hands and My
feet," but "They pierced My hands and My feet, and parted My garments among
them, and cast lots upon My vesture" [Psalm 22:16-18]; and discoursing of the
traitor as yet unborn, he says, "He which did eat of My bread, has lifted up his
heel against Me" [Psalm 41:9]; and of the circumstances of the Crucifixion,
"They gave Me gall for meat, and in My thirst they gave Me vinegar to drink."
[Psalm 69:21]
4. Do you desire that we adduce more examples, or do these suffice? For
my part, I think they do; for if we have not dug over the ground in all its extent,
we have at least dug down to its bottom; and this last kind of work is not less
laborious than the former; and we fear lest by straining your attention
immoderately we cause you to fall back.
Let us then give to our discourse a becoming conclusion. And what
conclusion is becoming? A suitable giving of glory to God; and that is suitable
which is given, not by words only, but much more by actions. For He says, "Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven." [Matthew 5:16] Now nothing is more full of
light than a most excellent conversation. As one of the wise men has said, "The
paths of the just shine like the light" [Proverbs 4:18, Septuagint]; and they shine
not for them alone who kindle the flame by their works, and are guides in the
way of righteousness, but also for those who are their neighbors. Let us then
pour oil into these lamps, that the flame become higher, that rich light appear.
For not only has this oil great strength now, but even when sacrifices were at
their height, it was far more acceptable than they could be. "I will have mercy,"
He says, "and not sacrifice." [Matthew 12:7; Hosea 6:6] And with good reason;
for that is a lifeless altar, this a living; and all that is laid on that altar becomes
the food of fire, and ends in dust, and it is poured forth as ashes, and the smoke
of it is dissolved into the substance of the air; but here there is nothing like this,
the fruits which it bears are different. As the words of Paul declare; for in