had finished our course from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais, and saluted the
brethren, and abode with them one day. And the next day we that were of Paul's
company departed, and came unto Cæsarea: and we entered into the house of
Philip the evangelist, which was one of the seven; and abode with him." [Acts
21:5-8] Having come to Cæsarea, it says, we abode with Philip, which was one
of the seven. "And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did
prophesy." [Acts 21:9] But it is not these that foretell to Paul, though they were
prophetesses; it is Agabus. "And as we tarried there many days, there came
down from Judea a certain prophet, named Agabus. And when he had come unto
us, he took Paul's girdle, and bound his own hands and feet, and said, Thus says
the Holy Ghost, So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owns this
girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles." (v. 10, 11.) He who
formerly had declared about the famine, the same says, This "man, who owns
this girdle, thus shall they bind." [Acts 11:28] The same that the prophets used to
do, representing events to the sight, when they spoke about the captivity— as did
Ezekiel— the same did this (Agabus). "And," what is the grievous part of the
business, "deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. And when we heard these
things, both we, and they of that place, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem."
[Acts 21:12] Many even besought him not to depart, and still he would not
comply. "Then Paul answered, What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart?"
[Acts 21:13] Do you mark? Lest, having heard that saying, "I go bound in the
Spirit" [Acts 20:22], you should imagine it a matter of necessity, or that he fell
into it ignorantly, therefore these things are foretold. But they wept, and he
comforted them, grieving at their tears. For, "what mean ye," he says, "to weep
and to break my heart?" Nothing could be more affectionate: because he saw
them weeping, he grieved, he that felt no pain at his own trials. "For I am ready
not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be
done." (v. 13, 14.) You do me wrong in doing this: for do I grieve? Then they
ceased, when he said, "to break my heart." I weep, he says, for you, not on

account of my own sufferings: as for those (men), I am willing even to die for
them. But let us look over again what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "Silver, or gold, or apparel," etc. [ch. 20:33, 34; 1
Corinthians 9; 2 Corinthians 11] So then, it was not in Corinth only that they did
this — they that corrupted the disciples, but in Asia as well. But he nowhere
casts this up as a reproach to the Ephesians, when writing to them. And why?
Because he did not fall upon any subject that obliged him to speak of this. But to
the Corinthians he says, "My boasting has not been stopped in the regions of
Achaia." [2 Corinthians 11:10] And he does not say, You did not give to me; but,
"Silver, or gold, or apparel, I coveted not," that it might not seem to be their
doing, that they had not given. And he does not say, From no man have I coveted
the necessaries of life, that again it might not look like accusing them: but he
covertly hints as much, seeing that he provided subsistence for others as well as
himself. See how he worked with earnestness, "night and day" discoursing (to
others), "with tears warning each one of them." [Acts 20:31] (Here) again he
puts them in fear: "I have showed you all things," he says: you cannot take
refuge in the plea of ignorance: "have shown you" by works "how that so
laboring you ought to work." And he does not say, that to receive is bad, but that
not to receive is better. For, "remember," he says, "the words of the Lord which
he spoke: It is more blessed to give than to receive." [Acts 20:35] And where
said He this? Perhaps the Apostles delivered it by unwritten tradition; or else it is
plain from (recorded sayings, from) which one could infer it. For in fact here he
has shown both boldness in meeting dangers, sympathy with those over whom
he ruled, teaching with (unshrinking) boldness, humility, (voluntary) poverty:
but, what we have here is even more than that poverty. For if He says there (in
the Gospel), "If you will be perfect, sell what you have and give to the poor"
[Matthew 19:21], when, besides receiving nothing himself, he provides
sustenance for others also, what could equal this? It is one degree to fling away
one's possessions; a second, to be sufficient for the supply of one's own
necessities: a third, to provide for others also; a fourth, for one (to do all this)