win acceptance, feasting, as they do, whole cities with all sorts of spectacles;
contributing largely, bearing all the cost. And therefore those whom they have
treated, requite them for these enjoyments with words of welcome and
benediction, with hanging ([παραπετάσματα]) of tapestries, and a blaze of lamps,
and with wreaths, and boughs, and brilliant garments. Whereas, at the sight of
the physician, the sick become sad and downcast: at sight of the magistrate, the
rioters become subdued: no running riot then, no gambolling, except when he
also goes over into their ranks. Let us see, then, which render the best service to
their cities; those who provide these festivities, and banquetings, and expensive
entertainments, and manifold rejoicings; or those who restrain all those doings,
bearing before them stocks, scourges, executioners, dreaded soldiers, and a voice
fraught with much terror: and issuing orders, and making men hang down their
heads, and with the rod dispersing the idlers in the market-place. Let us see, I
say; these are the disagreeable, those the beloved: let us see where the gain rests.
([λήλει].) What comes then of your pleasure-givers? A kind of frigid enjoyment,
lasting till the evening, and tomorrow vanished; mirth ungoverned, words
unseemly and dissolute. And what of these? Awe, sobriety, subdued thoughts;
reasonableness of mind, an end of idleness; a curb on the passions within; a wall
of defence, next to God, against assailants from without. It is by means of these
we have each our property but by those ruinous festivities we dissipate it.
Robbers indeed have not invaded it, but vainglory together with pleasure acts the
part of robber. Each sees the robber carrying off everything before his eyes, and
is delighted at it! A new fashion of robbery, this, to induce people to be glad
when one is plundering them! On the other part, there is nothing of the kind: but
God, as the common Father, has secured us as by a wall against all [depredators],
both seen and unseen. For, "Take heed," says He, "that you do not your alms
before men." [Matthew 6:1] The soul learns from the one, [excess; from the
other] to flee injustice. For injustice consists not merely in grasping at more
wealth than belongs to us, but in giving to the belly more than its needful
sustenance, in carrying mirth beyond its proper bounds, and causing it to run into

frantic excesses. From the one, it learns sobriety; from the other, unchastity. For
it is unchastity, not merely to have carnal intercourse with women, but even to
look upon a woman with unchaste eyes. From the one, it learns modesty; from
the other, conceited self-importance. For, "All things," says the Apostle, "are
lawful for me, but not all things expedient." [1 Corinthians 6:12] From the one,
decent behavior; from the other unseemliness. For, as to the doings in the
theatres, I pass these. But to let you see that it is not even a pleasure either, but a
grief, show me, but a single day after the festival, both those who spent their
money in giving it, and those who were feasted with spectacles: and you shall
see them all looking dejected enough, but most of all him, your ([ἔ] [κεἵνον])
famous man that has spent his money for it. And this is but fair: for, the day
before, he delighted the common man, and the common man indeed was in high
good humor and enjoyment, and rejoiced indeed in the splendid garment, but
then not having the use of it, and seeing himself stripped of it, he was grieved
and annoyed; and wanted to be the great man, seeing even his own enjoyment to
be small compared with his. Therefore, the day after, they change places, and
now he, the great man, gets the larger share in the dejection.
Now if in worldly matters, amusements are attended with such
dissatisfaction, while disagreeable things are so beneficial, much more does this
hold in things spiritual. Why is it that no one quarrels with the laws, but on the
contrary all account that matter a common benefit? For indeed not strangers
from some other quarter, nor enemies of those for whom the laws are made,
came and made these orders, but the citizens themselves, their patrons, their
benefactors: and this very thing, the making of laws, is a token of beneficence
and good-will. And yet the laws are full of punishment and restraint, and there is
no such thing as law without penalty and coercion. Then is it not unreasonable,
that while the expositors of those laws are called deliverers, benefactors, and
patrons, we are considered troublesome and vexatious if we speak of the laws of
God? When we discourse about hell, then we bring forward those laws: just as in
the affairs of the world, people urge the laws of murder, highway robbery, and