is not bad, if it be distributed to the poor, otherwise it is bad, it is ensnaring. "But
if he does not evil, though he does no good, it is not bad," he argues. True. But is
not this an evil, that you alone should have the Lord's property, that you alone
should enjoy what is common? Is not "the earth God's, and the fullness thereof"?
If then our possessions belong to one common Lord, they belong also to our
fellow-servants. The possessions of one Lord are all common. Do we not see this
the settled rule in great houses? To all is given an equal portion of provisions, for
it proceeds from the treasures of their Lord. And the house of the master is
opened to all. The king's possessions are all common, as cities, market-places,
and public walks. We all share them equally.
Mark the wise dispensation of God. That He might put mankind to shame,
He has made certain things common, as the sun, air, earth, and water, the heaven,
the sea, the light, the stars; whose benefits are dispensed equally to all as
brethren. We are all formed with the same eyes, the same body, the same soul,
the same structure in all respects, all things from the earth, all men from one
man, and all in the same habitation. But these are not enough to shame us. Other
things then (as we have said) He has made common, as baths, cities, marketplaces, walks. And observe, that concerning things that are common there is no
contention, but all is peaceable. But when one attempts to possess himself of
anything, to make it his own, then contention is introduced, as if nature herself
were indignant, that when God brings us together in every way, we are eager to
divide and separate ourselves by appropriating things, and by using those cold
words "mine and yours." Then there is contention and uneasiness. But where this
is not, no strife or contention is bred. This state therefore is rather our
inheritance, and more agreeable to nature. Why is it, that there is never a dispute
about a market-place? Is it not because it is common to all? But about a house,
and about property, men are always disputing. Things necessary are set before us
in common; but even in the least things we do not observe a community. Yet
those greater things He has opened freely to all, that we might thence be
instructed to have these inferior things in common. Yet for all this, we are not

instructed.
But as I said, how can he, who is rich, be a good man? When he distributes
his riches, he is good, so that he is good when he has ceased to have it, when he
gives it to others; but while he keeps it himself, he is not good. How then is that
a good which being retained renders men evil, being parted with makes them
good? Not therefore to have wealth, but to have it not, makes one appear to be
good. Wealth therefore is not a good. But if, when you can receive it, you receive
it not, again you are good.
If then we are good, when having it, we distribute it to others; or when
offered to us we refuse it, and if we are not good, when we receive or gain it,
how can it be a good thing in itself? Call it not therefore a good. You possess it
not, because you think it a good, because you are anxious to possess it. Cleanse
your mind, and rectify your judgment, and then you will be good. Learn what are
really goods. What are they? Virtue and benevolence. These and not that, are
truly good. According to this rule, the more charitable you are, the more good
you will be considered. But if you are rich, you are no longer good. Let us
therefore become thus good, that we may be really good, and may obtain the
good things to come in Jesus Christ, with whom, etc.