curse. But if He cast them out of paradise, and condemned them to labor, even
for this we ought to adore and reverence Him the most. For since self-indulgence
issues in listlessness, He trenches upon the pleasure by building a fort of pain
against listlessness, that we may return to the love of Him. And what of Cain's
case? Does he not meet with the same gentleness? For being by him also
insulted, He does not reproach (same word as insult) in return, but entreats, (or
comforts) him, and says, "Why is your countenance fallen?" [Genesis 4:6] And
yet what he had done allowed of no excuse whatever. And this the younger
brother shows. But still even then He does not rebuke him: but what says He?
"Have you sinned: keep peace;" "do so no more." "To you shall his turning be,
and you shall rule over him" [Genesis 4:7, Septuagint], meaning his brother.
"For if you are afraid, lest for this sacrifice," He means, "I should deprive you of
the preëminence of the first-born, be of good cheer, for the entire command over
him do I put into your hands. Only be thou better, and love him that has done
you no wrong; for I have an interest in you both. And what makes Me most glad
is, that you be not at variance one with another." For as a devoted mother, so
does God do and plan everything to keep one from being torn from another; but
that you may get a clearer view, by an example, of my meaning, call to your
mind, pray, Rebecca in her trouble, and running about everywhere, when the
elder son was at enmity with the younger. For if she loved Jacob, still she did not
feel averse to Esau. And therefore she said, Lest by any means "I be deprived of
both of you, my children, in one day." [Genesis 27:45] Therefore also God upon
that occasion said, "You have sinned: be at peace: unto you shall his turning be"
[Genesis 4:7], so repressing the murder beforehand, and aiming at the peace of
them both. But when he had murdered him, He did not even then bring His care
for him to a close, but again answers the fratricide in gentle terms, saying,
"Where is your brother Abel?" that even now, if he would, he might make a full
confession. But he struggled in defence of his former misdeeds, with a greater
and sadder shamelessness. But even then God does not leave him, but again
speaks the language of an iujured and despised lover, and says, "The voice of

your brother's blood cries unto Me." [Genesis 4:10] And again He rebukes the
earth with the murderer, turning His wrath off to it, and saying, "Cursed be the
earth, which opened her mouth to receive your brother's blood" (ib. ii.); and
doing like those who lament ([ἀ] [νακαλοὕντας]), as David also did when Saul
was fallen. For he made an address to the mountains which received him as he
died, in the words, "You mountains of Gilboa, let there fall on you neither rain
nor dew, because there were the shields of the mighty cast away." [2 Samuel
1:21] And thus God also, as though singing some solitary dirge ([μονῳδίαν]),
says, "The voice of your brother's blood cries unto Me; and now are you cursed
from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive your brother's blood from
your hand." And this He said to humble his fiery passion, and to persuade him to
love him at least now he had gone. Have you extinguished his life? He would
say; why do you not now extinguish the hatred also? But what does He do? He
loves both the one and the other, since He made them both. What then? does (4
manuscripts will) He let the murderer go unpunished? Nay, he would but have
grown worse. Will He punish him then? Nay, He has more tenderness than a
father. See then how He at once punishes and also displays, even in this, His
love. Or rather, He does not so much as punish, but only corrects. For He does
not kill him, but only fetters him with trembling, that he may divest himself of
the crime, that so at least he may come back to a natural tenderness for the other,
and that so at last he may make a truce with him now he has gone; for He were
fain he should not go away to the other world in enmity with him that was
deceased. This is the way wherein they that love, when in doing acts of kindness
they meet with no love in return, are led on to be vehement and to threaten, not
with their will indeed, but led by their love to do this: that at least in this way
they may win over those that scorn them. Yet affection of this sort is one of
compulsion, and still this even solaces them, through the vehemency of their
love. And so punishment itself comes from affection, since unless pained at
being hated, they would not choose to punish either. Now observe, how this is
what Paul says to the Corinthians. For "who is he" (says he) "that makes me