contradiction. The word, "gave them over," then, means this, He permitted them
to be given over. Do you see, that the impure life is the ground for like doctrines
also? "Every one," says the Lord, "that does ill hates the light, and comes not to
the light." [John 3:20] For how could a profligate man, one more immersed in
the practice of indiscriminate lewdness than the swine that wallow in the mire,
and who is a lover of money, and has not so much as any desire after
temperance, enter upon a life like this? They made the thing, says he, their
"work." Hence their "hardening" [Ephesians 4:19], hence the "darkness of their
understanding." There is such a thing as being in the dark, even while the light is
shining, when the eyes are weak; and weak they become, either by the influx of
ill humors, or by superabundance of rheum. And so surely is it also here; when
the strong current of the affairs of this life overwhelms the perceptive power of
the understanding, it is thrown into a state of darkness. And in the same way as if
we were placed in the depths under water, we should be unable to see the sun
through the quantity of water lying, like a sort of barrier, above us, so surely, in
the eyes of the understanding also a blindness of the heart takes place, that is, an
insensibility, whenever there is no fear to agitate the soul. "There is no fear of
God," it says, "before his eyes" [Psalm 36:1]; and again, "The fool has said in his
heart, There is no God." [Psalm 14:1] Now blindness arises from no other cause
than from want of feeling; this clogs the channel; for whenever the fluids are
curdled and collected into one place, the limb becomes dead and void of feeling;
and though thou burn it, or cut it, or do what you will with it, still it feels not. So
is it also with those persons, when they have once given themselves over to
lasciviousness: though thou apply the word to them like fire, or steel, yet nothing
touches, nothing reaches them; their limb is utterly dead. And unless you can
remove the insensibility, so as to touch the healthy members, everything you do
is vain.
"With greediness," says he.
Here he has most completely taken away their excuse; for it was in their
power, if at least they chose it, not to be "greedy," nor to be "lascivious," nor

gluttonous, and yet to enjoy their desires. It was in their power to partake in
moderation of riches, and even of pleasure and of luxury; but when they
indulged the thing immoderately, they destroyed all.
"To work all uncleanness," says he.
You see how he strips them of all excuse by speaking of "working
uncleanness." They did not sin, he means, by making a false step, but they
worked out these horrid deeds, and they made the thing a matter of study. "All
uncleanness"; uncleanness is all adultery, fornication, unnatural lust, envy, every
kind of profligacy and lasciviousness.
Ver. 20, 21. "But ye did not so learn Christ," he continues, "if so be that you
heard Him, and were taught in Him even as truth is in Jesus."
The expression, "If so be that you heard Him," is not that of one doubting,
but of one even strongly affirming: as he also speaks elsewhere, "If so be that it
is a righteous thing with God to recompense affliction to them that afflict you."
[2 Thessalonians 1:6] That is to say, It was not for these purposes that "ye
learned Christ."
Ver. 22. "That ye put away as concerning your former manner of life, the
old man."
This then surely is to learn Christ, to live rightly; for he that lives wickedly
knows not God, neither is known of Him; for hear what he says elsewhere,
"They profess that they know God, but by their works they deny Him." [Titus
1:16]
"As truth is in Jesus; that you put away as concerning your former manner
of life, the old man."
That is to say, It was not on these terms that you entered into covenant.
What is found among us is not vanity, but truth. As the doctrines are true, so is
the life also. Sin is vanity and falsehood; but a right life is truth. For temperance
is indeed truth, for it has a great end; whereas profligacy ends in nothing.
"Which waxes corrupt," says he, "after the lusts of deceit." As his lusts
became corrupt, so himself also. How then do his lusts become corrupt? By