are certain individual goods which have not a necessary connection
with happiness, because without them a man can be happy: and to
such the will does not adhere of necessity. But there are some
things which have a necessary connection with happiness, by
means of which things man adheres to God, in Whom alone true
happiness consists. Nevertheless, until through the certitude of the
Divine Vision the necessity of such connection be shown, the will
does not adhere to God of necessity, nor to those things which are
of God. But the will of the man who sees God in His essence of
necessity adheres to God, just as now we desire of necessity to be
happy. It is therefore clear that the will does not desire of necessity
whatever it desires.
Reply to Objection 1: The will can tend to nothing except under the
aspect of good. But because good is of many kinds, for this reason
the will is not of necessity determined to one.
Reply to Objection 2: The mover, then, of necessity causes
movement in the thing movable, when the power of the mover
exceeds the thing movable, so that its entire capacity is subject to
the mover. But as the capacity of the will regards the universal and
perfect good, its capacity is not subjected to any individual good.
And therefore it is not of necessity moved by it.
Reply to Objection 3: The sensitive power does not compare
different things with each other, as reason does: but it simply
apprehends some one thing. Therefore, according to that one thing,
it moves the sensitive appetite in a determinate way. But the reason
is a power that compares several things together: therefore from
several things the intellectual appetite---that is, the will---may be
moved; but not of necessity from one thing.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the will is a higher power than the

intellect?
Objection 1: It would seem that the will is a higher power than the
intellect. For the object of the will is good and the end. But the end is
the first and highest cause. Therefore the will is the first and highest
power.
Objection 2: Further, in the order of natural things we observe a
progress from imperfect things to perfect. And this also appears in
the powers of the soul: for sense precedes the intellect, which is
more noble. Now the act of the will, in the natural order, follows the
act of the intellect. Therefore the will is a more noble and perfect
power than the intellect.
Objection 3: Further, habits are proportioned to their powers, as
perfections to what they make perfect. But the habit which perfects
the will---namely, charity---is more noble than the habits which
perfect the intellect: for it is written (1 Cor. 13:2): "If I should know all
mysteries, and if I should have all faith, and have not charity, I am
nothing." Therefore the will is a higher power than the intellect.
On the contrary, The Philosopher holds the intellect to be the higher
power than the intellect.
I answer that, The superiority of one thing over another can be
considered in two ways: "absolutely" and "relatively." Now a thing is
considered to be such absolutely which is considered such in itself:
but relatively as it is such with regard to something else. If therefore
the intellect and will be considered with regard to themselves, then
the intellect is the higher power. And this is clear if we compare their
respective objects to one another. For the object of the intellect is
more simple and more absolute than the object of the will; since the
object of the intellect is the very idea of appetible good; and the
appetible good, the idea of which is in the intellect, is the object of
the will. Now the more simple and the more abstract a thing is, the
nobler and higher it is in itself; and therefore the object of the
intellect is higher than the object of the will. Therefore, since the
proper nature of a power is in its order to its object, it follows that
the intellect in itself and absolutely is higher and nobler than the will.
But relatively and by comparison with something else, we find that