when the torment is excessive, and all our inward parts full of tempest, and the
soul is now come to be unable so much as to know itself, whence shall it derive
consolation? So that all these sayings are an absurdity, and fables of foolish
children. For this, of which you speak, takes place in dejection, and in moderate
dejection, when we are told, "the same thing has befallen such an one;" but
sometimes not even in dejection: now if in that case it has no strength, much less
in the anguish and burden unspeakable, which "the gnashing of teeth" indicates.
And I know that I am galling you, and giving you pain by these words; but
what can I do? For I would fain not speak thus, but be conscious of virtue both in
myself, and in all of you; but since we are in sins, the more part of us, who will
grant me ability to pain you indeed, and to penetrate the understanding of them
that hear me? Then might I so be at rest. But now I fear lest any despise my
sayings, and their punishments become the greater for their indifferent way of
hearing. Since, when a master utters a threat, should one of the fellow-servants
hear and make light of his menace, not without punishment would he hasten by
him, provoked as he is, but rather it would be a ground for increasing his
chastisement. Wherefore I entreat you, let us pierce our own hearts, when we
hear His sayings regarding hell. For nothing is more delightful than this
discourse, by how much nothing is more bitter than the reality. But how
delightful to be told of hell? One may ask. Because it were so far from delight to
fall into hell, which result, our words that appear so galling, keep off. And before
this they furnish another pleasure: in that they brace up our souls, and make us
more reverent, and elevate the mind, and give wings to the thoughts, and cast out
the desires that so mischievously beset us; and the thing becomes a cure.
7. Wherefore, to proceed, together with the punishment let me speak also of
the shame. For as the Jews shall then be condemned by the Ninevites, so we too
by many that seem beneath us now.
Let us imagine then how great the mockery, how great the condemnation;
let us imagine, and cast some foundation at length, some door of repentance.
To myself I say these things, to myself first I give this advice, and let no

one be angry, as though he were condemned. Let us enter upon the narrow way.
How long shall it be luxury? How long sloth? Have we not had enough of
indolence, mirth, procrastination? Will it not be the same over again, feasting,
and surfeiting, and expense, and wealth, and acquisitions, and buildings? And
what is the end? Death. What is the end? Ashes, and dust, and coffins, and
worms.
Let us show forth then a new kind of life. Let us make earth, heaven; let us
hereby show the Greeks, of how great blessings they are deprived. For when
they behold in us good conversation, they will look upon the very face of the
kingdom of Heaven. Yea, when they see us gentle, pure from wrath, from evil
desire, from envy, from covetousness, rightly fulfilling all our other duties, they
will say, "If the Christians have become angels here, what will they be after their
departure hence? If where they are strangers they shine so bright, how great will
they become when they shall have won their native land!" Thus they too will be
reformed, and the word of godliness "will have free course,"
[2 Thessalonians 3:1] not less than in the apostles' times. For if they, being
twelve, converted entire cities and countries; were we all to become teachers by
our careful conduct, imagine how high our cause will be exalted. For not even a
dead man raised so powerfully attracts the Greek, as a person practising selfdenial. At that indeed he will be amazed, but by this he will be profited. That is
done, and is past away; but this abides, and is constant culture to his soul.
Let us take heed therefore to ourselves, that we may gain them also. I say
nothing burdensome. I say not, do not marry. I say not, forsake cities, and
withdraw yourself from public affairs; but being engaged in them, show virtue.
Yea, and such as are busy in the midst of cities, I would fain have more approved
than such as have occupied the mountains. Wherefore? Because great is the
profit thence arising. "For no man lights a candle, and sets it under the bushel."
Therefore I would that all the candles were set upon the candlestick, that the
light might wax great.
Let us kindle then His fire; let us cause them that are sitting in darkness to