THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.40, C.2.

Wherefore (Lk. 4:42,43) He says to those who wished to stay Him:
"To other cities also I must preach the kingdom of God: for therefore
am I sent."
Secondly, He came in order to free men from sin; according to 1 Tim.
1:15: "Christ Jesus came into this world to save sinners." And
hence, as Chrysostom says, "although Christ might, while staying in
the same place, have drawn all men to Himself, to hear His
preaching, yet He did not do so; thus giving us the example to go
about and seek those who perish, like the shepherd in his search of
the lost sheep, and the physician in his attendance on the sick."
Thirdly, He came that by Him "we might have access to God," as it is
written (Rm. 5:2). And thus it was fitting that He should give men
confidence in approaching Him by associating familiarly with them.
Wherefore it is written (Mt. 9:10): "It came to pass as He was
sitting . . . in the house, behold, many publicans and sinners came,
and sat down with Jesus and His disciples." On which Jerome
comments as follows: "They had seen the publican who had been
converted from a sinful to a better life: and consequently they did
not despair of their own salvation."
Reply to Objection 1: Christ wished to make His Godhead known
through His human nature. And therefore, since it is proper to man to
do so, He associated with men, at the same time manifesting His
Godhead to all, by preaching and working miracles, and by leading
among men a blameless and righteous life.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated in the SS, Question 182, Article 1; SS,
Question 188, Article 6, the contemplative life is, absolutely
speaking, more perfect than the active life, because the latter is
taken up with bodily actions: yet that form of active life in which a
man, by preaching and teaching, delivers to others the fruits of his
contemplation, is more perfect than the life that stops at
contemplation, because such a life is built on an abundance of
contemplation, and consequently such was the life chosen by Christ.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's action is our instruction. And
therefore, in order to teach preachers that they ought not to be for
ever before the public, our Lord withdrew Himself sometimes from
the crowd. We are told of three reasons for His doing this. First, for
the rest of the body: hence (Mk. 6:31) it is stated that our Lord said to

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.40, C.2.

His disciples: "Come apart into a desert place, and rest a little. For
there were many coming and going: and they had not so much as
time to eat." But sometimes it was for the sake of prayer; thus it is
written (Lk. 6:12): "It came to pass in those days, that He went out
into a mountain to pray; and He passed the whole night in the prayer
of God." On this Ambrose remarks that "by His example He instructs
us in the precepts of virtue." And sometimes He did so in order to
teach us to avoid the favor of men. Wherefore Chrysostom,
commenting on Mt. 5:1, Jesus, "seeing the multitude, went up into a
mountain," says: "By sitting not in the city and in the market-place,
but on a mountain and in a place of solitude, He taught us to do
nothing for show, and to withdraw from the crowd, especially when
we have to discourse of needful things."