extreme of folly and madness; for we render them more bold.
"And let ours," he says, "learn to maintain good works for necessary uses,
that they be not unfruitful." You observe that he is more anxious for them than
for those who are to receive their kindnesses. For they might probably have been
brought on their way by many others, but I am concerned, he says, for our own
friends. For what advantage would it be to them, if others should dig up
treasures, and maintain their teachers? This would be no benefit to them, for they
remained unfruitful. Could not Christ then, Who with five loaves fed five
thousand men, and with seven loaves fed four thousand, could not He have
supported Himself and His disciples?
Moral. For what reason then was He maintained by women? For women, it
is said, followed Him, and ministered unto Him. [Mark 15:41] It was to teach us
from the first that He is concerned for those who do good. Could not Paul, who
supported others by his own hands, have maintained himself without assistance
from others? But you see him receiving and requesting aid. And hear the reason
for it. "Not because I desire a gift," he says, "but I desire fruit that may abound
to your account." [Philippians 4:17] And at the beginning too, when men sold all
their possessions and laid them at the Apostles' feet, the Apostles, do you see,
were more concerned for them than for those who received their alms. For if
their concern had only been that the poor might by any means be relieved, they
would not have judged so severely of the sin of Ananias and Sapphira, when
they kept back their money. Nor would Paul have charged men to give "not
grudgingly nor of necessity." [2 Corinthians 9:7] What do you say, Paul? Do you
discourage giving to the poor? No, he answers; but I consider not their advantage
only, but the good of those who give. Do you see, that when the prophet gave
that excellent counsel to Nebuchadnezzar, he did not merely consider the poor.
For he does not content himself with saying, Give to the poor; but what? "Break
off your sins by almsdeeds, and your iniquities by showing mercy to the poor."
[Daniel 4:27] Part with your wealth, not that others may be fed, but that you may
escape punishment. And Christ again says, "Go and sell that you have, and give

to the poor...and come and follow Me." [Matthew 19:21] Do you see that the
commandment was given that he might be induced to follow Him? For as riches
are an impediment, therefore he commands them to be given to the poor,
instructing the soul to be pitiful and merciful, to despise wealth, and to flee from
covetousness. For he who has learned to give to him that needs, will in time
learn not to receive from those who have to give. This makes men like God. Yet
virginity, and fasting, and lying on the ground, are more difficult than this, but
nothing is so strong and powerful to extinguish the fire of our sins as almsgiving.
It is greater than all other virtues. It places the lovers of it by the side of the King
Himself, and justly. For the effect of virginity, of fasting, of lying on the ground,
is confined to those who practice them, and no other is saved thereby. But
almsgiving extends to all, and embraces the members of Christ, and actions that
extend their effects to many are far greater than those which are confined to one.
For almsgiving is the mother of love, of that love, which is the
characteristic of Christianity, which is greater than all miracles, by which the
disciples of Christ are manifested. It is the medicine of our sins, the cleansing of
the filth of our souls, the ladder fixed to heaven; it binds together the body of
Christ. Would you learn how excellent a thing it is? In the time of the Apostles,
men selling their possessions brought them to them, and they were distributed.
For it is said, "Distribution was made unto every man according as he had
need." [Acts 4:35] For tell me how, setting aside the future, and not now
considering the kingdom that is to come, let us see who in the present life are the
gainers, those who received, or those who gave. The former murmured and
quarreled with each other. The latter had one soul. "They were of one heart, and
of one soul," it is said, "and grace was upon them all." [Acts 4:32] And they
lived in great simplicity. Do you see that they were gainers even by thus giving?
Tell me now, with whom would you wish to be numbered, with those who gave
away their possessions, and had nothing, or with those who received even the
goods of others?
See the fruit of almsgiving, the separations and hindrances were removed,