king also, who aims at the common good of the whole kingdom, by
his rule moves all the governors of cities, each of whom rules over
his own particular city. Now the object of the will is good and the end
in general, and each power is directed to some suitable good proper
to it, as sight is directed to the perception of color, and the intellect
to the knowledge of truth. Therefore the will as agent moves all the
powers of the soul to their respective acts, except the natural powers
of the vegetative part, which are not subject to our will.
Reply to Objection 1: The intellect may be considered in two ways:
as apprehensive of universal being and truth, and as a thing and a
particular power having a determinate act. In like manner also the
will may be considered in two ways: according to the common
nature of its object---that is to say, as appetitive of universal good--and as a determinate power of the soul having a determinate act. If,
therefore, the intellect and the will be compared with one another
according to the universality of their respective objects, then, as we
have said above (Article 3), the intellect is simply higher and nobler
than the will. If, however, we take the intellect as regards the
common nature of its object and the will as a determinate power,
then again the intellect is higher and nobler than the will, because
under the notion of being and truth is contained both the will itself,
and its act, and its object. Wherefore the intellect understands the
will, and its act, and its object, just as it understands other species
of things, as stone or wood, which are contained in the common
notion of being and truth. But if we consider the will as regards the
common nature of its object, which is good, and the intellect as a
thing and a special power; then the intellect itself, and its act, and its
object, which is truth, each of which is some species of good, are
contained under the common notion of good. And in this way the will
is higher than the intellect, and can move it. From this we can easily
understand why these powers include one another in their acts,
because the intellect understands that the will wills, and the will wills
the intellect to understand. In the same way good is contained in
truth, inasmuch as it is an understood truth, and truth in good,
inasmuch as it is a desired good.
Reply to Objection 2: The intellect moves the will in one sense, and
the will moves the intellect in another, as we have said above.
Reply to Objection 3: There is no need to go on indefinitely, but we
must stop at the intellect as preceding all the rest. For every
movement of the will must be preceded by apprehension, whereas

every apprehension is not preceded by an act of the will; but the
principle of counselling and understanding is an intellectual
principle higher than our intellect ---namely, God---as also Aristotle
says (Eth. Eudemic. vii, 14), and in this way he explains that there is
no need to proceed indefinitely.