the more palpable the grace. He is ordained henceforth to Apostleship, so as to
preach with authority. How then does he himself say, "Not from men, nor by
man?" [Galatians 1:1] Because it was not man that called or brought him over:
this is why he says, "Not from men. Neither by man," that is, that he was not sent
by this (man), but by the Spirit. Wherefore also (the writer) thus proceeds: "So
they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and from
thence they sailed to Cyprus." [Acts 13:4] But let us look over again what has
been said.
(Recapitulation.) "And when it was day," etc. [Acts 12:18] For if the Angel
had brought out the soldiers also, along with Peter, it would have been thought a
case of flight. Then why, you may ask, was it not otherwise managed? Why,
where is the harm? Now, if we see that they who have suffered unjustly, take no
harm, we shall not raise these questions. For why do you not say the same of
James? Why did not (God) rescue him? "There was no small stir among the
soldiers." So (clearly) had they perceived nothing (of what had happened). Lo, I
take up the plea in their defence. The chains were there, and the keepers within,
and the prison shut, nowhere a wall broken through, all told the same tale: the
man had been carried off: why do you condemn them? Had they wished to let
him off, they would have done it before, or would have gone out with him. "But
he gave them money?" [Acts 3:6] And how should he, who had not to give even
to a poor man, have the means to give to these? And then neither had the chains
been broken, nor were they loosed. He ought to have seen, that the thing was of
God, and no work of man. "And he went down from Judea to Cæsarea, and there
abode. And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon," etc.
[Acts 12:19] He is now going to mention (a matter of) history: this is the reason
why he adds the names, that it may be shown how he keeps to the truth in all
things. "And," it says, "having made Blastus the king's chamberlain their friend,
they desired peace; because their country was nourished by the king's country."
(v. 20, 21.) For probably there was a famine. "And on a set day," etc. (Joseph.
Ant. xix.) Josephus also says this, that he fell into a lingering disease. Now the

generality were not aware of this, but the Apostle sets it down: yet at the same
time their ignorance was an advantage, in regard that they imputed what befell
(Agrippa) to his putting James and the soldiers to death. Observe, when he slew
the Apostle, he did nothing of this sort but when (he slew) these; in fact he knew
not what to say about it: as being at a loss, then, and feeling ashamed, "he went
down from Judea to Cæsarea." I suppose it was also to bring those (men of Tyre
and Sidon) to apologize, that he withdrew (from Jerusalem): for with those he
was incensed, while paying such court to these. See how vainglorious the man
is: meaning to confer the boon upon them, he makes an harangue. But Josephus
says, that he was also arrayed in a splendid robe made of silver. Observe both
what flatterers those were, and what a high spirit was shown by the Apostles: the
man whom the whole nation so courted, the same they held in contempt. [Acts
12:24] But observe again a great refreshing granted to them, and the numberless
benefits accruing from the vengeance inflicted upon him. But if this man,
because it was said to him, It is the voice of God and not of a man [Acts 12:22]
although he said nothing himself, suffered such things: much more should
Christ, had He not Himself been God (have suffered) for saying always as He
did, "These words of mine are not Mine" [John 14:10; 18:36] and, "Angels
minister to Me," and such like. But that man ended His life by a shameful and
miserable death, and thenceforth no more is seen of him. And observe him also,
easily talked over even by Blastus, like a poor creature, soon incensed and again
pacified, and on all occasions a slave of the populace, with nothing free and
independent about him. But mark also the authority of the Holy Ghost: "As they
ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate Me Barnabas
and Saul." [Acts 13:2] What being would have dared, if not of the same
authority, to say this? "Separate," etc. But this is done, that they may not keep
together among themselves. The Spirit saw that they had greater power, and
were able to be sufficient for many. And how did He speak to them? Probably by
prophets: therefore the writer premises, that there were prophets also. And they
were fasting and ministering: that you may learn that there was need of great