the cross, should be preached as Christ the Son of God, their eternal King. Since this, however,
was so, they certainly did not speak to them in accordance with their old belief. For they, who told
them to their face that they were the slayers of the Lord, would themselves also much more boldly
preach that Father who is above the Demiurge, and not what each individual bid himself believe
[respecting God]; and the sin was much less, if indeed they had not fastened to the cross the superior
Saviour (to whom it behoved them to ascend), since He was impassible. For, as they did not speak
to the Gentiles in compliance with their notions, but told them with boldness that their gods were
no gods, but the idols of demons; so would they in like manner have preached to the Jews, if they
had known another greater or more perfect Father, not nourishing nor strengthening the untrue
opinion of these men regarding God. Moreover, while destroying the error of the Gentiles, and
bearing them away from their gods, they did not certainly induce another error upon them; but,
removing those which were no gods, they pointed out Him who alone was God and the true Father.
7. From the words of Peter, therefore, which he addressed in Cæsarea to Cornelius the centurion,
and those Gentiles with him, to whom the word of God was first preached, we can understand what
the apostles used to preach, the nature of their preaching, and their idea with regard to God. For
this Cornelius was, it is said, "a devout man, and one who feared God with all his house, giving
much alms to the people, and praying to God always. He saw therefore, about the ninth hour of the
day, an angel of God coming in to him, and saying, Thine alms are come up for a memorial before
God. Wherefore send to Simon, who is called Peter." But when Peter saw the vision, in which
the voice from heaven said to him, "What God hath cleansed, that call not thou common," this
happened [to teach him] that the God who had, through the law, distinguished between clean and
unclean, was He who had purified the Gentiles through the blood of His Son—He whom also
Cornelius worshipped; to whom Peter, coming in, said, "Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter
of persons: but in every nation, he that feareth Him, and worketh righteousness, is acceptable to
Him." He thus clearly indicates, that He whom Cornelius had previously feared as God, of whom
he had heard through the law and the prophets, for whose sake also he used to give alms, is, in
truth, God. The knowledge of the Son was, however, wanting to him; therefore did [Peter] add,
"The word, ye know, which was published throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the
baptism which John preached, Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed Him with the Holy Ghost, and
with power; who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God
was with Him. And we are witnesses of all those things which He did both in the land of the Jews
and in Jerusalem; whom they slew, hanging Him on a beam of wood: Him God raised up the third
day, and showed Him openly; not to all the people, but unto us, witnesses chosen before of God,
who did eat and drink with Him after the resurrection from the dead. And He commanded us to
preach unto the people, and to testify that it is He which was ordained of God to be the Judge of