## Homily 4 on Romans

Romans I. 26, 27
"For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections: for even their
women did change the natural use into that which is against nature: and likewise
also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one
towards another."
All these affections then were vile, but chiefly the mad lust after males; for
the soul is more the sufferer in sins, and more dishonored, than the body in
diseases. But behold how here too, as in the case of the doctrines, he deprives
them of excuse, by saying of the women, that "they changed the natural use."
For no one, he means, can say that it was by being hindered of legitimate
intercourse that they came to this pass, or that it was from having no means to
fulfil their desire that they were driven into this monstrous insaneness. For the
changing implies possession. Which also when discoursing upon the doctrines
he said, "They changed the truth of God for a lie." And with regard to the men
again, he shows the same thing by saying, "Leaving the natural use of the
woman." And in a like way with those, these he also puts out of all means of
defending themselves by charging them not only that they had the means of
gratification, and left that which they had, and went after another, but that having
dishonored that which was natural, they ran after that which was contrary to
nature. But that which is contrary to nature has in it an irksomeness and
displeasingness, so that they could not fairly allege even pleasure. For genuine
pleasure is that which is according to nature. But when God has left one, then all
things are turned upside down. And thus not only was their doctrine Satanical,
but their life too was diabolical. Now when he was discoursing of their
doctrines, he put before them the world and man's understanding, telling them
that, by the judgment afforded them by God, they might through the things

which are seen, have been led as by the hand to the Creator, and then, by not
willing to do so, they remained inexcusable. Here in the place of the world he
sets the pleasure according to nature, which they would have enjoyed with more
sense of security and greater glad-heartedness, and so have been far removed
from shameful deeds. But they would not; whence they are quite out of the pale
of pardon, and have done an insult to nature itself. And a yet more disgraceful
thing than these is it, when even the women seek after these intercourses, who
ought to have more sense of shame than men. And here too the judgment of Paul
is worthy of admiration, how having fallen upon two opposite matters he
accomplishes them both with all exactness. For he wished both to speak chastely
and to sting the hearer. Now both these things were not in his power to do, but
one hindered the other. For if you speak chastely you shall not be able to bear
hard upon the hearer. But if you are minded to touch him to the quick, you are
forced to lay the naked facts before him in plain terms. But his discreet and holy
soul was able to do both with exactness, and by naming nature has at once given
additional force to his accusation, and also used this as a sort of veil, to keep the
chasteness of his description. And next, having reproached the women first, he
goes on to the men also, and says, "And likewise also the men leaving the natural
use of the woman." Which is an evident proof of the last degree of corruptness,
when both sexes are abandoned, and both he that was ordained to be the
instructor of the woman, and she who was bid to become an helpmate to the
man, work the deeds of enemies against one another. And reflect too how
significantly he uses his words. For he does not say that they were enamoured of,
and lusted after one another, but, "they burned in their lust one toward another."
You see that the whole of desire comes of an exorbitancy which endures not to
abide within its proper limits. For everything which transgresses the laws by
God appointed, lusts after monstrous things and not those which be customary.
For as many oftentimes having left the desire of food get to feed upon earth and
small stones, and others being possessed by excessive thirst often long even for
mire, thus these also ran into this ebullition of lawless love. But if you say, and