as color is in a body, hold that the soul separated from the body
takes all its powers away with it: because, if it lacked any one of
them, it would follow that the soul is changed in its natural
properties, since these cannot change so long as their subject
remains. But the aforesaid view is false, for since a power is so
called because it enables us to do or suffer something, and since to
do and to be able belong to the same subject, it follows that the
subject of a power is the same as that which is agent or patient.
Hence the Philosopher says (De Somn. et Vigil.) that "where we find
power there we find action." Now it is evident that certain operations,
whereof the soul's powers are the principles, do not belong to the
soul properly speaking but to the soul as united to the body,
because they are not performed except through the medium of the
body---such as to see, to hear, and so forth. Hence it follows that
such like powers belong to the united soul and body as their subject,
but to the soul as their quickening principle, just as the form is the
principle of the properties of a composite being. Some operations,
however, are performed by the soul without a bodily organ---for
instance to understand, to consider, to will: wherefore, since these
actions are proper to the soul, the powers that are the principles
thereof belong to the soul not only as their principle but also as their
subject. Therefore, since so long as the proper subject remains its
proper passions must also remain, and when it is corrupted they
also must be corrupted, it follows that these powers which use no
bodily organ for their actions must needs remain in the separated
body, while those which use a bodily organ must needs be corrupted
when the body is corrupted: and such are all the powers belonging
to the sensitive and the vegetative soul. On this account some draw
a distinction in the sensitive powers of the soul: for they say that
they are of two kinds---some being acts of organs and emanating
from the soul into the body are corrupted with the body; others,
whence the former originate, are in the soul, because by them the
soul sensitizes the body for seeing, hearing, and so on; and these
primary powers remain in the separated soul. But this statement
seems unreasonable: because the soul, by its essence and not
through the medium of certain other powers, is the origin of those
powers which are the acts of organs, even as any form, from the very
fact that by its essence it informs its matter, is the origin of the
properties which result naturally in the composite. For were it
necessary to suppose other powers in the soul, by means of which
the powers that perfect the organs may flow from the essence of the
soul, for the same reason it would be necessary to suppose other
powers by means of which these mean powers flow from the