2. A thing is not complete in being unless it is distinct from others; but place comes after
complete being; therefore motion to a place is the motion of that which is perfect according to
substance, as is said in IX Physic. Therefore it is not possible that any cause of the distinction of
bodies occupying space should be derived from place.

3. Numerical distinction is invariable as regards things that are distinct: but an invariable effect
cannot proceed from a variable cause; therefore, since place varies in regard to that having
location, it is not possible for diversity according to place to be the cause of numerical diversity.

4. If a cause is removed, so also is its effect: but it sometimes happens by a miracle that
distinction of place is removed in respect to two bodies, as has been previously said; yet
distinction according to number is not removed; therefore distinction according to place is not the
cause of numerical diversity.

5. Diversity according to number is found not only in corporeal things, but even in incorporeal
substances; but in these latter, diversity according to place cannot be the cause of numerical
diversity, since incorporeal beings are not in a place, as Boethius himself says in his book, De
hebdomadibus; therefore diversity according to place cannot be taken as the cause of diversity
according to number, that is, as its cause by very reason of its nature, as he himself seems to say.

#### Sed contra

On the contrary is the fact that things differing according to number differ by reason of their
accidents: but the diversity of no other accident is so inseparablv related to diversity in number as
is diversity of location; therefore diversity in place seems especially to influence diversity in
number.

Again, diversity of location according to the species of things is concomitant with the diversity of
bodies according to their species, as is evident in the case of heavy and light bodies. Therefore
also diversity of places according to number is indivisibly concomitant with diversity of bodies
according to number, and so the conclusion is the same as before.

Again, as time is the measure of motion, so place is the measure of a body: but motion is divided
numerically according to time, as is said in V Physic.; therefore also what is corporeal is divided
numerically according to place.

Response. I answer: It must be said that, as is evident from previous statements, diversity
according to number is caused by division of matter existing under dimensions. Now, matter
itself, according as it exists under dimensions, prohibits two bodies from being in the same place,
inasmuch as in each of the two bodies there must be matter distinct in its situation. And thus it is
evident that diversity according to number is caused by the same thing as diversity of location in
diverse bodies. Hence diversity of location, considered in itself, is a sign of the diversity which
exists according to numberÑjust as is also true of other accidents, except the first indeterminate
dimensions which have been previously discussed. But if diversity of place is considered
according to its own cause, then it is clear that diversity of place is the cause of diversity
according to number. Therefore Boethius says it is variety of accidents that produces diversity
according to number. But if all other accidents are removed, numerical diversity still remains
verifiable by reason of the diversity of things in place; since, indeed, no other of those accidents
which appear as extrinsic to a complete being is so closely related to the cause of diversity
according to number as is diversity of location.