FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.53, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: As stated in Ethic. vii, 10, a habit is like a
second nature, and yet it falls short of it. And so it is that while the
nature of a thing cannot in any way be taken away from a thing, a
habit is removed, though with difficulty.
Reply to Objection 2: Although there is no contrary to intelligible
species, yet there can be a contrary to assertions and to the process
of reason, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Science is not taken away by movement of the
body, if we consider the root itself of the habit, but only as it may
prove an obstacle to the act of science; in so far as the intellect, in
its act, has need of the sensitive powers, which are impeded by
corporal transmutation. But the intellectual movement of the reason
can corrupt the habit of science, even as regards the very root of the
habit. In like manner a habit of virtue can be corrupted. Nevertheless
when it is said that "virtue is more lasting than learning," this must
be understood in respect, not of the subject or cause, but of the act:
because the use of virtue continues through the whole of life,
whereas the use of learning does not.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.53, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether a habit can diminish?

Objection 1: It would seem that a habit cannot diminish. Because a
habit is a simple quality and form. Now a simple thing is possessed
either wholly or not at all. Therefore although a habit can be lost it
cannot diminish.
Objection 2: Further, if a thing is befitting an accident, this is by
reason either of the accident or of its subject. Now a habit does not
become more or less intense by reason of itself; else it would follow
that a species might be predicated of its individuals more or less.
And if it can become less intense as to its participation by its
subject, it would follow that something is accidental to a habit,
proper thereto and not common to the habit and its subject. Now
whenever a form has something proper to it besides its subject, that
form can be separate, as stated in De Anima i, text. 13. Hence it
follows that a habit is a separable form; which is impossible.
Objection 3: Further, the very notion and nature of a habit as of any
accident, is inherence in a subject: wherefore any accident is defined
with reference to its subject. Therefore if a habit does not become
more or less intense in itself, neither can it in its inherence in its
subject: and consequently it will be nowise less intense.
On the contrary, It is natural for contraries to be applicable to the
same thing. Now increase and decrease are contraries. Since
therefore a habit can increase, it seems that it can also diminish.
I answer that, Habits diminish, just as they increase, in two ways, as
we have already explained (Question 52, Article 1). And since they
increase through the same cause as that which engenders them, so
too they diminish by the same cause as that which corrupts them:
since the diminishing of a habit is the road which leads to its
corruption, even as, on the other hand, the engendering of a habit is
a foundation of its increase.
Reply to Objection 1: A habit, considered in itself, is a simple form. It
is not thus that it is subject to decrease; but according to the
different ways in which its subject participates in it. This is due to
the fact that the subject's potentiality is indeterminate, through its
being able to participate a form in various ways, or to extend to a