## Homily 42 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 15:47
The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from
heaven.
Having said that "the natural was first," and "the spiritual afterward," he
again states another difference, speaking of "the earthy" and "the heavenly." For
the first difference was between the present life and that which is to come: but
this between that before grace and that after grace. And he stated it with a view
to the most excellent way of life, saying—(for to hinder men, as I said, from
such confidence in the resurrection as would make them neglectful of their
practice and of perfection, from this topic also again he renders them anxious
and exhorts to virtue, saying,)— "The first man is of the earth, earthy; the
second man is the Lord from heaven:" calling the whole by the name of "man ,"
and naming the one from the better, and the other from the worst part.

1 Corinthians 15:48
"As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy:" so shall they perish
and have an end. "As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly:" so
shall they abide immortal and glorious.
What then? Did not This Man too die? He died indeed, but received no
injury therefrom, yea rather by this He put an end to death. Do you see how on
this part of his subject also, he makes use of death to establish the doctrine of the
resurrection? "For having, as I said before, the beginning and the head," so he
speaks, "doubt not of the whole body."
Moreover also he frames hereby his advice concerning the best way of
living, proposing standards of a lofty and severe life and of that which is not
such, and bringing forward the principles of both these, of the one Christ, but of
the other Adam. Therefore neither did he simply say, "of the earth," but "earthy,"
i.e., "gross, nailed down to things present:" and again with respect to Christ the
reverse, "the Lord from heaven."
2. But if any should say, therefore the Lord has not a body because He is
said to be "from heaven," although what is said before is enough to stop their
mouths: yet nothing hinders our silencing them from this consideration also: viz.
what is, "the Lord from heaven?" Does he speak of His nature, or His most
perfect life? It is I suppose evident to every one that he speaks of His life.
Wherefore also he adds,

1 Corinthians 15:49
"As we have borne the image of the earthy," i.e., as we have done evil, "let
us also bear the image of the heavenly," i.e., let us practise all goodness.
But besides this, I would fain ask you, is it of nature that it is said, "he that
is of the earth, earthy," and, "the Lord from heaven?" "Yea," says one. What
then? Was Adam only "earthy," or had he also another kind of substance
congenial with heavenly and incorporeal beings, which the Scripture calls
"soul," and "spirit?" Every one sees that he had this also. Therefore neither was
the Lord from above only although He is said to be "from heaven," but He had
also assumed our flesh. But Paul's meaning is such as this: "as we have borne the
image of the earthy," i.e., evil deeds, "let us also bear the image of the heavenly,"
the manner of life which is in the heavens. Whereas if he were speaking of
nature, the thing needed not exhortation nor advice. So that hence also it is
evident that the expression relates to our manner of life.
Wherefore also he introduces the saying in the manner of advice and calls it
an "image," here too again showing that he is speaking of conduct, not of nature.
For therefore are we become earthy, because we have done evil: not because we
were originally formed "earthy," but because we sinned. For sin came first, and
then death and then the sentence, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shall you return."
[Genesis 3:19] Then also entered in the swarm of the passions. For it is not
simply the being born "of earth" that makes a man "earthy," (since the Lord also
was of this mass and lump ,) but the doing earthly things, even as also he is
made "heavenly" by performing things meet for heaven.
But enough: for why need I labor overmuch in the proof of this, when the
apostle himself goes on to unfold the thought to us, thus saying,