again. Observe then what they say: "And by what name have ye done this? Then
Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost, said unto them." [Acts 4:8] And now, I pray
you, call to mind Christ's saying; When they deliver you up unto the synagogues,
take ye no thought how or what thing you shall speak; for it is the Spirit of your
Father which speaks in you. [Luke 12:11-14] So that it was a mighty Power they
enjoyed. What then says Peter? "You rulers of the people, and elders of Israel."
Mark the Christian wisdom of the man; how full of confidence it is: he utters not
a word of insult, but says with respect, "You rulers of the people, and elders of
Israel, if we be this day called to account of the good deed done to the impotent
man." He takes them in hand right valiantly; by the opening of his speech he
exposes them, and reminds them of the former things: that it is for a work of
beneficence they are calling them to account. As if he had said, In all fairness we
ought to have been crowned for this deed, and proclaimed benefactors; but since
"we are even put upon our trial for a good deed done to an impotent man," not a
rich man, not powerful, not noble— and yet who would feel envy in a case like
this? It is a most forcible ([ἀ] [παγγελια], al. [ἐ] [παγγελία]) way of putting the
case; and he shows that they are piercing their own selves:— "By what means
this man is made whole: be it known unto you all, and to all the people Israel;
that by the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth:"— this is what would vex them
most. For this was that which Christ had told the disciples, "What ye hear in the
ear that preach ye upon the housetops.— That in the name of Jesus Christ," he
says, "of Nazareth, Whom you crucified, Whom God raised from the dead, even
by Him does this man stand here before you whole." [Acts 4:10]. [Matthew
10:27] Think not, he says that we conceal the country, or the nature of the death.
"Whom you crucified, Whom God raised from the dead, even by Him does this
man stand before you whole." Again the death, again the resurrection. "This is
the stone," he says, "which was set at nought of you builders, which has become
the head of the corner." [Acts 4:11] He reminds them also of a saying which was
enough to frighten them. For it had been said, Whosoever shall fall on this stone
shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

[Matthew 21:44]— Neither is there salvation in any other, [Acts 4:12] Peter
says. What wounds, think you, must these words inflict on them! "For there is
none other name," he continues, "under heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved." Here he utters also lofty words. For when the object is, not to
carry some point successfully, but only to show boldness he does not spare; for
he was not afraid of striking too deep. Nor does he say simply, "By another;"
but, "Neither is there salvation in any other:" that is, He is able to save us. In
this way he subdued their threatening.
"Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that
they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marvelled and they took knowledge
of them, that they had been with Jesus." [Acts 4:13] The two unlearned men beat
down with their rhetoric them and the chief priests. For it was not they that
spoke, but the grace of the Spirit. "And beholding the man which was healed
standing with them, they could say nothing against it." [Acts 4:14] Great was the
boldness of the man; that even in the judgment-hall he has not left them. For had
they said that the fact was not so, there was he to refute them. "But when they
had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among
themselves, saying, What are we to do to these men?" [Acts 4:15] See the
difficulty they are in, and how the fear of men again does everything. As in the
case of Christ, they were not able (as the saying is) to undo what is done, nor to
cast it into the shade, but for all their hindering, the Faith did but gain ground the
more; so was it now. "What shall we do?" O the folly! To suppose that those who
had tasted of the conflict, would now take fright at it: to expect, impotent as their
efforts had proved in the beginning, to effect something new, after such a
specimen of oratory as had been exhibited! The more they wished to hinder, the
more the business grew upon their hands. But what say they? "For that indeed a
notable miracle has been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell in
Jerusalem; and we cannot deny it. But that it spread no further among the
people, let us straightly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in
this name. And they called them, and commanded them not to speak at all, nor