FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.4.

the virtues: so that, for instance, any virtue that causes good in
reason's act of consideration, may be called prudence; every virtue
that causes the good of right and due in operation, be called justice;
every virtue that curbs and represses the passions, be called
temperance; and every virtue that strengthens the mind against any
passions whatever, be called fortitude. Many, both holy doctors, as
also philosophers, speak about these virtues in this sense: and in
this way the other virtues are contained under them. Wherefore all
the objections fail.
Secondly, they may be considered in point of their being
denominated, each one from that which is foremost in its respective
matter, and thus they are specific virtues, condivided with the
others. Yet they are called principal in comparison with the other
virtues, on account of the importance of their matter: so that
prudence is the virtue which commands; justice, the virtue which is
about due actions between equals; temperance, the virtue which
suppresses desires for the pleasures of touch; and fortitude, the
virtue which strengthens against dangers of death. Thus again do
the objections fail: because the other virtues may be principal in
some other way, but these are called principal by reason of their
matter, as stated above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.61, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the four cardinal virtues differ from one

another?
Objection 1: It would seem that the above four virtues are not diverse
and distinct from one another. For Gregory says (Moral. xxii, 1):
"There is no true prudence, unless it be just, temperate and brave;
no perfect temperance, that is not brave, just and prudent; no sound
fortitude, that is not prudent, temperate and just; no real justice,
without prudence, fortitude and temperance." But this would not be
so, if the above virtues were distinct from one another: since the
different species of one genus do not qualify one another. Therefore
the aforesaid virtues are not distinct from one another.
Objection 2: Further, among things distinct from one another the
function of one is not attributed to another. But the function of
temperance is attributed to fortitude: for Ambrose says (De Offic.
xxxvi): "Rightly do we call it fortitude, when a man conquers himself,
and is not weakened and bent by any enticement." And of
temperance he says (De Offic. xliii, xlv) that it "safeguards the
manner and order in all things that we decide to do and say."
Therefore it seems that these virtues are not distinct from one
another.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 4) that the
necessary conditions of virtue are first of all "that a man should have
knowledge; secondly, that he should exercise choice for a particular
end; thirdly, that he should possess the habit and act with firmness
and steadfastness." But the first of these seems to belong to
prudence which is rectitude of reason in things to be done; the
second, i.e. choice, belongs to temperance, whereby a man, holding
his passions on the curb, acts, not from passion but from choice; the
third, that a man should act for the sake of a due end, implies a
certain rectitude, which seemingly belongs to justice; while the last,
viz. firmness and steadfastness, belongs to fortitude. Therefore each
of these virtues is general in comparison to other virtues. Therefore
they are not distinct from one another.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. xi) that "there are
four virtues, corresponding to the various emotions of love," and he
applies this to the four virtues mentioned above. Therefore the same
four virtues are distinct from one another.