were even jealously disposed towards him. "Rabbi," says one, "He that was with
you beyond Jordan, to whom you bore witness, behold, the same baptizes, and
all men come unto him." [John 3:26] And again they appear bringing a charge
against him; "Why do we fast, but your disciples fast not?" [Matthew 9:14] But
those who were better than the rest had no such feeling, but heard, and at once
followed; followed, not as despising their teacher, but as being most fully
persuaded by him, and producing the strongest proof that they acted thus from a
right judgment of his reasonings. For they did not do so by his advice, that might
have appeared suspicious; but when he merely foretold what was to come to
pass, that "He should baptize with the Holy Ghost, [and with fire,]" they
followed. They did not then desert their teacher, but rather desired to learn what
Christ brought with Him more than John. And observe zeal combined with
modesty. They did not at once approach and question Jesus on necessary and
most important matters, nor were they desirous to converse with Him publicly,
while all were present, at once and in an off-hand manner, but privately; for they
knew that the words of their teacher proceeded not from humility, but from truth.

John 1:40
"One of the two who heard, and followed Him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's
brother."
Wherefore then has he not made known the name of the other also? Some
say, because it was the writer himself that followed; others, not so, but that he
was not one of the distinguished disciples; it behooved not therefore to say more
than was necessary. For what would it have advantaged us to learn his name,
when the writer does not mention the names even of the seventy-two? St. Paul
also did the same. "We have sent," says he, "with him the brother," (who has
often in many things been forward,) "whose praise is in the Gospel." [2
Corinthians 8:18] Moreover, he mentions Andrew for another reason. What is
this? It is, that when you are informed that Simon having in company with him
heard, "Follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men" [Matthew 4:19], was not
perplexed at so strange a promise, you may learn that his brother had already
laid down within him the beginnings of the faith.

John 1:38
"Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and says unto them, What do you
seek?"
Hence we are taught, that God does not prevent our wills by His gifts, but
that when we begin, when we provide the being willing, then He gives us many
opportunities of salvation. "What do you seek?" How is this? He who knows the
hearts of men, who dwells in our thoughts, does He ask? He does; not that He
may be informed; how could that be? But that by the question He may make
them more familiar, and impart to them greater boldness, and show them that
they are worthy to hear Him; for it was probable that they would blush and be
afraid, as being unknown to him, and as having heard such accounts of Him
from the testimony of their teacher. Therefore to remove all this, their shame and
their fear, he questions them, and would not let them come all the way to the
house in silence. Yet the event would have been the same had He not questioned
them; they would have remained by following Him, and walking in His steps
would have reached His dwelling. Why then did He ask? To effect that which I
said, to calm their minds, yet disturbed with shame and anxiety, and to give them
confidence.
Nor was it by their following only that they showed their earnest desire, but
by their question also: for when they had not as yet learned or even heard
anything from Him, they call Him, "Master"; thrusting themselves as it were
among His disciples, and declaring what was the cause of their following, that
they might hear somewhat profitable. Observe their wisdom also. They did not
say, "Teach us of Your doctrines, or some other thing that we need to know"; but
what? "Where dwellest Thou?" Because, as I before said, they wished in quiet to
say somewhat to Him, and to hear somewhat from Him, and to learn. Therefore
they did not defer the matter, nor say, "We will come tomorrow by all means, and
hear you speak in public"; but showed the great eagerness they had to hear Him,