of the signs: being scourged, they were none the worse for it: (some) were
ordained in the matter of the widows : the word increased: once more, God
permits a great hindrance to arise. And a persecution of no ordinary kind ["and
they were all scattered," etc.]; for they feared their enemies, now become more
daring: and at the same time it is shown that they were but men, these that were
afraid, that fled. For, that you may not say after these things that by grace alone
they effected (what they did), they were also persecuted, and themselves became
more timorous, while their adversaries were more daring. "And were all
scattered abroad," it says, "except the Apostles." But this was divinely ordered,
so that they should no longer all sit there in Jerusalem. "And devout men," it
says, "carried Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him."
[Acts 8:2] If they were "devout," why did they "make great lamentation over
him?" They were not yet perfect. The man was gracious and amiable: this also
shows that they were men— not their fear alone, but their grief and lamentation.
Who would not have wept to see that mild, that lamb-like person stoned, and
lying dead? Fit eulogy to be spoken over his grave has the Evangelist recorded,
in this one speech, "Lay not this sin to their charge."— "And made," he says,
"great lamentation over him."— But let us look over again what has been said.
He mentions the cause of his (angelic) appearance [Recapitulation, 7:54;
8:2]; "But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven,
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God." And
when he said, "I see the heavens opened, they stopped their ears, and ran upon
him with one accord." (v. 56, 57.) And yet in what respect are these things
deserving of accusation? "Upon him," the man who has wrought such miracles,
the man who has prevailed over all in speech, the man who can hold such
discourse! As if they had got the very thing they wanted, they straightway give
full scope to their rage. "And the witnesses," he says, "laid down their clothes at
the feet of a young man, whose name was Saul." [Acts 7:58] Observe how
particularly he relates what concerns Paul, to show you that the Power which
wrought in him was of God. But after all these things, not only did he not

believe, but also aimed at Him with a thousand hands: for this is why it says,
"And Saul was consenting unto his death."— And this blessed man does not
simply pray, but does it with earnestness: "having kneeled down." Mark his
divine death! So long only the Lord permitted the soul to remain in him. "And
having said this, he fell asleep." [Acts 7:60]— And they were all scattered
abroad throughout the region of Judea and Samaria. [Acts 8:1] And now without
scruple they had intercourse with Samaria, whereas it had been said to them, "Go
not into the way of the Gentiles" "and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye
not." [Matthew 10:5] "Except the Apostles," it says: they, in this way also,
wishing to win the Jews—but not to leave the city—and to be the means of
inspiring others with boldness.
"As for Saul, he made havoc of the Church, entering into every house, and
haling men and women committed them to prison." [Acts 8:3] Great was his
frenzy: that he was alone, that he even entered into houses: for indeed he was
ready to give his life for the Law. "Haling," it says, "men and women:" mark
both the confidence, and the violence, and the frenzy. All that fell into his hands,
he put to all manner of ill-treatment: for in consequence of the recent murder, he
was become more daring. "Therefore they that were scattered abroad went
everywhere preaching the word. Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria,
and preached Christ unto them. And the people with one accord gave heed unto
those things which Philip spoke, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did.
For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were
possessed with them: and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were
healed. And there was great joy in that city. But there was a certain man, called
Simon, which before time in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the
people of Samaria." [Acts 8:4-9] Observe another trial, this affair of Simon.
"Giving out," it says, "that he was himself some great one. To whom they all
gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of
God. And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched
them with sorceries. But when they believed Philip preaching the things