by which, if they are true, one so lives well in this mortality as to live
blessedly in that immortality which God promises. These and other
things of the kind have their proper order in time, and in that order we
discerned more easily a trinity of memory, sight, and love. For some of
such things anticipate the knowledge of learners. For they are knowable
also before they are known, and beget in the learner a knowledge of
themselves. And they either exist in their own proper places, or have
happened in time past; although things that are past do not themselves
exist, but only certain signs of them as past, the sight or hearing of which
makes it known that they have been and have passed away. And these
signs are either situate in the places themselves, as e.g. monuments of the
dead or the like; or exist in written books worthy of credit, as is all history
that is of weight and approved authority; or are in the minds of those who
already know them; since what is already known to them is knowable
certainly to others also, whose knowledge it has anticipated, and who are
able to know it on the information of those who do know it. And all these
things, when they are learned, produce a certain kind of trinity, viz. by
their own proper species, which was knowable also before it was known,
and by the application to this of the knowledge of the learner, which then
begins to exist when he learns them, and by will as a third which
combines both; and when they are known, yet another trinity is produced
in the recollecting of them, and this now inwardly in the mind itself, from
those images which, when they were learned, were impressed upon the
memory, and from the informing of the thought when the look has been
turned upon these by recollection, and from the will which as a third
combines these two. But those things which arise in the mind, not having
been there before, as faith and other things of that kind, although they
appear to be adventitious, since they are implanted by teaching, yet are
not situate without or transacted without, as are those things which are
believed; but began to be altogether within in the mind itself. For faith is
not that which is believed, but that by which it is believed; and the former
is believed, the latter seen. Nevertheless, because it began to be in the
mind, which was a mind also before these things began to be in it, it
seems to be somewhat adventitious, and will be reckoned among things
past, when sight shall have succeeded, and itself shall have ceased to be.
And it makes now by its presence, retained as it is, and beheld, and loved,
a different trinity from that which it will then make by means of some

trace of itself, which in passing it will have left in the memory: as has
been already said above.

### CHAP. 9.—WHETHER JUSTICE AND THE OTHER VIRTUES CEASE TO EXIST IN THE FUTURE LIFE.