THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.12.

Parvulorum iv): "The Blessed Cyprian argues with considerable
reason from the thief to whom, though not baptized, it was said:
'Today shalt thou be with Me in Paradise' that suffering can take the
place of Baptism. Having weighed this in my mind again and again, I
perceive that not only can suffering for the name of Christ supply for
what was lacking in Baptism, but even faith and conversion of heart,
if perchance on account of the stress of the times the celebration of
the mystery of Baptism is not practicable."
Reply to Objection 1: The other two Baptisms are included in the
Baptism of Water, which derives its efficacy, both from Christ's
Passion and from the Holy Ghost. Consequently for this reason the
unity of Baptism is not destroyed.
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above (Question 60, Article 1), a
sacrament is a kind of sign. The other two, however, are like the
Baptism of Water, not, indeed, in the nature of sign, but in the
baptismal effect. Consequently they are not sacraments.
Reply to Objection 3: Damascene enumerates certain figurative
Baptisms. For instance, "the Deluge" was a figure of our Baptism, in
respect of the salvation of the faithful in the Church; since then "a
few . . . souls were saved in the ark," according to 1 Pt. 3:20. He also
mentions "the crossing of the Red Sea": which was a figure of our
Baptism, in respect of our delivery from the bondage of sin; hence
the Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:2) that "all . . . were baptized in the cloud
and in the sea." And again he mentions "the various washings which
were customary under the Old Law," which were figures of our
Baptism, as to the cleansing from sins: also "the Baptism of John,"
which prepared the way for our Baptism.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.66, C.13.

### ARTICLE 12. Whether the Baptism of Blood is the most

excellent of these?
Objection 1: It seems that the Baptism of Blood is not the most
excellent of these three. For the Baptism of Water impresses a
character; which the Baptism of Blood cannot do. Therefore the
Baptism of Blood is not more excellent than the Baptism of Water.
Objection 2: Further, the Baptism of Blood is of no avail without the
Baptism of the Spirit, which is by charity; for it is written (1 Cor.
13:3): "If I should deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity,
it profiteth me nothing." But the Baptism of the Spirit avails without
the Baptism of Blood; for not only the martyrs are saved. Therefore
the Baptism of Blood is not the most excellent.
Objection 3: Further, just as the Baptism of Water derives its efficacy
from Christ's Passion, to which, as stated above (Article 11), the
Baptism of Blood corresponds, so Christ's Passion derives its
efficacy from the Holy Ghost, according to Heb. 9:14: "The Blood of
Christ, Who by the Holy Ghost offered Himself unspotted unto God,
shall cleanse our conscience from dead works," etc. Therefore the
Baptism of the Spirit is more excellent than the Baptism of Blood.
Therefore the Baptism of Blood is not the most excellent.
On the contrary, Augustine (Ad Fortunatum) speaking of the
comparison between Baptisms says: "The newly baptized confesses
his faith in the presence of the priest: the martyr in the presence of
the persecutor. The former is sprinkled with water, after he has
confessed; the latter with his blood. The former receives the Holy
Ghost by the imposition of the bishop's hands; the latter is made the
temple of the Holy Ghost."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 11), the shedding of blood for
Christ's sake, and the inward operation of the Holy Ghost, are called
baptisms, in so far as they produce the effect of the Baptism of
Water. Now the Baptism of Water derives its efficacy from Christ's
Passion and from the Holy Ghost, as already stated (Article 11).
These two causes act in each of these three Baptisms; most
excellently, however, in the Baptism of Blood. For Christ's Passion
acts in the Baptism of Water by way of a figurative representation; in
the Baptism of the Spirit or of Repentance, by way of desire. but in