not, "It was necessary that the word of God should have been spoken unto you,"
but "should first have been spoken unto you" [Acts 13:46], to show that in the
second place it must be to us also. And this was both done and said, that they
might not be able, shameless though they were, to pretend that they were
overlooked, and that was why they did not believe. This then was why Christ,
though he knew all things before, yet came to them first.
Ver. 12. "Now if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, how much more their fullness?"
Here he is speaking to gratify them. For even if these had fallen a thousand
times, the Gentiles would not have been saved unless they had shown faith. As
the Jews likewise would not have perished unless they had been unbelieving and
disputatious. But as I said, he is solacing them now they are laid low, giving
them so much the more ground to be confident of their salvation if they altered.
For if when they stumbled, he says, so many enjoyed salvation, and when they
were cast out so many were called, just consider what will be the case when they
return. But he does not put it thus, When they return. Now he does not say "how
much more their" return, or their altering, or their well-doing, but "how much
more their fullness," that is, when they are all about coming in. And this he said
to show that then also grace and God's gift will do the larger part, or almost the
whole.
Ver. 13, 14. "For I speak to you Gentiles; inasmuch as I am the Apostle of
the Gentiles, I magnify mine office; if by any means I may provoke to emulation
them which are my flesh, and might save some of them."
Again he endeavors much to get himself clear of untoward suspicion. And
he seems to be blaming the Gentiles, and to be humbling their conceits, yet he
gives a gentle provocation to the Jew also. And indeed he goes round about
seeking to veil and allay this great ruin of theirs. But he finds no means of doing
it, owing to the nature of the facts. For from what he had said, they deserved but
the greater condemnation, when those who were far short of them had taken the
good things prepared for them. This is why then he passes from the Jews to those

of the Gentiles, and puts in between his discourse the part about them, as
wishing to show that he is saying all these things in order to instruct them to be
reasonable. For I praise you, he means, for these two reasons; one, because I am
necessitated to do so as being your commissioned minister; the other, that
through you I may save others. And he does not say, my brethren, my kinsmen;
but, "my flesh." And next, when pointing out their disputatious spirit, he does not
say, "if by any means I may" persuade, but, "provoke to jealousy and save;" and
here again not all, but, "some of them." So hard were they! And even amid his
rebuke he shows again the Gentiles honored, for they are causes of their
salvation, and not in the same way. For they became purveyors of blessings to
them through unbelief, but these to the Jews by faith. Hence the estate of the
Gentiles seems to be at once equal and superior. For what will you say, O Jew?
That if we had not been cast out, he would not have been called so soon? This
the man of the Gentiles may say too, If I had not been saved, you would not have
been moved to jealousy. But if you would know wherein we have the advantage,
I save you by believing, but it is by stumbling that you have afforded us an
access before yourself. Then perceiving again that he had touched them to the
quick, resuming his former argument, he says,
Ver. 15. "For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world,
what shall the receiving of them be but life from the dead?"
Yet this again condemns them, since, while others gained by their sins, they
did not profit by other men's well doings. But if he asserts that to be their doing
which necessarily happened, be not surprised: since (as I have said several
times) it is to humble these, and to exhort the other, that he throws his address
into this form. For as I said before, if the Jews had been cast away a thousand
times over, and the Gentiles had not shown faith, they would never have been
saved. But he stands by the feeble party, and gives assistance to the distressed
one. But see also even in his favors to them, how he solaces them in words only.
"For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world," (and what is
this to the Jews?) "what shall the receiving of them be but life from the dead?"