another Judas, "Lebbæus, whose surname was Thaddæus," who, Luke says, was
the brother of James, saying, "Judas the brother of James." [Luke 6:16]
Therefore to distinguish him from this man, it says, "Judas Iscariot, who also
betrayed Him." [Matthew 10:4] And he is not ashamed to say, "who also
betrayed Him." So far were they from ever disguising anything even of those
things that seem to be matters of reproach.
And first of all, and leader of the choir, is the "unlearned, the ignorant
man." [Acts 4:13]
But let us see whither, and to whom, He sends them.
"These twelve," it is said, "Jesus sent forth." [Matthew 10:5]
What manner of men were these? The fishermen, the publicans: for indeed
four were fishermen and two publicans, Matthew and James, and one was even a
traitor. And what says He to them? He presently charges them, saying,
"Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans
enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel."
[Matthew 10:5-6]
"For think not at all," says He, "because they insult me, and call me
demoniac, that I hate them and turn away from them. Nay, as I sought earnestly
to amend them in the first place, so keeping you away from all the rest, to them
do I send you as teachers and physicians. And I not only forbid you to preach to
others before these, but I do not suffer you so much as to touch upon the road
that leads there, nor to enter into such a city." Because the Samaritans too are in
a state of enmity with the Jews. And yet it was an easier thing to deal with them,
for they were much more favorably disposed to the faith; but the case of these
was more difficult. But for all this, He sends them on the harder task, indicating
his guardian care of them, and stopping the mouths of the Jews, and preparing
the way for the teaching of the apostles, that people might not hereafter blame
them for "entering in to men uncircumcised," [Acts 11:3] and think they had a
just cause for shunning and abhorring them. And he calls them "lost," not
"stray," "sheep," in every way contriving how to excuse them, and winning their

mind to himself.
6. "And as you go," says He, "preach, saying, The kingdom of Heaven is at
hand." [Matthew 10:7]
Do you see the greatness of their ministry? Do you see the dignity of
apostles? Of nothing that is the object of sense are they commanded to speak,
nor such as Moses spoke of, and the prophets before them, but of some new and
strange things. For while the former preached no such things, but earth, and the
good things in the earth, these preached the kingdom of Heaven, and whatever is
there.
And not from this circumstance only were these the greater, but also from
their obedience: in that they shrink not, nor are they backward, like those of old;
but, warned as they are of perils, and wars, and of those insupportable evils, they
receive with great obedience His injunctions, as being heralds of a kingdom.
"And what marvel," says one, "if having nothing to preach that is dismal or
grievous, they readily obeyed?" What do you say? Nothing grievous enjoined
them? Do you not hear of the prisons, the executions, the civil wars, the hatred
of all men? All which, He said a little while after, they must undergo. True, as to
other men, He sent them to be procurers and heralds of innumerable blessings:
but for themselves, He said and proclaimed beforehand, that they were to suffer
terrible and incurable ills.
After this, to make them trustworthy, He says,
"Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, cast out devils: freely you have received,
freely give."
See how He provides for their conduct, and that no less than for their
miracles, implying that the miracles without this are nothing. Thus He both
quells their pride by saying, "Freely you have received, freely give;" and takes
order for their being clear of covetousness. Moreover, lest it should be thought
their own work, and they be lifted up by the signs that were wrought, He says,
"freely you have received." "You bestow no favor on them that receive you, for
not for a price did ye receive these things, nor after toil: for the grace is mine. In