furnace. The summer is past, the winter has come: we sit, both young and old,
taken captive by our own evil passions. Tell not me, I do not commit fornication:
for what are you the better, if though thou be no fornicator you are covetous? It
matters not to the sparrow caught in the snare that he is not held tight in every
part, but only by the foot: he is a lost bird for all that; in the snare he is, and it
profits him not that he has his wings free, so long as his foot is held tight. Just
so, you are caught, not by fornication, but by love of money: but caught you are
nevertheless; and the point is, not how you are caught, but that you are caught.
Let not the young man say, I am no money-lover: well, but perchance you are a
fornicator: and then again what are you the better? For the fact is, it is not
possible for all the passions to set upon us at one and the same time of life: they
are divided and marked off, and that, through the mercy of God, that they may
not by assailing us all at once become insuperable, and so our wrestling with
them be made more difficult. What wretched inertness it shows, not to be able to
conquer our passions even when taken one by one, but to be defeated at each
several period of our life, and to take credit to ourselves for those which (let us
alone) not in consequence of our own hearty endeavors, but merely because, by
reason of the time of life, they are dormant? Look at the chariot-drivers, do you
not see how exceedingly careful and strict they are with themselves in their
training-practice, their labors, their diet, and all the rest, that they may not be
thrown down from their chariots, and dragged along (by the reins)?— See what a
thing art is. Often even a strong man cannot master a single horse: but a mere
boy who has learned the art shall often take the pair in hand, and with ease lead
them and drive them where he will. Nay, in India it is said that a huge monster of
an elephant shall yield to a stripling of fifteen, who manages him with the utmost
ease. To what purpose have I said all this? To show that, if by dint of study and
practice we can throttle into submission ([ἄ] [γχομεν]) even elephants and wild
horses, much more the passions within us. Whence is it that throughout life we
continually fail (in every encounter)? We have never practised this art: never in a
time of leisure when there is no contest, talked over with ourselves what shall be

useful for us. We are never to be seen in our place on the chariot, until the time
for the contest is actually come. Hence the ridiculous figure we make there.
Have I not often said, Let us practise ourselves upon those of our own family
before the time of trial? With our servants ([παἵδας]) at home we are often
exasperated, let us there quell our anger, that in our intercourse with our friends
we may come to have it easily under control. And so, in the case of all the other
passions, if we practised ourselves beforehand, we should not make a ridiculous
figure in the contests themselves. But now we have our implements and our
exercises and our trainings for other things, for arts and feats of the palæstra, but
for virtue nothing of the sort. The husbandman would not venture to meddle with
a vine, unless he had first been practised in the culture of it: nor the pilot to sit by
the helm, unless he had first practised himself well at it: but we, in all respects
unpractised, wish for the first prizes! It were good to be silent, good to have no
communication with any man in act or word, until we were able to charm
([κατεπᾴδειν]) the wild beast that is within us. The wild beast, I say: for indeed
is it not worse than the attack of any wild beast, when wrath and lust make war
upon us? Beware of invading the market-place (Μ[ὴ] [ἐμβάλῃς εἰς ἀγοράν])
with these beasts, until thou have got the muzzle well upon their mouths, until
thou have tamed and made them tractable. Those who lead about their tame lions
in the market-place, do you not see what a gain they make of it, what admiration
they get, because in the irrational beast they have succeeded in producing such
tameness— but, should the lion suddenly take a savage fit, how he scares all the
people out of the market-place, and then both the man that leads him about is
himself in danger, and if there be loss of life to others, it is his doing? Well then
do thou also first tame your lion, and so lead him about, not for the purpose of
receiving money, but that you may acquire a gain, to which there is none equal.
For there is nothing equal to gentleness, which both to those that possess it, and
to those who are its objects, is exceeding useful. This then let us follow after,
that having kept in the way of virtue, and with all diligence finished our course
therein, we may be enabled to attain unto the good things eternal, through the