that he who shall come claiming the kingdom for himself, and shall terrify those men of whom we
have been speaking, having a name containing the aforesaid number, is truly the abomination of
desolation. This, too, the apostle affirms: "When they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden
destruction shall come upon them." And Jeremiah does not merely point out his sudden coming,
but he even indicates the tribe from which he shall come, where he says, "We shall hear the voice
of his swift horses from Dan; the whole earth shall be moved by the voice of the neighing of his
galloping horses: he shall also come and devour the earth, and the fulness thereof, the city also,
and they that dwell therein." This, too, is the reason that this tribe is not reckoned in the
Apocalypse along with those which are saved.
3. It is therefore more certain, and less hazardous, to await the fulfilment of the prophecy, than
to be making surmises, and casting about for any names that may present themselves, inasmuch as
many names can be found possessing the number mentioned; and the same question will, after all,
remain unsolved. For if there are many names found possessing this number, it will be asked which
among them shall the coming man bear. It is not through a want of names containing the number
of that name that I say this, but on account of the fear of God, and zeal for the truth: for the name
Evanthas (!"#$%#&) contains the required number, but I make no allegation regarding it. Then
also Lateinos ('#(!)$*&) has the number six hundred and sixty-six; and it is a very probable
[solution], this being the name of the last kingdom [of the four seen by Daniel]. For the Latins are
they who at present bear rule: I will not, however, make any boast over this [coincidence]. Teitan
too, ((!)(#$, the first syllable being written with the two Greek vowels + and ,, among all the
names which are found among us, is rather worthy of credit. For it has in itself the predicted number,
and is composed of six letters, each syllable containing three letters; and [the word itself] is ancient,
and removed from ordinary use; for among our kings we find none bearing this name Titan, nor
have any of the idols which are worshipped in public among the Greeks and barbarians this
appellation. Among many persons, too, this name is accounted divine, so that even the sun is termed
"Titan" by those who do now possess [the rule]. This word, too, contains a certain outward
appearance of vengeance, and of one inflicting merited punishment because he (Antichrist) pretends
that he vindicates the oppressed. And besides this, it is an ancient name, one worthy of credit,
of royal dignity, and still further, a name belonging to a tyrant. Inasmuch, then, as this name "Titan"
has so much to recommend it, there is a strong degree of probability, that from among the many