brought it about that the Pleroma should be possessed of a configuration of this kind—receive the
figure of those things which existed before Himself? For it must needs be, either that the intention
[of creating] dwelt in that god who made the world, so that of his own power, and from himself,
he obtained the model of its formation; or, if any departure is made from this being, then there will
arise a necessity for constantly asking whence there came to that one who is above him the
configuration of those things which have been made; what, too, was the number of the productions;
and what the substance of the model itself? If, however, it was in the power of Bythus to impart of
himself such a configuration to the Pleroma, then why may it not have been in the power of the
Demiurge to form of himself such a world as exists? And then, again, if creation be an image of
those things [above], why should we not affirm that those are, in turn, images of others above them,
and those above these again, of others, and thus go on supposing innumerable images of images?
2. This difficulty presented itself to Basilides after he had utterly missed the truth, and was
conceiving that, by an infinite succession of those beings that were formed from one another, he
might escape such perplexity. When he had proclaimed that three hundred and sixty-five heavens
were formed through succession and similitude by one another, and that a manifest proof [of the
existence] of these was found in the number of the days of the year, as I stated before; and that
above these there was a power which they also style Unnameable, and its dispensation—he did not
even in this way escape such perplexity. For, when asked whence came the image of its configuration
to that heaven which is above all, and from which he wishes the rest to be regarded as having been
formed by means of succession, he will say, from that dispensation which belongs to the Unnameable.
He must then say, either that the Unspeakable formed it of himself, or he will find it necessary to
acknowledge that there is some other power above this being, from whom his unnameable One
derived such vast numbers of configurations as do, according to him, exist.
3. How much safer and more accurate a course is it, then, to confess at once that which is true:
that this God, the Creator, who formed the world, is the only God, and that there is no other God
besides Him—He Himself receiving from Himself the model and figure of those things which have
been made—than that, after wearying ourselves with such an impious and circuitous description,
we should be compelled, at some point or another, to fix the mind on some One, and to confess
that from Him proceeded the configuration of things created.
4. As to the accusation brought against us by the followers of Valentinus, when they declare
that we continue in that Hebdomad which is below, as if we could not lift our minds on high, nor
understand those things which are above, because we do not accept their monstrous assertions: this
very charge do the followers of Basilides bring in turn against them, inasmuch as they (the
Valentinians) keep circling about those things which are below, [going] as far as the first and second
Ogdoad, and because they unskilfully imagine that, immediately after the thirty Æons, they have
discovered Him who is above all things Father, not following out in thought their investigations to