FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.3.

in time. Another movement is "the act of something perfect, i.e. of
something existing in act," e.g. to understand, to feel, and to will and
such like, also to have delight. This movement is not successive, nor
is it of itself in time.
Reply to Objection 2: Delight is said to be long lasting or morose,
according as it is accidentally in time.
Reply to Objection 3: Other passions have not for their object a good
obtained, as delight has. Wherefore there is more of the movement
of the imperfect in them than in delight. And consequently it belongs
more to delight not to be in time.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether delight differs from joy?

Objection 1: It would seem that delight is altogether the same as joy.
Because the passions of the soul differ according to their objects.
But delight and joy have the same object, namely, a good obtained.
Therefore joy is altogether the same as delight.
Objection 2: Further, one movement does not end in two terms. But
one and the same movement, that of desire, ends in joy and delight.
Therefore delight and joy are altogether the same.
Objection 3: Further, if joy differs from delight, it seems that there is
equal reason for distinguishing gladness, exultation, and
cheerfulness from delight, so that they would all be various passions
of the soul. But this seems to be untrue. Therefore joy does not differ
from delight.
On the contrary, We do not speak of joy in irrational animals;
whereas we do speak of delight in them. Therefore joy is not the
same as delight.
I answer that, Joy, as Avicenna states (De Anima iv), is a kind of
delight. For we must observe that, just as some concupiscences are
natural, and some not natural, but consequent to reason, as stated
above (Question 30, Article 3), so also some delights are natural, and
some are not natural but rational. Or, as Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii,
13) and Gregory of Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xviii.] put it,
"some delights are of the body, some are of the soul"; which
amounts to the same. For we take delight both in those things which
we desire naturally, when we get them, and in those things which we
desire as a result of reason. But we do not speak of joy except when
delight follows reason; and so we do not ascribe joy to irrational
animals, but only delight.
Now whatever we desire naturally, can also be the object of
reasoned desire and delight, but not vice versa. Consequently
whatever can be the object of delight, can also be the object of joy in
rational beings. And yet everything is not always the object of joy;
since sometimes one feels a certain delight in the body, without
rejoicing thereat according to reason. And accordingly delight
extends to more things than does joy.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.31, C.4.