since, although the nature of the soul already existed, which that people
had (a matter into which we do not now inquire), yet that people existed
not as yet, and the time is apparent when it began to exist. Lastly, that He
should be Lord of this or that tree, or of this or that corn crop, which only
lately began to be, happened in time; since, although the matter itself
already existed, yet it is one thing to be Lord of the matter (materiæ),
another to be Lord of the already created nature (naturæ). For man, too,
is lord of the wood at one time, and at another he is lord of the chest,
although fabricated of that same wood; which he certainly was not at the
time when he was already the lord of the wood. How then shall we make
it good that nothing is said of God according to accident, except because
nothing happens to His nature by which He may be changed, so that
those things are relative accidents which happen in, connection with
some change of the things of which they are spoken. As a friend is so
called relatively: for he does not begin to be one, unless when he has
begun to love; therefore some change of will takes place, in order that he
may be called a friend. And money, when it is called a price, is spoken of
relatively, and yet it was not changed when it began to be a price; nor,
again, when it is called a pledge, or any other thing of the kind. If,
therefore, money can so often be spoken of relatively with no change of
itself, so that neither when it begins, nor when it ceases to be so spoken
of, does any change take place in that nature or form of it, whereby it is
money; how much more easily ought we to admit, concerning that
unchangeable substance of God, that something may be so predicated
relatively in respect to the creature, that although it begin to be so
predicated in time, yet nothing shall be understood to have happened to
the substance itself of God, but only to that creature in respect to which it
is predicated? "Lord," it is said, "Thou hast been made our refuge." God,
therefore, is said to be our refuge relatively, for He is referred to us, and
He then becomes our refuge when we flee to Him; pray does anything
come to pass then in His nature, which, before we fled to Him, was not?
In us therefore some change does take place; for we were worse before we
fled to Him, and we become better by fleeing to Him: but in Him there is
no change. So also He begins to be our Father, when we are regenerated
through His grace, since He gave us power to become the sons of God.
Our substance therefore is changed for the better, when we become His
sons; and He at the same time begins to be our Father, but without any

change of His own substance. Therefore that which begins to be spoken of
God in time, and which was not spoken of Him before, is manifestly
spoken of Him relatively; yet not according to any accident of God, so
that anything should have happened to Him, but clearly according to
some accident of that, in respect to which God begins to be called
something relatively. When a righteous man begins to be a friend of God,
he himself is changed; but far be it from us to say, that God loves any one
in time with as it were a new love, which was not in Him before, with
whom things gone by have not passed away and things future have been
already done. Therefore He loved all His saints before the foundation of
the world, as He predestinated them; but when they are converted and
find Him, then they are said to begin to be loved by Him, that what is said
may be said in that way in which it can be comprehended by human
affections. So also, when He is said to be wroth with the unrighteous, and
gentle with the good, they are changed, not He: just as the light is
troublesome to weak eyes, pleasant to those that are strong; namely, by
their change, not its own.