ought you not readily to part with all? Behold, I solemnly declare and testify;
reform these oaths of the forum, these superfluous oaths, and bring to me all
those who wish to take them. Behold, in the presence of this assembly, I charge
those who are set apart for the tending of the Houses of Prayer, I exhort and
issue this order to them, that no person be allowed to take such oaths at his own
discretion: or rather, that none be allowed to swear in any other way, but that the
person be brought to me, whosoever he be, since even for these matters less will
not serve but they must needs come before us, just as if one had to do with little
children. May there be no occasion! It is a shame in some things still to need to
be taught. Do you dare to touch the Holy Table, being a person unbaptized? No,
but what is still worse, you the baptized dare to lay your hand upon the Holy
Table, which not even all ordained persons are allowed to touch, and so to take
your oath. Now you would not go and lay your hand upon the head of your child,
and yet do you touch the Table, and not shudder, not feel afraid? Bring these
men to me; I will judge, and send them away rejoicing, both the one and the
other. Do what you choose; I lay it down as a law that there be no swearing at
all. What hope of salvation, while we thus make all to have been done in vain? Is
this the end of your bills, and your bonds, that you should sacrifice your own
soul? What gain do you get so great as the loss? Has he forsworn himself? You
have undone both him and yourself. But has he not? Even so still you have
undone (both), by forcing him to transgress the commandment. Let us cast out
this disease from the soul: at any rate let us drive it out of the forum, out of our
shops, out of our other work-places; our profits will but be the greater. Do not
imagine that the success of your worldly plans is to be ensured by transgressions
of the Divine laws. "But he refuses to trust me," say you; and in fact I have
sometimes heard this said by some: "Unless I swear oaths without number, the
man will not trust me." Yes, and for this you may thank yourself, because you
are so off-hand with your oaths. For were it not so, but on the contrary were it
clear to all men that you do not swear, take my word for it, you would be more
readily believed upon your mere nod, than those are who swallow oaths by

thousands. For look now: which do you more readily believe? Me who do not
swear, or those that do swear? "Yes," say you, "but then you are ruler and
bishop." Then suppose I prove to you that it is not only for that reason? Answer
me with truth, I beseech you; were I in the habit of perpetually swearing, would
my office stand me in that stead? Not a whit. Do you see that it is not for this
reason? And what do you gain at all? Answer me that. Paul endured hunger; do
you then also choose to hunger rather than to transgress one of the
commandments of God. Why are you so unbelieving? Here are you, ready to do
and suffer all things for the sake of not swearing: and shall not He reward you?
Shall He, Who sustains day by day both takers and breakers of oaths, give you
over to hunger, when you have obeyed Him? Let all men see, that of those who
assemble in this Church not one is a swearer. By this also let us become
manifest, and not by our creed alone; let us have this mark also to distinguish us
both from the Gentiles and from all men. Let us receive it as a seal from heaven,
that we may everywhere be seen to be the King's own flock. By our mouth and
tongue let us be known, in the first place, just as the barbarians are by theirs:
even as those who speak Greek are distinguished from barbarians, so let us be
known. Answer me: the birds which are said to be parrots, how are they known
to be parrots? Is it not by speaking like men? Let us then be known by speaking
like the Apostles; by speaking like the Angels. If any one bid you swear tell him,
"Christ has spoken, and I do not swear." This is enough to make a way for all
virtue to come in. It is a gate to religion, a high road leading to the philosophy of
piety; a kind of training-school. These things let us observe, that we may obtain
also the future blessings, through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to Whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory, power and
honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.