is for this we are friends, that we may be of use one to another. A man will listen
in a different spirit to a friend, and to any other chance person. A chance person
he will regard perhaps with suspicion, and so in like manner will he a teacher,
but not so a friend.
"For," he says, "the things which are done by them in secret it is a shame
even to speak of: but all things when they are reproved are made manifest by the
light." What is it he means to say here? He means this. That some sins in this
world are done in secret, and some also openly; but in the other it shall not be so.
Now there is no one who is not conscious to himself of some sin. This is why he
says, "But all the things when they are reproved are made manifest by the light."
What then? Is this again, it will be said, meant concerning idolatry? It is not; the
argument is about our life and our sins. "For everything that is made manifest,"
says he, "is light."
Wherefore, I entreat you, be ye never backward to reprove, nor displeased
at being reproved. For as long indeed as anything is carried on in the dark, it is
carried on with greater security; but when it has many to witness what is done, it
is brought to light. By all means then let us do all we can to chase away the
deadness which is in our brethren, to scatter the darkness, and to attract to us the
"Sun of righteousness." For if there be many shining lights, the path of virtue
will be easy to themselves, and they which are in darkness will be more easily
detected, while the light is held forth and puts the darkness to flight. Whereas if
it be the reverse, there is fear lest as the thick mist of darkness and of sin
overpowers the light, and dispels its transparency, those shining lights
themselves should be extinguished. Let us be then disposed to benefit one
another, that one and all, we may offer up praise and glory to the God of
lovingkindness, by the grace and lovingkindness of the only begotten Son with
whom to the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, strength, honor now
and forever and forever. Amen.

## Homily 19 on Ephesians

Ephesians 5:15, 16, 17
"Look then carefully how ye walk, not as unwise, but as wise; redeeming the
time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not foolish, but understand what
the will of the Lord is."
He is still cleansing away the root of bitterness, still cutting off the very
groundwork of anger. For what is he saying? "Look carefully how ye walk."
"They are sheep in the midst of wolves," and he charges them to be also "as
doves." For "you shall be harmless," says he, "as doves." [Matthew 10:16]
Forasmuch then as they were both among wolves, and were besides commanded
not to defend themselves, but to suffer evil, they needed this admonition. Not
indeed but that the former was sufficient to render them stronger; but now that
there is besides the addition of the two, reflect how exceedingly it is heightened.
Observe then here also, how carefully he secures them, by saying, "Look how ye
walk." Whole cities were at war with them; yea, this war made its way also into
houses. They were divided, father against son, and son against father, mother
against daughter, and daughter against mother. What then? Whence these
divisions? They heard Christ say, "He that loves father or mother more than me,
is not worthy of me." [Matthew 10:37] Lest therefore they should think that he
was without reason introducing wars and fightings, (since there was likely to be
much anger produced, if they on their part were to retaliate,) to prevent this, he
says, "See carefully how ye walk." That is to say, "Except the Gospel message,
give no other handle on any score whatever, for the hatred which you will incur."
Let this be the only ground of hatred. Let no one have any other charge to make
against you; but show all deference and obedience, whenever it does no harm to
the message, whenever it does not stand in the way of godliness. For it is said,
"Render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom."