be punished in hell for the other sins.
But this cannot be, because satisfaction requires the reinstatement
of friendship and the restoration of the equality of justice, the
contrary of which destroys friendship, as the Philosopher states
(Ethic. ix, 1,3). Now in satisfaction made to God, the equality is
based, not on equivalence but rather on God's acceptation: so that,
although the offense be already removed by previous contrition, the
works of satisfaction must be acceptable to God, and for this they
are dependent on charity. Consequently works done without charity
are not satisfactory.
Reply to Objection 1: Daniel's advice meant that he should give up
sin and repent, and so make satisfaction by giving alms.
Reply to Objection 2: Even as man knows not for certain whether he
had charity when making satisfaction, or whether he has it now, so
too he knows not for certain whether he made full satisfaction:
wherefore it is written (Ecclus. 5:5): "Be not without fear about sin
forgiven." And yet man need not, on account of that fear, repeat the
satisfaction made, if he is not conscious of a mortal sin. For
although he may not have expiated his punishment by that
satisfaction, he does not incur the guilt of omission through
neglecting to make satisfaction; even as he who receives the
Eucharist without being conscious of a mortal sin of which he is
guilty, does not incur the guilt of receiving unworthily.
Reply to Objection 3: His intention was interrupted by his
subsequent sin, so that it gives no virtue to the works done after that
sin.
Reply to Objection 4: Sufficient equalization is impossible both as to
the Divine acceptation and as to equivalence: so that the argument
proves nothing.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether previous satisfaction begins to avail after

man is restored to charity?
Objection 1: It would seem that when a man has recovered charity
his previous satisfaction begins to avail, because a gloss on Lev.
25:25, "If thy brother being impoverished," etc., says that "the fruit of
a man's good works should be counted from the time when he
sinned." But they would not be counted, unless they derived some
efficacy from his subsequent charity. Therefore they begin to avail
after he recovers charity.
Objection 2: Further, as the efficacy of satisfaction is hindered by
sin, so the efficacy of Baptism is hindered by insincerity. Now
Baptism begins to avail when insincerity ceases. Therefore
satisfaction begins to avail when sin is taken away.
Objection 3: Further, if a man is given as a penance for the sins he
has committed, to fast for several days, and then, after falling again
into sin, he completes his penance, he is not told, when he goes to
confession a second time, to fast once again. But he would be told to
do so, if he did not fulfill his duty of satisfaction by them. Therefore
his previous works become valid unto satisfaction, through his
subsequent repentance.
On the contrary, Works done without charity were not satisfactory,
through being dead works. But they are not quickened by penance.
Therefore they do not begin to be satisfactory.
Further, charity does not quicken a work, unless in some way that
work proceeds therefrom. But works cannot be acceptable to God,
and therefore cannot be satisfactory, unless they be quickened by
charity. Since then the works done without charity, in no way
proceeded from charity, nor ever can proceed therefrom, they can by
no means count towards satisfaction.
I answer that, Some have said that works done while in a state of
charity, which are called living works, are meritorious in respect of
eternal life, and satisfactory in respect of paying off the debt of
punishment; and that by subsequent charity, works done without
charity are quickened so as to be satisfactory, but not so as to be
meritorious of eternal life. But this is impossible, because works