THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.3.

human nature to the Person of the Word, It is said to take it to Itself.
But although the Father takes human nature to the Person of the
Word, He did not thereby take it to Himself, for the suppositum of the
Father and the Son is not one. and hence it cannot properly be said
that the Father assumes human nature.
Reply to Objection 2: What is befitting to the Divine Nature in Itself is
befitting to the three Persons, as goodness, wisdom, and the like.
But to assume belongs to It by reason of the Person of the Word, as
was said above, and hence it is befitting to that Person alone.
Reply to Objection 3: As in God "what is" and "whereby it is" are the
same, so likewise in Him "what acts" and "whereby it acts" are the
same, since everything acts, inasmuch as it is a being. Hence the
Divine Nature is both that whereby God acts, and the very God Who
acts.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.3, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the Nature abstracted from the

Personality can assume?
Objection 1: It would seem that if we abstract the Personality by our
mind, the Nature cannot assume. For it was said above (Article 1)
that it belongs to the Nature to assume by reason of the Person. But
what belongs to one by reason of another cannot belong to it if the
other is removed; as a body, which is visible by reason of color,
without color cannot be seen. Hence if the Personality be mentally
abstracted, the Nature cannot assume.
Objection 2: Further, assumption implies the term of union, as was
said above (Article 1). But the union cannot take place in the nature,
but only in the Person. Therefore, if the Personality be abstracted,
the Divine Nature cannot assume.
Objection 3: Further, it has been said above (FP, Question 40, Article
3) that in the Godhead if the Personality is abstracted, nothing
remains. But the one who assumes is something. Therefore, if the
Personality is abstracted, the Divine Nature cannot assume.
On the contrary, In the Godhead Personality signifies a personal
property; and this is threefold, viz. Paternity, Filiation and
Procession, as was said above (FP, Question 30, Article 2). Now if we
mentally abstract these, there still remains the omnipotence of God,
by which the Incarnation was wrought, as the angel says (Lk. 1:37):
"No word shall be impossible with God." Therefore it seems that if
the Personality be removed, the Divine Nature can still assume.
I answer that, The intellect stands in two ways towards God. First, to
know God as He is, and in this manner it is impossible for the
intellect to circumscribe something in God and leave the rest, for all
that is in God is one, except the distinction of Persons; and as
regards these, if one is removed the other is taken away, since they
are distinguished by relations only which must be together at the
same time. Secondly, the intellect stands towards God, not indeed as
knowing God as He is, but in its own way, i.e. understanding
manifoldly and separately what in God is one: and in this way our
intellect can understand the Divine goodness and wisdom, and the
like, which are called essential attributes, without understanding
Paternity or Filiation, which are called Personalities. And hence if we