THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.10.

martyrdom, that the light of his charity dispels the darkness of his
fault, and if anything needed pruning, the sickle of his passion cut it
off."
Reply to Objection 3: The power of administering the sacraments
belongs to the spiritual character which is indelible, as explained
above (Question 63, Article 3). Consequently, if a man be suspended
by the Church, or excommunicated or degraded, he does not lose
the power of conferring sacraments, but the permission to use this
power. Wherefore he does indeed confer the sacrament, but he sins
in so doing. He also sins that receives a sacrament from such a man:
so that he does not receive the reality of the sacrament, unless
ignorance excuses him.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.64, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether the validity of a sacrament requires a

good intention in the minister?
Objection 1: It seems that the validity of a sacrament requires a good
intention in the minister. For the minister's intention should be in
conformity with the Church's intention, as explained above (Article 8,
ad 1). But the intention of the Church is always good. Therefore the
validity of a sacrament requires of necessity a good intention in the
minister.
Objection 2: Further, a perverse intention seems worse than a playful
one. But a playful intention destroys a sacrament: for instance, if
someone were to baptize anybody not seriously but in fun. Much
more, therefore, does a perverse intention destroy a sacrament: for
instance, if somebody were to baptize a man in order to kill him
afterwards.
Objection 3: Further, a perverse intention vitiates the whole work,
according to Lk. 11:34: "If thy eye be evil, thy" whole "body will be
darksome." But the sacraments of Christ cannot be contaminated by
evil men; as Augustine says against Petilian (Cont. Litt. Petil ii).
Therefore it seems that, if the minister's intention is perverse, the
sacrament is invalid.
On the contrary, A perverse intention belongs to the wickedness of
the minister. But the wickedness of the minister does not annul the
sacrament: neither, therefore, does his perverse intention.
I answer that, The minister's intention may be perverted in two ways.
First in regard to the sacrament: for instance, when a man does not
intend to confer a sacrament, but to make a mockery of it. Such a
perverse intention takes away the truth of the sacrament, especially
if it be manifested outwardly.
Secondly, the minister's intention may be perverted as to something
that follows the sacrament: for instance, a priest may intend to
baptize a woman so as to be able to abuse her; or to consecrate the
Body of Christ, so as to use it for sorcery. And because that which
comes first does not depend on that which follows, consequently
such a perverse intention does not annul the sacrament; but the
minister himself sins grievously in having such an intention.