gave the Gift, He Himself having taught us through the Gift so to speak. But
when the "Spirit bears witness" what farther place for doubtfulness? For if it
were a man, or angel, or archangel, or any other such power that promised this,
then there might be reason in some doubting. But when it is the Highest Essence
that bestows this Gift, and "bears witness" by the very words He bade us use in
prayer, who would doubt any more of our dignity? For not even when the
Emperor elects any one, and proclaims in all men's hearing the honor done him,
does anybody venture to gainsay.
Ver. 17. "And if children, then heirs."
Observe how he enhances the Gift little by little. For since it is a possible
case to be children, and yet not become heirs (for it is not by any means all
children that are heirs), he adds this besides— that we are heirs. But the Jews,
besides their not having the same adoption as we, were also cast out from the
inheritance. For "He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out
the vineyard to other husbandmen" [Matthew 21:41]: and before this, He said
that "many shall come from the East and from the West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, but the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out." (ib. 8:11, 12.) But
even here he does not pause, but sets down something even greater than this.
What may this be then? That we are heirs of God; and so he adds, "heirs of
God." And what is more still, that we are not simply heirs, but also "joints heirs
with Christ." Observe how ambitious he is of bringing us near to the Master. For
since it is not all children that are heirs, he shows that we are both children and
heirs; next, as it is not all heirs that are heirs to any great amount, he shows that
we have this point with us too, as we are heirs of God. Again, since it were
possible to be God's heir, but in no sense "joint heir with" the Only-Begotten, he
shows that we have this also. And consider his wisdom. For after throwing the
distasteful part into a short compass, when he was saying what was to become of
such as "live after the flesh," for instance, that they "shall die," when he comes
to the more soothing part, he leads forth his discourse into a large room, and so
expands it on the recompense of rewards, and in pointing out that the gifts too

are manifold and great. For if even the being a child were a grace unspeakable,
just think how great a thing it is to be heir! But if this be great, much more is it
to be "joint heir." Then to show that the Gift is not of grace only, and to give at
the same time a credibility to what he says, he proceeds, "If so be that we suffer
with Him, that we may be also glorified together." If, he would say, we be
sharers with Him in what is painful, much more shall it be so in what is good.
For He who bestowed such blessings upon those who had wrought no good,
how, when He sees them laboring and suffering so much, shall he do else than
give them greater requital? Having then shown that the thing was a matter of
return, to make men give credit to what was said, and prevent any from
doubting, he shows further that it has the virtue of a gift. The one he showed,
that what was said might gain credit even with those that doubted, and that the
receivers of it might not feel ashamed as being evermore receiving salvation for
nought; and the other, that you might see that God outdoes the toils by His
recompenses. And the one he has shown in the words, "If so be that we suffer
with Him, that we may be also glorified together." But the other in proceeding to
add;
Ver. 18. "The sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in (Gr. [εἰς]) us."
In what went before, he requires of the spiritual man the correcting of his
habits (Mar. and 6 manuscripts passions), where he says, "You are not debtors to
live after the flesh," that such an one, for instance, should be above lust, anger,
money, vainglory, grudging. But here having reminded them of the whole gift,
both as given and as to come, and raised him up aloft with hopes, and placed him
near to Christ, and showed him to be a joint-heir of the Only-Begotten; he now
leads him forth with confidence even to dangers. For to get the better of the evil
affections in us, is not the same thing with bearing up under those trials,
scourges, famine, plunderings, bonds, chains, executions. For these last required
much more of a noble and vigorous spirit. And observe how he at once allays
and rouses the spirit of the combatants. For after he had shown that the rewards