FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.3.

Hence the Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:6) "The letter killeth, but the spirit
quickeneth": and Augustine explains this (De Spir. et Lit. xiv, xvii) by
saying that the letter denotes any writing external to man, even that
of the moral precepts such as are contained in the Gospel.
Wherefore the letter, even of the Gospel would kill, unless there were
the inward presence of the healing grace of faith.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument holds true of the New Law, not
as to its principal, but as to its secondary element: i.e. as to the
dogmas and precepts outwardly put before man either in words or in
writing.
Reply to Objection 2: Although the grace of the New Testament helps
man to avoid sin, yet it does not so confirm man in good that he
cannot sin: for this belongs to the state of glory. Hence if a man sin
after receiving the grace of the New Testament, he deserves greater
punishment, as being ungrateful for greater benefits, and as not
using the help given to him. And this is why the New Law is not said
to "work wrath": because as far as it is concerned it gives man
sufficient help to avoid sin.
Reply to Objection 3: The same God gave both the New and the Old
Law, but in different ways. For He gave the Old Law written on tables
of stone: whereas He gave the New Law written "in the fleshly tables
of the heart," as the Apostle expresses it (2 Cor. 3:3). Wherefore, as
Augustine says (De Spir. et Lit. xviii), "the Apostle calls this letter
which is written outside man, a ministration of death and a
ministration of condemnation: whereas he calls the other letter, i.e.
the Law of the New Testament, the ministration of the spirit and the
ministration of justice: because through the gift of the Spirit we work
justice, and are delivered from the condemnation due to
transgression."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.106, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the New Law should have been given

from the beginning of the world?
Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law should have been given
from the beginning of the world. "For there is no respect of persons
with God" (Rm. 2:11). But "all" men "have sinned and do need the
glory of God" (Rm. 3:23). Therefore the Law of the Gospel should
have been given from the beginning of the world, in order that it
might bring succor to all.
Objection 2: Further, as men dwell in various places, so do they live
in various times. But God, "Who will have all men to be saved" (1
Tim. 2:4), commanded the Gospel to be preached in all places, as
may be seen in the last chapters of Matthew and Mark. Therefore the
Law of the Gospel should have been at hand for all times, so as to be
given from the beginning of the world.
Objection 3: Further, man needs to save his soul, which is for all
eternity, more than to save his body, which is a temporal matter. But
God provided man from the beginning of the world with things that
are necessary for the health of his body, by subjecting to his power
whatever was created for the sake of man (Gn. 1:26-29). Therefore
the New Law also, which is very necessary for the health of the soul,
should have been given to man from the beginning of the world.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:46): "That was not first
which is spiritual, but that which is natural." But the New Law is
highly spiritual. Therefore it was not fitting for it to be given from the
beginning of the world.
I answer that, Three reasons may be assigned why it was not fitting
for the New Law to be given from the beginning of the world. The
first is because the New Law, as stated above (Article 1), consists
chiefly in the grace of the Holy Ghost: which it behoved not to be
given abundantly until sin, which is an obstacle to grace, had been
cast out of man through the accomplishment of his redemption by
Christ: wherefore it is written (Jn. 7:39): "As yet the Spirit was not
given, because Jesus was not yet glorified." This reason the Apostle
states clearly (Rm. 8:2, seqq.) where, after speaking of "the Law of
the Spirit of life," he adds: "God sending His own Son, in the
likeness of sinful flesh, of sin hath condemned sin in the flesh, that