through the prayers of those who preside over us, as well as of all the saints,
having corrected these and all other deficiencies, we may obtain the kingdom of
heaven through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father, together with the Holy Spirit, be glory, honour, and
adoration, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

## Homily 21 on the Statues
On the return of Flavian the Bishop, and the reconciliation of the
Emperor with the city, and with those who had offended in overthrowing the
Statues.
1. Today, I shall begin with that very same saying with which I have ever
been used to open my address to you during the season of danger, and shall say
together with you, "Blessed be God," Who has granted us this day to celebrate
this holy Feast with much joy and gladness; and has restored the head to the
body, the shepherd to the sheep, the master to the disciples, the general to the
soldiers, the High Priest to the Priests! Blessed be God, "Who does exceeding
abundantly above what we ask or think!" [Ephesians 3:20] For to us it would
have seemed sufficient, had we been but delivered from the hitherto impending
evil; and for this we made all our supplication. But the God who loves man, and
ever in His giving surpasses our prayers by an excess of bounty, has brought
back our Father too, sooner than we could at all have expected. Who would,
indeed, have thought that in so few days, he would have gone, and have had
audience with the Emperor, and set us free from the calamity, and again come
back to us so quickly, as to be able to anticipate the Holy Passover, and to
celebrate it with ourselves? Behold, however, this event, which was so contrary
to expectation, has been realized! We have received back our Father; and we
enjoy so much the greater pleasure, inasmuch as we have received him back now
beyond our hopes. For all these things, let us give thanks to the merciful God,
and be amazed at the power, the lovingkindness, the wisdom, and the tender care
which has been manifested on behalf of the city. For the devil had attempted its
entire subversion through the daring crimes committed; but God, by means of
this same calamity, has adorned the city, the Priest, and the Emperor; and has
made them all more illustrious.

2. The city has won renown, because when such a danger had overtaken
her, passing by at once all those who were in power, those who were surrounded
with much wealth, those who possessed great influence with the Emperor, it fled
for refuge to the Church, and to the Priest of God, and with much faith, rested
itself entirely upon the hope which is from above! Many indeed, after the
departure of the common Father, were ready to terrify those who lay in prison,
by saying, "The Emperor does not lay aside his wrath, but is still more provoked,
and is thinking of the utter ruin of the city." But while they were whispering all
this, and much more, they who were then in bonds were not the least
intimidated, but upon our saying, "These things are false, and they are a device
of the devil, who desires to fill you with consternation;" they replied to us, "We
need no consolation to be addressed to us; for we know where we have taken
refuge from the first; and upon what hope we have rested ourselves. We have
fixed our safety upon the sacred anchor! We have not entrusted this to man, but
to the Almighty God; therefore we are most assuredly confident, that the result
will be favourable; for it is impossible, truly impossible, that this hope can ever
be confounded!" To how many crowns, how many encomiums, is this equivalent
for our city? How much of God's favour will it draw down upon us too in our
other affairs! For it is not, indeed it is not a thing belonging to a soul of mean
order to be watchful against the attack of temptations, and to look to God; and
scorning all that is human, to yearn after that Divine aid.
3. The city then has thus won renown; and the Priest again not less than the
city, for he exposed his life for all; and while there were many things to hinder
him, as the winter, his age, the feast, and not less than these, his sister, then at her
last breath, he raised himself above all these obstacles, and did not say to
himself, "What a thing is this? Our only remaining sister, she who has drawn the
yoke of Christ along with me, and who has been my domestic companion so
long, is now at her last breath; and shall we desert her, and go hence, and not
behold her expiring, and uttering her paring words? But she indeed was praying
daily, that we might close her eyes, and shut and compose her mouth, and attend