THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the Incarnation ought to have been put

off till the end of the world?
Objection 1: It would seem that the work of the Incarnation ought to
have been put off till the end of the world. For it is written (Ps. 91:11):
"My old age in plentiful mercy"---i.e. "in the last days," as a gloss
says. But the time of the Incarnation is especially the time of mercy,
according to Ps. 101:14: "For it is time to have mercy on it."
Therefore the Incarnation ought to have been put off till the end of
the world.
Objection 2: Further, as has been said (Article 5, ad 3), in the same
subject, perfection is subsequent in time to imperfection. Therefore,
what is most perfect ought to be the very last in time. But the highest
perfection of human nature is in the union with the Word, because
"in Christ it hath pleased the Father that all the fulness of the
Godhead should dwell," as the Apostle says (Col. 1:19, and 2:9).
Therefore the Incarnation ought to have been put off till the end of
the world.
Objection 3: Further, what can be done by one ought not to be done
by two. But the one coming of Christ at the end of the world was
sufficient for the salvation of human nature. Therefore it was not
necessary for Him to come beforehand in His Incarnation; and hence
the Incarnation ought to have been put off till the end of the world.
On the contrary, It is written (Hab. 3:2): "In the midst of the years
Thou shalt make it known." Therefore the mystery of the Incarnation
which was made known to the world ought not to have been put off
till the end of the world.
I answer that, As it was not fitting that God should become incarnate
at the beginning of the world, so also it was not fitting that the
Incarnation should be put off till the end of the world. And this is
shown first from the union of the Divine and human nature. For, as it
has been said (Article 5, ad 3), perfection precedes imperfection in
time in one way, and contrariwise in another way imperfection
precedes perfection. For in that which is made perfect from being
imperfect, imperfection precedes perfection in time, whereas in that
which is the efficient cause of perfection, perfection precedes
imperfection in time. Now in the work of the Incarnation both concur;

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.1, C.7.

for by the Incarnation human nature is raised to its highest
perfection; and in this way it was not becoming that the Incarnation
should take place at the beginning of the human race. And the Word
incarnate is the efficient cause of the perfection of human nature,
according to Jn. 1:16: "Of His fulness we have all received"; and
hence the work of the Incarnation ought not to have been put off till
the end of the world. But the perfection of glory to which human
nature is to be finally raised by the Word Incarnate will be at the end
of the world.
Secondly, from the effect of man's salvation; for, as is said Qq. Vet et
Nov. Test., qu. 83, "it is in the power of the Giver to have pity when,
or as much as, He wills. Hence He came when He knew it was fitting
to succor, and when His boons would be welcome. For when by the
feebleness of the human race men's knowledge of God began to
grow dim and their morals lax, He was pleased to choose Abraham
as a standard of the restored knowledge of God and of holy living;
and later on when reverence grew weaker, He gave the law to Moses
in writing; and because the gentiles despised it and would not take it
upon themselves, and they who received it would not keep it, being
touched with pity, God sent His Son, to grant to all remission of their
sin and to offer them, justified, to God the Father." But if this remedy
had been put off till the end of the world, all knowledge and
reverence of God and all uprightness of morals would have been
swept away from the earth.
Thirdly, this appears fitting to the manifestation of the Divine power,
which has saved men in several ways---not only by faith in some
future thing, but also by faith in something present and past.
Reply to Objection 1: This gloss has in view the mercy of God, which
leads us to glory. Nevertheless, if it is referred to the mercy shown
the human race by the Incarnation of Christ, we must reflect that, as
Augustine says (Retract. i), the time of the Incarnation may be
compared to the youth of the human race, "on account of the
strength and fervor of faith, which works by charity"; and to old age--i.e. the sixth age---on account of the number of centuries, for Christ
came in the sixth age. And although youth and old age cannot be
together in a body, yet they can be together in a soul, the former on
account of quickness, the latter on account of gravity. And hence
Augustine says elsewhere (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 44) that "it was not
becoming that the Master by Whose imitation the human race was to
be formed to the highest virtue should come from heaven, save in