relaxed the hearer, he again binds him up, that he may not become remiss. For
such was the nature of the Jewish nation; by all encouraging things they were
easily puffed up, and corrupted. Wherefore he again adduces his terrors, saying,
"Whose fan is in His hand." [Matthew 3:12]
Thus, as before he had spoken of the punishment, so here he points out the
Judge likewise, and introduces the eternal vengeance. For "He will burn the
chaff," says he, "with unquenchable fire." You see that He is Lord of all things,
and that He is Himself the Husbandman; albeit in another place He calls His
Father the same. For "My Father," says He, "is the Husbandman." [John 15:1]
Thus, inasmuch as He had spoken of an axe, lest you should suppose that the
thing needed labor, and the separation was hard to make; by another comparison
he suggests the easiness of it, implying that all the world is His; since He could
not punish those who were not His own. For the present, it is true, all are
mingled together (for though the wheat appears gleaming through, yet it lies
with the chaff, as on a threshing floor, not as in a garner), but then, great will be
the separation.
Where now are they by whom hell-fire is disbelieved? Since surely here are
two points laid down, one, that He will baptize with the Holy Ghost, the other,
that He will burn up the disobedient. If then that is credible, so is this too,
assuredly. Yea, this is why the two predictions are put by him in immediate
connection, that by that which has taken place already, he might accredit the
other, as yet unaccomplished. For Christ too Himself in many places does so,
often of the same things, and often of opposites, setting down two prophecies;
the one of which He performs here, the other He promises in the future; that such
as are too contentious may, from the one which has already come to pass, believe
the other also, which is not yet accomplished. For instance, to them that strip
themselves of all that they have for His sake He promised to give an hundred
fold in the present world, and life eternal in that which is to come; by the things
already given making the future also credible. Which, as we see, John likewise
has done in this place; laying down two things, that He shall both baptize with

the Holy Ghost, and burn up with unquenchable fire. Now then, if He had not
baptized with the Spirit the apostles, and all every day who are willing, you
might have doubts concerning those other things too; but if that which seems to
be greater and more difficult, and which transcends all reason, has been done,
and is done every day; how do you deny that to be true, which is easy, and
comes to pass according to reason? Thus having said, "He shall baptize with the
Holy Ghost and with fire," and having thence promised great blessings; lest you,
released wholly from the former things, grow supine, he has added the fan, and
the judgment thereby declared. Thus, "think not at all," says he, "that your
baptism suffices, if you become ordinary persons hereafter:" for we need both
virtue, and plenty of that known self-restraint. Therefore as by the axe he urges
them unto grace, and unto the font, so after grace he terrifies them by the fan,
and the unquenchable fire. And of the one sort, those yet unbaptized, he makes
no distinction, but says in general, "Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is
hewn down," [Matthew 3:10] punishing all the unbelievers. Whereas after
baptism He works out a kind of division, because many of them that believed
would exhibit a life unworthy of their faith.
Let no man then become chaff, let no one be tossed to and fro, nor lie
exposed to wicked desires, blown about by them easily every way. For if you
continue wheat, though temptation be brought on you, you will suffer nothing
dreadful; nay, for in the threshing floor, the wheels of the car, that are like saws,
do not cut in pieces the wheat; but if you fall away into the weakness of chaff,
you will both here suffer incurable ills, being smitten of all men, and there you
will undergo the eternal punishment. For all such persons both before that
furnace become food for the irrational passions here, as chaff is for the brute
animal: and there again they are material and food for the flame.
Now to have said directly that He will judge men's doings, would not so
effectually procure acceptance for His doctrine: but to blend with it the parable,
and so establish it all, was apter to persuade the hearer, and attract him by a more
ample encouragement. Wherefore also Christ Himself for the most part so