However, when he had been found in the Temple, and his Mother asked him, "Son, why
have you treated us so?" the twelve-year-old Jesus answered: "Did you not know that I
must be in my Father's house?" And the Evangelist adds: "And they (Joseph and Mary)
did not understand the saying which he spoke to them" (Lk. 2:48-50). Jesus was aware
that "no one knows the Son except the Father" (cf. Mt. 11:27); thus even his Mother, to
whom had been revealed most completely the mystery of his divine sonship, lived in
intimacy with this mystery only through faith! Living side by side with her Son under the
same roof, and faithfully persevering "in her union with her Son," she "advanced in her
pilgrimage of faith," as the Council emphasizes. And so it was during Christ's public

life too (cf. Mk. 3:21-35) that day by day there was fulfilled in her the blessing uttered by
Elizabeth at the Visitation: "Blessed is she who believed."

18. This blessing reaches its full meaning when Mary stands beneath the Cross of her Son
(cf. Jn. 19:25). The Council says that this happened "not without a divine plan": by
"suffering deeply with her only-begotten Son and joining herself with her maternal spirit
to his sacrifice, lovingly consenting to the immolation of the victim to whom she had
given birth," in this way Mary "faithfully preserved her union with her Son even to the
Cross." It is a union through faith- the same faith with which she had received the
angel's revelation at the Annunciation. At that moment she had also heard the words: "He
will be great...and the Lord God will give to him the throne of his father David, and he
will reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there will be no end" (Lk. 1:32-33).

And now, standing at the foot of the Cross, Mary is the witness, humanly speaking, of the
complete negation of these words. On that wood of the Cross her Son hangs in agony as
one condemned. "He was despised and rejected by men; a man of sorrows...he was
despised, and we esteemed him not": as one destroyed (cf. Is. 53:3- 5). How great, how
heroic then is the obedience of faith shown by Mary in the face of God's "unsearchable
judgments"! How completely she "abandons herself to God" without reserve, offering the
full assent of the intellect and the will" to him whose "ways are inscrutable" (cf. Rom.
11:33)! And how powerful too is the action of grace in her soul, how all pervading is the
influence of the Holy Spirit and of his light and power!

Through this faith Mary is perfectly united with Christ in his self- emptying. For "Christ
Jesus, who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to
be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness
of men": precisely on Golgotha "humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even
death on a cross" (cf. Phil. 2:5-8). At the foot of the Cross Mary shares through faith in
the shocking mystery of this self- emptying. This is perhaps the deepest "kenosis" of faith
in human history. Through faith the Mother shares in the death of her Son, in his
redeeming death; but in contrast with the faith of the disciples who fled, hers was far
more enlightened. On Golgotha, Jesus through the Cross definitively confirmed that he
was the "sign of contradiction" foretold by Simeon. At the same time, there were also
fulfilled on Golgotha the words which Simeon had addressed to Mary: "and a sword will
pierce through your own soul also."