should dare such things in palaces, much more when the King is everywhere
present, and observes what is done, shall we if we dare them undergo severest
chastisement. Wherefore let us, I exhort you, show forth in our life much
gentleness, much purity, for we have a King who beholds all our actions
continually. In order then that this light may ever richly enlighten us, let us
gladly accept these bright beams, for so shall we enjoy both the good things
present and those to come, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom, and with whom, to the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Homily 6 on the Gospel of John
John 1:6
"There was a man sent from God, whose name was John."
1. Having in the introduction spoken to us things of urgent importance
concerning God the Word, (the Evangelist) proceeding on his road, and in order,
afterwards comes to the herald of the Word, his namesake John. And now that
you hear that he was "sent from God," do not for the future imagine that any of
the words spoken by him are mere man's words; for all that he utters is not his
own, but is of Him who sent him. Wherefore he is called "messenger" [Malachi
3:1], for the excellence of a messenger is, that he say nothing of his own. But the
expression "was," in this place is not significative of his coming into existence,
but refers to his office of messenger; for "'there was' a man sent from God," is
used instead of "a man 'was sent' from God."
How then do some say, that the expression, "being in the form of God"
[Philippians 2:6] is not used of His invariable likeness to the Father, because no
article is added? For observe, that the article is nowhere added here. Are these
words then not spoken of the Father? What then shall we say to the prophet who
says, that, "Behold, I send My messenger before Your face, who shall prepare
Your way" [Malachi 3:1, as found in Mark 1:2]? For the expressions "My" and
"Your" declare two Persons.

John 1:7
"The same came for a witness, to bear witness of that Light."
What is this, perhaps one may say, the servant bear witness to his Master?
When then you see Him not only witnessed to by His servant, but even coming
to him, and with Jews baptized by him, will you not be still more astonished and
perplexed? Yet you ought not to be troubled nor confused, but amazed at such
unspeakable goodness. Though if any still continue bewildered and confused, He
will say to such an one what He said to John, "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness" [Matthew 3:15]; and, if any be still
further troubled, again He will say to him too what he said to the Jews, "But I
receive not testimony from man." [John 5:34] If now he needs not this witness,
why was John sent from God? Not as though He required his testimony— this
were extremest blasphemy. Why then? John himself informs us, when he says,
"That all men through him might believe."
And Christ also, after having said that "I receive not testimony from man"
[John 5:34], in order that He may not seem to the foolish to clash with Himself,
by declaring at one time "There is another that bears witness of Me and I know
that his witness is true" [John 5:32] (for He pointed to John;) and at another, "I
receive not testimony from man" [John 5:34]; He immediately adds the solution
of the doubt, "But these things I say" for your own sake, "that you might be
saved." As though He had said, that "I am God, and the really-Begotten Son of
God, and am of that Simple and Blessed Essence, I need none to witness to Me;
and even though none would do so, yet am not I by this anything diminished in
My Essence; but because I care for the salvation of the many, I have descended
to such humility as to commit the witness of Me to a man." For by reason of the
groveling nature and infirmity of the Jews, the faith in Him would in this way be
more easily received, and more palatable. As then He clothed Himself with
flesh, that he might not, by encountering men with the unveiled Godhead,