This order, therefore, Boethius followed: intending to treat of those things which are of faith, he
took as the starting point of his study that highest origin of things, namely, the Trinity of the one,
simple God. Whence it is that the above-quoted words are applicable to him: "I will seek her out
from the beginning of her birth, and bring the knowledge of her to light."

In these words, as regards the present opusculum, which he addressed to Symmachus, a
patrician of Rome, three things can be noted: namely, the matter, the mode, and the purpose.

The matter of this work is the Trinity of Persons in the one, divine Essence, that Trinity which
has its source in the primal nativity in which divine wisdom is eternally generated by the Father.
"The depths were not as yet, and I was already conceived" (Prov. 8:24), and: "This day have I
begotten you" (Ps. 2:7)

This nativity is the beginning of every other nativity, as it is the only one involving perfect
participation in the nature of the generator: but all others are imperfect according as the one
generated receives either a part of the substance of the generator, or only a similitude: from this it
follows that from the aforesaid nativity, every other is derived by a kind of imitation; and thus:
"Of whom all paternity in heaven and in earth is named" (Eph. 3: 15); and on this account the
Son ,is called the first-born of every creature (Col. 1:15) so that the origin of nativity and its
imitation might be designated, but not according to the same meaning of generation; and therefore
it is aptly said: "I will seek her out from the beginning of her birth." "The Lord possessed me in
the beginning of his ways" (Prov. 8:22); for not only of creatures is the aforesaid nativity the
beginning, but even of the Holy Spirit, who proceeds from the Generator and the Generated.

But in saying this, he does not say: "I will seek out the beginning of nativity," but "from the
beginning" signifies that his search is not limited by initiation of this kind of nativity, but that,
beginning from this, he proceeds to others, for his doctrine is divided into three parts. The first
part, concerning the Trinity of Persons, from the procession of whom every other nativity and
procession are derived, is contained in that book which we possess at hand, so far as anything
can be known about the Trinity and Unity.

But in another book which he wrote to John, a deacon of the Roman Church, we find what he
says about the mode of predication which we employ in the distinction of Persons and unity of
essence; and this book begins: "I inquire whether the Father."

The second part, which is about the procession of good creatures from a good God, is in a book

that is written to the same John (De hebdomadibus), and this begins: "You ask of me.