frequently, nor immoderately, nor for any wrongs of your own, as I am
constantly saying, nor for any little failure in her service, but only if she is doing
harm to her own soul. If you chastise her for a fault of this kind, all will applaud,
and there will be none to upbraid you; but if you do it for any reasons of your
own, all will condemn your cruelty and harshness. And what is more base than
all, there are some so fierce and so savage as to lash them to such a degree, that
the bruises will not disappear with the day. For they will strip the damsels, and
call their husbands for the purpose, and oftentimes tie them to the pallets. Alas!
At that moment, tell me, does no recollection of hell come over you? What? Do
you strip your handmaid, and expose her to your husband? And are you not
ashamed, lest he should condemn you for it? And then do you exasperate him
yet more, and threaten to put her in chains, having first taunted the wretched and
pitiable creature with ten thousand reproachful names, and called her
"Thessalian witch, runaway, and prostitute"?
For her passion allows her not to spare even her own mouth, but she looks
to one single object, how she may wreak her vengeance on the other, even
though she disgrace herself. And then after all these things forsooth, she will sit
in state like any tyrant, and call her children, and summon her foolish husband,
and treat him as a hangman. Ought these things to take place in the houses of
Christians? "Aye" say ye, "but slaves are a troublesome, audacious, impudent,
incorrigible race." True, I know it myself, but there are other ways to keep them
in order; by terrors, by threats, by words; which may both touch her more
powerfully, and save you from disgrace. Thou who art a free woman hast uttered
foul words, and do you not disgrace yourself more than her? Then if she shall
have occasion to go out to the bath, there are bruises on her back when she is
naked, and she carries about with her the marks of your cruelty. "But," say ye,
"the whole tribe of slaves is intolerable if it meet with indulgence." True, I know
it myself. But then, as I was saying, correct them in some other way, not by the
scourge only, and by terror, but even by flattering them, and by acts of kindness.
If she is a believer, she is your sister. Consider that you are her mistress, and that

she ministers unto you. If she be intemperate, cut off the occasions of
drunkenness; call your husband, and admonish her. Or do you not feel how
disgraceful a thing it is for a woman to be beaten? They at least who have
enacted ten thousand punishments for men,— the stake, and the rack,— will
scarcely ever hang a woman, but limit men's anger to smiting her on the cheek;
and so great respect have they observed towards the sex, that not even when
there is absolute necessity have they often hung a woman, if she happen to be
pregnant. For it is a disgrace for a man to strike a woman; and if for a man, much
more for one of her own sex. It is moreover by these things that women become
odious to their husbands. "What then," ye may say, "if she shall act the harlot?"
Marry her to a husband; cut off the occasions of fornication, suffer her not to be
too high fed. "What then, if she shall steal?" Take care of her, and watch her.—
"Extravagant!" you will say; "What, am I to be her keeper? How absurd!" And
why, I pray, are you not to be her keeper? Has she not the same kind of soul as
thou? Has she not been vouchsafed the same privileges by God? Does she not
partake of the same table? Does she not share with you the same high birth? "But
what then," you will say, "if she shall be a railer, or a gossip, or a drunkard?"
Yet, how many free women are such? Now, with all the failings of women God
has charged men to bear: only, He says, let not a woman be an harlot, but every
other failing besides bear with. Yea, be she drunkard, or railer, or gossip, or evileyed, or extravagant, and a squanderer of your substance, you have her for the
partner of your life. Train and restrain her. Necessity is upon you. It is for this
you are the head. Regulate her therefore, do your own part. Yea, and if she
remain incorrigible, yea, though she steal, take care of your goods, and do not
punish her so much. If she be a gossip, silence her. This is the very highest
philosophy.
Now, however, some have come to such a height of indecency as to uncover
the head, and to drag their maid-servants by the hair.— Why do ye all blush? I
am not addressing myself to all, but to those who are carried away into such
brutal conduct. Paul says, "Let not a woman be uncovered." [1 Corinthians 11:5-