the multitude, and be able to lead them over to a more useful way of hearing,
that his people may follow and yield to him, and that he may not be led away by
their own humors, and this it is not possible to arrive at, except by two means:
indifference to their praise, and the power of preaching well.
2. For if either of these be lacking, the remaining one becomes useless,
owing to its divorce from the other, for if a preacher be indifferent to praise, and
yet cannot produce the doctrine "which is with grace seasoned with salt,"
[Colossians 4:6] he becomes despised by the multitude, while he gains nothing
from his own nobleness of mind; and if on the other hand he is successful as a
preacher, and is overcome by the thought of applause, harm is equally done in
turn, both to himself and the multitude, because in his desire for praise he is
careful to speak rather with a view to please than to profit. And as he who
neither lets good opinion influence him, nor is skillful in speaking, does not
yield to the pleasure of the multitude, and is unable to do them any good worth
mentioning, because he has nothing to say, so he who is carried away with desire
for praise, though he is able to render the multitude better service, rather
provides in place of this such food as will suit their taste, because he purchases
thereby the tumult of acclamation.
3. The best kind of Bishop must, therefore, be strong in both these points,
so that neither may supplant the other. For if when he stands up in the
congregation and speaks words calculated to make the careless wince, he then
stumbles, and stops short, and is forced to blush at his failure, the good of what
he has spoken is immediately wasted. For they who are rebuked, being galled by
what has been told them, and unable to avenge themselves on him otherwise,
taunt him, with jeers at this ignorance of his, thinking to screen their own
reproach thereby. Wherefore he ought, like some very good charioteer, to come
to an accurate judgment about both these good things, in order that he may be
able to deal with both as he may have need; for when he is irreproachable in the
eyes of all, then he will be able, with just so much authority as he wishes, both to
correct and to remit from correction all those who are under his rule. But without

this it will not be easy for him to do so. But this nobleness of soul should be
shown not only up to the limit of indifference to praise, but should go further in
order that the gain thus gotten may not in its turn be fruitless.
4. To what else ought he then to be indifferent? Slander and envy.
Unseasonable evil speaking, however (for of course the Bishop undergoes some
groundless censure), it is well that he should neither fear nor tremble at
excessively, nor entirely pass over; but we ought, though it happen to be false, or
to be brought against us by the common herd, to try and extinguish it
immediately. For nothing so magnifies both an evil and a good report as the
undisciplined mob. For accustomed to hear and to speak without stopping to
make inquiry, they repeat at random everything which comes in their way,
without any regard to the truth of it. Therefore the Bishop ought not to be
unconcerned about the multitude, but straightway to nip their evil surmisings in
the bud; persuading his accusers, even if they be the most unreasonable of all
men, and to omit nothing which is able to dispel an ill-favored report. But if,
when we do all this, they who blame us will not be persuaded, thenceforward we
should give them no concern. Since if any one be too quick to be dejected by
these accidents, he will not be able at any time to produce anything noble and
admirable. For despondency and constant cares are mighty for destroying the
powers of the mind, and for reducing it to extreme weakness. Thus then must the
Priest behave towards those in his charge, as a father would behave to his very
young children; and as such are not disturbed either by their insults or their
blows, or their lamentations, nor even if they laugh and rejoice with us, do we
take much account of it; so should we neither be puffed up by the promises of
these persons nor cast down at their censure, when it comes from them
unseasonably. But this is hard, my good friend; and perhaps, methinks, even
impossible. For I know not whether any man ever succeeded in the effort not to
be pleased when he is praised, and the man who is pleased at this is likely also to
desire to enjoy it, and the man who desires to enjoy it will, of necessity, be
altogether vexed and beside himself whenever he misses it. For as they who