SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.11.

have grace from God lose it, which is also heretical. But God's
"counsel" whereby He makes even things corruptible and
changeable, is imperishable according to Is. 46:10, "My counsel shall
stand and all My will shall be done." Hence the purpose of entering
religion needs not to be tried whether it be of God, because "it
requires no further demonstration," as a gloss says on 1 Thess. 5:21,
"Prove all things."
Reply to Objection 2: Even as "the flesh lusteth against the
spirit" (Gal. 5:17), so too carnal friends often thwart our spiritual
progress, according to Mic. 7:6, "A man's enemies are they of his
own household." Wherefore Cyril expounding Lk. 9:61, "Let me first
take my leave of them that are at my house," says [St. Thomas's
Catena Aurea]: "By asking first to take his leave of them that were at
his house, he shows he was somewhat of two minds. For to
communicate with his neighbors, and consult those who are
unwilling to relish righteousness, is an indication of weakness and
turning back. Hence he hears our Lord say: 'No man putting his hand
to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God,'
because he looks back who seeks delay in order to go home and
confer with his kinsfolk."
Reply to Objection 3: The building of the tower signifies the
perfection of Christian life; and the renunciation of one's
possessions is the wherewithal to build this tower. Now no one
doubts or deliberates about wishing to have the wherewithal, or
whether he is able to build the tower if he have the wherewithal, but
what does come under deliberation is whether one has the
wherewithal. Again it need not be a matter of deliberation whether
one ought to renounce all that one has, or whether by so doing one
may be able to attain to perfection; whereas it is a matter of
deliberation whether that which one is doing amounts to the
renunciation of all that he has, since unless he does renounce
(which is to have the wherewithal) he cannot, as the text goes on to
state, be Christ's disciple, and this is to build the tower.
The misgiving of those who hesitate as to whether they may be able
to attain to perfection by entering religion is shown by many
examples to be unreasonable. Hence Augustine says (Confess. viii,
11): "On that side whither I had set my face, and whither I trembled to
go, there appeared to me the chaste dignity of continency . . .
honestly alluring me to come and doubt not, and stretching forth to
receive and embrace me, her holy hands full of multitudes of good

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.188, C.11.

examples. There were so many young men and maidens here, a
multitude of youth and every age, grave widows and aged virgins . . .
And she smiled at me with a persuasive mockery as though to say:
Canst not thou what these youths and these maidens can? Or can
they either in themselves, and not rather in the Lord their God? . . .
Why standest thou in thyself, and so standest not? Cast thyself upon
Him; fear not, He will not withdraw Himself that thou shouldst fall.
Cast thyself fearlessly upon Him: He will receive and will heal thee."
The example quoted of David is not to the point, because "the arms
of Saul," as a gloss on the passage observes, "are the sacraments of
the Law, as being burdensome": whereas religion is the sweet yoke
of Christ, for as Gregory says (Moral. iv, 33), "what burden does He
lay on the shoulders of the mind, Who commands us to shun all
troublesome desires, Who warns us to turn aside from the rough
paths of this world?"
To those indeed who take this sweet yoke upon themselves He
promises the refreshment of the divine fruition and the eternal rest of
their souls.
To which may He Who made this promise bring us, Jesus Christ our
Lord, "Who is over all things God blessed for ever. Amen."