come unto Him? I, who chose that part, shall I not much rather choose this, shall
I not with pleasure harm myself by this delay and postponement, that they may
be saved?
"Who shall utter Your mighty acts, O Lord" [Psalm 106:2], because You
suffered not Paul to be hidden, because You made manifest to the world such a
man? All the Angels of God praised You with one accord, when You made the
stars [Job 38:7], and so too surely when You made the sun, but not so much as
when You manifested Paul to the whole world. By this, the earth was made more
brilliant than the heaven, for he is brighter than the solar light, he has shot forth
more brilliant rays, he has shed abroad more joyous beams. What fruit has this
man borne for us! not by making fat our grain, not by nurturing our
pomegranates, but by producing and perfecting the fruit of holiness, and when
falling to pieces, continually recovering them. For the sun itself can nothing
profit fruits that are once decayed, but Paul has called out of their sins those who
had manifold decays. And it gives place to the night, but he had mastery over the
Devil. Nothing ever subdued him, nothing mastered him. The sun, when it
mounts the heavens, darts down its rays, but he, as he rose from beneath, filled
not the mid space of heaven and earth with light, but as soon as he opened his
mouth, filled the Angels with exceeding joy. For if "there is joy in heaven over
one sinner that repents" [Luke 15:7], while he at his first address caught
multitudes, does he not fill with joy the Powers above? What say I? It suffices
that Paul should only be named, and the heavens leap for joy. For if when the
Israelites "went forth out of Egypt, the mountains skipped like rams" [Psalm
114:4], how great, do you think, was the joy, when men ascended from earth to
heaven!
Ver. 24. For this cause "to abide in the flesh is more needful for your sake."
And what excuse is left to us? ofttimes it happens that a man who possesses
a little and poor city, chooses not to depart to another place, preferring his own
rest. Paul might depart to Christ, and would not, (Christ whom he so desired, as
for his sake to choose even hell, ) but still remained in the contest on behalf of

man. What excuse shall we have? May we then even make mention of Paul?
Look to his deeds. He showed that to depart was better, persuading himself not
to grieve: he showed them, that if he remained, he remained for their sake, that it
proceeded not from wickedness of those who plotted against him. He subjoined
also the reason, that he might secure their belief. For if this is necessary, that is, I
shall by all means remain, and I will not "remain" simply, but "will remain with
you." For this is the meaning of the word, "and I shall abide with," i.e. I shall see
you. For what cause? "For your progress and joy in the faith." Here too he
rouses them, to take heed unto themselves. If, says he, for your sakes I abide, see
that you shame not my abiding. "For your progress," I have chosen to remain,
when I was about to see Christ. I have chosen to remain, because my presence
advances both your faith and your joy. What then? Did he remain for the sake of
the Philippians only? He stayed not for their sake only; but this he says, that he
may show regard to them. And how were they to "progress" in "the faith "? That
you may be more strengthened, like young fowl, who need their mother until
their feathers are set. This is a proof of his great love. In like sort, we also rouse
some of you, when we say, for your sake have I remained, that I may make you
good.
Ver. 26. "That your glorying may abound in Christ Jesus in me, through my
presence with you again."
You see that this explains the word "abide with you." Behold his humility.
Having said, "for your progress," he shows that it was for his own profit too.
This also he does, when he writes to the Romans, and says, "That is, that we may
be comforted together in you." [Romans 1:11-12] Having previously said, "That
I may impart unto you some spiritual gift." And what means, "That your
glorying may abound"? This glorying was, their establishment in the faith. For
an upright life is glorying in Christ. And do you say, "Your glorying in me,
through my presence with you again"? Yes, he answers; "For what is our hope,
or crown of glorying? Are not even ye?" [1 Thessalonians 2:19] Because "you
are our glorying, even as we also are yours" [2 Corinthians 1:14], i.e. that I may