the great apostle, "night and day with tears," had forewarned the churches of "the grievous wolves"
which were to make havoc of the fold.
If it shocks the young student of the virgin years of Christianity to find such a state of things,
let him reflect that it was all foretold by Christ himself, and demonstrates the malice and power of
the adversary. "An enemy hath done this," said the Master. The spirit that was then working "in
the children of disobedience," now manifested itself. The awful visions of the Apocalypse began
to be realized. It was now evident in what sense "the Prince of peace" had pronounced His mission,
"not peace, but a sword." In short, it became a conspicuous fact, that the Church here on earth is
"militant;" while, at the same time, there was seen to be a profound philosophy in the apostolic
comment, "There must be also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest." In the divine economy of Providence it was permitted that every form of heresy which
was ever to infest the Church should now exhibit its essential principle, and attract the censures of
the faithful. Thus testimony to primitive truth was secured and recorded: the language of catholic
orthodoxy was developed and defined, and landmarks of faith were set up for perpetual memorial
to all generations. It is a striking example of this divine economy, that the see of Rome was allowed
to exhibit its fallibility very conspicuously at this time, and not only to receive the rebukes of
Irenæus, but to accept them as wholesome and necessary; so that the heresy of Eleutherus, and the
spirit of Diotrephes in Victor, have enabled reformers ever since, and even in the darkest days of
pontifical despotism, to testify against the manifold errors patronized by Rome. Hilary and other
Gallicans have been strengthened by the example of Irenæus, and by his faithful words of reproof
and exhortation, to resist Rome, even down to our own times.
That the intolerable absurdities of Gnosticism should have gained so many disciples, and proved
itself an adversary to be grappled with and not despised, throws light on the condition of the human
mind under heathenism, even when it professed "knowledge" and "philosophy." The task of Irenæus
was twofold: (1) to render it impossible for any one to confound Gnosticism with Christianity, and
(2) to make it impossible for such a monstrous system to survive, or ever to rise again. His task
was a nauseous one; but never was the spirit enjoined by Scripture more patiently exhibited, nor
with more entire success. If Julian had found Gnosticism just made to his hand, and powerful
enough to suit his purposes, the whole history of his attempt to revive Paganism would have been
widely different. Irenæus demonstrated its essential unity with the old mythology, and with heathen
systems of philosophy. If the fog and malaria that rose with the Day-star, and obscured it, were
speedily dispersed, our author is largely to be identified with the radiance which flowed from the
Sun of righteousness, and with the breath of the Spirit that banished them for ever.
The Episcopate of Irenæus was distinguished by labours, "in season and out of season," for the
evangelization of Southern Gaul; and he seems to have sent missionaries into other regions of what
we now call France. In spite of Paganism and heresy, he rendered Lyons a Christian city; and