been subjected, had He not chosen it of His own accord, and of His own free
will, it would not have been an act of humility. For if He knew not that so it must
be, He would have been imperfect. If, not knowing it, He had waited for the time
of action, then would He not have known the season. But if He both knew that so
it must be, and when it must be, wherefore should He submit to be subjected? To
show, they say, the superiority of the Father. But this shows not the superiority of
the Father, but His own inferiority. For is not the name of the Father sufficient to
show the priority of the Father? For apart from Him, the son has all the same
things. For this honor is not capable of passing from the Father to the Son.
What then say the heretics? See, say they, He did not become man. The
Marcionites, I mean. But why? He was "made in the likeness of man." But how
can one be "made in the likeness of men"? By putting on a shadow? But this is a
phantom, and no longer the likeness of a man, for the likeness of a man is
another man. And what will you answer to John, when he says, "The Word
became flesh"? [John 1:14] But this same blessed one himself also says in
another place, "in the likeness of sinful flesh." [Romans 8:3]
"And being found in fashion as a man." See, they say, both "in fashion," and
"as a man." To be as a man, and to be a man in fashion, is not to be a man
indeed. To be a man in fashion is not to be a man by nature. See with what
ingenuousness I lay down what our enemies say, for that is a brilliant victory,
and amply gained, when we do not conceal what seem to be their strong points.
For this is deceit rather than victory. What then do they say? Let me repeat their
argument. To be a man in fashion is not to be a man by nature; and to be as a
man, and in the fashion of a man, this is not to be a man. So then to take the
form of a servant, is not to take the form of a servant. Here then is an
inconsistency; and wherefore do you not first of all solve this difficulty? For as
you think that this contradicts us, so do we say that the other contradicts you. He
says not, "as the form of a servant," nor "in the likeness of the form of a servant,"
nor "in the fashion of the form of a servant," but "He took the form of a servant."
What then is this? For there is a contradiction. There is no contradiction. God

forbid! It is a cold and ridiculous argument of theirs. He took, say they, the form
of a servant, when He girded Himself with a towel, and washed the feet of His
disciples. Is this the form of a servant? Nay, this is not the form, but the work of
a servant. It is one thing that there should be the work of a servant, and another
to take the form of a servant. Why did he not say, He did the work of a servant,
which were clearer? But nowhere in Scripture is "form" put for "work," for the
difference is great: the one is the result of nature, the other of action. In common
speaking, too, we never use "form" for "work." Besides, according to them, He
did not even take the work of a servant, nor even gird Himself. For if all was a
mere shadow, there was no reality. If He had not real hands, how did He wash
their feet? If He had not real loins, how did He gird Himself with a towel? And
what kind of garments did he take? For Scripture says, "He took His garments."
[John 13:12] So then not even the work is found to have really taken place, but it
was all a deception, nor did He even wash the disciples. For if that incorporeal
nature did not appear, it was not in a body. Who then washed the disciples' feet?
Again, what in opposition to Paul of Samosata? For what did he affirm?
The very same. But it is no emptying of Himself, that one who is of human
nature, and a mere man, should wash his fellow-servants. For what we said
against the Arians, we must repeat against these too, for they differ not from one
another, save by a little space of time; both the one and the other affirm the Son
of God to be a creature. What then shall we say to them? If He being a man
washed man, He emptied not, He humbled not Himself. If He being a man
seized not on being equal with God, He is not deserving of praise. That God
should become man, is great, unspeakable, inexpressible humility; but what
humility is there in that one, who was a man should do the works of men? And
where is the work of God ever called "the form of God"? For if he were a mere
man, and was called the form of God by reason of His works, why do we not do
the same of Peter, for he wrought greater deeds than Christ Himself? Why say
you not of Paul, that he had the form of God? Why did not Paul give an example
of himself, for he wrought a thousand servile works, and did not even refuse to