Acts iv. 2.
New Testament.

Church had its origin; these are the voices of the metropolis of the citizens of the new covenant;
these are the voices of the apostles; these are voices of the disciples of the Lord, the truly perfect,
who, after the assumption of the Lord, were perfected by the Spirit, and called upon the God who
made heaven, and earth, and the sea,—who was announced by the prophets,— and Jesus Christ
His Son, whom God anointed, and who knew no other [God]. For at that time and place there was
neither Valentinus, nor Marcion, nor the rest of these subverters [of the truth], and their adherents.
Wherefore God, the Maker of all things, heard them. For it is said, "The place was shaken where
they were assembled together; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the
word of God with boldness" to every one that was willing to believe. "And with great power,"
it is added, "gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus," saying to them,
"The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye seized and slew, hanging [Him] upon a beam
of wood: Him hath God raised up by His right hand to be a Prince and Saviour, to give repentance
to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And we are in this witnesses of these words; as also is the Holy
Ghost, whom God hath given to them that believe in Him." "And daily," it is said, "in the temple,
and from house to house, they ceased not to teach and preach Christ Jesus," the Son of God. For
this was the knowledge of salvation, which renders those who acknowledge His Son's advent
perfect towards God.
6. But as some of these men impudently assert that the apostles, when preaching among the
Jews, could not declare to them another god besides Him in whom they (their hearers) believed,
we say to them, that if the apostles used to speak to people in accordance with the opinion instilled
into them of old, no one learned the truth from them, nor, at a much earlier date, from the Lord;
for they say that He did Himself speak after the same fashion. Wherefore neither do these men
themselves know the truth; but since such was their opinion regarding God, they had just received
doctrine as they were able to hear it. According to this manner of speaking, therefore, the rule of
truth can be with nobody; but all learners will ascribe this practice to all [teachers], that just as
every person thought, and as far as his capability extended, so was also the language addressed to
him. But the advent of the Lord will appear superfluous and useless, if He did indeed come intending
to tolerate and to preserve each man's idea regarding God rooted in him from of old. Besides this,
also, it was a much heavier task, that He whom the Jews had seen as a man, and had fastened to

The Latin is, "ut convertat se unusquisque."