might be applied to the other instruments of the soul: but it is the
"first" principle of life, which we call the soul. Now, though a body
may be a principle of life, or to be a living thing, as the heart is a
principle of life in an animal, yet nothing corporeal can be the first
principle of life. For it is clear that to be a principle of life, or to be a
living thing, does not belong to a body as such; since, if that were
the case, every body would be a living thing, or a principle of life.
Therefore a body is competent to be a living thing or even a principle
of life, as "such" a body. Now that it is actually such a body, it owes
to some principle which is called its act. Therefore the soul, which is
the first principle of life, is not a body, but the act of a body; thus
heat, which is the principle of calefaction, is not a body, but an act of
a body.
Reply to Objection 1: As everything which is in motion must be
moved by something else, a process which cannot be prolonged
indefinitely, we must allow that not every mover is moved. For, since
to be moved is to pass from potentiality to actuality, the mover gives
what it has to the thing moved, inasmuch as it causes it to be in act.
But, as is shown in Phys. viii, 6, there is a mover which is altogether
immovable, and not moved either essentially, or accidentally; and
such a mover can cause an invariable movement. There is, however,
another kind of mover, which, though not moved essentially, is
moved accidentally; and for this reason it does not cause an
invariable movement; such a mover, is the soul. There is, again,
another mover, which is moved essentially---namely, the body. And
because the philosophers of old believed that nothing existed but
bodies, they maintained that every mover is moved; and that the soul
is moved directly, and is a body.
Reply to Objection 2: The likeness of a thing known is not of
necessity actually in the nature of the knower; but given a thing
which knows potentially, and afterwards knows actually, the likeness
of the thing known must be in the nature of the knower, not actually,
but only potentially; thus color is not actually in the pupil of the eye,
but only potentially. Hence it is necessary, not that the likeness of
corporeal things should be actually in the nature of the soul, but that
there be a potentiality in the soul for such a likeness. But the ancient
philosophers omitted to distinguish between actuality and
potentiality; and so they held that the soul must be a body in order to
have knowledge of a body; and that it must be composed of the
principles of which all bodies are formed in order to know all bodies.

Reply to Objection 3: There are two kinds of contact; of "quantity,"
and of "power." By the former a body can be touched only by a
body; by the latter a body can be touched by an incorporeal thing,
which moves that body.