beginning," the Word was not made, but "the Word was with God, and
the Word was God, and all things were made by Him;" neither had all
things been made by Him, unless He had Himself been before all things
and not made. (But in those things which were made by Him, even body,
which is not life, would not have been made by Him, except it had been
life in Him before it was made. For "that which was made was already life
in Him;" and not life of any kind soever: for the soul also is the life of the
body, but this too is made, for it is changeable;) and by what was it made,
except by the unchangeable Word of God? For "all things were made by
Him; and without Him was not anything made that was made." "What,
therefore, was made was already life in Him;" and not any kind of life, but
"the life  was the light of men;" the light certainly of rational
minds, by which men differ from beasts, and therefore are men.
Therefore not corporeal light, which is the light of the flesh, whether it
shine from heaven, or whether it be lighted by earthly fires; nor that of
human flesh only, but also that of beasts, and down even to the minutest
of worms. For all these things see that light: but that life was the light of
men; nor is it far from any one of us, for in it "we live, and move, and
have our being."

### CHAP. 2.—HOW WE ARE RENDERED APT FOR THE PERCEPTION OF TRUTH THROUGH THE INCARNATE WORD.

4. But "the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not." Now the "darkness" is the foolish minds of men, made blind by
vicious desires and unbelief. And that the Word, by whom all things were
made, might care for these and heal them, "The Word was made flesh,
and dwelt among us." For our enlightening is the partaking of the Word,
namely, of that life which is the light of men. But for this partaking we
were utterly unfit, and fell short of it, on account of the uncleanness of
sins. Therefore we were to be cleansed. And further, the one cleansing of
the unrighteous and of the proud is the blood of the Righteous One, and
the humbling of God Himself; that we might be cleansed through Him,
made as He was what we are by nature, and what we are not by sin, that
we might contemplate God, which by nature we are not. For by nature we
are not God: by nature we are men, by sin we are not righteous.
Wherefore God, made a righteous man, interceded with God for man the

sinner. For the sinner is not congruous to the righteous, but man is
congruous to man. By joining therefore to us the likeness of His
humanity, He took away the unlikeness of our unrighteousness; and by
being made partaker of our mortality, He made us partakers of His
divinity. For the death of the sinner springing from the necessity of
comdemnation is deservedly abolished by the death of the Righteous One
springing from the free choice of His compassion, while His single  answers to our double .3 For
this congruity, or suitableness, or concord, or consonance, or whatever
more appropriate word there may be, whereby one is  to two, is of
great weight in all compacting, or better, perhaps, co-adaptation, of the
creature. For (as it just occurs to me) what I mean is precisely that coadaptation which the Greeks call ἁρμονία. However this is not the place
to set forth the power of that consonance of single to double which is
found especially in us, and which is naturally so implanted in us (and by
whom, except by Him who created us?), that not even the ignorant can
fail to perceive it, whether when singing themselves or hearing others.
For by this it is that treble and bass voices are in harmony, so that any
one who in his note departs from it, offends extremely, not only trained
skill, of which the most part of men are devoid, but the very sense of
hearing. To demonstrate this, needs no doubt a long discourse; but any
one who knows it, may make it plain to the very ear in a rightly ordered
monochord.