SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.7.

Wherefore our Lord after saying to the young man: "If thou wilt enter
into life, keep the commandments," said afterwards by way of
addition: "If thou wilt be perfect go sell" all "that thou hast, and give
to the poor" (Mt. 19:17,21). Bishops, however, do not bind
themselves at their ordination to live without possessions of their
own; nor indeed does the pastoral office, to which they bind
themselves, make it necessary for them to live without anything of
their own. Therefore bishops are not bound to live without
possessions of their own.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above (Question 184, Article 3, ad 1)
the perfection of the Christian life does not essentially consist in
voluntary poverty, but voluntary poverty conduces instrumentally to
the perfection of life. Hence it does not follow that where there is
greater poverty there is greater perfection; indeed the highest
perfection is compatible with great wealth, since Abraham, to whom
it was said (Gn. 17:1): "Walk before Me and be perfect," is stated to
have been rich (Gn. 13:2).
Reply to Objection 2: This saying of our Lord can be understood in
three ways. First, mystically, that we should possess neither gold
nor silver means that the preacher should not rely chiefly on
temporal wisdom and eloquence; thus Jerome expounds the
passage.
Secondly, according to Augustine's explanation (De Consens. Ev. ii,
30), we are to understand that our Lord said this not in command but
in permission. For he permitted them to go preaching without gold or
silver or other means, since they were to receive the means of
livelihood from those to whom they preached; wherefore He added:
"For the workman is worthy of his meat." And yet if anyone were to
use his own means in preaching the Gospel, this would be a work of
supererogation, as Paul says in reference to himself (1 Cor. 9:12,15).
Thirdly, according to the exposition of Chrysostom [Hom. ii in Rom.
xvi, 3], we are to understand that our Lord laid these commands on
His disciples in reference to the mission on which they were sent to
preach to the Jews, so that they might be encouraged to trust in His
power, seeing that He provided for their wants without their having
means of their own. But it does not follow from this that they, or their
successors, were obliged to preach the Gospel without having
means of their own: since we read of Paul (2 Cor. 11:8) that he
"received wages" of other churches for preaching to the Corinthians,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.184, C.7.

wherefore it is clear that he possessed something sent to him by
others. And it seems foolish to say that so many holy bishops as
Athanasius, Ambrose, and Augustine would have disobeyed these
commandments if they believed themselves bound to observe them.
Reply to Objection 3: Every part is less than the whole. Accordingly
a man has other portions together with God, if he becomes less
intent on things pertaining to God by occupying himself with things
of the world. Now neither bishops nor clerics ought thus to possess
means of their own, that while busy with their own they neglect
those that concern the worship of God.