nerves, to bones; so he too, more briefly indeed, as heedful of brevity, yet far
more, clearly and more powerfully, says, "For the love of money is the root of all
evils." [1 Timothy 6:10]
Of what then should one make use? He tells this also: of contentedness
instead of covetousness. "For contentment," he says, "with godliness is great
gain." [1 Timothy 5:6] But if you are dissatisfied, and desirest more, and art not
yet equal to cast away all superfluous things, he tells also him that is thus
diseased, how he ought to handle these things too. "That they that rejoice in
wealth, be as though they rejoiced not; and they that have, as though they
possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing it."
[1 Corinthians 7:30-31]
Do you see what manner of things he enjoins? Will you call in also another
physician besides? To me at least it seems well. For neither are these physicians
like those of the body, who often, while vying one with another, overwhelm the
sick man. But not so these, for they have regard to the health of the sick, not to
their own vainglory. Be not then afraid of the number of them; one Master
speaks in all, that is, Christ.
5. See, for instance, another again entering in, and saying severe things
concerning this disease, or rather it is the Master by him; "For you cannot serve
God and mammon." [Matthew 6:24] Yea, says he, and how will these things be?
How shall we cease from the desire? Hence may we learn this also. And how
shall we know? Hear him saying this too: "Lay not up for yourselves treasures
upon the earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal." [Matthew 6:19]
Do you see how by the place, by the things that waste there, He draws men
off from this desire that is here, and rivets them to Heaven, where all things are
impregnable? For if you transfer your wealth there where neither rust nor moth
corrupts, nor thieves break through and steal, you will both expel this disease,
and establish your soul in the greatest abundance.
And together with what we have said, He brings forward an example also to

teach you moderation. And like as the physician, to alarm the sick man says, that
such a one died from the use of cold water; so does He also bring in the rich
man, [Matthew 19:16] laboring indeed, and longing for life and health, but not
able to attain thereto, because of having set his heart on covetousness, but going
away empty. And besides this man, another is shown to you again by another
evangelist, he that was in torment, [Luke 16:24-26] and was not master so much
as of a drop of water. Then showing that His injunctions are easy, He says,
"Behold the fowls of the air." [Matthew 6:26] But being compassionate, He
suffers not even the rich to despair. "For the things which are impossible with
men, are possible with God," [Luke 18:27] says He. For though thou be rich, the
physician is able to cure you. For neither was it wealth that He took away, but to
be slave of riches, and a lover of greedy gain.
How then is it possible for the rich man to be saved. By possessing his
goods in common with them that are in need, being such as Job was, and
exterminating out of his soul the desire of more, and in no points going beyond
real need.
He shows you together with these this selfsame publican also, that was
grievously oppressed by the fever of covetousness, quickly set free from it. For
what more sordid than a publican? Nevertheless, the man became indifferent to
wealth from obeying the laws of the physician. For indeed He has for His
disciples such persons as these, that were sick of the same diseases as we are,
and have recovered their health quickly. And He shows us each, in order we may
not despair. See at least this publican. Mark again another, a chief of the
publicans, who promised four fold indeed for all that he had extorted, and the
half of all that he possessed, that he might receive Jesus.
But are you on fire with exceeding desire for riches. Have the possessions
of all men instead of your own. For indeed I give you, He says, more than you
seek, in opening to you the houses of the wealthy throughout the world. "For
whosoever has forsaken father or mother, or lands, or house, shall receive an
hundredfold." [Matthew 19:29] Thus will you not enjoy more abundant