SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.2.

above (Question 47, Article 5, ad 1; FS, Question 58, Article 2, ad 4).
For this reason also the execution of justice in so far as it is directed
to the common good, which is part of the kingly office, needs the
guidance of prudence. Hence these two virtues---prudence and
justice---belong most properly to a king, according to Jer. 23:5: "A
king shall reign and shall be wise, and shall execute justice and
judgment in the earth." Since, however, direction belongs rather to
the king, and execution to his subjects, regnative prudence is
reckoned a species of prudence which is directive, rather than to
justice which is executive.
Reply to Objection 2: A kingdom is the best of all governments, as
stated in Ethic. viii, 10: wherefore the species of prudence should be
denominated rather from a kingdom, yet so as to comprehend under
regnative all other rightful forms of government, but not perverse
forms which are opposed to virtue, and which, accordingly, do not
pertain to prudence.
Reply to Objection 3: The Philosopher names regnative prudence
after the principal act of a king which is to make laws, and although
this applies to the other forms of government, this is only in so far as
they have a share of kingly government.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.49, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether political prudence is fittingly accounted a

part of prudence?
Objection 1: It would seem that political prudence is not fittingly
accounted a part of prudence. For regnative is a part of political
prudence, as stated above (Article 1). But a part should not be
reckoned a species with the whole. Therefore political prudence
should not be reckoned a part of prudence.
Objection 2: Further, the species of habits are distinguished by their
various objects. Now what the ruler has to command is the same as
what the subject has to execute. Therefore political prudence as
regards the subjects, should not be reckoned a species of prudence
distinct from regnative prudence.
Objection 3: Further, each subject is an individual person. Now each
individual person can direct himself sufficiently by prudence
commonly so called. Therefore there is no need of a special kind of
prudence called political.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 8) that "of the
prudence which is concerned with the state one kind is a masterprudence and is called legislative; another kind bears the common
name political, and deals with individuals."
I answer that, A slave is moved by his master, and a subject by his
ruler, by command, but otherwise than as irrational and inanimate
beings are set in motion by their movers. For irrational and
inanimate beings are moved only by others and do not put
themselves in motion, since they have no free-will whereby to be
masters of their own actions, wherefore the rectitude of their
government is not in their power but in the power of their movers.
On the other hand, men who are slaves or subjects in any sense, are
moved by the commands of others in such a way that they move
themselves by their free-will; wherefore some kind of rectitude of
government is required in them, so that they may direct themselves
in obeying their superiors; and to this belongs that species of
prudence which is called political.
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above, regnative is the most perfect
species of prudence, wherefore the prudence of subjects, which falls