perfect likeness, but imperfect. And Scripture implies the same when
it says that man was made "to" God's likeness; for the preposition
"to" signifies a certain approach, as of something at a distance.
Reply to Objection 1: The Prophet speaks of bodily images made by
man. Therefore he says pointedly: "What image will you make for
Him?" But God made a spiritual image to Himself in man.
Reply to Objection 2: The First-Born of creatures is the perfect Image
of God, reflecting perfectly that of which He is the Image, and so He
is said to be the "Image," and never "to the image." But man is said
to be both "image" by reason of the likeness; and "to the image" by
reason of the imperfect likeness. And since the perfect likeness to
God cannot be except in an identical nature, the Image of God exists
in His first-born Son; as the image of the king is in his son, who is of
the same nature as himself: whereas it exists in man as in an alien
nature, as the image of the king is in a silver coin, as Augustine says
explains in De decem Chordis (Serm. ix, al, xcvi, De Tempore).
Reply to Objection 3: As unity means absence of division, a species
is said to be the same as far as it is one. Now a thing is said to be
one not only numerically, specifically, or generically, but also
according to a certain analogy or proportion. In this sense a creature
is one with God, or like to Him; but when Hilary says "of a thing
which adequately represents another," this is to be understood of a
perfect image.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the image of God is to be found in

irrational creatures?
Objection 1: It would seem that the image of God is to be found in
irrational creatures. For Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ii): "Effects are
contingent images of their causes." But God is the cause not only of
rational, but also of irrational creatures. Therefore the image of God
is to be found in irrational creatures.
Objection 2: Further, the more distinct a likeness is, the nearer it
approaches to the nature of an image. But Dionysius says (Div. Nom.
iv) that "the solar ray has a very great similitude to the Divine
goodness." Therefore it is made to the image of God.
Objection 3: Further, the more perfect anything is in goodness, the
more it is like God. But the whole universe is more perfect in
goodness than man; for though each individual thing is good, all
things together are called "very good" (Gn. 1:31). Therefore the
whole universe is to the image of God, and not only man.
Objection 4: Further, Boethius (De Consol. iii) says of God: "Holding
the world in His mind, and forming it into His image." Therefore the
whole world is to the image of God, and not only the rational
creature.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. vi, 12): "Man's
excellence consists in the fact that God made him to His own image
by giving him an intellectual soul, which raises him above the beasts
of the field." Therefore things without intellect are not made to God's
image.
I answer that, Not every likeness, not even what is copied from
something else, is sufficient to make an image; for if the likeness be
only generic, or existing by virtue of some common accident, this
does not suffice for one thing to be the image of another. For
instance, a worm, though from man it may originate, cannot be
called man's image, merely because of the generic likeness. Nor, if
anything is made white like something else, can we say that it is the
image of that thing; for whiteness is an accident belonging to many
species. But the nature of an image requires likeness in species;
thus the image of the king exists in his son: or, at least, in some