effects which participate in His goodness. Above and beyond this
common mode, however, there is one special mode belonging to the
rational nature wherein God is said to be present as the object
known is in the knower, and the beloved in the lover. And since the
rational creature by its operation of knowledge and love attains to
God Himself, according to this special mode God is said not only to
exist in the rational creature but also to dwell therein as in His own
temple. So no other effect can be put down as the reason why the
divine person is in the rational creature in a new mode, except
sanctifying grace. Hence, the divine person is sent, and proceeds
temporally only according to sanctifying grace.
Again, we are said to possess only what we can freely use or enjoy:
and to have the power of enjoying the divine person can only be
according to sanctifying grace. And yet the Holy Ghost is possessed
by man, and dwells within him, in the very gift itself of sanctifying
grace. Hence the Holy Ghost Himself is given and sent.
Reply to Objection 1: By the gift of sanctifying grace the rational
creature is perfected so that it can freely use not only the created gift
itself, but enjoy also the divine person Himself; and so the invisible
mission takes place according to the gift of sanctifying grace; and
yet the divine person Himself is given.
Reply to Objection 2: Sanctifying grace disposes the soul to possess
the divine person; and this is signified when it is said that the Holy
Ghost is given according to the gift of grace. Nevertheless the gift
itself of grace is from the Holy Ghost; which is meant by the words,
"the charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost."
Reply to Objection 3: Although the Son can be known by us
according to other effects, yet neither does He dwell in us, nor is He
possessed by us according to those effects.
Reply to Objection 4: The working of miracles manifests sanctifying
grace as also does the gift of prophecy and any other gratuitous
graces. Hence gratuitous grace is called the "manifestation of the
Spirit" (1 Cor. 12:7). So the Holy Ghost is said to be given to the
apostles for the working of miracles, because sanctifying grace was
given to them with the outward sign. Were the sign only of
sanctifying grace given to them without the grace itself, it would not
be simply said that the Holy Ghost was given, except with some

qualifying term; just as we read of certain ones receiving the gift of
the spirit of prophecy, or of miracles, as having from the Holy Ghost
the power of prophesying or of working miracles.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the Father can be fittingly sent?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is fitting also that the Father should
be sent. For being sent means that the divine person is given. But
the Father gives Himself since He can only be possessed by His
giving Himself. Therefore it can be said that the Father sends
Himself.
Objection 2: Further, the divine person is sent according to the
indwelling of grace. But by grace the whole Trinity dwells in us
according to Jn. 14:23: "We will come to him and make Our abode
with him." Therefore each one of the divine persons is sent.
Objection 3: Further, whatever belongs to one person, belongs to
them all, except the notions and persons. But mission does not
signify any person; nor even a notion, since there are only five
notions, as stated above (Question 32, Article 3). Therefore every
divine person can be sent.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. ii, 3), "The Father alone is
never described as being sent."
I answer that, The very idea of mission means procession from
another, and in God it means procession according to origin, as
above expounded. Hence, as the Father is not from another, in no
way is it fitting for Him to be sent; but this can only belong to the
Son and to the Holy Ghost, to Whom it belongs to be from another.
Reply to Objection 1: In the sense of "giving" as a free bestowal of
something, the Father gives Himself, as freely bestowing Himself to
be enjoyed by the creature. But as implying the authority of the giver
as regards what is given, "to be given" only applies in God to the
Person Who is from another; and the same as regards "being sent."
Reply to Objection 2: Although the effect of grace is also from the
Father, Who dwells in us by grace, just as the Son and the Holy
Ghost, still He is not described as being sent, for He is not from
another. Thus Augustine says (De Trin. iv, 20) that "The Father, when
known by anyone in time, is not said to be sent; for there is no one
whence He is, or from whom He proceeds."