from those who are without. For he did not simply say, "he must have a good
report," but added the words, "from them which are without," wishing to show
that before the report of those without he must be carefully examined. Inasmuch,
then, as I myself knew your affairs better than your parents, as you also yourself
acknowledged, I might deserve to be released from all blame.
Basil: Nay this is the very reason why you could not escape, if any one
chose to indite you. Do you not remember hearing from me, and often learning
from my actual conduct, the feebleness of my character? Were you not
perpetually taunting me for my pusillanimity, because I was so easily dejected by
ordinary cares?
5. Chrysostom: I do indeed remember often hearing such things said by
you; I would not deny it. But if I ever taunted you, I did it in sport and not in
serious truth. However, I do not now dispute about these matters, and I claim the
same degree of forbearance from you while I wish to make mention of some of
the good qualities which you possess. For if you attempt to convict me of saying
what is untrue, I shall not spare you, but shall prove that you say these things
rather by way of self-depreciation than with a view to truth, and I will employ no
evidence but your own words and deeds to demonstrate the truth of my assertion.
And now the first question I wish to ask of you is this: do you know how great
the power of love is? For omitting all the miracles which were to be wrought by
the apostles, Christ said, "Hereby shall men know that you are my disciples if you
love one another," [John 13:35] and Paul said that it was the fulfilling of the law,
[Romans 13:10] and that in default of it no spiritual gift had any profit. Well, this
choice good, the distinguishing mark of Christ's disciples, the gift which is
higher than all other gifts, I perceived to be deeply implanted in your soul, and
teeming with much fruit.
Basil: I acknowledge indeed that the matter is one of deep concern to me,
and that I endeavor most earnestly to keep this commandment, but that I have
not even half succeeded in so doing, even you yourself would bear me witness if
you would leave off talking out of partiality, and simply respect the truth.

6. Chrysostom: Well, then, I shall betake myself to my evidences, and shall
now do what I threatened, proving that you wish to disparage yourself rather
than to speak the truth. But I will mention a fact which has only just occurred,
that no one may suspect me of attempting to obscure the truth by the great lapse
of time in relating events long past, as oblivion would then prevent any objection
being made to the things which I might say with a view to gratification. For
when one of our intimate friends, having been falsely accused of insult and folly,
was in extreme peril, you then flung yourself into the midst of the danger,
although you were not summoned by any one, or appealed to by the person who
was about to be involved in danger. Such was the fact: but that I may convict
you out of your own mouth, I will remind you of the words you uttered: for
when some did not approve of this zeal, while others commended and admired
it, "How can I help myself?" you said to those who accused you, "for I do not
know how otherwise to love than by giving up my life when it is necessary to
save any of my friends who is in danger:" thus repeating, in different words,
indeed, but with the same meaning, what Christ said to his disciples when he laid
down the definition of perfect love. "Greater love," He said, "has no man than
this that a man lay down his life for his friends." If then it is impossible to find
greater love than this, you have attained its limit, and both by your deeds and
words have crowned the summit. This is why I betrayed you, this is why I
contrived that plot. Do I now convince you that it was not from any malicious
intent, nor from any desire to thrust you into danger, but from a persuasion of
your future usefulness that I dragged you into this course?
Basil: Do you then suppose that love is sufficient for the correction of one's
fellowmen?
Chrysostom: Certainly it would contribute in a great measure to this end.
But if you wish me to produce evidence of your practical wisdom also, I will
proceed to do so, and will prove that your understanding exceeds your
lovingkindness.
At these remarks he blushed scarlet and said, Let my character be now