THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.6.

the authority of the Sacred Scriptures that He proved to them the
truth of His Resurrection, which authority is the basis of faith, when
He said: "All things must needs be fulfilled which are written in the
Law, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning Me": as is
set forth Lk. 24:44.
But if the term "proof" be taken in the second sense, then Christ is
said to have demonstrated His Resurrection by proofs, inasmuch as
by most evident signs He showed that He was truly risen. Hence
where our version has "by many proofs," the Greek text, instead of
proof has tekmerion, i.e. "an evident sign affording positive
proof" [Prior. Anal. ii]. Now Christ showed these signs of the
Resurrection to His disciples, for two reasons. First, because their
hearts were not disposed so as to accept readily the faith in the
Resurrection. Hence He says Himself (Lk. 24:25): "O foolish and slow
of heart to believe": and (Mk. 16:14): "He upbraided them with their
incredulity and hardness of heart." Secondly, that their testimony
might be rendered more efficacious through the signs shown them,
according to 1 Jn. 1:1,3: "That which we have seen, and have heard,
and our hands have handled . . . we declare."
Reply to Objection 1: Ambrose is speaking there of proofs drawn
from human reason, which are useless for demonstrating things of
faith, as was shown above.
Reply to Objection 2: The merit of faith arises from this, that at God's
bidding man believes what he does not see. Accordingly, only that
reason debars merit of faith which enables one to see by knowledge
what is proposed for belief: and this is demonstrative argument. But
Christ did not make use of any such argument for demonstrating His
Resurrection.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated already (ad 2), the merit of beatitude,
which comes of faith, is not entirely excluded except a man refuse to
believe only such things as he can see. But for a man to believe from
visible signs the things he does not see, does not entirely deprive
him of faith nor of the merit of faith: just as Thomas, to whom it was
said (Jn. 20:29): "'Because thou hast seen Me, Thomas, thou hast
believed,' saw one thing and believed another" [Gregory, Hom. xxvi]:
the wounds were what he saw, God was the object of His belief. But
his is the more perfect faith who does not require such helps for
belief. Hence, to put to shame the faith of some men, our Lord said
(Jn. 4:48): "Unless you see signs and wonders, you believe not."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.6.

From this one can learn how they who are so ready to believe God,
even without beholding signs, are blessed in comparison with them
who do not believe except they see the like.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.55, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the proofs which Christ made use of