Where now are the philosophers of the Greeks, who at random and for
nought emulated the shamelessness of the Cynics (for what is the profit of being
shut up in a tub, and afterwards running into such wantonness)? They who
encompassed themselves with rings and cups, and men servants and maid
servants, and with much pomp besides, falling into either extreme. But this man
was not so; but he dwelt in the wilderness as in Heaven, showing forth all
strictness of self-restraint. And from thence, like some angel from Heaven, he
went down unto the cities, being a champion of godliness, and a crowned victor
over the world, and a philosopher of that philosophy which is worthy of the
heavens. And these things were, when sin was not yet put away, when the law
had not yet ceased, when death was not yet bound, when the brazen gates were
not yet broken up, but while the ancient polity still was in force.
Such is the nature of a noble and thoroughly vigilant soul, for it is
everywhere springing forward, and passing beyond the limits set to it; as Paul
also did with respect to the new polity.
But why, it may be asked, did he use a girdle with his raiment? This was
customary with them of old time, before men passed into this soft and loose kind
of dress. Thus, for instance, both Peter [John 21:7] appears to have been
"girded," and Paul; for it says, "the man that owns this girdle." [Acts 21:11] And
Elijah [2 Kings 1:8] too was thus arrayed, and every one of the saints, because
they were at work continually, laboring, and busying themselves either in
journeyings, or about some other necessary matter; and not for this cause only,
but also with a view of trampling under foot all ornaments, and practising all
austerity. This very kind of thing accordingly Christ declares to be the greatest
praise of virtue, thus saying, "What went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft
raiment? Behold, they that wear soft clothing are in king's houses."
[Matthew 11:8]
But if he, who was so pure, and more glorious than the heaven, and above
all prophets, than whom none greater was born, and who had such great boldness
of speech, thus exercised himself in austerity, scorning so exceedingly all

dissolute delicacy, and training himself to this hard life; what excuse shall we
have, who after so great a benefit, and the unnumbered burdens of our sins, do
not show forth so much as the least part of his penance, but are drinking and
surfeiting, and smelling of perfumes, and in no better trim than the harlot women
on the stage, and are by all means softening ourselves, and making ourselves an
easy prey to the devil?
5. "Then went out to him all Judea, and Jerusalem, and all the region round
about Jordan, and were baptized of him, confessing their sins." [Matthew 3:5-6]
Do you see how great power was in the coming of the prophet? How he
stirred up all the people; how he led them to a consideration of their own sins?
For it was indeed worthy of wonder to behold him in human form showing forth
such things and using so great freedom of speech, and rising up in condemnation
of all as children, and having his great grace beaming out from his countenance.
And, moreover, the appearance of a prophet after the great interval of time
contributed to their amazement, because the gift had failed them, and returned to
them after a long time. And the nature of his preaching too was strange and
unusual. For they heard of none of those things to which they were accustomed;
such as wars and battles and victories below, and famine and pestilence, and
Babylonians and Persians, and the taking of the city, and the other things with
which they were familiar, but of Heaven and of the kingdom there, and of the
punishment in hell. And it was for this cause, let me add, that although they that
committed revolt in the wilderness, those in the company of Judas, and of
Theudas, [Acts 5:36-37] had been all of them slain no great while before, yet
they were not the more backward to go out there. For neither was it for the same
objects that he summoned them, as for dominion, or revolt, or revolution; but in
order to lead them by the hand to the kingdom on high. Wherefore neither did he
keep them in the wilderness to take them about with him, but baptizing them,
and teaching them the rules concerning self-denial, he dismissed them; by all
means instructing them to scorn whatever things are on earth, and to raise
themselves up to the things to come, and press on every day.