they hear from us. They do not lay to heart, they do not consider, that they are
entering into the presence of God, that it is He who addresses them. For when
the Reader standing up says, "Thus says the Lord," and the Deacon stands and
imposes silence on all, he does not say this as doing honor to the Reader, but to
Him who speaks to all through him. If they knew that it was God who through
His prophet speaks these things, they would cast away all their pride. For if
when rulers are addressing them, they do not allow their minds to wander, much
less would they, when God is speaking. We are ministers, beloved. We speak not
our own things, but the things of God, letters coming from heaven are every day
read.
Tell me then, I beseech you, if now, when we are all present some one
entered, having a golden girdle, and drawing himself up, and with an air of
consequence said that he was sent by the king that is on the earth, and that he
brought letters to the whole city concerning matters of importance; would you
not then be all turned towards him? Would you not, without any command from
a deacon, observe a profound silence? Truly I think so. For I have often heard
letters from kings read here. Then if any one comes from a king, you all attend;
and does a Prophet come from God, and speak from heaven, and no one attend?
Or do you not believe that these things are messages from God? These are letters
sent from God; therefore let us enter with becoming reverence into the Churches,
and let us hearken with fear to the things here said.
What do I come in for, you say, if I do not hear some one discoursing? This
is the ruin and destruction of all. For what need of a person to discourse? This
necessity arises from our sloth. Wherefore any necessity for a homily? All things
are clear and open that are in the divine Scriptures; the necessary things are all
plain. But because you are hearers for pleasure's sake, for that reason also you
seek these things. For tell me, with what pomp of words did Paul speak? And yet
he converted the world. Or with what the unlettered Peter? But I know not, you
say, the things that are contained in the Scriptures. Why? For are they spoken in
Hebrew? Are they in Latin, or in foreign tongues? Are they not in Greek? But

they are expressed obscurely, you say: What is it that is obscure? Tell me. Are
there not histories? For (of course) you know the plain parts, in that you enquire
about the obscure. There are numberless histories in the Scriptures. Tell me one
of these. But you cannot. These things are an excuse, and mere words. Every
day, you say, one hears the same things. Tell me, then, do you not hear the same
things in the theaters? Do you not see the same things in the race-course? Are
not all things the same? Is it not always the same sun that rises? Is it not the
same food that we use? I should like to ask you, since you say that you every day
hear the same things; tell me, from what Prophet was the passage that was read?
From what Apostle, or what Epistle? But you cannot tell me— you seem to hear
strange things. When therefore you wish to be slothful, you say that they are the
same things. But when you are questioned, you are in the case of one who never
heard them. If they are the same, you ought to know them. But you are ignorant
of them.
This state of things is worthy of lamentation— of lamentation and
complaint: for the coiner coins but in vain. For this you ought more especially to
attend, because they are the same things, because we give you no labor, nor
speak things that are strange or variable. What then, since you say, that those are
the same things, but our discourses are not the same things, but we always speak
things that are new to you, do you pay heed to these? By no means. But if we
say, Why do you not retain even these? "We hear them but once," you say, "and
how can we retain them?" If we say, Why do ye not attend to those other things?
"The same things," you say, "are always said"— and every way these are words
of sloth and excuse. But they will not always serve, but there will be a time when
we shall lament in vain and without effect. Which may God forbid, and grant
that having repented here, and attending with understanding and godly fear to
the things spoken, we may both be urged on to the due performance of good
works, and may amend our own lives with all diligence, that we may be able to
obtain the blessings promised to those who love Him, by the grace and
lovingkindness, etc.