"Let each one remain in the calling in which he is called?" And in another place,
[1 Timothy 6:1-2] "As many servants as are under the yoke, let them count their
own masters worthy of all honor; and those that have believing masters, let them
not despise them, because they are brethren who partake of the benefit." And
writing to the Ephesians also and to the Colossians, he ordains and exacts the
same rules. Whence it is plain that it is not this slavery which he annuls, but that
which caused as it is by vice befalls free men also: and this is the worst kind of
slavery, though he be a free man who is in bondage to it. For what profit had
Joseph's brethren of their freedom? Were they not more servile than all slaves;
both speaking lies to their father, and to the merchants using false pretences, as
well as to their brother? But not such was the free man: rather every where and
in all things he was true. And nothing had power to enslave him, neither chain
nor bondage nor the love of his mistress nor his being in a strange land. But he
abode free every where. For this is liberty in the truest sense when even in
bondage it shines through.
6. Such a thing is Christianity; in slavery it bestows freedom. And as that
which is by nature an invulnerable body then shows itself to be invulnerable
when having received a dart it suffers no harm; so also he that is strictly free
then shows himself, when even under masters he is not enslaved. For this cause
his bidding is, "remain a slave." But if it is impossible for one who is a slave to
be a Christian such as he ought to be, the Greeks will condemn true religion of
great weakness: whereas if they can be taught that slavery in no way impairs
godliness, they will admire our doctrine. For if death hurt us not, nor scourges,
nor chains, much less slavery. Fire and iron and tyrannies innumerable and
diseases and poverty and wild beasts and countless things more dreadful than
these, have not been able to injure the faithful; nay, they have made them even
mightier. And how shall slavery be able to hurt? It is not slavery itself, beloved,
that hurts; but the real slavery is that of sin. And if you be not a slave in this
sense, be bold and rejoice. No one shall have power to do you any wrong, having
the temper which cannot be enslaved. But if you be a slave to sin, even though

thou be ten thousand times free you have no good of your freedom.
For, tell me, what profit is it when, though not in bondage to a man, you lie
down in subjection to your passions? Since men indeed often know how to
spare; but those masters are never satiated with your destruction. Are you in
bondage to a man? Why, your master also is slave to you, in arranging about
your food, in taking care of your health and in looking after your shoes and all
the other things. And thou dost not fear so much less you should offend your
master, as he fears lest any of those necessaries should fail you. "But he sits
down, while you stand." And what of that? Since this may be said of you as well
as of him. Often, at least, when you are lying down and sleeping sweetly, he is
not only standing, but undergoing endless discomforts in the market-place; and
he lies awake more painfully than thou.
For instance; what did Joseph suffer from his mistress to be compared with
what she suffered from her evil desire? For he indeed did not the things which
she wished to put upon him; but she performed every thing which her mistress
ordered her, I mean her spirit of unchastity: which left not off until it had put her
to open shame. What master commands such things? What savage tyrant?
"Intreat your slave," that is the word: "flatter the person bought with your
money, supplicate the captive; even if he reject you with disgust, again besiege
him: even if you speak to him oftentimes, and he consent not, watch for his being
alone, and force him, and become an object of derision." What can be more
dishonorable, what more shameful, than these words? "And if even by these
means you make no progress, why, accuse him falsely and deceive your
husband." Mark how mean, how shameful are the commands, how unmerciful
and savage and frantic. What command does the master ever lay on his slave,
such as those which her wantonness then laid upon that royal woman? And yet
she dare not disobey. But Joseph underwent nothing of this sort, but every thing
on the contrary which brought glory and honor.
Would you like to see yet another man under severe orders from a hard
mistress, and without spirit to disobey any of them? Consider Cain, what