the imprinting of the character, so the outward acts and the words
expressive of consent directly effect a certain tie which is the
sacrament of matrimony; and this tie by virtue of its Divine
institution works dispositively to the infusion of grace.
Reply to Objection 3: This argument would hold if no more
efficacious remedy could be employed against the disease of
concupiscence; but a yet more powerful remedy is found in spiritual
works and mortification of the flesh by those who make no use of
matrimony.
Reply to Objection 4: A remedy can be employed against
concupiscence in two ways. First, on the part of concupiscence by
repressing it in its root, and thus matrimony affords a remedy by the
grace given therein. Secondly, on the part of its act, and this in two
ways: first, by depriving the act to which concupiscence inclines of
its outward shamefulness, and this is done by the marriage
blessings which justify carnal concupiscence; secondly, by
hindering the shameful act, which is done by the very nature of the
act. because concupiscence, being satisfied by the conjugal act,
does not incline so much to other wickedness. For this reason the
Apostle says (1 Cor. 7:9): "It is better to marry than to burn." For
though the works congenial to concupiscence are in themselves of a
nature to increase concupiscence, yet in so far as they are directed
according to reason they repress concupiscence, because like acts
result in like dispositions and habits.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether carnal intercourse is an integral part of

this sacrament?
Objection 1: It would seem that carnal intercourse is an integral part
of marriage. For at the very institution of marriage it was declared
(Gn. 2:24): "They shall be two in one flesh." Now this is not brought
about save by carnal intercourse. Therefore it is an integral part of
marriage.
Objection 2: Further, that which belongs to the signification of a
sacrament is necessary for the sacrament, as we have stated above
(Article 2; Question 9, Article 1). Now carnal intercourse belongs to
the signification of matrimony, as stated in the text (Sent. iv, D, 26).
Therefore it is an integral part of the sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, this sacrament is directed to the preservation
of the species. But the species cannot be preserved without carnal
intercourse. Therefore it is an integral part of the sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, Matrimony is a sacrament inasmuch as it
affords a remedy against concupiscence; according to the Apostle's
saying (1 Cor. 7:9): "It is better to marry than to burn." But it does
not afford this remedy to those who have no carnal intercourse.
Therefore the same conclusion follows as before.
On the contrary, There was matrimony in Paradise, and yet there was
no carnal intercourse. Therefore carnal intercourse is not an integral
part of matrimony.
Further, a sacrament by its very name denotes a sanctification. But
matrimony is holier without carnal intercourse, according to the text
(Sent. D, 26). Therefore carnal intercourse is not necessary for the
sacrament.
I answer that, Integrity is twofold. One regards the primal perfection
consisting in the very essence of a thing; the other regards the
secondary perfection consisting in operation. Since then carnal
intercourse is an operation or use of marriage which gives the
faculty for that intercourse, it follows, that carnal intercourse
belongs to the latter, and not to the former integrity of marriage [TP,
Question 29, Article 2].