In order to make this clear, we must observe that since habits are
known by their acts, and acts by their objects, faith, being a habit,
should be defined by its proper act in relation to its proper object.
Now the act of faith is to believe, as stated above (Question 2,
Articles 2,3), which is an act of the intellect determinate to one object
of the will's command. Hence an act of faith is related both to the
object of the will, i.e. to the good and the end, and to the object of the
intellect, i.e. to the true. And since faith, through being a theological
virtues, as stated above (FS, Question 62, Article 2), has one same
thing for object and end, its object and end must, of necessity, be in
proportion to one another. Now it has been already stated (Question
1, Articles 1,4) that the object of faith is the First Truth, as unseen,
and whatever we hold on account thereof: so that it must needs be
under the aspect of something unseen that the First Truth is the end
of the act of faith, which aspect is that of a thing hoped for,
according to the Apostle (Rm. 8:25): "We hope for that which we see
not": because to see the truth is to possess it. Now one hopes not
for what one has already, but for what one has not, as stated above
(FS, Question 67, Article 4). Accordingly the relation of the act of
faith to its end which is the object of the will, is indicated by the
words: "Faith is the substance of things to be hoped for." For we are
wont to call by the name of substance, the first beginning of a thing,
especially when the whole subsequent thing is virtually contained in
the first beginning; for instance, we might say that the first selfevident principles are the substance of science, because, to wit,
these principles are in us the first beginnings of science, the whole
of which is itself contained in them virtually. In this way then faith is
said to be the "substance of things to be hoped for," for the reason
that in us the first beginning of things to be hoped for is brought
about by the assent of faith, which contains virtually all things to be
hoped for. Because we hope to be made happy through seeing the
unveiled truth to which our faith cleaves, as was made evident when
we were speaking of happiness (FS, Question 3, Article 8; FS,
Question 4, Article 3).
The relationship of the act of faith to the object of the intellect,
considered as the object of faith, is indicated by the words,
"evidence of things that appear not," where "evidence" is taken for
the result of evidence. For evidence induces the intellect to adhere to
a truth, wherefore the firm adhesion of the intellect to the nonapparent truth of faith is called "evidence" here. Hence another
reading has "conviction," because to wit, the intellect of the believer
is convinced by Divine authority, so as to assent to what it sees not.