not worthy of the earth up to heaven, and brought those who had fallen from the
present life into that undying and unalterable life, and made those who were
trampled down by devils to vie with Angels, and opened Paradise, and put a stop
to all the old evils, and this too in a short time and by an easy and compendious
way, then will you learn His wisdom—when you see that which neither Angels
nor Archangels knew, they of the Gentiles learned on a sudden through Jesus. (2
manuscripts add "then will you know His power.") Right then is it to admire His
wisdom, and to give Him glory! But you keep dwelling over little things, still
sitting under the shadow. And this is not much like one that gives glory. For he
who has no confidence in Him, and no trust in the faith, does not bear testimony
to the grandeur of His doings. But he himself offers glory up in their behalf, in
order to bring them also to the same zeal. But when you hear him say, "to the
only wise God," think not that this is said in disparagement of the Son. For if all
these things whereby His wisdom is made apparent were done [or made, see
John 1:3] by Christ, and without Him no single one, it is quite plain that he is
equal in wisdom also. What then is the reason of his saying "only?" To set Him
in contrast with every created being. After giving the doxology then, he again
goes from prayer to exhortation, directing his discourse against the stronger, and
saying as follows:
Chap. xv. ver. 1. "We then that are strong, ought"— it is "we ought," not
"we are so kind as to." What is it we ought to do?— "to bear the infirmities of
the weak."
See how he has roused their attention by his praises, not only by calling
them powerful, but also by putting them alongside of himself. And not by this
only, but by the advantage of the thing he again allures them, and by its not
being burdensome. For thou, he says, art powerful, and art no whit the worse for
condescending. But to him the hazard is of the last consequence, if he is not
borne with. And he does not say the infirm, but the "infirmities of the weak," so
drawing him and bending him to mercy. As in another place too he says, "You
that are spiritual restore such an one." [Galatians 6:1] Are you become

powerful? Render a return to God for making you so. But render it you will if
you set the weakness of the sickly right. For we too were weak, but by grace we
have become powerful. And this we are to do not in this case only, but also in
the case of those who are weak in other respects. As, for instance, if any be
passionate, or insolent, or has any such like failing bear with him. And how is
this to be? Listen to what comes next. For after saying "we ought to bear," he
adds, "and not to please ourselves."
Ver. 2. "Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to edification."
But what he says is this. Are you powerful? Let the weak have trial of your
power. Let him come to know your strength; please him. And he does not barely
say please, but for his good, and not barely for his good, lest the advanced
person should say, See I am drawing him to his good! But he adds, "to
edification." And so if you be rich or be in power, please not yourself, but the
poor and the needy, because in this way you will at once have true glory to
enjoy, and be doing much service. For glory from things of the world soon flies
away, but that from things of the Spirit is abiding, if you do it to edification.
Wherefore of all men he requires this. For it is not this and that person that is to
do it, but "each of you." Then since it was a great thing he had commanded
them, and had bidden them even relax their own perfectness in order to set right
the other's weakness; he again introduces Christ, in the following words:
Ver. 3. "For even Christ pleased not Himself."
And this he always does. For when he was upon the subject of alms, he
brought Him forward and said, "You know the grace of the Lord, that though He
was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor." [2 Corinthians 8:9] And when he
was exhorting to charity, it was from Him that he exhorted in the words "As
Christ also loved us." [Ephesians 5:25] And when he was giving advice about
bearing shame and dangers, he took refuge in Him and said, "Who for the joy
that was set before Him endured the Cross, despising the shame." [Hebrews
12:2]. So in this passage too he shows how He also did this, and how the prophet
proclaimed it from of old. Wherefore also he proceeds: