merely prided themselves on the bare reading. Then lest owing to His very
tender care He should incur among them the suspicion of vainglory, and because
He desired to be believed by them, should be deemed to be seeking His own;
(for He reminded them of the words of John, and of the witness of God, and of
His own works, and said all He could to draw them to Him, and promised them
"life"; ) since, I say, it was likely that many would suspect that He spoke these
things from a desire of glory, hear what He says:

John 5:41
"I receive not honor from men."
That is, "I need it not": "My nature," He says, "is not of such a kind as to
need the honor which is from men, for if the sun can receive no addition from the
light of a candle, much farther am I from needing the honor which is from men."
"Why then," asks some one, "do you say these things, if you need it not?" "That
ye may be saved." This He positively asserted above, and the same He implied
here also, by saying, "that you might have life." Moreover, He puts another
reason:

John 5:42
"But I know you that you have not the love of God in you."
For when under pretense of loving God they persecuted Him because He
made Himself equal with God, and He knew that they would not believe Him,
lest any one should ask, "why do you speak these words?" "I speak them," He
says, "to convict you of this, that it is not for the love of God that you persecute
Me, if it be so that He testifies to Me both by works and by the Scriptures. For as
before this when you deemed Me an enemy of God ye drove Me away, so now,
since I have declared these things, you ought to have hastened to Me, if you had
really loved. God. But ye love Him not. And therefore have I spoken these words,
to show that you are possessed with excessive pride, that you are vainly boasting
and shading over your own enviousness." And the same He proves not by these
things only, but by those that should come to pass.

John 5:43
"I have come in My Father's name, and you receive Me not; if another shall
comei in his own name, him will you receive."
2. Do you see that He everywhere declares that He has been "sent," that
judgment has been committed to Him by the Father, that He can do nothing of
Himself, in order that He may cut off all excuse for their unfairness? But who is
it that He here says shall come "in his own name"? He alludes here to Antichrist,
and puts an incontrovertible proof of their unfairness. "For if as loving God ye
persecute Me, much more ought this to have taken place in the case of Antichrist.
For he will neither say that he is sent by the Father, nor that he comes according
to his will, but in everything contrariwise, seizing like a tyrant what belongs not
to him, and asserting that he is the very God over all, as Paul says, 'Exalting
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, showing himself that
he is God.' [2 Thessalonians 2:4] This is to 'come in his own name.' I do not so,
but have come in the Name of My Father." That they received not One who said
that He was sent of God, was a sufficient proof that they loved not God; but now
from the contrary of this fact, from their being about to receive Antichrist, He
shows their shamelessness. For when they received not One who asserts that He
was sent by God, and are about to worship one who knows Him not, and who
says that he is God over all, it is clear that their persecution proceeded from
malice and from hating God. On this account He puts two reasons for His words;
and first the kinder one, "That ye may be saved"; and, "That ye may have life":
and when they would have mocked at Him, He puts the other which was more
striking, showing that even although His hearers should not believe, yet that God
was wont always to do His own works. Now Paul speaking concerning
Antichrist said prophetically, that "God shall send them strong delusion—that
they all might be judged who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness." [2 Thessalonians 2:11-12] Christ said not, "He shall come";