FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.4.

so forth; this he excludes by saying in the second place: "Blessed
are ye that hunger." The third is that it should be well with man as to
joyfulness of heart, and this he puts aside by saying: "Blessed are ye
that weep now." The fourth is the outward favor of man; and this he
excludes, saying, fourthly: "Blessed shall you be, when men shall
hate you." And as Ambrose says on Lk. 6:20, "poverty corresponds
to temperance, which is unmoved by delights; hunger, to justice,
since who hungers is compassionate and, through compassion
gives; mourning, to prudence, which deplores perishable things;
endurance of men's hatred belongs to fortitude."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.69, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the rewards of the beatitudes are suitably

enumerated?
Objection 1: It would seem that the rewards of the beatitudes are
unsuitably enumerated. Because the kingdom of heaven, which is
eternal life, contains all good things. Therefore, once given the
kingdom of heaven, no other rewards should be mentioned.
Objection 2: Further, the kingdom of heaven is assigned as the
reward, both of the first and of the eighth beatitude. Therefore, on the
same ground it should have been assigned to all.
Objection 3: Further, the beatitudes are arranged in the ascending
order, as Augustine remarks (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4): whereas
the rewards seem to be placed in the descending order, since to
"possess the land" is less than to possess "the kingdom of heaven."
Therefore these rewards are unsuitably enumerated.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Our Lord Who propounded
these rewards.
I answer that, These rewards are most suitably assigned,
considering the nature of the beatitudes in relation to the three kinds
of happiness indicated above (Article 3). For the first three
beatitudes concerned the withdrawal of man from those things in
which sensual happiness consists: which happiness man desires by
seeking the object of his natural desire, not where he should seek it,
viz. in God, but in temporal and perishable things. Wherefore the
rewards of the first three beatitudes correspond to these things
which some men seek to find in earthly happiness. For men seek in
external things, viz. riches and honors, a certain excellence and
abundance, both of which are implied in the kingdom of heaven,
whereby man attains to excellence and abundance of good things in
God. Hence Our Lord promised the kingdom of heaven to the poor in
spirit. Again, cruel and pitiless men seek by wrangling and fighting
to destroy their enemies so as to gain security for themselves.
Hence Our Lord promised the meek a secure and peaceful
possession of the land of the living, whereby the solid reality of
eternal goods is denoted. Again, men seek consolation for the toils
of the present life, in the lusts and pleasures of the world. Hence Our
Lord promises comfort to those that mourn.