FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.10.

Reply to Objection 2: The intention of the lawgiver is twofold. His
aim, in the first place, is to lead men to something by the precepts of
the law: and this is virtue. Secondly, his intention is brought to bear
on the matter itself of the precept: and this is something leading or
disposing to virtue, viz. an act of virtue. For the end of the precept
and the matter of the precept are not the same: just as neither in
other things is the end the same as that which conduces to the end.
Reply to Objection 3: That works of virtue should be done without
sadness, falls under the precept of the Divine law; for whoever works
with sadness works unwillingly. But to work with pleasure, i.e.
joyfully or cheerfully, in one respect falls under the precept, viz. in so
far as pleasure ensues from the love of God and one's neighbor
(which love falls under the precept), and love causes pleasure: and
in another respect does not fall under the precept, in so far as
pleasure ensues from a habit; for "pleasure taken in a work proves
the existence of a habit," as stated in Ethic. ii, 3. For an act may give
pleasure either on account of its end, or through its proceeding from
a becoming habit.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether the mode of charity falls under the

precept of the Divine law?
Objection 1: It would seem that the mode of charity falls under the
precept of the Divine law. For it is written (Mt. 19:17): "If thou wilt
enter into life, keep the commandments": whence it seems to follow
that the observance of the commandments suffices for entrance into
life. But good works do not suffice for entrance into life, except they
be done from charity: for it is written (1 Cor. 13:3): "If I should
distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if I should deliver my
body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing."
Therefore the mode of charity is included in the commandment.
Objection 2: Further, the mode of charity consists properly speaking
in doing all things for God. But this falls under the precept; for the
Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:31): "Do all to the glory of God." Therefore
the mode of charity falls under the precept.
Objection 3: Further, if the mode of charity does not fall under the
precept, it follows that one can fulfil the precepts of the law without
having charity. Now what can be done without charity can be done
without grace, which is always united to charity. Therefore one can
fulfil the precepts of the law without grace. But this is the error of
Pelagius, as Augustine declares (De Haeres. lxxxviii). Therefore the
mode of charity is included in the commandment.
On the contrary, Whoever breaks a commandment sins mortally. If
therefore the mode of charity falls under the precept, it follows that
whoever acts otherwise than from charity sins mortally. But whoever
has not charity, acts otherwise than from charity. Therefore it follows
that whoever has not charity, sins mortally in whatever he does,
however good this may be in itself: which is absurd.
I answer that, Opinions have been contrary on this question. For
some have said absolutely that the mode of charity comes under the
precept; and yet that it is possible for one not having charity to fulfil
this precept: because he can dispose himself to receive charity from
God. Nor (say they) does it follow that a man not having charity sins
mortally whenever he does something good of its kind: because it is
an affirmative precept that binds one to act from charity, and is
binding not for all time, but only for such time as one is in a state of