and awful would be the sight he showed; even so may one see here.
For in nothing are their lodging-places in a condition inferior to the
heavens; for the angels lodge with them, and the Lord of the angels. For if they
came to Abraham, a man having a wife, and bringing up children, because they
saw him hospitable; when they find much more abundant virtue, and a man
delivered from the body, and in the flesh disregarding the flesh, much more do
they tarry there, and celebrate the choral feast that becomes them. For there is
moreover a table among them pure from all covetousness, and full of self-denial.
No streams of blood are among them, nor cutting up of flesh, nor heaviness
of head, nor dainty cooking, neither are there unpleasing smells of meat among
them, nor disagreeable smoke, neither runnings and tumults, and disturbances,
and wearisome clamors; but bread and water, the latter from a pure fountain, the
former from honest labor. But if any time they should be minded to feast more
sumptuously, their sumptuousness consists of fruits, and greater is the pleasure
there than at royal tables. There is no fear there, or trembling; no ruler accuses,
no wife provokes, no child casts into sadness, no dis orderly mirth dissipates, no
multitude of flatterers puffs up; but the table is an angel's table free from all such
turmoil.
And for a couch they have grass only beneath them, like as Christ did when
making a dinner in the wilderness. And many of them do this, not being even
under shelter, but for a roof they have heaven, and the moon instead of the light
of a candle, not wanting oil, nor one to attend to it; on them alone does it shine
worthily from on high.
4. This table even angels from heaven beholding are delighted and pleased.
For if over one sinner that repents they rejoice, over so many just men imitating
them, what will they not do? There are not master and slave; all are slaves, all
free men. And do not think the saying to be a dark proverb, for they are indeed
slaves one of another, and masters one of another.
They have no occasion to be in sadness when evening has overtaken them,
as many men feel, revolving the anxious thoughts that spring from the evils of

the day. They have no occasion after their supper to be careful about robbers,
and to shut the doors, and to put bars against them, neither to dread the other ills,
of which many are afraid, extinguishing their candles with strict care, lest a
spark anywhere should set the house on fire.
And their conversation again is full of the same calm. For they talk not of
these things, whereof we discourse, that are nothing to us; such a one is made
governor, such a one has ceased to be governor; such a one is dead, and another
has succeeded to the inheritance, and all such like, but always about the things to
come do they speak and seek wisdom; and as though dwelling in another world,
as though they had migrated unto heaven itself, as living there, even so all their
conversation is about the things there, about Abraham's bosom, about the crowns
of the saints, about the choiring with Christ; and of things present they have
neither any memory nor thought, but like as we should not deign to speak at all
of what the ants do in their holes and clefts; so neither do they of what we do;
but about the King that is above, about the war in which they are engaged, about
the devil's crafts, about the good deeds which the saints have achieved.
Wherein therefore are we different from ants, when compared with them?
For like as they care for the things of the body, so also do we; and would it were
for these alone: but now it is even for things far worse. For not for necessary
things only do we care like them, but also for things superfluous. For those
insects pursue a business free from all blame, but we follow after all
covetousness, and not even the ways of ants do we imitate, but the ways of
wolves, but the ways of leopards, or rather we are even worse than these. For to
them nature has assigned that they should be thus fed, but us God has honored
with speech, and a sense of equity, and we have become worse than the wild
beasts.
And whereas we are worse than the brutes, those men are equal to the
angels, being strangers and pilgrims as to the things here; and all things in them
are made different from us, clothing, and food, and house, and shoes, and
speech. And if any one were to hear them conversing and us, then he would