FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.6.

Secondly, a man is said to be subject to a law as the coerced is
subject to the coercer. In this way the virtuous and righteous are not
subject to the law, but only the wicked. Because coercion and
violence are contrary to the will: but the will of the good is in
harmony with the law, whereas the will of the wicked is discordant
from it. Wherefore in this sense the good are not subject to the law,
but only the wicked.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument is true of subjection by way of
coercion: for, in this way, "the law is not made for the just men":
because "they are a law to themselves," since they "show the work
of the law written in their hearts," as the Apostle says (Rm. 2:14,15).
Consequently the law does not enforce itself upon them as it does
on the wicked.
Reply to Objection 2: The law of the Holy Ghost is above all law
framed by man: and therefore spiritual men, in so far as they are led
by the law of the Holy Ghost, are not subject to the law in those
matters that are inconsistent with the guidance of the Holy Ghost.
Nevertheless the very fact that spiritual men are subject to law, is
due to the leading of the Holy Ghost, according to 1 Pt. 2:13: "Be ye
subject . . . to every human creature for God's sake."
Reply to Objection 3: The sovereign is said to be "exempt from the
law," as to its coercive power; since, properly speaking, no man is
coerced by himself, and law has no coercive power save from the
authority of the sovereign. Thus then is the sovereign said to be
exempt from the law, because none is competent to pass sentence
on him, if he acts against the law. Wherefore on Ps. 50:6: "To Thee
only have I sinned," a gloss says that "there is no man who can
judge the deeds of a king." But as to the directive force of law, the
sovereign is subject to the law by his own will, according to the
statement (Extra, De Constit. cap. Cum omnes) that "whatever law a
man makes for another, he should keep himself. And a wise
authority [Dionysius Cato, Dist. de Moribus] says: 'Obey the law that
thou makest thyself.'" Moreover the Lord reproaches those who "say
and do not"; and who "bind heavy burdens and lay them on men's
shoulders, but with a finger of their own they will not move
them" (Mt. 23:3,4). Hence, in the judgment of God, the sovereign is
not exempt from the law, as to its directive force; but he should fulfil
it to his own free-will and not of constraint. Again the sovereign is
above the law, in so far as, when it is expedient, he can change the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.6.

law, and dispense in it according to time and place.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.96, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether he who is under a law may act beside the

letter of the law?
Objection 1: It seems that he who is subject to a law may not act
beside the letter of the law. For Augustine says (De Vera Relig. 31):
"Although men judge about temporal laws when they make them, yet
when once they are made they must pass judgment not on them, but
according to them." But if anyone disregard the letter of the law,
saying that he observes the intention of the lawgiver, he seems to
pass judgment on the law. Therefore it is not right for one who is
under the law to disregard the letter of the law, in order to observe
the intention of the lawgiver.
Objection 2: Further, he alone is competent to interpret the law who
can make the law. But those who are subject to the law cannot make
the law. Therefore they have no right to interpret the intention of the
lawgiver, but should always act according to the letter of the law.
Objection 3: Further, every wise man knows how to explain his
intention by words. But those who framed the laws should be
reckoned wise: for Wisdom says (Prov. 8:15): "By Me kings reign,
and lawgivers decree just things." Therefore we should not judge of
the intention of the lawgiver otherwise than by the words of the law.
On the contrary, Hilary says (De Trin. iv): "The meaning of what is
said is according to the motive for saying it: because things are not
subject to speech, but speech to things." Therefore we should take
account of the motive of the lawgiver, rather than of his very words.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 4), every law is directed to the
common weal of men, and derives the force and nature of law
accordingly. Hence the jurist says [Pandect. Justin. lib. i, ff., tit. 3, De
Leg. et Senat.]: "By no reason of law, or favor of equity, is it
allowable for us to interpret harshly, and render burdensome, those
useful measures which have been enacted for the welfare of man."
Now it happens often that the observance of some point of law
conduces to the common weal in the majority of instances, and yet,
in some cases, is very hurtful. Since then the lawgiver cannot have
in view every single case, he shapes the law according to what
happens most frequently, by directing his attention to the common
good. Wherefore if a case arise wherein the observance of that law