THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether the soul of Christ can know the infinite in

the Word?
Objection 1: It would seem that the soul of Christ cannot know the
infinite in the Word. For that the infinite should be known is
repugnant to the definition of the infinite which (Phys. iii, 63) is said
to be that "from which, however much we may take, there always
remains something to be taken." But it is impossible for the
definition to be separated from the thing defined, since this would
mean that contradictories exist together. Therefore it is impossible
that the soul of Christ knows the infinite.
Objection 2: Further, the knowledge of the infinite is infinite. But the
knowledge of the soul of Christ cannot be infinite, because its
capacity is finite, since it is created. Therefore the soul of Christ
cannot know the infinite.
Objection 3: Further, there can be nothing greater than the infinite.
But more is contained in the Divine knowledge, absolutely speaking,
than in the knowledge of Christ's soul, as stated above (Article 2).
Therefore the soul of Christ does not know the infinite.
On the contrary, The soul of Christ knows all its power and all it can
do. Now it can cleanse infinite sins, according to 1 Jn. 2:2: "He is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for those of
the whole world." Therefore the soul of Christ knows the infinite.
I answer that, Knowledge regards only being, since being and truth
are convertible. Now a thing is said to be a being in two ways: First,
simply, i.e. whatever is a being in act; secondly, relatively, i.e.
whatever is a being in potentiality. And because, as is said Metaph.
ix, 20, everything is known as it is in act, and not as it is in
potentiality, knowledge primarily and essentially regards being in
act, and secondarily regards being in potentiality, which is not
knowable of itself, but inasmuch as that in whose power it exists is
known. Hence, with regard to the first mode of knowledge, the soul
of Christ does not know the infinite. Because there is not an infinite
number in act, even though we were to reckon all that are in act at
any time whatsoever, since the state of generation and corruption
will not last for ever: consequently there is a certain number not only
of things lacking generation and corruption, but also of things

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.10, C.4.

capable of generation and corruption. But with regard to the other
mode of knowing, the soul of Christ knows infinite things in the
Word, for it knows, as stated above (Article 2), all that is in the power
of the creature. Hence, since in the power of the creature there is an
infinite number of things, it knows the infinite, as it were, by a certain
knowledge of simple intelligence, and not by a knowledge of vision.
Reply to Objection 1: As we said in the FP, Question 8, Article 1, the
infinite is taken in two ways. First, on the part of a form, and thus we
have the negatively infinite, i.e. a form or act not limited by being
received into matter or a subject; and this infinite of itself is most
knowable on account of the perfection of the act, although it is not
comprehensible by the finite power of the creature; for thus God is
said to be infinite. And this infinite the soul of Christ knows, yet does
not comprehend. Secondly, there is the infinite as regards matter,
which is taken privatively, i.e. inasmuch as it has not the form it
ought naturally to have, and in this way we have infinite in quantity.
Now such an infinite of itself, is unknown: inasmuch as it is, as it
were, matter with privation of form as is said Phys. iii, 65. But all
knowledge is by form or act. Therefore if this infinite is to be known
according to its mode of being, it cannot be known. For its mode is
that part be taken after part, as is said Phys. iii, 62,63. And in this
way it is true that, if we take something from it, i.e. taking part after
part, there always remains something to be taken. But as material
things can be received by the intellect immaterially, and many things
unitedly, so can infinite things be received by the intellect, not after
the manner of infinite, but finitely; and thus what are in themselves
infinite are, in the intellect of the knower, finite. And in this way the
soul of Christ knows an infinite number of things, inasmuch as it
knows them not by discoursing from one to another, but in a certain
unity, i.e. in any creature in whose potentiality infinite things exist,
and principally in the Word Himself.
Reply to Objection 2: There is nothing to hinder a thing from being
infinite in one way and finite in another, as when in quantities we
imagine a surface infinite in length and finite in breadth. Hence, if
there were an infinite number of men, they would have a relative
infinity, i.e. in multitude; but, as regards the essence, they would be
finite, since the essence of all would be limited to one specific
nature. But what is simply infinite in its essence is God, as was said
in the FP, Question 7, Article 2. Now the proper object of the intellect
is "what a thing is," as is said De Anima iii, 26, to which pertains the
notion of the species. And thus the soul of Christ, since it has a finite