blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against the world rulers
of this darkness:" [Ephesians 6:12] For now it is not as yet "put down" perfectly,
they working in many places, but then shall they cease.

1 Corinthians 15:25
"For He must reign, till He has put all enemies under His feet."
Again from hence also another absurdity is produced, unless we take this
also in a way becoming Deity. For the expression "until," is one of end and
limitation: but in reference to God, this does not exist.

1 Corinthians 15:26
"The last enemy that shall be abolished is death."
How the last? After all, after the devil, after all the other things. For so in
the beginning also death came in last; the counsel of the devil having come first,
and our disobedience, and then death. Virtually then indeed it is even now
abolished: but actually, at that time.

1 Corinthians 15:27
7. "For He has put all things in subjection under His feet. But when He
says, All things are put in subjection, it is manifest that He is excepted who did
subject all things unto Him."

1 Corinthians 15:28
"And when all things have been subjected unto Him, then shall the Son also
Himself be subjected unto Him that did subject all things unto Him."
And yet before he said not that it was the Father who "put things under
Him," but He Himself who "abolishes." For "when He shall have abolished,"
says he, "all rule and authority:" and again, "for He must reign until He has put
all His enemies under His feet." How then does he here say, "the Father?"
And not only is there this apparent perplexity, but also that he is afraid with
a very unaccountable fear, and uses a correction, saying, "He is excepted, who
did subject all things unto Him," as though some would suspect, whether the
Father might Himself not be subject unto the Son; than which what can be more
irrational? Nevertheless, he fears this.
How then is it? For in truth there are many questions following one upon
another. Well, give me then your earnest attention; since in fact it is necessary
for us first to speak of the scope of Paul and his mind, which one may find
everywhere shining forth, and then to subjoin our solution: this being itself an
ingredient in our solution.
What then is Paul's mind, and what is his custom? He speaks in one way
when he discourses of the Godhead alone, and in another when he falls into the
argument of the economy. Thus having once taken hold of our Lord's Flesh, he
freely thereafter uses all the sayings that humiliate Him; without fear as though
that were able to bear all such expressions. Let us see therefore here also,
whether his discourse is of the simple Godhead, or whether in view of the
incarnation he asserts of Him those things which he says: or rather let us first
point out where he did this of which I have spoken. Where then did he this?
Writing to the Philippians he says, "Who, being in the form of God, counted it
not a prize to be on an equality with God, but emptied Himself of no reputation,