THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.2.

which is spiritual generation; and Confirmation, which is spiritual
growth: so there needed to be the sacrament of the Eucharist, which
is spiritual food.
Reply to Objection 1: Perfection is twofold. The first lies within man
himself; and he attains it by growth: such perfection belongs to
Confirmation. The other is the perfection which comes to man from
the addition of food, or clothing, or something of the kind; and such
is the perfection befitting the Eucharist, which is the spiritual
refreshment.
Reply to Objection 2: The water of Baptism does not cause any
spiritual effect by reason of the water, but by reason of the power of
the Holy Ghost, which power is in the water. Hence on Jn. 5:4, "An
angel of the Lord at certain times," etc., Chrysostom observes: "The
water does not act simply as such upon the baptized, but when it
receives the grace of the Holy Ghost, then it looses all sins." But the
true body of Christ. bears the same relation to the species of the
bread and wine, as the power of the Holy Ghost does to the water of
Baptism: hence the species of the bread and wine produce no effect
except from the virtue of Christ's true body.
Reply to Objection 3: A sacrament is so termed because it contains
something sacred. Now a thing can be styled sacred from two
causes; either absolutely, or in relation to something else. The
difference between the Eucharist and other sacraments having
sensible matter is that whereas the Eucharist contains something
which is sacred absolutely, namely, Christ's own body; the baptismal
water contains something which is sacred in relation to something
else, namely, the sanctifying power: and the same holds good of
chrism and such like. Consequently, the sacrament of the Eucharist
is completed in the very consecration of the matter, whereas the
other sacraments are completed in the application of the matter for
the sanctifying of the individual. And from this follows another
difference. For, in the sacrament of the Eucharist, what is both reality
and sacrament is in the matter itself. but what is reality only, namely,
the grace bestowed, is in the recipient; whereas in Baptism both are
in the recipient, namely, the character, which is both reality and
sacrament, and the grace of pardon of sins, which is reality only.
And the same holds good of the other sacraments.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.2.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.73, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the Eucharist is one sacrament or

several?
Objection 1: It seems that the Eucharist is not one sacrament but
several, because it is said in the Collect [Postcommunion "pro vivis
et defunctis"]: "May the sacraments which we have received purify
us, O Lord": and this is said on account of our receiving the
Eucharist. Consequently the Eucharist is not one sacrament but
several.
Objection 2: Further, it is impossible for genera to be multiplied
without the species being multiplied: thus it is impossible for one
man to be many animals. But, as stated above (Question 60, Article
1), sign is the genus of sacrament. Since, then, there are more signs
than one, to wit, bread and wine, it seems to follow that here must be
more sacraments than one.
Objection 3: Further, this sacrament is perfected in the consecration
of the matter, as stated above (Article 1, ad 3). But in this sacrament
there is a double consecration of the matter. Therefore, it is a twofold
sacrament.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:17): "For we, being
many, are one bread, one body, all that partake of one bread": from
which it is clear that the Eucharist is the sacrament of the Church's
unity. But a sacrament bears the likeness of the reality whereof it is
the sacrament. Therefore the Eucharist is one sacrament.
I answer that, As stated in Metaph. v, a thing is said to be one, not
only from being indivisible, or continuous, but also when it is
complete; thus we speak of one house, and one man. A thing is one
in perfection, when it is complete through the presence of all that is
needed for its end; as a man is complete by having all the members
required for the operation of his soul, and a house by having all the
parts needful for dwelling therein. And so this sacrament is said to
be one. Because it is ordained for spiritual refreshment, which is
conformed to corporeal refreshment. Now there are two things
required for corporeal refreshment, namely, food, which is dry
sustenance, and drink, which is wet sustenance. Consequently, two
things concur for the integrity of this sacrament, to wit, spiritual food
and spiritual drink, according to John: "My flesh is meat indeed, and