essence of the soul, and so on to infinity, and if we have to stop it is
better to do so at the first step.
Hence others say that the sensitive and other like powers do not
remain in the separated soul except in a restricted sense, namely
radically, in the same way as a result is in its principle: because
there remains in the separated soul the ability to produce these
powers if it should be reunited to the body; nor is it necessary for
this ability to be anything in addition to the essence of the soul, as
stated above. This opinion appears to be the more reasonable.
Reply to Objection 1: This saying of Augustine is to be understood
as meaning that the soul takes away with it some of those powers
actually, namely understanding and intelligence, and some radically,
as stated above [FP, Question 77, Article 8, ad 1 and infra Article 2,
ad 1].
Reply to Objection 2: The senses which the soul takes away with it
are not these external senses, but the internal, those, namely, which
pertain to the intellective part, for the intellect is sometimes called
sense, as Basil states in his commentary on the Proverbs, and again
the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 11). If, however, he means the external
senses we must reply as above to the first objection.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above, the sensitive powers are
related to the soul, not as natural passions to their subject, but as
compared to their origin: wherefore the conclusion does not follow.
Reply to Objection 4: The powers of the soul are not called its
integral but its potential parts. Now the nature of such like wholes is
that the entire energy of the whole is found perfectly in one of the
parts, but partially in the others; thus in the soul the soul's energy is
found perfectly in the intellective part, but partially in the others.
Wherefore, as the powers of the intellective part remain in the
separated soul, the latter will remain entire and undiminished,
although the sensitive powers do not remain actually: as neither is
the king's power decreased by the death of a mayor who shared his
authority.
Reply to Objection 5: The body co-operates in merit, as an essential
part of the man who merits. The sensitive powers, however, do not
co-operate thus, since they are of the genus of accidents. Hence the

comparison fails.
Reply to Objection 6: The powers of the sensitive soul are said to be
acts of the organs, not as though they were the essential forms of
those organs, except in reference to the soul whose powers they are.
But they are the acts of the organs, by perfecting them for their
proper operations, as heat is the act of fire by perfecting it for the
purpose of heating. Wherefore, just as a fire would remain identically
the same, although another individual heat were in it (even so the
cold of water that has been heated returns not identically the same,
although the water remains the same in identity), so the organs will
be the same identically, although the powers be not identically the
same.
Reply to Objection 7: The Philosopher is speaking there of these
powers as being rooted in the soul. This is clear from his saying that
"old age is an affection not of the soul, but of that in which the soul
is," namely the body. For in this way the powers of the soul are
neither weakened nor corrupted on account of the body.