Further, the Apostle says (Phil. 1:23): "I desire to be dissolved and to
be with Christ." From these words Gregory argues as follows (Dial.
iv, 25): "If there is no doubt that Christ is in heaven, it cannot be
denied that Paul's soul is in heaven likewise." Now it cannot be
gainsaid that Christ is in heaven, since this is an article of faith.
Therefore neither is it to be denied that the souls of the saints are
borne to heaven. That also some souls go down to hell immediately
after death is evident from Lk. 16:22, "And the rich man died, and he
was buried in hell."
I answer that, Even as in bodies there is gravity or levity whereby
they are borne to their own place which is the end of their
movement, so in souls there is merit or demerit whereby they reach
their reward or punishment, which are the ends of their deeds.
Wherefore just as a body is conveyed at once to its place, by its
gravity or levity, unless there be an obstacle, so too the soul, the
bonds of the flesh being broken, whereby it was detained in the state
of the way, receives at once its reward or punishment, unless there
be an obstacle. Thus sometimes venial sin, though needing first of
all to be cleansed, is an obstacle to the receiving of the reward; the
result being that the reward is delayed. And since a place is
assigned to souls in keeping with their reward or punishment, as
soon as the soul is set free from the body it is either plunged into
hell or soars to heaven, unless it be held back by some debt, for
which its flight must needs be delayed until the soul is first of all
cleansed. This truth is attested by the manifest authority of the
canonical Scriptures and the doctrine of the holy Fathers; wherefore
the contrary must be judged heretical as stated in Dial. iv, 25, and in
De Eccl. Dogm. xlvi.
Reply to Objection 1: The gloss explains itself: for it expounds the
words, "They will not yet be where the saints will be," etc., by saying
immediately afterwards: "That is to say, they will not have the double
stole which the saints will have at the resurrection."
Reply to Objection 2: Among the secret abodes of which Augustine
speaks, we must also reckon hell and heaven, where some souls are
detained before the resurrection. The reason why a distinction is
drawn between the time before and the time after the resurrection is
because before the resurrection they are there without the body
whereas afterwards they are with the body, and because in certain
places there are souls now which will not be there after the

resurrection.
Reply to Objection 3: There is a kind of continuity among men as
regards the body, because in respect thereof is verified the saying of
Acts 17:24,26, "God . . . hath made of one all mankind": whereas He
has fashioned souls independently of one another. Consequently it
is not so fitting that all men should be glorified together in the soul
as that they should be glorified together in the body. Moreover the
glory of the body is not so essential as the glory of the soul;
wherefore it would be more derogatory to the saints if the glory of
the soul were delayed, than that the glory of the body be deferred:
nor could this detriment to their glory be compensated on account of
the joy of each one being increased by the common joy.
Reply to Objection 4: Gregory proposes and solves this very
difficulty (Dial. iv, 25): "If then," he says, "the souls of the just are in
heaven now, what will they receive in reward for their justice on the
judgment day?" And he answers: "Surely it will be a gain to them at
the judgment, that whereas now they enjoy only the happiness of the
soul, afterwards they will enjoy also that of the body, so as to rejoice
also in the flesh wherein they bore sorrow and torments for the
Lord." The same is to be said in reference to the damned.