FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

sacrificeth to gods, shall be put to death, save only to the Lord."
Wherefore another reasonable cause may be assigned to the
ceremonies of the sacrifices, from the fact that thereby men were
withdrawn from offering sacrifices to idols. Hence too it is that the
precepts about the sacrifices were not given to the Jewish people
until after they had fallen into idolatry, by worshipping the molten
calf: as though those sacrifices were instituted, that the people,
being ready to offer sacrifices, might offer those sacrifices to God
rather than to idols. Thus it is written (Jer. 7:22): "I spake not to your
fathers and I commanded them not, in the day that I brought them
out of the land of Egypt, concerning the matter of burnt-offerings and
sacrifices."
Now of all the gifts which God vouchsafed to mankind after they had
fallen away by sin, the chief is that He gave His Son; wherefore it is
written (Jn. 3:16): "God so loved the world, as to give His onlybegotten Son; that whosoever believeth in Him, may not perish, but
may have life everlasting." Consequently the chief sacrifice is that
whereby Christ Himself "delivered Himself . . . to God for an odor of
sweetness" (Eph. 5:2). And for this reason all the other sacrifices of
the Old Law were offered up in order to foreshadow this one
individual and paramount sacrifice--the imperfect forecasting the
perfect. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. 10:11) that the priest of the Old
Law "often" offered "the same sacrifices, which can never take away
sins: but" Christ offered "one sacrifice for sins, for ever." And since
the reason of the figure is taken from that which the figure
represents, therefore the reasons of the figurative sacrifices of the
Old Law should be taken from the true sacrifice of Christ.
Reply to Objection 1. God did not wish these sacrifices to be offered
to Him on account of the things themselves that were offered, as
though He stood in need of them: wherefore it is written (Is. 1:11): "I
desire not holocausts of rams, and fat of fatlings, and blood of
calves and lambs and buckgoats." But, as stated above, He wished
them to be offered to Him, in order to prevent idolatry; in order to
signify the right ordering of man's mind to God; and in order to
represent the mystery of the Redemption of man by Christ.
Reply to Objection 2. In all the respects mentioned above (ad 1),
there was a suitable reason for these animals, rather than others,
being offered in sacrifice to God. First, in order to prevent idolatry.
Because idolaters offered all other animals to their gods, or made
use of them in their sorceries: while the Egyptians (among whom the

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

people had been dwelling) considered it abominable to slay these
animals, wherefore they used not to offer them in sacrifice to their
gods. Hence it is written (Ex. 8:26): "We shall sacrifice the
abominations of the Egyptians to the Lord our God." For they
worshipped the sheep; they reverenced the ram (because demons
appeared under the form thereof); while they employed oxen for
agriculture, which was reckoned by them as something sacred.
Secondly, this was suitable for the aforesaid right ordering of man's
mind to God: and in two ways. First, because it is chiefly by means
of these animals that human life is sustained: and moreover they are
most clean, and partake of a most clean food: whereas other animals
are either wild, and not deputed to ordinary use among men: or, if
they be tame, they have unclean food, as pigs and geese: and
nothing but what is clean should be offered to God. These birds
especially were offered in sacrifice because there were plenty of
them in the land of promise. Secondly, because the sacrificing of
these animals represented purity of heart. Because as the gloss says
on Lev. 1, "We offer a calf, when we overcome the pride of the flesh;
a lamb, when we restrain our unreasonable motions; a goat, when
we conquer wantonness; a turtledove, when we keep chaste;
unleavened bread, when we feast on the unleavened bread of
sincerity." And it is evident that the dove denotes charity and
simplicity of heart.
Thirdly, it was fitting that these animals should be offered, that they
might foreshadow Christ. Because, as the gloss observes, "Christ is
offered in the calf, to denote the strength of the cross; in the lamb, to
signify His innocence; in the ram, to foreshadow His headship; and
in the goat, to signify the likeness of 'sinful flesh'. The turtledove and
dove denoted the union of the two natures"; or else the turtledove
signified chastity; while the dove was a figure of charity. "The wheatflour foreshadowed the sprinkling of believers with the water of
Baptism."
Reply to Objection 3. Fish through living in water are further
removed from man than other animals, which, like man, live in the
air. Again, fish die as soon as they are taken out of water; hence they
could not be offered in the temple like other animals.
Reply to Objection 4. Among turtledoves the older ones are better
than the young; while with doves the case is the reverse. Wherefore,
as Rabbi Moses observes (Doct. Perplex. iii), turtledoves and young