FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.3.

in him. It is the same with anger; for when a man is angry, he wishes
to be avenged on someone. Hence the movement of anger has a
twofold tendency: viz. to vengeance itself, which it desires and
hopes for as being a good, wherefore it takes pleasure in it; and to
the person on whom it seeks vengeance, as to something contrary
and hurtful, which bears the character of evil.
We must, however, observe a twofold difference in this respect,
between anger on the one side, and hatred and love on the other.
The first difference is that anger always regards two objects:
whereas love and hatred sometimes regard but one object, as when
a man is said to love wine or something of the kind, or to hate it. The
second difference is, that both the objects of love are good: since
the lover wishes good to someone, as to something agreeable to
himself: while both the objects of hatred bear the character of evil:
for the man who hates, wishes evil to someone, as to something
disagreeable to him. Whereas anger regards one object under the
aspect of evil, viz. the noxious person, on whom it seeks to be
avenged. Consequently it is a passion somewhat made up of
contrary passions.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.46, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether anger is in the concupiscible faculty?

Objection 1: It would seem that anger is in the concupiscible faculty.
For Cicero says (De Quaest. Tusc. iv, 9) that anger is a kind of
"desire." But desire is in the concupiscible faculty. Therefore anger
is too.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says in his Rule, that "anger grows
into hatred": and Cicero says (De Quaest. Tusc. iv, 9) that "hatred is
inveterate anger." But hatred, like love, is a concupiscible passion.
Therefore anger is in the concupiscible faculty.
Objection 3: Further, Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 16) and Gregory of
Nyssa [Nemesius, De Nat. Hom. xxi.] say that "anger is made up of
sorrow and desire." Both of these are in the concupiscible faculty.
Therefore anger is a concupiscible passion.
On the contrary, The concupiscible is distinct from the irascible
faculty. If, therefore, anger were in the concupiscible power, the
irascible would not take its name from it.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 23, Article 1), the passions
of the irascible part differ from the passions of the concupiscible
faculty, in that the objects of the concupiscible passions are good
and evil absolutely considered, whereas the objects of the irascible
passions are good and evil in a certain elevation or arduousness.
Now it has been stated (Article 2) that anger regards two objects: viz.
the vengeance that it seeks; and the person on whom it seeks
vengeance; and in respect of both, anger requires a certain
arduousness: for the movement of anger does not arise, unless
there be some magnitude about both these objects; since "we make
no ado about things that are naught or very minute," as the
Philosopher observes (Rhet. ii, 2). It is therefore evident that anger is
not in the concupiscible, but in the irascible faculty.
Reply to Objection 1: Cicero gives the name of desire to any kind of
craving for a future good, without discriminating between that which
is arduous and that which is not. Accordingly he reckons anger as a
kind of desire, inasmuch as it is a desire of vengeance. In this sense,
however, desire is common to the irascible and concupiscible
faculties.