2 Corinthians 11:10
"As the truth of Christ is in me." 'Do not think that I therefore have spoken,
that I may receive, that I may the rather draw you on: for,' says he, as the truth is
in me,
"No man shall stop me of this glorying in the regions of Achaia." For that
none should think again that he is grieved at this, or that he speaks these things
in anger, he even calls the thing a "glorying." And in his former Epistle too he
dressed it out in like terms. For so that he may not wound them there either, he
says, "What then is my reward?" "That when I preach the Gospel, I may make
the Gospel of Christ without charge." [1 Corinthians 9:18] And as he there calls
it "reward," so does he here "glorying," that they may not be excessively
ashamed at what he said, as if he were asking and they gave not to him. 'For,
what, if even ye would give?' says he, 'Yet I do not accept it.' And the
expression, "shall not stop me," is a metaphor taken from rivers, or from the
report, as if running every where, of his receiving nothing. 'You stop not with
your giving this my freedom of speech.' But he said not, 'ye stop not,' which
would have been too cutting, but it "no man shall stop me in the regions of
Achaia." This again was like giving them a fatal blow, and exceedingly apt to
deject and pain them, since they were the only persons he refused [to take from].
'For if he made that his boast, it were meet to make it so every where: but if he
only does so among us, perchance this is owing to our weakness.' Lest therefore
they should so reason and be dejected, see how he corrects this.

2 Corinthians 11:11
"Wherefore? Because I love you not? God knows."
Quickly [is it done], and by an easy method. But still, not even so did he rid
them of those charges. For he neither said, 'you are not weak,' nor yet, 'you are
strong;' but, "I love you," which very greatly aggravated the accusation against
them. For the not receiving from them, because they felt it an exceeding
grievance, was a proof of special love toward them. So he acted in two contrary
ways out of love; he both did receive, and did not receive: but this contrariety
was on account of the disposition of the givers. And he did not say, 'I therefore
do not take of you, because I exceedingly love you,' for this would have
contained an accusation of their weakness and have thrown them into distress;
but he turned what he said to another reason. What then is this?

2 Corinthians 11:12
"That I may cut off occasion from them that desire an occasion; that
wherein they glory, they may be found even as we."
For since this they sought earnestly, to find some handle against him, it is
necessary to remove this also. For this is the one point on which they pique
themselves. Therefore that they might not have any advantage whatever, it was
necessary to set this right; for in other things they were inferior. For, as I have
said, nothing does so edify worldly people as the receiving nothing from them.
Therefore the devil in his craftiness dropped this bait especially, when desirous
to injure them in other respects. But it appears to me that this even was in
hypocrisy. And therefore he did not say, 'wherein they have well done,' but what?
"wherein they glory;" which also was as jeering at their glorying; for they
gloried also of that which they were not. But the man of noble spirit not only
ought not to boast of what he has not, but not even of what he possesses; as this
blessed saint was wont to do, as the patriarch Abraham did, saying, "But I am
earth and ashes." [Genesis 18:27] For since he had no sins to speak of, but shone
with good works; having run about in every direction and found no very great
handle against himself, he betakes himself to his nature; and since the name of
"earth" is in some way or other one of dignity, he added to it that of "ashes."
Wherefore also another says, "Why is earth and ashes proud?" [Sirach 10:9]
7. For tell me not of the bloom of the countenance, nor of the uplifted neck,
nor of the mantle, and the horse, and the followers; but reflect where all these
things do end, and put that to them. But and if you tell me of what appears to the
eye, I too will tell you of things in pictures, brighter far than these. But as we do
not admire those for their appearance, as seeing what their nature is, that all is
clay; so therefore let us not these either, for these too are but clay. Yea rather,
even before they are dissolved and become dust, show me this uplifted [neck] a