revel in being rich, when they fall into poverty are grieved, and they who have
been used to live luxuriously cannot bear to live shabbily; so, too, they who long
for applause, not only when they are blamed without a cause, but when they are
not constantly being praised, become, as by some famine, wasted in soul,
particularly when they happen themselves to have been used to praise, or if they
hear others being praised. He who enters upon the trial of preaching with desires
of this kind, how many annoyances and how many pangs do you think that he
has? It is no more possible for the sea to be without waves than that man to be
without cares and grief.
5. For though the preacher may have great ability (and this one would only
find in a few), not even in this case is he released from perpetual toil. For since
preaching does not come by nature, but by study, suppose a man to reach a high
standard of it, this will then forsake him if he does not cultivate his power by
constant application and exercise. So that there is greater labor for the wiser than
for the unlearned. For there is not the same degree of loss attending negligence
on the part of the one and the other, but the loss is in exact proportion to the
difference between the two possessions. For the latter no one would blame, as
they furnish nothing worth regarding. But the former, unless they are constantly
producing matter beyond the reputation in which all hold them, great censure
attends on all hands; and besides these things, the latter would meet with
considerable praise, even for small performances, while the efforts of the former,
unless they be specially wonderful and startling, not only fail to win applause,
but meet with many fault-finders. For the audience set themselves to be critics,
not so much in judgment of what is said as of the reputation of the speaker, so
that whenever any one excels all others in oratorical powers, then especially of
all others does he need laborious study. For this man is not allowed to avail
himself of the usual plea which human nature urges, that one cannot succeed in
everything; but if his sermons do not throughout correspond to the greatness of
the expectations formed, he will go away without having gained anything but
countless jeers and censures; and no one takes this into consideration about him,

that dejection and pain, and anxiety, and often anger, may step in, and dim the
clearness of his thoughts and prevent his productions from coming from him
unalloyed, and that on the whole, being but a man, he cannot be constantly the
same, nor at all times acquit himself successfully, but naturally must sometimes
fall short of the mark, and appear on a lower level of ability than usual. None of
these things, as I said, are they willing to take into consideration, but charge him
with faults as if they were sitting in judgment on an angel; though in other cases,
too, a man is apt to overlook the good performances of his neighbor, though they
be many and great, and if anywhere a defect appears, even if it be accidental,
even if it only occur at long intervals, it is quickly perceived, and always
remembered, and thus small and trifling matters have often lessened the glory of
many and great doings.
6. You see, my excellent friend, that the man who is powerful in preaching
has peculiar need of greater study than others; and besides study, of forbearance
also greater than what is needed by all those whom I have already mentioned.
For thus are many constantly springing up against him, in a vain and senseless
spirit, and having no fault to find with him, but that he is generally approved of,
hate him; and he must bear their bitter malice nobly, for as they are not able to
hide this cursed hatred, which they so unreasonably entertain, they both revile,
and censure, and slander in private, and defame in public, and the mind which
has begun to be pained and exasperated, on every one of these occasions, will
not escape being corrupted by grief. For they will not only revenge themselves
upon him by their own acts, but will try to do so by means of others, and often
having chosen some one of those who are unable to speak a word, will extol him
with their praises and admire him beyond his worth. Some do this through
ignorance alone, some through ignorance and envy, in order that they may ruin
the reputation of the other, not that they may prove the man to be wonderful who
is not so, and the noble-minded man has not only to struggle against these, but
often against the ignorance of the whole multitude; for since it is not possible
that all those who come together should consist of learned men, but the chances