anointed on the head, the right ear, the hand [Leviticus 8:23-24]; to excite him to
obedience, and to good works; but this one, all over. For he comes not to be
instructed merely; but to wrestle, and to be exercised; he is advanced to another
creation. For when one confesses (his belief) in the life everlasting, he has
confessed a second creation. He took dust from the earth, and formed man
[Genesis 2:7]: but now, dust no longer, but the Holy Spirit; with This he is
formed, with this harmonized, even as Himself was in the womb of the Virgin.
He said not in Paradise, but "in Heaven." For deem not that, because the subject
is earth, it is done on earth; he is removed there, to Heaven, there these things
are transacted, in the midst of Angels: God takes up your soul above, above He
harmonizes it anew, He places you near to the Kingly Throne. He is formed in
the water, he receives spirit instead of a soul. And after he is formed, He brings
to him, not beasts, but demons, and their prince, and says, "Tread upon serpents
and scorpions." [Luke 10:19] He says not, "Let Us make man in our image, and
after our likeness" [Genesis 1:26], but what? "He gives them to become the sons
of God; but of God," he says, "they were born." [John 1:12-13] Then that thou
give no ear to the serpent, straightway he teaches you to say, "I renounce you,"
that is, "whatsoever you say, I will not hear you." Then, that he destroy you not
by means of others, it is said, "and your pomp, and your service, and your
angels." He has set him no more to keep Paradise, but to have his citizenship in
heaven. For straightway when he comes up he pronounces these words, "Our
Father, Which art in Heaven,...Your will be done, as in Heaven, so on earth."
The plain falls not on your sight, you see not tree, nor fountain, but straightway
you take into you the Lord Himself, you are mingled with His Body, you are
intermixed with that Body that lies above, whither the devil cannot approach. No
woman is there, for him to approach, and deceive as the weaker; for it is said,
"There is neither female, nor male." [Galatians 3:28] If you go not down to him,
he will not have power to come up where you are; for you are in Heaven, and
Heaven is unapproachable by the devil. It has no tree with knowledge of good
and evil, but the Tree of Life only. No more shall woman be formed from your

side, but we all are one from the side of Christ. For if they who have been
anointed of men take no harm by serpents, neither will you take any harm at all,
so long as you are anointed; that you may be able to grasp the Serpent and choke
him, "to tread upon serpents and scorpions." [Luke 10:19] But as the gifts are
great, so is the punishment great also. It is not possible for him that has fallen
from Paradise, to dwell "in front of Paradise" [Genesis 3:24], nor to reascend
there from whence we have fallen. But what after this? Hell, and the worm
undying. But far be it that any of us should become amenable to this
punishment! But living virtuously, let us earnestly strive to do throughout His
will. Let us become well-pleasing to God, that we may be able both to escape the
punishment, and to obtain the good things eternal, of which may we all be
counted worthy, through the grace and love toward man, etc.