After this, He openly calls Himself Lord, having nowhere spoken so
distinctly. But here He seems to me also to put to shame the careless, that not
even as much care as they that expect a thief have taken for their money, not
even this much do these take for their own soul. For they indeed, when they
expect it, watch, and suffer none of the things in their house to be carried off; but
you, although knowing that He will come, and come assuredly, continue not
watching, says He, and ready so as not to be carried away hence unprepared. So
that the day comes unto destruction for them that sleep. For as that man, if he
had known, would have escaped, so also ye, if you be ready, escape free.
Then, as He had fallen upon the mention of the judgment, He directs His
discourse to the teachers next, speaking of punishment and honors; and having
put first them that do right, He ends with them that continue in sin, making His
discourse to close with that which is alarming.
Wherefore He first says this, "Who then is the faithful and wise servant,
whom his Lord shall set over His household to give them their meat in their due
season? Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when He comes shall find so
doing. Verily I say unto you, that He shall make him ruler over all His goods."
Tell me, is this too the language of one who is in ignorance? For if because
He said, "neither does the Son know," you say He is ignorant of it; as He says,
"who then?" what will you say? Will you say He is ignorant of this too? Away
with the thought. For not even one of them that are frantic would say this. And
yet in the former case one might assign a cause; but here not even this. And what
when He said, "Peter, do you love me?" [John 21:16] asking it, knew He not so
much as this? Nor when He said, "Where have ye laid him?" [John 11:34]
And the Father too will be found to be saying such things. For He Himself
likewise says, "Adam, where are you?" [Genesis 3:9] and, "The cry of Sodom
and Gomorrha is waxed great before me. I will go down therefore, and see
whether their doings be according to their cry which comes unto me, and if not, I
will know." [Genesis 18:20-21] And elsewhere He says, "Whether they will hear,
whether they will understand." [Ezekiel 2:5] And in the gospel too, "It may be

they will reverence my Son:" all which are expressions of ignorance. But not in
ignorance did He say these things, but as compassing objects such as became
Him: in the case of Adam, that He might drive him to make an excuse for his
sin: in that of the Sodomites, that He might teach us never to be positive, till we
are present at the very deeds; in that of the prophet, that the prediction might not
appear in the judgment of the foolish a kind of compulsion to disobedience; and
in the parable in the gospel, that He might show that they ought to have done
this, and to have reverenced the Son: but here, as well that they may not be
curious, nor over busy again, as that He might indicate that this was a rare and
precious thing. And see of what great ignorance this saying is indicative, if at
least He know not even him that is set over. For He blesses him indeed, "For
blessed," says He, "is that servant;" but He says not who this is. "For who is he,"
He says, "whom His Lord shall set over?" and, "Blessed is he whom He shall
find so doing."
But these things are spoken not of money only, but also of speech, and of
power, and of gifts, and of every stewardship, wherewith each is entrusted. This
parable would suit rulers in the state also, for every one is bound to make full
use of what he has for the common advantage. If it be wisdom you have, if
power, if wealth, if what it may, let it not be for the hurt of your fellow-servants,
neither for your own ruin. For this cause, therefore, He requires both things of
him, wisdom, and fidelity: for sin arises from folly also. He calls him faithful
then, because he has purloined nothing, neither misspent his Lord's goods
without aim or fruit; and wise, because he knew how to dispense the things
given him, according as was fit. For indeed we have need of both things, as well
not to purloin the goods of our Master, as also to dispense them as is fit. But if
the one be wanting, the other halts. For if he be faithful and steal not, yet were to
waste and to spend upon that which concerned him not, great were the blame;
and if he should know how to dispense it well, yet were to purloin, again there is
no common charge against him.
And let us also that have money listen to these things. For not unto teachers