discourses first of these very things, and shows that without it they are nothing;
reducing them to the greatest necessity of loving one another; seeing also that
from neglect of it sprang that which caused all their evils. So that in this respect
also it might justly appear great, if the gifts not only brought them not together,
but divided them even when united: but this, when many were so divided, would
reunite them by virtue of its own and make them one body. This however he
does not say at once, but what they chiefly longed for, that he sets down; as that
the thing was a gift and a most excellent way to all the gifts. So that, even if you
will not love your brother on the score of friendship, yet for the sake of obtaining
a better sign and an abundant gift, cherish love.
6. And see whence he first begins; from that which was marvellous in their
eyes and great, the gift of tongues. And in bringing forward that gift, he
mentions it not just in the degree they had it in, but far more. For he did not say,
"if I speak with tongues," but,

1 Corinthians 13:1
"If I speak with the tongues of men—"
What is, "of men?" Of all nations in every part of the world. And neither
was he content with this amplification, but he likewise uses another much
greater, adding the words, "and of angels—and have not love, I have become
sounding brass, or a clanging cymbal."
Do you see to what point he first exalted the gift, and to what afterwards he
lowered and cast it down? For neither did he simply say, "I am nothing," but, "I
have become sounding brass," a thing senseless and inanimate. But how
"sounding brass?" Emitting a sound indeed, but at random and in vain, and for
no good end. Since besides my profiting nothing, I am counted by most men as
one giving impertinent trouble, an annoying and wearisome kind of person. Do
you see how one void of love is like to things inanimate and senseless?
Now he here speaks of the "tongues of angels," not investing angels with a
body, but what he means is this: "should I even so speak as angels are wont to
discourse unto each other, without this I am nothing, nay rather a burden and an
annoyance." Thus (to mention one other example) where he says, "To Him every
knee shall bow, of things in heaven and things on earth, and things under the
earth," [Philippians 2:10] he does not say these things as if he attributed to
angels knees and bones, far from it, but it is their intense adoration which he
intends to shadow out by the fashion among us: so also here he calls it "a
tongue" not meaning an instrument of flesh, but intending to indicate their
converse with each other by the manner which is known among us.
7. Then, in order that his discourse may be acceptable, he stops not at the
gift of tongues, but proceeds also to the remaining gifts; and having depreciated
all in the absence of love, he then depicts her image. And because he preferred to
conduct his argument by amplification, he begins from the less and ascends to