be taken. For what else is pleasure, but freedom from care and fear and
despondency, and the not being under the power of any? And who is in pleasure,
tell me, the man in frenzy and convulsion, who is goaded by various lusts, and is
not even himself; or he who is freed from all these waves, and is settled in the
love of wisdom, as it were in a harbor? Is it not evident, the latter? But this
would seem to be a thing peculiar to virtue. So that vice has merely the name of
pleasure, but of the substance it is destitute. And before the enjoyment, it is
madness, not pleasure: but after the enjoyment, straightway this also is
extinguished. Now then if neither at the beginning nor afterwards can one
discern the pleasure of it, when will it appear, and where?
And that you may more clearly understand what I say, let us try the force of
the argument in an example. Now consider. One is enamored of a fair and lovely
woman: this man as long as he cannot obtain his desire is like men beside
themselves and frantic; but after that he has obtained it, he has quenched his
appetite. If therefore neither at the beginning does he feel pleasure, (for the affair
is madness,) nor in the end, (for by the indulgence of his lust he cools down his
wild fancy,) where after all are we to find it? But our doings are not such, but
both at the beginning they are freed from all disturbance, and to the end the
pleasure remains in its bloom: nay rather there is no end of our pleasure, nor
have our good things a limit, nor is this pleasure ever done away.
Upon all these considerations, then, if we love pleasure, let us lay hold on
virtue that we may win good things both now and hereafter: unto which may we
all attain, through the grace and mercy, etc.

## Homily 23 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 9:24
Do you not know that they which run in a race run all, but one receives the
prize?
Having pointed out the manifold usefulness of condescension and that this
is the highest perfectness, and that he himself having risen higher than all
towards perfection, or rather having gone beyond it by declining to receive,
descended lower than all again; and having made known to us the times for each
of these, both for the perfectness and for the condescension; he touches them
more sharply in what follows, covertly intimating that this which was done by
them and which was counted a mark of perfectness, is a kind of superfluous and
useless labor. And he says it not thus out clearly, lest they should become
insolent; but the methods of proof employed by him makes this evident.
And having said that they sin against Christ and destroy the brethren, and
are nothing profited by this perfect knowledge, except charity be added; he again
proceeds to a common example, and says,
"Do you not know that they which run in a race run all, but one receives the
prize?" Now this he says, not as though here also one only out of many would be
saved; far from it; but to set forth the exceeding diligence which it is our duty to
use. For as there, though many descend into the course not many are crowned,
but this befalls one only; and it is not enough to descend into the contest, nor to
anoint one's self and wrestle: so likewise here it is not sufficient to believe, and
to contend in any way; but unless we have so run as unto the end to show
ourselves unblameable, and to come near the prize, it will profit us nothing. For
even though thou consider yourself to be perfect according to knowledge, you
have not yet attained the whole; which hinting at, he said, "so run, that you may