FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.6.

Reply to Objection 4: That a man should not do harm to anyone is an
immediate dictate of his natural reason: and therefore the precepts
that forbid the doing of harm are binding on all men. But it is not an
immediate dictate of natural reason that a man should do one thing
in return for another, unless he happen to be indebted to someone.
Now a son's debt to his father is so evident that one cannot get away
from it by denying it: since the father is the principle of generation
and being, and also of upbringing and teaching. Wherefore the
decalogue does not prescribe deeds of kindness or service to be
done to anyone except to one's parents. On the other hand parents
do not seem to be indebted to their children for any favors received,
but rather the reverse is the case. Again, a child is a part of his
father; and "parents love their children as being a part of
themselves," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 12). Hence, just as
the decalogue contains no ordinance as to man's behavior towards
himself, so, for the same reason, it includes no precept about loving
one's children.
Reply to Objection 5: The pleasure of adultery and the usefulness of
wealth, in so far as they have the character of pleasurable or useful
good, are of themselves, objects of appetite: and for this reason they
needed to be forbidden not only in the deed but also in the desire.
But murder and falsehood are, of themselves, objects of repulsion
(since it is natural for man to love his neighbor and the truth): and
are desired only for the sake of something else. Consequently with
regard to sins of murder and false witness, it was necessary to
proscribe, not sins of thought, but only sins of deed.
Reply to Objection 6: As stated above (Question 25, Article 1), all the
passions of the irascible faculty arise from the passions of the
concupiscible part. Hence, as the precepts of the decalogue are, as it
were, the first elements of the Law, there was no need for mention of
the irascible passions, but only of the concupiscible passions.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the ten precepts of the decalogue are set

in proper order?
Objection 1: It would seem that the ten precepts of the decalogue are
not set in proper order. Because love of one's neighbor is seemingly
previous to love of God, since our neighbor is better known to us
than God is; according to 1 Jn. 4:20: "He that loveth not his brother,
whom he seeth, how can he love God, Whom he seeth not?" But the
first three precepts belong to the love of God, while the other seven
pertain to the love of our neighbor. Therefore the precepts of the
decalogue are not set in proper order.
Objection 2: Further, the acts of virtue are prescribed by the
affirmative precepts, and acts of vice are forbidden by the negative
precepts. But according to Boethius in his commentary on the
Categories [Lib. iv, cap. De Oppos.], vices should be uprooted before
virtues are sown. Therefore among the precepts concerning our
neighbor, the negative precepts should have preceded the
affirmative.
Objection 3: Further, the precepts of the Law are about men's
actions. But actions of thought precede actions of word or outward
deed. Therefore the precepts about not coveting, which regard our
thoughts, are unsuitably placed last in order.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rm. 13:1): "The things that are of
God, are well ordered". But the precepts of the decalogue were given
immediately by God, as stated above (Article 3). Therefore they are
arranged in becoming order.
I answer that, As stated above (Articles 3,5, ad 1), the precepts of the
decalogue are such as the mind of man is ready to grasp at once.
Now it is evident that a thing is so much the more easily grasped by
the reason, as its contrary is more grievous and repugnant to
reason. Moreover, it is clear, since the order of reason begins with
the end, that, for a man to be inordinately disposed towards his end,
is supremely contrary to reason. Now the end of human life and
society is God. Consequently it was necessary for the precepts of
the decalogue, first of all, to direct man to God; since the contrary to
this is most grievous. Thus also, in an army, which is ordained to the
commander as to its end, it is requisite first that the soldier should