victory, and that marvellous trophy which they raised without blood, by means
of his hands, over the Egyptians who had enslaved them; after the manna; after
the rocks, and the fountains of rivers which break out thence; after ten thousand
miracles in the land of Egypt and the Red Sea and the wilderness. Jeremiah they
cast into a pit, and many of the prophets they slew. Hear, for example, what says
Elias, after that fearful famine, and the marvellous rain, and the torch which he
brought down from heaven, and the strange holocaust; driven, as he was, to the
very extreme edge of their country: "Lord, your prophets they have killed, your
altars they have dug down, and I am left alone, and they seek my life." [1 Kings
19:10] Yet were not those (who were so persecuted) disturbing any of the
established rules. Tell me then, what ground had men for attending to these of
whom we are speaking? For, on one hand, they were meaner persons than any of
the prophets; on the other, they were introducing just such novelties as had
caused the Jews to nail even their Master to the Cross.
And in another way, too, it seemed less unaccountable for Christ to utter
such things than for them; for He, they might suppose, acted thus to acquire
glory for himself; but these they would have hated even the more, as waging war
with them in behalf of another.
10. But did the laws of the Romans help them? Nay, by these they were
more involved in difficulties. For their language was, [John 19:12] "Whosoever
makes himself a king is not Cæsar's friend." So that this alone was a sufficient
impediment to them, that of Him who was accounted an usurper they were first
disciples, and afterwards desirous to strengthen His cause. What in the world
then set them upon rushing into such great dangers? And by what statements
about Him would they be likely to gain credit? That He was crucified? That He
was born of a poor Jewish woman who had been betrothed to a Jewish
carpenter? That He was of a nation hated by the world? Nay, all these things
were enough not only to fail of persuading and attracting the hearers, but also to
disgust every one; and especially when affirmed by the tent-maker and the
fisherman. Would not the disciples then bear all these things in mind? Timid

nature can imagine more than the reality, and such were their natures. Upon what
ground then did they hope to succeed? Nay, rather, they had no hope, there being
things innumerable to draw them aside, if so be that Christ had not risen. Is it not
quite plain even unto most thoughtless that unless they had enjoyed a copious
and mighty grace, and had received pledges of the resurrection, they would have
been unable, I say not, to do and undertake these things, but even so much as to
have them in their minds? For if when there were so great hinderances, in the
way of their planning, I say not of their succeeding, they yet both planned and
brought to effect and accomplishing things greater than all expectation, every
one, I suppose, can see that not by human power but by divine grace they
wrought things.
Now these arguments we ought to practice, not by ourselves only, but one
with another; and thus also the discovery of what remains will be easier to us.
11. And do not, because you are an artisan, suppose that this sort of exercise
is out of your province; for even Paul was a tent-maker.
"Yes," says some one, "but at that time he was also filled with abundant
grace, and out of that he spoke all things" Well; but before this grace, he was at
the feet of Gamaliel; yea, moreover, and he received the grace, because of this,
that he showed a mind worthy of the grace; and after these things he again put
his hand to his craft. Let no one, therefore, of those who have trades be ashamed;
but those, who are brought up to nothing and are idle, who employ many
attendants, and are served by an immense retinue. For to be supported by
continual hard work is a sort of asceticism. ([φιλοσοφίας?ἶδος] comp. Hooker, E.
P. V. lxxii. 18.) The souls of such men are clearer, and their minds better strung.
For the man who has nothing to do is apter to say many things at random, and do
many things at random; and he is busy all day long about nothing, a huge
lethargy taking him up entirely. But he that is employed will not lightly entertain
in himself any thing useless, in deeds, in words, or in thoughts; for his whole
soul is altogether intent upon his laborious way of livelihood. Let us not
therefore despise those who support themselves by the labor of their own hands;