4) In the fourth place, he refers to the final cause when he says: "What my intention is," that is,
what end I am striving for in regard to the above-mentioned problem: "Whenever I entrust my
thought to pen" concerning the aforesaid or certain other matters, "it is possible to understand"
for two reasons: "because of the difficulty of the matter" and also, "because it is only to you men
that I am addressing it."

This book, therefore, he has not written in order to read it to the many, which would be with
hope of popular acclaim, but rather, for one wise man alone; wherefore, he continues: "I am not
prompted by any desire for fame or for empty popular applause," as are the poets who recite their
verses before the foolish crowds in the theater, because such applause is often altogether without
reason. Thus he puts aside any unworthy end and establishes one that is honorable, implying a
principal purpose, which is interior, namely, knowledge of divine truth, and, explicitly pointing
out a secondary end, that is, the judgment of a wise man, when he says: "If there is any exterior
reward," as if he would say: It is an interior reward that principally urges me on, but if there is
any that is exterior, this can be none other than to wait and to hope for a judgment like to the
matter, that is, proportionate to it: By way of exterior return I ask for nothing except what is
fitting in a matter of such importance, in regard to which I have stated that a judgment of it

should be neither stolidly indifferent nor the bitter one of an envious critic, but only that
pronounced in good will by a wise man. Accordingly, he adds: "Wherever I have directed my
gaze apart from you, that is, to whomsoever I have looked, except to you alone, I have
encountered on the one side, stolid indifference"; that is, lack of comprehension, "on the other
side, sly envy," that is, ill will, sly only in condemnation, so that he who treated of these things,
would seem to offer insult to divine treatises, that is, by inordinately explaining them "to such
monsters of men." Men are called monsters who, though in human body, bear within them the
heart of a beast, since vice has made them like to beasts in their affections; hence these things
"would be trampled under foot by them, rather than acknowledged," because they do not so
much seek to know, butÑbecause of their envyÑto revile whatever is said; wherefore, "Give
not what is holy to dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their
feet" (Matt. 7:6). Therefore, that I should not do otherwise than this, "I restrain my pen by
brevity."

This is the second part of the preface, in which he adds an explanation of his manner of writing.
And first, he explains the difficulty of the task. In the second place, he excuses its imperfection.
"Only so much ought one require of me as the intuition of human reason can approximate about
the sublime truths of the Godhead. He refers also to a threefold difficulty which purposely he
attached to it.