is an excellent sacrifice, performed indeed below but immediately taken up on
high. Do we not wonder that of old time fire came down and consumed all? It is
possible now also that fire may come down far more wonderful than that, and
consume all the presented offerings: nay rather, not consume, but bear them up
to heaven. For it does not reduce them to ashes, but offers them as gifts to God.
7. Such were the offerings of Cornelius. For (it is said) "your prayers and
your alms have come up for a memorial before God." [Acts 10:4] You see a most
excellent union. Then are we heard, when we ourselves also hear the poor who
come to us. "He" (it is said) "that stops his ears that he may not hear the poor"
[Proverbs 21:13], his prayer God will not hearken to. "Blessed is he that
considers the poor and needy: the Lord will deliver him in the evil day." [Psalm
40:1] But what day is evil except that one which is evil to sinners?
What is meant by "he that considers"? He that understands what it is to be a
poor man, that has thoroughly learned his affliction. For he that has learned his
affliction, will certainly and immediately have compassion on him. When you
see a poor man, do not hurry by, but immediately reflect what you would have
been, had you been he. What would you not have wished that all should do for
you? "He that considers" (he says). Reflect that he is a free-man like yourself,
and shares the same noble birth with you, and possesses all things in common
with you; and yet oftentimes he is not on a level even with your dogs. On the
contrary, while they are satiated, he oftentimes lies, sleeps, hungry, and the freeman has become less honorable than your slaves.
But they perform needful services for you. What are these? Do they serve
you well? Suppose then I show that this [poor man] too performs needful
services for you far greater than they do. For he will stand by you in the Day of
judgment, and will deliver you from the fire. What do all your slaves do like
this? When Tabitha died, who raised her up? The slaves who stood around or the
poor? But you are not even willing to put the free-man on an equality with your
slaves. The frost is hard, and the poor man is cast out in rags, nearly dead, with
his teeth chattering, both by his looks and his air fitted to move you: and thou

passes by, warm and full of drink; and how do you expect that God should
deliver you when in misfortune?
And oftentimes you say this too: 'If it had been myself, and I had found one
that had done many wrong things, I would have forgiven him; and does not God
forgive?' Say not this. Him that has done you no wrong, whom you are able to
deliver, him you neglect. How shall He forgive you, who art sinning against
Him? Is not this deserving of hell?
And how amazing! Oftentimes you adorn with vestments innumerable, of
varied colors and wrought with gold, a dead body, insensible, no longer
perceiving the honor; while that which is in pain, and lamenting, and tormented,
and racked by hunger and frost, you neglect, and givest more to vainglory, than
to the fear of God.
8. And would that it stopped here; but immediately accusations are brought
against the applicant. For why does he not work (you say)? And why is he to be
maintained in idleness? But (tell me) is it by working that you have what you
have, did you not receive it as an inheritance from your fathers? And even if you
dost work, is this a reason why you should reproach another? Do you not hear
what Paul says? For after saying, "He that works not, neither let him eat" [2
Thessalonians 3:10], he says, "But ye be not weary in well doing." [2
Thessalonians 3:13]
But what say they? He is an impostor. What do you say, O man? Callest
thou him an impostor, for the sake of a single loaf or of a garment? But (you say)
he will sell it immediately. And do you manage all your affairs well? But what?
Are all poor through idleness? Is no one so from shipwreck? None from
lawsuits? None from being robbed? None from dangers? None from illness?
None from any other difficulties? If however we hear any one bewailing such
evils, and crying out aloud, and looking up naked toward heaven, and with long
hair, and clad in rags, at once we call him, The impostor! The deceiver! The
swindler! Are you not ashamed? Whom do you call impostor? Give nothing, and
do not accuse the man.