Again, "Of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
which are in heaven; neither the Son, but the Father." For He is ignorant
of this, as making others ignorant; that is, in that He did not so know as
at that time to show His disciples: as it was said to Abraham, "Now I
know that thou fearest God," that is, now I have caused thee to know it;
because he himself, being tried in that temptation, became known to
himself. For He was certainly going to tell this same thing to His disciples
at the fitting time; speaking of which yet future as if past, He says,
"Henceforth I call you not servants, but friends; for the servant knoweth

not what his Lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I
have heard of my Father I have made known unto you;" which He had not
yet done, but spoke as though He had already done it, because He
certainly would do it. For He says to the disciples themselves, "I have yet
many things to say unto you; but ye cannot bear them now." Among
which is to be understood also, "Of the day and hour." For the apostle
also says, "I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus
Christ, and Him crucified;" because he was speaking to those who were
not able to receive higher things concerning the Godhead of Christ. To
whom also a little while after he says, "I could not speak unto you as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal." He was "ignorant," therefore, among
them of that which they were not able to know from him. And that only
he said that he knew, which it was fitting that they should know from
him. In short, he knew among the perfect what he knew not among
babes; for he there says: "We speak wisdom among them that are
perfect." For a man is said not to know what he hides, after that kind of
speech, after which a ditch is called blind which is hidden. For the
Scriptures do not use any other kind of speech than may be found in use
among men, because they speak to men.
24. According to the form of God, it is said, "Before all the hills He begat
me," that is, before all the loftinesses of things created; and, "Before the
dawn I begat Thee," that is, before all times and temporal things: but
according to the form of a servant, it is said, "The Lord created me in the
beginning of His ways." Because, according to the form of God, He said,
"I am the truth;" and according to the form of a servant, "I am the way."
For, because He Himself, being the first-begotten of the dead, made a
passage to the kingdom of God to life eternal for His Church, to which He
is so the Head as to make the body also immortal, therefore He was
"created in the beginning of the ways" of God in His work. For, according
to the form of God, He is the beginning,6 that also speaketh unto us, in
which "beginning" God created the heaven and the earth; but according
to the form of a servant, "He is a bridegroom coming out of His
chamber." According to the form of God, "He is the first-born of every
creature, and He is before all things and by him all things consist;"
according to the form of a servant, "He is the head of the body, the
Church." According to the form of God, "He is the Lord of glory." From