just the opposite will befall us in everything. For we disgrace ourselves, and also
seem to those present to be guilty of the things mentioned, and fill our soul with
perturbation, and give our enemy pleasure, and provoke God, and add to our
former sins. Taking then all this into consideration, let us flee from the abyss of a
little mind ([μικροψυχίας]), and take refuge in the port of patient endurance
([μακροθυμίας]), that here we may at once "find rest unto our souls" [Matthew
11:29], as Christ also set forth, and may attain to the good things to come, by the
grace and love toward man, etc.

## Homily 13 on Romans

Rom. VII. 14
"For we know that the Law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin."
After having said that great evils had taken place, and that sin, taking
occasion by the commandment, had grown stronger, and the opposite of what the
Law mainly aimed at had been the result, and after having thrown the hearer into
a great deal of perplexity, he goes on next to give the rationale of these events,
after first clearing the Law of any ill suspicion. For lest— upon hearing that it
was through the commandment that sin took that occasion, and that it was when
it came that sin revived, and through it deceived and killed— any one should
suppose the Law to be the source of these evils, he first sets forth its defence
with considerable advantage, not clearing it from accusation only, but encircling
it also with the utmost praise. And this he lays down, not as granting it for his
own part, but as declaring a universal judgment. "For we know," he says, "that
the Law is spiritual." As if he had said, This is an allowed thing, and selfevident, that it "is spiritual," so far is it from being the cause of sin, or to blame
for the evils that have happened. And observe, that he not only clears it of
accusation, but bestows exceeding great praise upon it. For by calling it spiritual,
he shows it to be a teacher of virtue and hostile to vice; for this is what being
spiritual means, leading off from sin of every kind. And this the Law did do, by
frightening, admonishing, chastening, correcting, recommending every kind of
virtue. Whence then, was sin produced, if the teacher was so admirable? It was
from the listlessness of its disciples. Wherefore he went on to say, "but I am
carnal;" giving us a sketch now of man, as comporting himself in the Law, and
before the Law. "Sold under sin." Because with death (he means) the throng of
passions also came in. For when the body had become mortal, it was henceforth
a necessary thing for it to receive concupiscence, and anger, and pain, and all the

other passions, which required a great deal of wisdom ([φιλοσοφίας]) to prevent
their flooding us, and sinking reason in the depth of sin. For in themselves they
were not sin, but, when their extravagancy was unbridled, it wrought this effect.
Thus (that I may take one of them and examine it as a specimen) desire is not
sin: but when it has run into extravagance, being not minded to keep within the
laws of marriage, but springing even upon other men's wives; then the thing
henceforward becomes adultery, yet not by reason of the desire, but by reason of
its exorbitancy. And observe the wisdom of Paul. For after praising the Law, he
hastens immediately to the earlier period, that he may show the state of our race,
both then and at the time it received the Law, and make it plain how necessary
the presence of grace was, a thing he labored on every occasion to prove. For
when he says, "sold under sin," he means it not of those who were under the
Law only, but of those who had lived before the Law also, and of men from the
very first. Next he mentions the way in which they were sold and made over.
Ver. 15. "For that which I do, I know not."
What does the "I know not" mean?— I am ignorant. And when could this
ever happen? For nobody ever sinned in ignorance. Do you see, that if we do not
receive his words with the proper caution, and keep looking to the object of the
Apostle, countless incongruities will follow? For if they sinned through
ignorance, then they did not deserve to be punished. As then he said above, "for
without the Law sin is dead," not meaning that they did not know they were
sinning, but that they knew indeed, but not so distinctly; wherefore they were
punished, but not so severely: and again; "I should not have known lust;" not
meaning an entire ignorance of it, but referring to the most distinct knowledge of
it; and said, that it also "wrought in me all manner of concupiscence," not
meaning to say that the commandment made the concupiscence, but that sin
through the commandment introduces an intense degree of concupiscence; so
here it is not absolute ignorance that he means by saying, "For what I do, I know
not;" since how then would he have pleasure in the law of God in his inner man?
What then is this, "I know not?" I get dizzy, he means, I feel carried away, I find