yet by this reasoning, since the offering is made in many places, are there many
Christs? But Christ is one everywhere, being complete here and complete there
also, one Body. As then while offered in many places, He is one body and not
many bodies; so also [He is] one sacrifice. He is our High Priest, who offered the
sacrifice that cleanses us. That we offer now also, which was then offered, which
cannot be exhausted. This is done in remembrance of what was then done. For
(says He) "do this in remembrance of Me." [Luke 22:19] It is not another
sacrifice, as the High Priest, but we offer always the same, or rather we perform
a remembrance of a Sacrifice.
7. But since I have mentioned this sacrifice, I wish to say a little in
reference to you who have been initiated; little in quantity, but possessing great
force and profit, for it is not our own, but the words of Divine Spirit . What then
is it? Many partake of this sacrifice once in the whole year, others twice; others
many times. Our word then is to all; not to those only who are here, but to those
also who are settled in the desert. For they partake once in the year, and often
indeed at intervals of two years.
What then? Which shall we approve? Those [who receive] once [in the
year]? Those who [receive] many times? Those who [receive] few times?
Neither those [who receive] once, nor those [who receive] often, nor those [who
receive] seldom, but those [who come] with a pure conscience, from a pure
heart, with an irreproachable life. Let such draw near continually; but those who
are not such, not even once. Why, you will ask? Because they receive to
themselves judgment, yea and condemnation, and punishment, and vengeance.
And do not wonder. For as food, nourishing by nature, if received by a person
without appetite, ruins and corrupts all [the system], and becomes an occasion of
disease, so surely is it also with respect to the awful mysteries. Do you feast at a
spiritual table, a royal table, and again pollute your mouth with mire? Do you
anoint yourself with sweet ointment, and again fill yourself with ill savors?
Tell me, I beseech you, when after a year you partake of the Communion,
do you think that the Forty Days are sufficient for you for the purifying of the

sins of all that time? And again, when a week has passed, do you give yourself
up to the former things? Tell me now, if when you have been well for forty days
after a long illness, you should again give yourself up to the food which caused
the sickness, have you not lost your former labor too? For if natural things are
changed, much more those which depend on choice. As for instance, by nature
we see, and naturally we have healthy eyes; but oftentimes from a bad habit [of
body] our power of vision is injured. If then natural things are changed, much
more those of choice. Thou assignest forty days for the health of the soul, or
perhaps not even forty, and do you expect to propitiate God? Tell me, are you in
sport?
These things I say, not as forbidding you the one and annual coming, but as
wishing you to draw near continually.
8. These things have been given to the holy. This the Deacon also proclaims
when he calls on the holy; even by this call searching the faults of all. For as in a
flock, where many sheep indeed are in good health, but many are full of the
scab, it is needful that these should be separated from the healthy; so also in the
Church: since some sheep are healthy, and some diseased, by this voice he
separates the one from the other, the priest [I mean] going round on all sides by
this most awful cry, and calling and drawing on the holy. For it is not possible
that a man should know the things of his neighbor, (for "what man," he says,
"knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him?" [1
Corinthians 2:11]): he utters this voice after the whole sacrifice has been
completed, that no person should come to the spiritual fountain carelessly and in
a chance way. For in the case of the flock also (for nothing prevents us from
again using the same example), the sickly ones we shut up within, and keep them
in the dark, and give them different food, not permitting them to partake either of
pure air, or of simple grass, or of the fountain without [the fold]. In this case then
also this voice is instead of fetters.
You can not say, 'I did not know, I was not aware that danger attends the
matter.' Nay surely Paul too especially testified this. But will you say, 'I never