FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.4.

name: for incense is composed of matter, both rich and fragrant.
And since the sacrifice "of jealousy" did not proceed from devotion,
but rather from suspicion, therefore incense was not offered therein
(Num. 5:15).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether sufficient reason can be assigned for the

ceremonies pertaining to holy things?
Objection 1: It would seem that no sufficient reason can be assigned
for the ceremonies of the Old Law that pertain to holy things. For
Paul said (Acts 17:24): "God Who made the world and all things
therein; He being Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples
made by hands." It was therefore unfitting that in the Old Law a
tabernacle or temple should be set up for the worship of God.
Objection 2: Further, the state of the Old Law was not changed
except by Christ. But the tabernacle denoted the state of the Old
Law. Therefore it should not have been changed by the building of a
temple.
Objection 3: Further, the Divine Law, more than any other indeed,
should lead man to the worship of God. But an increase of divine
worship requires multiplication of altars and temples; as is evident in
regard to the New Law. Therefore it seems that also under the Old
Law there should have been not only one tabernacle or temple, but
many.
Objection 4: Further, the tabernacle or temple was ordained to the
worship of God. But in God we should worship above all His unity
and simplicity. Therefore it seems unbecoming for the tabernacle or
temple to be divided by means of veils.
Objection 5: Further, the power of the First Mover, i.e. God, appears
first of all in the east, for it is in that quarter that the first movement
begins. But the tabernacle was set up for the worship of God.
Therefore it should have been built so as to point to the east rather
than the west.
Objection 6: Further, the Lord commanded (Ex. 20:4) that they
should "not make . . . a graven thing, nor the likeness of anything." It
was therefore unfitting for graven images of the cherubim to be set
up in the tabernacle or temple. In like manner, the ark, the
propitiatory, the candlestick, the table, the two altars, seem to have
been placed there without reasonable cause.
Objection 7: Further, the Lord commanded (Ex. 20:24): "You shall

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.5.

make an altar of earth unto Me": and again (Ex. 20:26): "Thou shalt
not go up by steps unto My altar." It was therefore unfitting that
subsequently they should be commanded to make an altar of wood
laid over with gold or brass; and of such a height that it was
impossible to go up to it except by steps. For it is written (Ex.
27:1,2): "Thou shalt make also an altar of setim wood, which shall be
five cubits long, and as many broad . . . and three cubits high . . . and
thou shalt cover it with brass": and (Ex. 30:1,3): "Thou shalt make . . .
an altar to burn incense, of setim wood . . . and thou shalt overlay it
with the purest gold."
Objection 8: Further, in God's works nothing should be superfluous;
for not even in the works of nature is anything superfluous to be
found. But one cover suffices for one tabernacle or house. Therefore
it was unbecoming to furnish the tabernacle with many coverings,
viz. curtains, curtains of goats' hair, rams' skins dyed red, and violetcolored skins (Ex. 26).
Objection 9: Further, exterior consecration signifies interior
holiness, the subject of which is the soul. It was therefore unsuitable
for the tabernacle and its vessels to be consecrated, since they were
inanimate things.
Objection 1:: Further, it is written (Ps. 33:2): "I will bless the Lord at
all times, His praise shall always be in my mouth." But the solemn
festivals were instituted for the praise of God. Therefore it was not
fitting that certain days should be fixed for keeping solemn festivals;
so that it seems that there was no suitable cause for the ceremonies
relating to holy things.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 8:4) that those who "offer
gifts according to the law . . . serve unto the example and shadow of
heavenly things. As it was answered to Moses, when he was to finish
the tabernacle: See, says He, that thou make all things according to
the pattern which was shown thee on the mount." But that is most
reasonable, which presents a likeness to heavenly things. Therefore
the ceremonies relating to holy things had a reasonable cause.
I answer that, The chief purpose of the whole external worship is that
man may give worship to God. Now man's tendency is to reverence
less those things which are common, and indistinct from other
things; whereas he admires and reveres those things which are