but unfolded it the more. For the fact, that while His mother had her constant
residence in the one place, He was born in the other, shows the thing to have
been done by a Divine dispensation.
And for this cause, let me add, neither did He remove from thence
straightway after His birth, but abode forty days, giving opportunity to them that
were disposed to be inquisitive to examine all things accurately. Because there
were in truth many things to move them to such an inquiry, at least if they had
been disposed to give heed to them. Thus at the coming of the wise men the
whole city was in a flutter, and together with the city the king, and the prophet
was brought forward, and a court of high authority was summoned; and many
other things too were done there, all which Luke relates minutely. Such were
what concerns Anna, and Simeon, and Zacharias, and the angels, and the
shepherds; all which things were to the attentive sufficient to give hints for
ascertaining what had taken place. For if the wise men, who came from Persia,
were not ignorant of the place, much more might they, whose abode it was,
acquaint themselves with these things.
He manifested Himself then from the beginning by many miracles, but
when they would not see, He hid Himself for a while, to be again revealed from
another more glorious beginning. For it was no longer the wise men, nor the star,
but the Father from above that proclaimed Him at the streams of Jordan; and the
Spirit likewise came upon Him, guiding that voice to the head of Him just
baptized; and John, with all plainness of speech, cried out everywhere in Judæa,
till inhabited and waste country alike were filled with that kind of doctrine; and
the witness too of the miracles, and earth, and sea, and the whole creation,
uttered in His behalf a distinct voice. But at the time of the birth, just so many
things happened as were fitted quietly to mark out Him that had come. Thus, in
order that the Jews might not say, "We know not when He was born, nor
whereabouts," both all these events in which the wise men were concerned were
brought about by God's providence, and the rest of the things which we have
mentioned; so that they would have no excuse to plead, for not having inquired

into that which had come to pass.
But mark also the exactness of the prophecy. For it does not say, "He will
abide" in Bethlehem, but "He will come out" thence. So that this too was a
subject of prophecy, His being simply born there.
Some of them, however, being past shame, say that these things were
spoken of Zerubbabel. But how can they be right? For surely "his goings forth"
were not "from of old, from everlasting." [Micah 5:2] And how can that suit him
which is said at the beginning, "Out of you shall He come forth:" Zorobabel not
having been born in Judæa, but in Babylon, whence also he was called
Zorobabel, because he had his origin there? And as many as know the Syrians'
language know what I say.
And together with what has been said, all the time also since these things is
sufficient to establish the testimony. For what says he? "You are not the least
among the princes of Judah," and he adds the cause of the pre-eminence, saying,
"out of you shall He come." But no one else has made that place illustrious or
eminent, excepting Him alone. For example: since that birth, men come from the
ends of the earth to see the manger, and the site of the shed. And this the prophet
foretold aloud from the first, saying, "You are not the least among the princes of
Judah;" that is, among the heads of tribes. By which expression he
comprehended even Jerusalem. But not even so have they given heed, although
the advantage passes on to themselves. Yea, and because of this the prophets at
the beginning discourse nowhere so much of His dignity, as touching the benefit
which accrued to them by Him. For so, when the Virgin was bearing the child,
he says, "You shall call His name Jesus;" [Matthew 1:21] and he gives the
reason saying, "for He shall save His people from their sins." And the wise men
too said not, "Where is the Son of God?" but "He that is born King of the Jews."
And here again it is not affirmed, "Out of you shall come forth" the Son of God,
but "a Governor, that shall feed my people Israel." For it was needful to
converse with them at first, setting out in a tone of very exceeding
condescension, lest they should be offended; and to preach what related to their