divorce.
Objection 6: Further, the husband is placed as the head of the
woman in order to correct her. Therefore his sin is greater than the
woman's and so he should be punished the more.
I answer that, In a case of divorce husband and wife are judged on a
par with each other, in the sense that the same things are lawful or
unlawful to the one as to the other: but they are not judged on a par
with each other in reference to those things, since the reason for
divorce is greater in one spouse than in the other, although there is
sufficient reason for divorce in both. For divorce is a punishment of
adultery, in so far as it is opposed to the marriage goods. Now as
regards the good of fidelity to which husband and wife are equally
bound towards each other, the adultery of one is as great a sin
against marriage as the adultery of the other, and this is in either of
them a sufficient reason for divorce. But as regards the good of the
offspring the wife's adultery is a greater sin against marriage than
the husband's wherefore it is a greater reason for divorce in the wife
than in the husband: and thus they are under an equal obligation, but
not for equal reasons. Nor is this unjust for on either hand there is
sufficient reason for the punishment in question, just as there is in
two persons condemned to the punishment of death, although one of
them may have sinned more grievously than the other.
Reply to Objection 1: The only reason why divorce was permitted,
was to avoid murder. And since there was more danger of this in
men than in women, the husband was allowed to put away his wife
by a bill of divorce, but not "vice versa."
Reply to Objection 2:and 3: These arguments are based on the fact
that in comparison with the good of the offspring there is more
reason for divorce in an adulterous wife than in an adulterous
husband. It does not follow, however, that they are not judged on a
par with each other.
Reply to Objection 4: Although the husband is the head of the wife,
he is her pilot as it were, and is no more her judge than she is his.
Consequently in matters that have to be submitted to a judge, the
husband has no more power over his wife, than she over him.
Reply to Objection 5: In adultery there is the same sinful character as

in simple fornication, and something more which aggravates it,
namely the lesion to marriage. Accordingly if we consider that which
is common to adultery and fornication, the sin of the husband and
that of the wife are compared the one to the other as that which
exceeds to that which is exceeded, for in women the humors are
more abundant, wherefore they are more inclined to be led by their
concupiscences, whereas in man there is abundance of heat which
excites concupiscence. Simply speaking, however, other things
being equal, a man sins more grievously in simple fornication than a
woman, because he has more of the good of reason, which prevails
over all movements of bodily passions. But as regards the lesion to
marriage which adultery adds to fornication and for which reason it
is an occasion for divorce, the woman sins more grievously than the
man, as appears from what we have said above. And since it is more
grievous than simple fornication, it follows that, simply speaking, the
adulterous wife sins more grievously than the adulterous husband,
other things being equal.
Reply to Objection 6: Although the control which the husband
receives over his wife is an aggravating circumstance, nevertheless
the sin is yet more aggravated by this circumstance which draws the
sin to another species, namely by the lesion to marriage, which
lesion becomes a kind of injustice, through the fraudulent
substitution of another's child.