THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.5.

And Christ resisted these temptations by quoting the authority of the
Law, not by enforcing His power, "so as to give more honor to His
human nature and a greater punishment to His adversary, since the
foe of the human race was vanquished, not as by God, but as by
man"; as Pope Leo says (Serm. 1, De Quadrag. 3).
Reply to Objection 1: To make use of what is needful for self-support
is not the sin of gluttony; but if a man do anything inordinate out of
the desire for such support, it can pertain to the sin of gluttony. Now
it is inordinate for a man who has human assistance at his command
to seek to obtain food miraculously for mere bodily support. Hence
the Lord miraculously provided the children of Israel with manna in
the desert, where there was no means of obtaining food otherwise.
And in like fashion Christ miraculously provided the crowds with
food in the desert, when there was no other means of getting food.
But in order to assuage His hunger, He could have done otherwise
than work a miracle, as did John the Baptist, according to Matthew
(3:4); or He could have hastened to the neighboring country.
Consequently the devil esteemed that if Christ was a mere man, He
would fall into sin by attempting to assuage His hunger by a miracle.
Reply to Objection 2: It often happens that a man seeks to derive
glory from external humiliation, whereby he is exalted by reason of
spiritual good. Hence Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii,
12): "It must be noted that it is possible to boast not only of the
beauty and splendor of material things, but even of filthy squalor."
And this is signified by the devil urging Christ to seek spiritual glory
by casting His body down.
Reply to Objection 3: It is a sin to desire worldly riches and honors in
an inordinate fashion. And the principal sign of this is when a man
does something wrong in order to acquire such things. And so the
devil was not satisfied with instigating to a desire for riches and
honors, but he went so far as to tempt Christ, for the sake of gaining
possession of these things, to fall down and adore him, which is a
very great crime, and against God. Nor does he say merely, "if Thou
wilt adore me," but he adds, "if, falling down"; because, as Ambrose
says on Lk. 4:5: "Ambition harbors yet another danger within itself:
for, while seeking to rule, it will serve; it will bow in submission that
it may be crowned with honor; and the higher it aims, the lower it
abases itself."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.41, C.5.

In like manner [the devil] in the preceding temptations tried to lead
[Christ] from the desire of one sin to the commission of another;
thus from the desire of food he tried to lead Him to the vanity of the
needless working of a miracle; and from the desire of glory to tempt
God by casting Himself headlong.
Reply to Objection 4: As Ambrose says on Lk. 4:13, Scripture would
not have said that "'all the temptation being ended, the devil
departed from Him,' unless the matter of all sins were included in the
three temptations already related. For the causes of temptations are
the causes of desires"---namely, "lust of the flesh, hope of glory,
eagerness for power."
Reply to Objection 5: As Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. ii): "It
is not certain which happened first; whether the kingdoms of the
earth were first shown to Him, and afterwards He was set on the
pinnacle of the Temple; or the latter first, and the former afterwards.
However, it matters not, provided it be made clear that all these
things did take place." It may be that the Evangelists set these things
in different orders, because sometimes cupidity arises from
vainglory, sometimes the reverse happens.
Reply to Objection 6: When Christ had suffered the wrong of being
tempted by the devil saying, "If Thou be the Son of God cast Thyself
down," He was not troubled, nor did He upbraid the devil. But when
the devil usurped to himself the honor due to God, saying, "All these
things will I give Thee, if, falling down, Thou wilt adore me," He was
exasperated, and repulsed him, saying, "Begone, Satan": that we
might learn from His example to bear bravely insults leveled at
ourselves, but not to allow ourselves so much as to listen to those
which are aimed at God.
Reply to Objection 7: As Chrysostom says (Hom. v in Matth.): "The
devil set Him" (on a pinnacle of the Temple) "that He might be seen
by all, whereas, unawares to the devil, He acted in such sort that He
was seen by none."
In regard to the words, "'He showed Him all the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them,' we are not to understand that He saw
the very kingdoms, with the cities and inhabitants, their gold and
silver: but that the devil pointed out the quarters in which each
kingdom or city lay, and set forth to Him in words their glory and