THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.2.

I answer that, Nothing is handed down in the canonical Scriptures
concerning the sanctification of the Blessed Mary as to her being
sanctified in the womb; indeed, they do not even mention her birth.
But as Augustine, in his tractate on the Assumption of the Virgin,
argues with reason, since her body was assumed into heaven, and
yet Scripture does not relate this; so it may be reasonably argued
that she was sanctified in the womb. For it is reasonable to believe
that she, who brought forth "the Only-Begotten of the Father full of
grace and truth," received greater privileges of grace than all others:
hence we read (Lk. 1:28) that the angel addressed her in the words:
"Hail full of grace!"
Moreover, it is to be observed that it was granted, by way of
privilege, to others, to be sanctified in the womb; for instance, to
Jeremias, to whom it was said (Jer. 1:5): "Before thou camest forth
out of the womb, I sanctified thee"; and again, to John the Baptist, of
whom it is written (Lk. 1:15): "He shall be filled with the Holy Ghost
even from his mother's womb." It is therefore with reason that we
believe the Blessed Virgin to have been sanctified before her birth
from the womb.
Reply to Objection 1: Even in the Blessed Virgin, first was that which
is natural, and afterwards that which is spiritual: for she was first
conceived in the flesh, and afterwards sanctified in the spirit.
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine speaks according to the common
law, by reason of which no one is regenerated by the sacraments,
save those who are previously born. But God did not so limit His
power to the law of the sacraments, but that He can bestow His
grace, by special privilege, on some before they are born from the
womb.
Reply to Objection 3: The Blessed Virgin was sanctified in the womb
from original sin, as to the personal stain; but she was not freed
from the guilt to which the whole nature is subject, so as to enter
into Paradise otherwise than through the Sacrifice of Christ; the
same also is to be said of the Holy Fathers who lived before Christ.
Reply to Objection 4: Original sin is transmitted through the origin,
inasmuch as through the origin the human nature is transmitted, and
original sin, properly speaking, affects the nature. And this takes
place when the off-spring conceived is animated. Wherefore nothing

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.2.

hinders the offspring conceived from being sanctified after
animation: for after this it remains in the mother's womb not for the
purpose of receiving human nature, but for a certain perfecting of
that which it has already received.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.27, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the Blessed Virgin was sanctified before

animation?
Objection 1: It would seem that the Blessed Virgin was sanctified
before animation. Because, as we have stated (Article 1), more grace
was bestowed on the Virgin Mother of God than on any saint. Now it
seems to have been granted to some, to be sanctified before
animation. For it is written (Jer. 1:5): "Before I formed thee in the
bowels of thy mother, I knew thee": and the soul is not infused
before the formation of the body. Likewise Ambrose says of John the
Baptist (Comment. in Luc. i, 15): "As yet the spirit of life was not in
him and already he possessed the Spirit of grace." Much more
therefore could the Blessed Virgin be sanctified before animation.
Objection 2: Further, as Anselm says (De Concep. Virg. xviii), "it was
fitting that this Virgin should shine with such a purity that under God
none greater can be imagined": wherefore it is written (Canticles
4:7): "Thou art all fair, O my love, and there is not a spot in thee." But
the purity of the Blessed Virgin would have been greater, if she had
never been stained by the contagion of original sin. Therefore it was
granted to her to be sanctified before her flesh was animated.
Objection 3: Further, as it has been stated above, no feast is
celebrated except of some saint. But some keep the feast of the
Conception of the Blessed Virgin. Therefore it seems that in her very
Conception she was holy; and hence that she was sanctified before
animation.
Objection 4: Further, the Apostle says (Rm. 11:16): "If the root be
holy, so are the branches." Now the root of the children is their
parents. Therefore the Blessed Virgin could be sanctified even in her
parents, before animation.
On the contrary, The things of the Old Testament were figures of the
New, according to 1 Cor. 10:11: "All things happened to them in
figure." Now the sanctification of the tabernacle, of which it is written
(Ps. 45:5): "The most High hath sanctified His own tabernacle,"
seems to signify the sanctification of the Mother of God, who is
called "God's Tabernacle," according to Ps. 18:6: "He hath set His
tabernacle in the sun." But of the tabernacle it is written (Ex.
40:31,32): "After all things were perfected, the cloud covered the