3. It pertains to every science to consider the parts and passive potencies of its subject; but, since
God is simple form [absolute act], He has not any parts that can be distinguished, nor in Him can
there be any passive potencies; therefore there can be no science about God.

4. In any science, reason precedes assent, for it is demonstration which in the sciences makes one
assent to what is knowable; but in regard to those truths which are of faith, the converse ought to
prevail, namely, assent on account of faith ought to precede reason, as has been said; therefore,
of divine truths, especially of those which are known by faith, there can be no science.

5. Every science proceeds from self-evident principles which every man accepts upon first
hearing, or from principles in which he has faith because of those first principles; but the articles
of faith which are first principles in matters of faith, are not principles of this same kind, since
they are not per se nota nor can they be resolved by demonstration to those that are, as has been

said; therefore, there can be no science of divine truths held by faith.

6. Faith is not of those things that are apparent: but science is of things that are apparent, because
through science those things that are treated of come to be clearly seen; therefore, concerning
divine truths that are held by faith there can be no science.

7. Understanding is the principle of every science, because from the intellection of principles one
comes to scientific knowledge of conclusions: but in those things that are of faith, intellection is
not the beginning, but the end, for, as is said in Is. 7:9, "If you will not believe, you shall not
understand"; therefore there can be no science of divine truths held by faith.

#### Sed contra

But on the contrary is what Augustine says in XII De Trinitate: "To that science only do I
attribute any value by which faith is well served, which leads to, produces, defends, and
strengthens happiness"; therefore there is a science of the truths of faith.

Also, Wis. 10:10: "She gave him the science of the saints", that is, of the truths of faith, because
no other science can be here meant except that by which saints are distinguished from sinners,
which is the science of faith.

Also the Apostle in speaking of the knowledge of the faithfu says in 1 Cor. 8:7: "But there is not
knowledge in everyone," and thus we come to the same conclusion as before.

Response. I answer that, since the essence of science consists in this, that from things known a
knowledge of things previously unknown is derived, and this may occur in relation to divine
truths, evidently there can be a science of divine things.

But knowledge of divine truths can be thought of in two ways. In one way, as on our part, such
truths are not knowable except from created things, of which we have a knowledge derived from
sense experience. In another way, on the part of the nature of these things themselves, they are,
in themselves, most knowable; and although they are not known by us according to their
essences, they are known by God and by the blessed according to their proper mode; and so
science of divine things must be considered in a twofold manner. One is according to our mode
of knowledge, in which knowledge of sensible things serves as the principle for coming to a
knowledge of divine; and it was in this way that the philosophers handed down a traditional
science of divine things, calling first philosophy a divine science. The other mode is according to
that of divine things themselves as they are understood in themselves. This is, indeed, a mode of
knowledge which we cannot possess perfectly in this life; but there is for us, even in this life, a
certain participation and assimilation to such a cognition of divine truth, inasmuch as through the
faith which is infused into our souls we adhere to the very First Truth on account of Itself. And
as God, since He knows Himself, knows in a way that is His own, that is, by simple intuition,
not by discursive thought, so we, from those truths that we possess in adhering to First Truth,
come to a knowledge of other truths, according to our own mode of cognition, namely, by
proceeding from principles to conclusions. Wherefore, those truths that we hold in the first place
by faith are for us, as it were, first principles in this science, and the other truths to which we
attain are quasi-conclusions. From this it is evident that this science is of a higher order than that
which the philosophers traditionally termed divine, since it proceeds from higher principles.