example of wisdom, to appear inferior. So that in this way you will be an
instructor to all posterity; and you will obtain the palm among them, even
although they should attain to the highest point of moral wisdom! For it is not
the same thing for a person to set the first example of such meekness himself and
by looking at others, to imitate the good actions they have performed. On this
account, whatever philanthropy, or meekness, those who come after you may
display, you will enjoy the reward along with them; for he who provides the root,
must be considered the source of the fruits. For this reason, no one can possibly
now share with you the reward that will follow your generosity, since the good
deed has been entirely your own. But you will share the reward of all those who
shall come after, if any such persons should make their appearance; and it will be
in your power to have an equal share in the merit of the good work along with
them, and to carry off a portion as great as teachers have with scholars. And
supposing that no such person should come into being, the tribute of
commendation and applause will be accumulating to you throughout every age.
16. For consider, what it is for all posterity to hear it reported, that when so
great a city had become obnoxious to punishment and vengeance, that when all
were terrified, when its generals, its magistrates and judges, were all in horror
and alarm, and did not dare to utter a word on behalf of the wretched people; a
single old man, invested with the priesthood of God, came and moved the heart
of the Monarch by his mere aspect and intercourse; and that the favour which he
bestowed upon no other of his subjects, he granted to this one old man, being
actuated by a reverence for God's laws! For in this very thing, O Emperor, that I
have been sent hither on this embassy, the city has done you no small honour; for
they have thus pronounced the best and the most honourable judgment on you,
which is, that you respect the priests of God, however insignificant they may be,
more than any office placed under your authority!
17. But at the present time I have come not from these only, but rather from
One who is the common Lord of angels and men, to address these words to your
most merciful and most gentle soul, "if you forgive men their debts, your

heavenly Father will forgive you your trespasses." [Matthew 6:12] Remember
then that Day when we shall all give an account of our actions! Consider that if
you have sinned in any respect, you will be able to wipe away all offenses by
this sentence and by this determination, and that without difficulty and without
toil. Some when they go on an embassy, bring gold, and silver, and other gifts of
that kind. But I have come into your royal presence with the sacred laws; and
instead of all other gifts, I present these; and I exhort you to imitate your Lord,
who while He is daily insulted by us, unceasingly ministers His blessings to all!
And do not confound our hopes, nor defeat our promises. For I wish you withal
to understand, that if it be your resolution to be reconciled, and to restore your
former kindness to the city, and to remit this just displeasure, I shall go back with
great confidence. But if you determine to cast off the city, I shall not only never
return to it, nor see its soil again, but I shall in future utterly disown it, and enrol
myself a member of some other city; for God forbid that I should ever belong to
that country, which you, the most mild and merciful of all men, refuse to admit
to peace and reconciliation!
18. Having said this, and much more to the same effect, he so overcame the
Emperor, that the same thing occurred which once happened to Joseph. For just
as he, when he beheld his brethren, longed to shed tears, but restrained his
feeling, in order that he might not spoil the part which he was playing; even so
did the Emperor mentally weep, but did not let it be seen, for the sake of those
who were present. He was not, however, able to conceal the feeling at the close
of the conference; but betrayed himself, though against his will. For after this
speech was finished, no further words were necessary, but he gave utterance to
one only sentiment, which did him much more honour than the diadem. And
what was that? How, said he, can it be any thing wonderful or great, that we
should remit our anger against those who have treated us with indignity; we,
who ourselves are but men; when the Lord of the universe, having come as He
did on earth, and having been made a servant for us, and crucified by those who
had experienced His kindness, besought the Father on behalf of His crucifiers,