may learn that it came not of your own willing temper only, but the whole of it
of God's grace also, after saying, "You have obeyed from the heart," he adds,
"that form of doctrine which was delivered you." For the obedience from the
heart shows the free will. But the being delivered, hints the assistance from God.
But what is the form of doctrine? It is living aright, and in conformity with the
best conversation.
Ver. 18. "Being then made free from sin, you became the servants of
righteousness."
There are two gifts of God which he here points out. The "freeing from sin,"
and also the "making them servants to righteousness," which is better than any
freedom. For God has done the same as if a person were to take an orphan, who
had been carried away by savages into their own country, and were not only to
free him from captivity, but were to set a kind father over him, and bring him to
very great dignity. And this has been done in our case. For it was not our old
evils alone that He freed us from, since He even led us to the life of angels, and
paved the way for us to the best conversation, handing us over to the safe
keeping of righteousness, and killing our former evils, and deadening the old
man, and leading us to an immortal life.
Let us then continue living this life; for many of those who seem to breathe
and to walk about are in a more wretched plight than the dead. For there are
different kinds of deadness; and one there is of the body, according to which
Abraham was dead, and still was not dead. For "God," He says, "is not a God of
the dead, but of the living." [Matthew 22:32] Another is of the soul which Christ
alludes to when He says, "Let the dead bury their dead." [Matthew 8:22]
Another, which is even the subject of praise, which is brought about by religion
([φιλοσοφίας]), of which Paul says, "Mortify your members which are upon the
earth." [Colossians 3:5] Another, which is the cause even of this, the one which
takes place in baptism. "For our old man," he says, "has been crucified"
[Romans 6:6], that is, has been deadened. Since then we know this, let us flee
from the deadness by which, even though alive, we die. And let us not be afraid

of that with which common death comes on. But the other two, whereof one is
blissful, having been given by God, the other praiseworthy (cf. Ar. Eth. i. 12),
which is accomplished by ourselves together with God, let us both choose and be
emulous of. And of those two, one does David pronounce blessed, when he says,
"Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven" [Psalm 32:1]; and the other,
Paul holds in admiration, saying, and writing to the Galatians, "They that be
Christ's have crucified the flesh." [Galatians 5:24] But of the other couple, one
Christ declares to be easy to hold in contempt, when He says, "Fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul:" and the other fearful, for,
"Fear" (He says) "Him that is able to destroy both body and soul in hell."
[Matthew 10:28] And therefore let us flee from this, and choose that deadness
which is held blessed and admirable; that of the other two, we may escape the
one and not fear the other: for it is not the least good to us to see the sun, and to
eat and drink, unless the life of good words be with us. For what would be the
advantage, pray, of a king dressed in a purple robe and possessed of arms, but
without a single subject, and exposed to all that had a mind to attack and insult
him? In like manner it will be no advantage to a Christian to have faith, and the
gift of baptism, and yet be open to all the passions. In that way the disgrace will
be greater, and the shame more. For as such an one having the diadem and
purple is so far from gaining by this dress any honor to himself, that he even
does disgrace to that by his own shame: so the believer also, who leads a corrupt
life, is so far from becoming, as such, an object of respect, that he is only the
more one of scorn. "For as many," it says, "as sinned without law, shall also
perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by
the law." [Romans 2:12]. And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, he says, "He that
despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how
much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who had
trodden under foot the Son of God?" [Hebrews 10:28-29] And with reason. For I
placed (He might say) all the passions in subjection to you by baptism. How then
comes it that you have disgraced so great a gift, and hast become one thing