heard them, it is said, singing praises unto God. Secondly, the fact, that they
themselves did not take flight, but even withheld him from killing himself. Now
had they done it for their own sake, they never would have remained still within;
they would themselves have escaped first of all. Great again was their kindness
also; they withheld the man from killing himself, even him who had bound them,
thus all but saying unto him, "Truly, you bound us with all safety, and most
cruelly, that you yourself might be loosed from the most cruel of all bonds." For
every one is shackled with the chains of his own sins; and those bonds are
accursed, whereas these for Christ's sake are blessed, and worth many an earnest
prayer. For that these bonds can loose those other bonds of sin, he showed to us
by things which are matters of sense. Did you behold them released, who had
been bound with iron? You shall see yourself also delivered from other galling
bonds. These bonds, the prisoners' bonds, not those of Paul, I mean, are the
effect of those other bonds, the bonds of sins. They who were confined within,
were doubly prisoners, and the jailer himself was a prisoner. They indeed were
bound both with iron and with sins, he with sins only. Them did Paul loose to
assure the faith of him, for the chains which he loosed were visible. And thus too
did Christ Himself; but rather in the inverse order. In that instance, there was a
double palsy. What was it? There was that of the soul by sins, and also that of the
body. What then did the Lord do? "Son," says He, "be of good cheer, your sins
are forgiven." [Matthew 9:3-6] He first loosed the bonds of the real and true
palsy, and then proceeds to the other: for when "certain of the Scribes said
within themselves, This man blasphemes; Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said,
Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? For whether is easier, to say, Your sins
are forgiven, or to say, Arise, and walk? But, that you may know that the Son of
Man has power on earth to forgive sins, (then says he to the sick of the palsy,)
Arise, and take up your bed, and go unto your house." Having wrought the
invisible miracle, He confirmed it by the visible, the spiritual by the bodily cure.
And why did He do thus? That it might be fulfilled, which is spoken, [Luke
19:22] "Out of your own mouth will I judge you, thou wicked servant." For what

said they? "None can forgive sins, but God alone." Of course, therefore, no
Angel, nor Archangel, nor any other created power. This you have yourselves
confessed. And what then ought to be said? If I shall be shown to have forgiven
sins, it is fully evident that I am God. However, He said it not thus, but what said
He? "But that you may know that the Son of Man has power on earth to forgive
sins; then says He to the sick of the palsy, Arise, and take up your bed, and go
unto your house." [Matthew 9:6] When therefore, He would say, I work the more
difficult miracle, it is plain that there is no pretext left you, no room for
gainsaying about the easier one. Hence it was that He wrought the invisible
miracle first, because there were many gainsayers; and then He led them from
the invisible to the visible itself.
Surely then the faith of the jailer was no light or hasty faith. He saw the
prisoners. And he saw nothing, he heard nothing wrong; he saw that nothing was
done by sorcery, for they were singing hymns unto God. He saw that every thing
done proceeded from overflowing kindness, for they did not avenge themselves
against him, although they had it in their power; for it was in their power to
rescue both themselves and the prisoners, and escape; and if not the prisoners, at
all events themselves; but they did not do this. Thus did they challenge his
reverence, not only by the miracle, but also by their behavior. For how did Paul
cry out? "He cried with a loud voice, saying, Do yourself no harm, for we are all
here." You see at once his freedom from vain-glory and arrogance, and his
fellow-feeling. He said not, "It is for us these wonders have been wrought," but
as though he were merely one of the prisoners, he said, "For we are all here."
And yet, even though they had not before this loosed themselves, nor had done
so by means of the miracle, still they might have been silent, and have set all that
were bound at liberty. For had they held their peace, and had they not with their
loud crying stayed his hand, he would have thrust the sword through his throat.
Wherefore also Paul cried out, because he had been cast into the inner ward: as
though he had said, "To your own injury have you done this, that you have thrust
in so far those that could deliver you from the danger." However they imitated