would do it after first giving thanks, lest they should fall into any suspicion of
weakness on His part, observe how by the very manner of His working He
entirely raises their thoughts of it and shows them the difference (between
Himself and others). For when the loaves had not yet appeared, that you may
learn, that things that are not are to Him as though they were, (as Paul says, "who
calls the things that be not as though they were" [Romans 4:17]) He commanded
them as though the table were prepared and ready, straightway to sit down,
rousing by this the minds of His disciples. And because they had profited by the
questioning, they immediately obeyed, and were not confounded, nor said, "How
is this, why dost Thou bid us sit down, when there is nothing before us?" The
same men, who at first disbelieved so much as to say, "Whence shall we buy
bread?" began so far to believe even before they saw the miracle, that they
readily made the multitudes to sit down.
3. But why when He was about to restore the paralytic did He not pray, nor
when He was raising the dead, or bridling the sea, while He does so here over
the loaves? It was to show that when we begin our meals, we ought to give
thanks unto God. Moreover, He does it especially in a lesser matter, that you
may learn that He does it not as having any need; for were this the case, much
more would He have done so in greater things; but when He did them by His
own authority, it is clear that it was through condescension that He acted as He
did in the case of the lesser. Besides, a great multitude was present, and it was
necessary that they should be persuaded that He had come according to the will
of God. Wherefore, when He does miracles in the absence of witnesses, He
exhibits nothing of the kind; but when He does them in the presence of many, in
order to persuade them that He is no enemy of God, no adversary of Him who
has begotten Him, He removes the suspicion by thanksgiving.
"And He gave to them that were set down, and they were filled."
Do you see how great is the interval between the servants and the Master?
They having grace by measure, wrought their miracles accordingly, but God,
who acts with free power, did all most abundantly.

Ver. 12 . "And He said unto His disciples, Gather up the fragments which
remain; — and they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets."
This was not a superfluous show, but in order that the matter might not be
deemed a mere illusion; and for this reason He creates from matter already
subsisting. "But why gave He not the bread to the multitudes to bear, but (only)
to His disciples?" Because He was most desirous to instruct these who were to
be the teachers of the world. The multitude would not as yet reap any great fruit
from the miracles, (at least they straightway forgot this one and asked for
another,) while these would gain no common profit. And what took place was
moreover no ordinary condemnation of Judas, who bore a basket. And that these
things were done for their instruction is plain from what is said afterwards, when
He reminded them, saying, "Do ye not yet understand— how many baskets ye
took up?" [Matthew 16:9] And for the same reason it was that the baskets of
fragments were equal in number to the disciples; afterwards, when they were
instructed, they took not up so many, but only "seven baskets." [Matthew 15:37]
And I marvel not only at the quantity of loaves created, but besides the quantity,
at the exactness of the surplus, that He caused the superabundance to be neither
more nor less than just so much as He willed, foreseeing how much they would
consume; a thing which marked unspeakable power. The fragments then
confirmed the matter, showing both these points; that what had taken place was
no illusion, and that these were from the loaves by which the people had been
fed. As to the fishes, they at this time were produced from those already
subsisting, but at a later period, after the Resurrection, they were not made from
subsisting matter. "Wherefore?" That you may understand that even now He
employed matter, not from necessity, nor as needing any base (to work upon),
but to stop the mouths of heretics.
"And the multitudes said, that this is of a truth The Prophet."
Oh, excess of gluttony! He had done ten thousand things more admirable
than this, but nowhere did they make this confession, save when they had been
filled. Yet hence it is evident that they expected some remarkable prophet; for