cognitive faculty resist the same according to the mode of their cognition. Those
creatures therefore, devoid of cognition, who have in their natural constitution strength
enough to preserve perpetual being, so as to remain always the same numerically, have
a natural appetite for perpetuity of being even in respect of sameness of number: while
those whose natural constitution has not strength for this, but only for preservation of
perpetuity of being in respect of sameness of species, also have a natural appetite for
perpetuity. This difference then must be noted in those creatures whose desire of being
is attended with cognition, that they who do not know being except in the present time,
desire it for the present time, but not for ever, because they have no apprehension of
everlasting existence: still they desire the perpetual being of their species, a desire
unattended with cognition, because the generative power, which serves that end, is
preliminary to and does not come under cognition. Those then that do know and
apprehend perpetual being as such, desire the same with a natural desire. But this is
the case with all subsistent intelligences. All such subsistent intelligences therefore
have a natural desire of everlasting being. Therefore they cannot possibly cease to be.
13. All things that begin to be, and afterwards cease to be, have both their beginning
and their ceasing from the same power: for the same is the power to make to be and to
make not to be. But subsistent intelligences could not begin to be except through the
power of the prime agent. Therefore neither is there any power to make them cease to
be except in the prime agent, inasmuch as that agent may cease to pour being into
them. But in respect of this power alone nothing can be called perishable; as well
because things are called necessary or contingent in respect of the power that is in
them, not in respect of the power of God (Chap.XXX), as also because God, the
author of nature, does not withdraw from things that which is proper to their nature; and
it has been shown that it is proper to intellectual natures to be perpetual.

## CHAPTER LVI, LXIX--How a Subsistent Intelligence may be united with a Body, with a
Solution of the Arguments alleged to prove that a Subsistent Intelligence cannot be
united with a Body as its Form
A SUBSISTENT intelligence cannot be united with a body by any manner of
combination: for combined elements, when the combination is complete, do not remain
actually, but virtually only: for if they remained actually, it would not be a combination,
but a mere mechanical mixture. But this combination and consequent cessation of
actual existence cannot befall subsistent intelligences; for they are imperishable.
It is likewise evident that a subsistent intelligence cannot be united with a body by any
manner of contact, properly so called. For contact is only of bodies: those things are in
contact, the extremities of which are together, as points, or lines, or
circumferences, which are the extremities of bodies.
Still there is one mode of contact whereby a subsistent intelligence may be mingled with
a body. For natural bodies in touching one another involve a change, and thus are
united together, not only in their quantitative extremities, but also by likeness of one
same quality or form, the one in pressing its form on the other. And though, if we regard
only quantitative extremities, the contact must be mutual in all cases, yet, if we consider
action and passion, there will be found some cases of touching without being touched,
and some cases of being touched without touching. Any cases that may be found of
contact without contact in quantitative extremities must still be ca]led instances of
contact, inasmuch as they are instances of action: thus we say that he who saddens
another `touches' him. According to this mode of touch it is possible for a
subsistent intelligence to be united to a body by contact: for subsistent intelligences act
upon bodies and move them, being more highly actualised than bodies are.
This contact is not quantitative but virtual, and differs from bodily contact in three
respects. First, because in this contact the indivisible can touch the divisible, which
cannot happen in bodily contact: for only that which is indivisible can be touched by a
point, whereas a subsistent intelligence, indivisible though it be, can touch a
divisible quantity by acting upon it. The point and the subsistent intelligence are not
indivisible in the same way. The point is indivisible as a term of quantity, and has a
definite situation in a continuous surface, beyond which it cannot be thrown:
whereas a subsistent intelligence is indivisible by being outside of the category of
quantity altogether: hence no indivisible element of quantity is marked out for contact
with it. Secondly, because quantitative contact is only with extremities, but virtual
contact is with the whole subject touched: for the subject is touched inasmuch as it is
acted upon and moved; but that is inasmuch as it is in potentiality; and potentiality
extends to the whole, not merely to the extremities of the whole: hence the whole is
touched. From this appears a third difference: because in quantitative touch, which is of
extremities, the touching body must be outside of the touched, and cannot pervade it,
but is stopped by it; whereas the virtual contact, which is proper to subsistent
intelligences, reaching to the inmost recesses of things, makes the touching substance