FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.3.

archer who directs his action to the end. Therefore those things that
are possessed of reason, move themselves to an end; because they
have dominion over their actions through their free-will, which is the
"faculty of will and reason." But those things that lack reason tend to
an end, by natural inclination, as being moved by another and not by
themselves; since they do not know the nature of an end as such,
and consequently cannot ordain anything to an end, but can be
ordained to an end only by another. For the entire irrational nature is
in comparison to God as an instrument to the principal agent, as
stated above (FP, Question 22, Article 2, ad 4; FP, Question 103,
Article 1, ad 3). Consequently it is proper to the rational nature to
tend to an end, as directing [agens] and leading itself to the end:
whereas it is proper to the irrational nature to tend to an end, as
directed or led by another, whether it apprehend the end, as do
irrational animals, or do not apprehend it, as is the case of those
things which are altogether void of knowledge.
Reply to Objection 1: When a man of himself acts for an end, he
knows the end: but when he is directed or led by another, for
instance, when he acts at another's command, or when he is moved
under another's compulsion, it is not necessary that he should know
the end. And it is thus with irrational creatures.
Reply to Objection 2: To ordain towards an end belongs to that
which directs itself to an end: whereas to be ordained to an end
belongs to that which is directed by another to an end. And this can
belong to an irrational nature, but owing to some one possessed of
reason.
Reply to Objection 3: The object of the will is the end and the good in
universal. Consequently there can be no will in those things that lack
reason and intellect, since they cannot apprehend the universal; but
they have a natural appetite or a sensitive appetite, determinate to
some particular good. Now it is clear that particular causes are
moved by a universal cause: thus the governor of a city, who intends
the common good, moves, by his command, all the particular
departments of the city. Consequently all things that lack reason are,
of necessity, moved to their particular ends by some rational will
which extends to the universal good, namely by the Divine will.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.3.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether human acts are specified by their end?

Objection 1: It would seem that human acts are not specified by their
end. For the end is an extrinsic cause. But everything is specified by
an intrinsic principle. Therefore human acts are not specified by their
end.
Objection 2: Further, that which gives a thing its species should
exist before it. But the end comes into existence afterwards.
Therefore a human act does not derive its species from the end.
Objection 3: Further, one thing cannot be in more than one species.
But one and the same act may happen to be ordained to various
ends. Therefore the end does not give the species to human acts.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Mor. Eccl. et Manich. ii, 13):
"According as their end is worthy of blame or praise so are our
deeds worthy of blame or praise."
I answer that Each thing receives its species in respect of an act and
not in respect of potentiality; wherefore things composed of matter
and form are established in their respective species by their own
forms. And this is also to be observed in proper movements. For
since movements are, in a way, divided into action and passion,
each of these receives its species from an act; action indeed from
the act which is the principle of acting, and passion from the act
which is the terminus of the movement. Wherefore heating, as an
action, is nothing else than a certain movement proceeding from
heat, while heating as a passion is nothing else than a movement
towards heat: and it is the definition that shows the specific nature.
And either way, human acts, whether they be considered as actions,
or as passions, receive their species from the end. For human acts
can be considered in both ways, since man moves himself, and is
moved by himself. Now it has been stated above (Article 1) that acts
are called human, inasmuch as they proceed from a deliberate will.
Now the object of the will is the good and the end. And hence it is
clear that the principle of human acts, in so far as they are human, is
the end. In like manner it is their terminus: for the human act
terminates at that which the will intends as the end; thus in natural
agents the form of the thing generated is conformed to the form of
the generator. And since, as Ambrose says (Prolog. super Luc.)