John 7:20
"You have a devil; who goes about to kill you?"
3. The expression is one of wrath and anger, and of a soul made shameless
by an unexpected reproof, and put to confusion before their time, as they
thought. For just as a sort of robbers who sing over their plots, then when they
desire to put him against whom they are plotting off his guard, effect their object
by keeping silence, so also do these. But He, omitting to rebuke them for this, so
as not to make them more shameless, again takes in hand His defense with
respect to the Sabbath, reasoning with them from the Law. And observe how
prudently. "No wonder," He says, "if you disobey Me, when you disobey the Law
which you think ye obey, and which you hold to have been given you by Moses. It
is therefore no new thing, if you give not heed to My words." For because they
said, "God spoke to Moses, but as for this fellow we know not whence he is"
[John 9:29], He shows that they were insulting Moses as well as Himself, for
Moses gave them the Law, and they obeyed it not.

John 7:21
"I have done one work, and you all marvel."
Observe how He argues, where it is necessary to defend Himself, and make
His defense a charge against them. For with respect to that which had been
wrought, He introduces not the Person of the Father, but His own: "I have done
one work." He would show, that not to have done it would have been to break
the Law, and that there are many things more authoritative than the Law, and that
"Moses" endured to receive a command against the Law, and more authoritative
than the Law. For "circumcision" is more authoritative than the Sabbath, and yet
circumcision is not of the Law, but of "the fathers." "But I," He says, "have done
that which is more authoritative and better than circumcision." Then He
mentions not the command of the Law; for instance, that the Priests profane the
Sabbath, as He had said already, but speaks more largely. The meaning of, "You
marvel" [Matthew 12:5] is, "You are confused," "are troubled." For if the Law
was to be lasting, circumcision would not have been more authoritative than it.
And He said not, "I have done a thing greater than circumcision," but
abundantly refutes them by saying,

John 7:23
"If a man receive circumcision."
"Do you see that the Law is most established when a man breaks it? Do you
see that the breaking of the Sabbath is the keeping of the Law? That if the
Sabbath were not broken, the Law must needs have been broken? So that I also
have established the Law." He said not, "You are angry with Me because I have
wrought a thing which is greater than circumcision," but having merely
mentioned what had been done, He left it to them to judge, whether entire health
was not a more necessary thing than circumcision. "The Law," He says, "is
broken, that a man may receive a sign which contributes nothing to health; are
you vexed and indignant at its being broken, that one might be freed from so
grievous a disease?"