and there are many honors for Christians, and precedences, and distinctions, and
immunities, and not even so do we prevail. And whereas they being daily led to
execution, both teachers and disciples, and bearing innumerable stripes, and
continual brandings, were in greater luxury than such as abide in Paradise; we
who have endured no such thing, not even in a dream, are softer than any wax.
"But they," it will be said, "wrought miracles." Did this then keep them from the
scourge? Did it free them from persecution? Nay, for this is the strange thing,
that they suffered such things often even at the hands of them whom they
benefited, and not even so were they confounded, receiving only evil for good.
But thou if you bestow on any one any little benefit, and then be requited with
anything unpleasant, art confounded, art troubled, and repentest of that which
you have done.
If now it should happen, as I pray it may not happen nor at any time fall
out, that there be a war against churches, and a persecution, imagine how great
will be the ridicule, how sore the reproaches. And very naturally; for when no
one exercises himself in the wrestling school, how shall he be distinguished in
the contests? What champion, not being used to the trainer, will be able, when
summoned by the Olympic contests, to show forth anything great and noble
against his antagonist? Ought we not every day to wrestle and fight and run? See
ye not them that are called Pentathli, when they have no antagonists, how they
fill a sack with much sand, and hanging it up try their full strength thereupon?
And they that are still younger, practise the fight against their enemies upon the
persons of their companions.
These do thou also emulate, and practise the wrestlings of self denial. For
indeed there are many that provoke to anger, and incite to lust, and kindle a great
flame. Stand therefore against your passions, bear nobly the mental pangs, that
you may endure also those of the body.
7. For so the blessed Job, if he had not exercised himself well before his
conflicts, would not have shone so brightly in the same. Unless he had practised
freedom from all despondency, he would have uttered some rash word, when his

children died. But as it was he stood against all the assaults, against ruin of
fortune, and destruction of so great affluence: against loss of children, against his
wife's commiseration, against plagues in body, against reproaches of friends,
against revilings of servants.
And if you would see his ways of exercise also, hear him saying, how he
used to despise wealth: "If I did but rejoice," says he, "because my wealth was
great: if I set gold up for a heap, if I put my trust in a precious stone." Therefore
neither was he confounded at their being taken away, since he desired them not
when present.
Hear how he also managed what related to his children, not giving way to
undue softness, as we do, but requiring of them all circumspection. For he who
offered sacrifice even for their secret sins, imagine how strict a judge he was of
such as were manifest. [Job 1:5]
And if you would also hear of his strivings after continence, hearken to him
when he says, "I made a covenant with my eyes, that I should not think upon a
maid." [Job 31:1] For this cause his wife did not break his spirit, for he loved her
even before this, not however immoderately, but as is due to a wife.
Wherefore I am led even to marvel, whence it came into the devil's thought
to stir up the contest, knowing as he did of his previous training. Whence then
did it occur to him? The monster is wicked, and never despairs: and this turns
out to us a very great condemnation that he indeed never gives up the hope of
our destruction, but we despair of our own salvation.
But for bodily mutilation and indignity, mark how he practised himself.
Why, inasmuch as he himself had never undergone any such thing, but had
continued to live in wealth and luxury, and in all other splendor, he used to
divine other men's calamities, one by one. And this he declared, when he said,
"For the thing which I greatly feared has come upon me; and that which I was
afraid of has come unto me." [Job 3:25] And again, "But I wept for every
helpless man, and groaned when I saw a man in distress." [Job 30:25]
So because of this, nothing of what happened confounded him, none of