atmosphere for our trial: although some of them are even now in
hell, to torment those whom they have led astray; just as some of the
good angels are with the holy souls in heaven. But after the
judgment day all the wicked, both men and angels, will be in hell,
and the good in heaven.
Reply to Objection 1: A place is not penal to angel or soul as if
affecting the nature by changing it, but as affecting the will by
saddening it: because the angel or the soul apprehends that it is in a
place not agreeable to its will.
Reply to Objection 2: One soul is not set over another in the order of
nature, as the demons are over men in the order of nature;
consequently there is no parallel.
Reply to Objection 3: Some have maintained that the pain of sense
for demons and souls is postponed until the judgment day: and that
the beatitude of the saints is likewise postponed until the judgment
day. But this is erroneous, and contrary to the teaching of the
Apostle (2 Cor. 5:1): "If our earthly house of this habitation be
dissolved, we have a house in heaven." Others, again, while not
admitting the same of souls, admit it as to demons. But it is better to
say that the same judgment is passed upon wicked souls and wicked
angels, even as on good souls and good angels.
Consequently, it must be said that, although a heavenly place
belongs to the glory of the angels, yet their glory is not lessened by
their coming to us, for they consider that place to be their own; in
the same way as we say that the bishop's honor is not lessened
while he is not actually sitting on his throne. In like manner it must
be said, that although the demons are not actually bound within the
fire of hell while they are in this dark atmosphere, nevertheless their
punishment is none the less; because they know that such
confinement is their due. Hence it is said in a gloss upon James 3:6:
"They carry fire of hell with them wherever they go." Nor is this
contrary to what is said (Lk. 8:31), "They besought the Lord not to
cast them into the abyss"; for they asked for this, deeming it to be a
punishment for them to be cast out of a place where they could
injure men. Hence it is stated, "They besought Him that He would not
expel them out of the country" (Mk. 5:10).

## QUESTION 65 — THE WORK OF CREATION OF CORPOREAL

CREATURES

Prologue
From the consideration of spiritual creatures we proceed to that of
corporeal creatures, in the production of which, as Holy Scripture
makes mention, three works are found, namely, the work of creation,
as given in the words, "In the beginning God created heaven and
earth"; the work of distinction as given in the words, "He divided the
light from the darkness, and the waters that are above the firmament
from the waters that are under the firmament"; and the work of
adornment, expressed thus, "Let there be lights in the firmament."
First, then, we must consider the work of creation; secondly, the
work of distinction; and thirdly, the work of adornment. Under the
first head there are four points of inquiry:
(1) Whether corporeal creatures are from God?
(2) Whether they were created on account of God's goodness?
(3) Whether they were created by God through the medium of the
angels?
(4) Whether the forms of bodies are from the angels or immediately
from God.