FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.9.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether the mode of virtue falls under the precept

of the law?
Objection 1: It would seem that the mode of virtue falls under the
precept of the law. For the mode of virtue is that deeds of justice
should be done justly, that deeds of fortitude should be done
bravely, and in like manner as to the other virtues. But it is
commanded (Dt. 26:20) that "thou shalt follow justly after that which
is just." Therefore the mode of virtue falls under the precept.
Objection 2: Further, that which belongs to the intention of the
lawgiver comes chiefly under the precept. But the intention of the
lawgiver is directed chiefly to make men virtuous, as stated in Ethic.
ii: and it belongs to a virtuous man to act virtuously. Therefore the
mode of virtue falls under the precept.
Objection 3: Further, the mode of virtue seems to consist properly in
working willingly and with pleasure. But this falls under a precept of
the Divine law, for it is written (Ps. 99:2): "Serve ye the Lord with
gladness"; and (2 Cor. 9:7): "Not with sadness or necessity: for God
loveth a cheerful giver"; whereupon the gloss says: "Whatever ye
do, do gladly; and then you will do it well; whereas if you do it
sorrowfully, it is done in thee, not by thee." Therefore the mode of
virtue falls under the precept of the law.
On the contrary, No man can act as a virtuous man acts unless he
has the habit of virtue, as the Philosopher explains (Ethic. ii, 4; v, 8).
Now whoever transgresses a precept of the law, deserves to be
punished. Hence it would follow that a man who has not the habit of
virtue, would deserve to be punished, whatever he does. But this is
contrary to the intention of the law, which aims at leading man to
virtue, by habituating him to good works. Therefore the mode of
virtue does not fall under the precept.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 90, Article 3, ad 2), a
precept of law has compulsory power. Hence that on which the
compulsion of the law is brought to bear, falls directly under the
precept of the law. Now the law compels through fear of punishment,
as stated in Ethic. x, 9, because that properly falls under the precept
of the law, for which the penalty of the law is inflicted. But Divine law
and human law are differently situated as to the appointment of

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.100, C.10.

penalties; since the penalty of the law is inflicted only for those
things which come under the judgment of the lawgiver; for the law
punishes in accordance with the verdict given. Now man, the framer
of human law, is competent to judge only of outward acts; because
"man seeth those things that appear," according to 1 Kgs. 16:7:
while God alone, the framer of the Divine law, is competent to judge
of the inward movements of wills, according to Ps. 7:10: "The
searcher of hearts and reins is God."
Accordingly, therefore, we must say that the mode of virtue is in
some sort regarded both by human and by Divine law; in some
respect it is regarded by the Divine, but not by the human law; and in
another way, it is regarded neither by the human nor by the Divine
law. Now the mode of virtue consists in three things, as the
Philosopher states in Ethic. ii. The first is that man should act
"knowingly": and this is subject to the judgment of both Divine and
human law; because what a man does in ignorance, he does
accidentally. Hence according to both human and Divine law, certain
things are judged in respect of ignorance to be punishable or
pardonable.
The second point is that a man should act "deliberately," i.e. "from
choice, choosing that particular action for its own sake"; wherein a
twofold internal movement is implied, of volition and of intention,
about which we have spoken above (Questions 8, 12): and
concerning these two, Divine law alone, and not human law, is
competent to judge. For human law does not punish the man who
wishes to slay, and slays not: whereas the Divine law does,
according to Mt. 5:22: "Whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be
in danger of the judgment."
The third point is that he should "act from a firm and immovable
principle": which firmness belongs properly to a habit, and implies
that the action proceeds from a rooted habit. In this respect, the
mode of virtue does not fall under the precept either of Divine or of
human law, since neither by man nor by God is he punished as
breaking the law, who gives due honor to his parents and yet has not
the habit of filial piety.
Reply to Objection 1: The mode of doing acts of justice, which falls
under the precept, is that they be done in accordance with right; but
not that they be done from the habit of justice.