place; His Father's, by intimating that neither had He done this upon entreaty, but
of Himself upon His own will; "For so," says He, "it seemed good in Your
sight:" that is, "so it pleased You."
And wherefore was it hidden from them? Hear Paul, saying, that "Seeking
to establish their own righteousness, they have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God." [Romans 10:3]
Consider now how it was likely the disciples should be affected, hearing
this; that what wise men knew not, these knew, and knew it continuing babes,
and knew it by God's revelation. But Luke says, that "at the very hour," when the
seventy came telling Him about the devils, then He "rejoiced" and spoke these
things, [Luke 10:21] which, besides increasing their diligence, would also
dispose them to be modest. That is, since it was natural for them to pride
themselves on their driving away devils, on this among other grounds He
refrains them; that it was a revelation, whatever had been done, no diligence on
their part. Wherefore also the scribes, and the wise men, thinking to be
intelligent for themselves, fell away through their own vanity. Well then, if for
this cause it was hidden from them, "do you also," says He, "fear, and continue
babes." For this caused you to have the benefit of the revelation, as indeed on the
other hand the contrary made them be deprived of it. For by no means, when He
says, "You have hid," does He mean that it is all God's doing: but as when Paul
says, "He gave them over to a reprobate mind," [Romans 1:28] and, "He has
blinded their minds," it is not meant to bring Him in as the doer of it, but those
who gave the occasion: so here also He uses the expression, "You have hid."
For since He had said, "I thank You, because You have hid them, and hast
revealed them unto babes;" to hinder your supposing that as being Himself
deprived of this power, and unable to effect it, so He offers thanks, He says,
"All things are delivered unto me of my Father." [Matthew 11:27] And to
them that are rejoicing, because the devils obey them, "Nay, why marvel," says
He, [Luke 10:22] that devils yield to you? All things are mine; "All things are
delivered unto me."

But when you hear, "they are delivered," do not surmise anything human.
For He uses this expression, to prevent your imagining two unoriginate Gods.
Since, that He was at the same time both begotten, and Lord of all, He declares
in many ways, and in other places also.
2. Then He says what is even greater than this, lifting up your mind; "And
no man knows the Son, but the Father; neither knows any man the Father, but
the Son." Which seems indeed to the ignorant unconnected with what went
before, but has full accordance therewith. As thus: having said, "All things are
delivered unto me of my Father," He adds, "And what marvel," so He speaks, "if
I be Lord of all? I who have also another greater privilege, the knowing the
Father, and being of the same substance." Yea, for this too He covertly signifies
by His being the only one who so knew Him. For this is His meaning, when He
says, "No man knows the Father but the Son."
And see at what time He says this. When they by His works had received
the certain proof of His might, not only seeing Him work miracles, but endowed
also in His name with so great powers. Then, since He had said, "You have
revealed them unto babes," He signifies this also to pertain to Himself; for
"neither knows any man the Father," says He, save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son is willing to reveal Him; [Matthew 11:27] not "to
whomsoever He may be enjoined," "to whomsoever He may be commanded."
But if He reveals Him, then Himself too. This however He let pass as
acknowledged, but the other He has set down. And everywhere He affirms this;
as when He says, "No man comes unto the Father, but by me." [John 14:6]
And thereby he establishes another point also, His being in harmony and of
one mind with Him. "Why," says He, "I am so far from fighting and warring with
Him, that no one can even come to Him but by me." For because this most
offended them, His seeming to be a rival God, He by all means does away with
this; and interested Himself about this not less earnestly, but even more so, than
about His miracles.
But when He says, "Neither knows any man the Father, save the Son," He