ordinances and various kinds of laws. Yes! Yet now he has learned by experience
what it was he did, and he himself by his own deeds has been the first to break
the law, and has become a spectacle to the whole world, and silent though he is,
he utters from thence a warning voice to all, saying "do not such things as I have
done, that you suffer not such things as I suffer." He appears as a teacher by
means of his calamity, and the altar emits great lustre, inspiring now the greatest
awe from the fact that it holds the lion in bondage; for any figure of royalty
might be very much set off if the king were not only to be seen seated on his
throne arrayed in purple and wearing his crown, but if also prostrate at the feet of
the king barbarians with their hands bound behind their backs were bending low
their heads. And that no persuasive arguments have been used, you yourselves
are witnesses of the enthusiasm, and the concourse of the people. For brilliant
indeed is the scene before us to day, and magnificent the assembly, and I see as
large a gathering here today as at the Holy Paschal Feast. Thus the man has
summoned you here without speaking and yet uttering a voice through his
actions clearer than the sound of a trumpet: and you have all thronged hither
today, maidens deserting their boudoirs, and matrons the women's chambers, and
men the market place that you may see human nature convicted, and the
instability of worldly affairs exposed, and the harlot-face which a few days ago
was radiant (such is the prosperity derived from extortion) looking uglier than
any wrinkled old woman, this face I say you may see denuded of its enamel and
pigments by the action of adversity as by a sponge.
4. Such is the force of this calamity: it has made one who was illustrious
and conspicuous appear the most insignificant of men. And if a rich man should
enter the assembly he derives much profit from the sight: for when he beholds
the man who was shaking the whole world, now dragged down from so high a
pinnacle of power, cowering with fright, more terrified than a hare or a frog,
nailed fast to yonder pillar, without bonds, his fear serving instead of a chain,
panic-stricken and trembling, he abates his haughtiness, he puts down his pride,
and having acquired the kind of wisdom concerning human affairs which it

concerns him to have he departs instructed by example in the lesson which Holy
Scripture teaches by precept:— "All flesh is grass and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass: the grass withers and the flower fails" [Isaiah 40:6-7] or "They
shall wither away quickly as the grass, and as the green herb shall they quickly
fail" or "like smoke are his days," and all passages of that kind. Again the poor
man when he has entered and gazed at this spectacle does not think meanly of
himself, nor bewail himself on account of his poverty, but feels grateful to his
poverty, because it is a place of refuge to him, and a calm haven, and secure
bulwark; and when he sees these things he would many times rather remain
where he is, than enjoy the possession of all men for a little time and afterwards
be in jeopardy of his own life. Do you see how the rich and poor, high and low,
bond and free have derived no small profit from this man's taking refuge here?
Do you see how each man will depart hence with a remedy, being cured merely
by this sight? Well! Have I softened your passion, and expelled your wrath?
Have I extinguished your cruelty? Have I induced you to be pitiful? Indeed I
think I have; and your countenances and the streams of tears you shed are proofs
of it. Since then your hard rock has turned into deep and fertile soil let us hasten
to produce some fruit of mercy, and to display a luxuriant crop of pity by falling
down before the Emperor or rather by imploring the merciful God so to soften
the rage of the Emperor, and make his heart tender that he may grant the whole
of the favour which we ask. For indeed already since that day when this man fled
here for refuge no slight change has taken place; for as soon as the Emperor
knew that he had hurried to this asylum, although the army was present, and
incensed on account of his misdeeds, and demanded him to be given up for
execution, the Emperor made a long speech endeavouring to allay the rage of the
soldiers, maintaining that not only his offenses, but any good deed which he
might have done ought to be taken into account, declaring that he felt gratitude
for the latter, and was prepared to forgive him as a fellow creature for deeds
which were otherwise. And when they again urged him to avenge the insult done
to the imperial majesty, shouting, leaping, and brandishing their spears, he shed