up, and carried him out, and buried him. And it was about the space of three
hours after, when his wife, not knowing what was done, came in. And Peter
answered unto her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much?" [Acts 5:6-8]
The woman he would fain save, for the man had been the author of the sin:
therefore he gives her time to clear herself, and opportunity for repentance,
saying, "Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much? And she said, Yea, for so
much. Then Peter said unto her, How is it that you have agreed together to tempt
the Holy Ghost? Behold, the feet of them which have buried your husband are at
the door, and shall carry you out. Then she fell down straightway at his feet, and
yielded up the ghost; and the young men came in, and found her dead, and,
carrying her forth, buried her by her husband. And great fear came upon all the
Church, and upon as many as heard these things." [Acts 5:9-11]
After this fear had come upon them, he wrought more miracles; both Peter
and the rest; "And by the hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders
wrought among the people; and they were all with one accord in Solomon's
porch. And of the rest dared no man join himself to them," i.e. to the Apostles;
"but the people magnified them," i.e. the Jewish people. If "no man dared join
himself unto them," the Apostles, "there were," however, "the more added unto
the Lord, believers, multitudes both of men and of women, insomuch that they
brought out into the streets their impotent folk, and laid them upon couches and
beds, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some of
them." [Acts 5:12-15] For Peter was the wonderful one, and he to whom they
more gave heed both because of his public harangue, the first and the second and
the third, and because of the miracle; for he it was that wrought the miracle, the
first, the second, the third: for the present miracle was twofold: first, the
convicting the thoughts of the heart, and next the inflicting of death at his word
of command. "That at the least the shadow of Peter passing by," etc. This had
not occurred in the history of Christ; but see here what He had told them actually
coming to pass, that "they which believe in Me, the works that I do shall they do
also; and greater works than these shall they do." [John 14:12] "There came also

a multitude out of the cities round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and
them that were vexed with unclean spirits; and they were healed every one."
[Acts 5:16]
And now I would have you observe the way in which their whole life is
interwoven. First there was despondency on account of Christ taken from them,
and then came joy because of the Spirit descending upon them; again, dejection
because of the scoffers, and then joy in the result of their own apology. And here
again we find both dejection and gladness. In that they had become conspicuous,
and that God made revelations to them, there was gladness: in that they had cut
off some of their own company, there was sadness. Once more: again there is
gladness upon their success, and again sadness by reason of the High Priest. And
so it will be seen to be the case throughout. And the same will be found to hold
in the case of the ancient saints likewise.— But let us look over again what has
been said.
"They sold them," it is written, "and brought the prices, and laid them down
at the Apostles' feet." [Recapitulation. Acts 4:34-37] See, my beloved brethren,
how instead of leaving the Apostles to sell, they themselves sold, and presented
the prices to them. "But a certain man named Ananias," etc. [Acts 5:1] This
history touches Bishops too, and very forcibly. And the wife of Ananias was
privy to the thing done: therefore he examines her. But perhaps some one will
say that he dealt very harshly with her. What do you mean? What harshness? If
for gathering sticks a man is to be stoned, much rather ought he for sacrilege; for
this money was become sacred. He that has chosen to sell his goods and
distribute them, and then withdraws them, is guilty of sacrilege. But if he is
sacrilegious, who resumes from his own, much more he who takes from what is
not his own. And do not think that because the consequence is not now the same,
the crime will go unpunished. Do you see that this is the charge brought against
Ananias, that having made the money sacred, he afterwards secreted it? Couldest
thou not, said Peter, after selling your land, use the proceeds as your own? Were
you forbidden? Wherefore after you had promised it? See how at the very