the habit of receiving; abashing them and signifying that not as from a forbidden
thing does he abstain from it: so again, lest by his large store of proof and the
examples and reasonings by which he had pointed out the propriety of receiving,
he should seem to be anxious to receive himself and therefore to say these
things; he now corrects it. And afterwards he laid it down more clearly where he
says, "And I wrote not these things, that it may be so done in my case;" but here
his words are, "we did not use this right."
And what is a still greater thing, neither could any have this to say, that
being in abundance we declined using it; rather, when necessity pressed upon us
we would not yield to the necessity. Which also in the second Epistle he says; "I
robbed other Churches, taking wages of them that I might minister unto you; and
when I was present with you, and was in want, I was not a burden on any man."
[2 Corinthians 11:8-9] And in this Epistle again, "We both hunger, and thirst, and
are naked, and are buffeted." [1 Corinthians 4:11] And here again he hints the
same thing, saying, "But we bear all things." For by saying, "we bear all things,"
he intimates both hunger and great straits and all the other things. "But not even
thus have we been compelled," says he, to break the law which we laid down for
ourselves. Wherefore? "that we may cause no hinderance to the Gospel of
Christ." For since the Corinthians were rather weak-minded, "lest we should
wound you," says he "by receiving, we chose to do even more than was
commanded rather than hinder the Gospel," i.e., your instruction. Now if we in a
matter left free to us, and when we were both enduring much hardship and
having Apostles for our pattern, used abstinence lest we should give hindrance,
(and he did not say, "subversion," but "hindrance;" nor simply "hindrance," but
"any" hindrance,) that we might not, so to speak, cause so much as the slightest
suspense and delay to the course of the Word: "If now," says he, "we used so
great care, how much more ought you to abstain, who both come far short of the
Apostles and have no law to mention, giving you permission: but contrariwise
are both putting your hand to things forbidden and things which tend to the great
injury of the Gospel, not to its hindrance only ; and not even having any pressing

necessity in view." For all this discussion he had moved on account of these
Corinthians, who were making their weaker brethren to stumble by eating of
things sacrificed to idols.
8. These things also let us listen to, beloved; that we may not despise those
who are offended, nor, "cause any hindrance to the Gospel of Christ;" that we
may not betray our own salvation. And say not thou to me when your brother is
offended, "this or that, whereby he is offended, has not been forbidden; it is
permitted." For I have something greater to say to you: "although Christ Himself
have permitted it, yet if you see any injured, stop and do not use the permission."
For this also did Paul; when he might have received, Christ having granted
permission, he received not. Thus has our Lord in His mercy mingled much
gentleness with His precepts that it might not be all merely of commandment,
but that we might do much also of our own mind. Since it was in His power, had
He not been so minded, to extend the commandments further and to say, "he who
fasts not continually, let him be chastised; he who keeps not his virginity, let him
be punished; he that does not strip himself of all that he has, let him suffer the
severest penalty." But he did not so, giving you occasion, if you will, to be
forward in doing more. Wherefore both when He was discoursing about
virginity, He said, "He that is able to receive, let him receive it:" and in the case
of the rich man, some things He commanded, but some He left to the
determination of his mind. For He said not, "Sell what you have," but, "If you
will be perfect, sell."
But we are not only not forward to do more, and to go beyond the precepts,
but we fall very short even of the measure of things commanded. And whereas
Paul suffered hunger that he might not hinder the Gospel; we have not the heart
even to touch what is in our own stores, though we see innumerable souls
overthrown. "Yea" says one, "let the moth eat, and let not the poor eat; let the
worm devour, and let not the naked be clothed; let all be wasted away with time,
and let not Christ be fed; and this when He hungers." "Why, who said this?" it
will be asked. Nay, this is the very grievance, that not in words but in deeds these