I have not always occasion to use my weapons, for from time to time I lay these
aside, and from time to time resume them. In order then that I might be free and
unfettered in this matter, not being at all times compelled to carry my weapons,
He has made these to be separate from my nature. For it is not only in our
possessing a rational nature that we surpass the brutes, but we also excel them in
body. For God has made this to correspond with the soul's nobility, and fitted to
execute its commands. He has not, indeed, made the body such as it is, without
reason; but such as it ought to be, as having to minister to a rational soul; so that
if it were not such as it is, the operations of the soul would be greatly impeded:
and this is manifest from diseases. For if this nice adjustment of the body be
diverted from its proper condition in ever so small a degree, many of the soul's
energies are impeded; as, for instance, if the brain should become too hot, or too
cold. So that from the body it is easy to see much of the Divine Providence, not
only because He made it at first better than it is at present; nor because even now
He has changed it for a useful purpose, but also because He will raise it again to
much greater glory.
12. But, if you are desirous to learn in a different way what wisdom God
has shown respecting the body, I will mention that by which Paul seems most
especially to be constantly struck. But what is this? That He has made the
members to excel one another, though not in the same things? Some He has
appointed to surpass the rest in beauty, and some in strength. Thus, the eye is
beautiful, but the feet are stronger. The head is honourable, but it cannot say to
the feet, "I have no need of you." [1 Corinthians 12:21] And this may be seen too
with regard to irrational animals; and the same in all the relations of life. The
king, for instance, has need of his subjects, and the subjects of the king; just as
the head has need of the feet. And again, as to brutes; some are more powerful
than the rest; and some more beautiful. Some there are that delight us; some that
nourish; and some that clothe us. Thus the peacock delights; and fowls and
swine nourish; sheep and goats provide us clothing; and the ox and ass share our
labours. There are also others which provide us with none of these, but which

call our powers into active exercise. Thus the wild animals increase the strength
of the hunters; and instruct our race by the fear which they inspire, and render us
more cautious; and for medical purposes, they supply no small contributions
from their bodies. So that if any one say to you, "How are you a lord of the
brutes, while afraid of the lion?" Answer him, "Things were not ordered in this
manner at the beginning, when I was in favour with God, when I dwelt in
Paradise. But when I had offended my Master, I fell under the power of those
who were my servants! Yet not even now entirely; since I possess an art by which
I overcome the wild animals." So also it happens in great houses; the sons, while
they are yet under age, are afraid of many of the servants; but when they have
done amiss, their dread is greatly heightened. And this we may say also of
serpents, and scorpions, and vipers; that they are formidable to us by reason of
sin.
13. And not only as it regards our body, and the various states of life, is this
diversity observable; nor is it confined to brutes; but it may be seen also in trees;
and the meanest of them may be observed to have an excellence above those
which are greater; so that all things are not alike in all, that all may be necessary
to us; and that we may perceive the manifold wisdom of the Lord. Do not then
lay blame on God on account of the body's corruptibleness, but for this the rather
do Him homage, and admire Him for His wisdom and His tender care; His
wisdom, that in so corruptible a body He has been able to display such harmony;
His tender care that for the benefit of the soul He has made it corruptible, that He
might repress her vanity, and subdue her pride! Why then did He not make it
thus from the beginning, asks some one? It was, I reply, to justify Himself before
you by these very works; and as much as to say by the result itself, I called you
to greater honour, but you constituted yourself unworthy of the gift, banishing
yourself from Paradise! Nevertheless, I will not even now despise you, but I will
correct your sin, and bring you back to heaven. Therefore for your own sake, I
have permitted you so long to decay and suffer corruption, that in the fullness of
time the discipline of your humility might be established; and that you might