from it, as becomes Christian men, knowing that deposition of this kind brings
its reward no less than the discharge of the office. For when any one suffers
anything of this kind, in order to avoid submitting to something which is
unbecoming or unworthy of this dignity, he procures punishment for those who
wrongfully depose him, and a greater reward for himself. "Blessed," says our
Lord, "are you when men shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake; rejoice and be exceeding glad,
for great is your reward in Heaven." [Matthew 5:1] And this, indeed, is the case
when any one is expelled by those of his own rank either on account of envy,
with a view to the favor of others, or through hatred, or from any other wrong
motive: but when it is the lot of any one to experience this treatment at the hand
of opponents, I do not think a word is needed to prove what great gain they
confer upon him by their wickedness.
It behooves us, then, to be on the watch on all sides, and to make a careful
search lest any spark of this desire should be secretly smouldering somewhere.
For it is much to be wished that those who are originally free from this passion,
should also be able to avoid it when they have lighted upon this office. But if any
one, before he obtains the honor, cherishes in himself this terrible and savage
monster, it is impossible to say into what a furnace he will fling himself after he
has attained it. Now I possessed this desire in a high degree (and do not suppose
that I would ever tell you what was untrue in self-disparagement): and this,
combined with other reasons, alarmed me not a little, and induced me to take
flight. For just as lovers of the human person, as long as they are permitted to be
near the objects of their affection, suffer more severe torment from their passion,
but when they remove as far as possible from these objects of desire, they drive
away the frenzy: even so when those who desire this dignity are near it, the evil
becomes intolerable: but when they cease to hope for it, the desire is
extinguished together with the expectation.
12. This single motive then is no slight one: and even taken by itself it
would have sufficed to deter me from this dignity: but, as it is, another must be

added not less than the former. And what is this? A priest ought to be sober
minded, and penetrating in discernment, and possessed of innumerable eyes in
every direction, as one who lives not for himself alone but for so great a
multitude. But that I am sluggish and slack, and scarcely able to bring about my
own salvation, even you yourself would admit, who out of love to me art
especially eager to conceal my faults. Talk not to me in this connection of
fasting, and watching, or sleeping on the ground, and other hard discipline of the
body: for you know how defective I am in these matters: and even if they had
been carefully practised by me they could not with my present sluggishness have
been of any service to me with a view to this post of authority. Such things might
be of great service to a man who was shut up in a cell, and caring only for his
own concerns: but when a man is divided among so great a multitude, and enters
separately into the private cares of those who are under his direction, what
appreciable help can be given to their improvement unless he possesses a robust
and exceedingly vigorous character?
13. And do not be surprised if, in connection with such endurance, I seek
another test of fortitude in the soul. For to be indifferent to food and drink and a
soft bed, we see is to many no hard task, especially at least to such as are of a
rough habit of life and have been brought up in this way from early youth, and to
many others also; bodily discipline and custom softening the severity of these
laborious practices: but insult, and abuse, and coarse language, and gibes from
inferiors, whether wantonly or justly uttered, and rebukes vainly and idly spoken
both by rulers and the ruled— this is what few can bear, in fact only one or two
here and there; and one may see men, who are strong in the former exercises, so
completely upset by these things, as to become more furious than the most
savage beasts. Now such men especially we should exclude from the precincts of
the priesthood. For if a prelate did not loathe food, or go barefoot, no harm
would be done to the common interests of the Church; but a furious temper
causes great disasters both to him who possesses it, and to his neighbours. And
there is no divine threat against those who fail to do the things referred to, but