the steward of another man's goods; not only not extorting from others, but even
giving up his own to them that were in need. And what is more, when he had
them they were no joy to him: so he also declared, saying, "If I did so much as
rejoice when my wealth waxed great:" [Job 31:25] wherefore neither did he
grieve when it had gone. But they that are rich are not now such as he was, but
are rather in a worse condition than any slave, paying as it were tribute to some
grievous tyrant. Because their mind is as a kind of citadel occupied by the love
of money, which from thence daily sends out unto them its commands full of all
iniquity, and there is none to disobey. Be not therefore thus over subtle. Nay, for
God has once for all declared and pronounced it a thing impossible for the one
service and the other to agree. Say not thou, then, "it is possible." Why, when the
one master is commanding you to spoil by violence, the other to strip yourself of
your possessions; the one to be chaste, the other to commit fornication; the one
to be drunken and luxurious, the other to keep the belly in subjection; the one
again to despise the things that are, the other to be rivetted to the present; the one
to admire marbles, and walls, and roofs, the other to contemn these, but to honor
self-restraint: how is it possible that these should agree?
Now He calls mammon here "a master," not because of its own nature, but
on account of the wretchedness of them that bow themselves beneath it. So also
He calls "the belly a god," [Philippians 3:19] not from the dignity of such a
mistress, but from the wretchedness of them that are enslaved: it being a thing
worse than any punishment, and enough, before the punishment, in the way of
vengeance on him who is involved in it. For what condemned criminals can be
so wretched, as they who having God for their Lord, do from that mild rule
desert to this grievous tyranny, and this when their act brings after it so much
harm even here? For indeed their loss is unspeakable by so doing: there are suits,
and molestations, and strifes, and toils, and a blinding of the soul; and what is
more grievous than all, one falls away from the highest blessings; for such a
blessing it is to be God's servant.
3. Having now, as you see, in all ways taught the advantage of contemning

riches, as well for the very preservation of the riches, as for the pleasure of the
soul, and for acquiring self-command, and for the securing of godliness; He
proceeds to establish the practicability of this command. For this especially
pertains to the best legislation, not only to enjoin what is expedient, but also to
make it possible. Therefore He also goes on to say,
"Take no thought for your life, what you shall eat."
That is, lest they should say, "What then? If we cast all away, how shall we
be able to live?" At this objection, in what follows, He makes a stand, very
seasonably. For as surely as if at the beginning He had said, "Take no thought,"
the word would have seemed burdensome; so surely, now that He has shown the
mischief arising out of covetousness, His admonition coming after is made easy
to receive. Wherefore neither did He now simply say, "Take no thought," but He
added the reason, and so enjoined this. After having said, "You cannot serve God
and mammon," He added, "therefore I say unto you, take no thought. Therefore;"
for what? Because of the unspeakable loss. For the hurt you receive is not in
riches only, rather the wound is in the most vital parts, and in that which is the
overthrow of your salvation; casting you as it does out from God, who made
you, and cares for you, and loves you.
"Therefore I say unto you, take no thought." Thus, after He has shown the
hurt to be unspeakable, then and not before He makes the commandment stricter;
in that He not only bids us cast away what we have, but forbids to take thought
even for our necessary food, saying, "Take no thought for your soul, what you
shall eat." Not because the soul needs food, for it is incorporeal; but He spoke
according to the common custom. For though it needs not food, yet can it not
endure to remain in the body, except that be fed. And in saying this, He puts it
not simply so, but here also He brings up arguments, some from those things
which we have already, and some from other examples.
From what we have already, thus saying:
"Is not the soul more than meat, and the body more than the raiment?"
He therefore that has given the greater, how shall He not give the less? He