SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.7.

1:23), saying: "I call God to witness upon my soul."
As to Joseph's oath by the health of Pharaoh this may be
understood in both ways: either by way of a curse, as though he
pledged Pharao's health to God; or by way of contestation, as
though he appealed to the truth of God's justice which the princes of
the earth are appointed to execute.
Reply to Objection 1: Our Lord forbade us to swear by creatures so
as to give them the reverence due to God. Hence Jerome adds that
"the Jews, through swearing by the angels and the like, worshipped
creatures with a Divine honor."
In the same sense a cleric is punished, according to the canons (22,
qu. i, can. Clericum, Objection 2), for swearing by a creature, for this
savors of the blasphemy of unbelief. Hence in the next chapter, it is
said: "If any one swears by God's hair or head, or otherwise utter
blasphemy against God, and he be in ecclesiastical orders, let him
be degraded."
This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: Religious worship is shown to one whose
testimony is invoked by oath: hence the prohibition (Ex. 23:13): "By
the name of strange gods you shall not swear." But religious
worship is not given to creatures employed in an oath in the ways
mentioned above.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether an oath has a binding force?

Objection 1: It would seem that an oath has no binding force. An
oath is employed in order to confirm the truth of an assertion. But
when a person makes an assertion about the future his assertion is
true, though it may not be verified. Thus Paul lied not (2 Cor. 1:15,
seqq.) though he went not to Corinth, as he had said he would (1
Cor. 16:5). Therefore it seems that an oath is not binding.
Objection 2: Further, virtue is not contrary to virtue (Categ. viii, 22).
Now an oath is an act of virtue, as stated above (Article 4). But it
would sometimes be contrary to virtue, or an obstacle thereto, if one
were to fulfil what one has sworn to do: for instance, if one were to
swear to commit a sin, or to desist from some virtuous action.
Therefore an oath is not always binding.
Objection 3: Further, sometimes a man is compelled against his will
to promise something under oath. Now, "such a person is loosed by
the Roman Pontiffs from the bond of his oath" (Extra, De Jurejur.,
cap. Verum in ea quaest., etc.). Therefore an oath is not always
binding.
Objection 4: Further, no person can be under two opposite
obligations. Yet sometimes the person who swears and the person
to whom he swears have opposite intentions. Therefore an oath
cannot always be binding.
On the contrary, It is written (Mt. 5:33): "Thou shalt perform thy oaths
to the Lord."
I answer that, An obligation implies something to be done or omitted;
so that apparently it regards neither the declaratory oath (which is
about something present or past), nor such oaths as are about
something to be effected by some other cause (as, for example, if
one were to swear that it would rain tomorrow), but only such as are
about things to be done by the person who swears.
Now just as a declaratory oath, which is about the future or the
present, should contain the truth, so too ought the oath which is
about something to be done by us in the future. Yet there is a
difference: since, in the oath that is about the past or present, this