and makes clean the man who had been fast bound with [the chain of] sin. In like manner it was
with regard to Solomon, while he continued to judge uprightly, and to declare the wisdom of God,
and built the temple as the type of truth, and set forth the glories of God, and announced the peace
about to come upon the nations, and prefigured the kingdom of Christ, and spake three thousand
parables about the Lord's advent, and five thousand songs, singing praise to God, and expounded
the wisdom of God in creation, [discoursing] as to the nature of every tree, every herb, and of all
fowls, quadrupeds, and fishes; and he said, "Will God whom the heavens cannot contain, really
dwell with men upon the earth?" And he pleased God, and was the admiration of all; and all
kings of the earth sought an interview with him (quærebant faciem ejus) that they might hear the
wisdom which God had conferred upon him. The queen of the south, too, came to him from the
ends of the earth, to ascertain the wisdom that was in him: she whom the Lord also referred to
as one who should rise up in the judgment with the nations of those men who do hear His words,
and do not believe in Him, and should condemn them, inasmuch as she submitted herself to the
wisdom announced by the servant of God, while these men despised that wisdom which proceeded
directly from the Son of God. For Solomon was a servant, but Christ is indeed the Son of God, and
the Lord of Solomon. While, therefore, he served God without blame, and ministered to His
dispensations, then was he glorified: but when he took wives from all nations, and permitted them
to set up idols in Israel, the Scripture spake thus concerning him: "And King Solomon was a lover
of women, and he took to himself foreign women; and it came to pass, when Solomon was old, his
heart was not perfect with the Lord his God. And the foreign women turned away his heart after
strange gods. And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord: he did not walk after the Lord, as did
David his father. And the Lord was angry with Solomon; for his heart was not perfect with the
Lord, as was the heart of David his father." The Scripture has thus sufficiently reproved him, as
the presbyter remarked, in order that no flesh may glory in the sight of the Lord.
2. It was for this reason, too, that the Lord descended into the regions beneath the earth, preaching
His advent there also, and [declaring] the remission of sins received by those who believe in Him.
Now all those believed in Him who had hope towards Him, that is, those who proclaimed His
advent, and submitted to His dispensations, the righteous men, the prophets, and the patriarchs, to
whom He remitted sins in the same way as He did to us, which sins we should not lay to their
charge, if we would not despise the grace of God. For as these men did not impute unto us (the
Gentiles) our transgressions, which we wrought before Christ was manifested among us, so also it
is not right that we should lay blame upon those who sinned before Christ's coming. For "all men