to mention now. For having shown, from the grounds given, that the Gentile is
greater than the Jew; in the inference, and the conclusion of his reasoning, he
does not state it, in order not to exasperate the Jew. But to make what I have said
clearer, I will give the very words of the Apostle. For after saying, that it is not
the hearers of the Law, but the doers of the Law, that shall be justified, it
followed to say, "For when the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by nature
the things contained in the Law," they are much better than those who are
instructed by the Law. But this he does not say, but he stays at the encomium of
the Gentiles, and does not yet awhile carry on his discourse by way of
comparison, that so at least the Jew may receive what is said. And so he does not
word it as I was doing, but how? "For when the Gentiles, which have not the
Law, do by nature the things contained in the Law, these, not having the Law, are
a law unto themselves; which show the work of the Law, written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness." For the conscience and reason does
suffice in the Law's stead. By this he showed, first, that God made man
independent, so as to be able to choose virtue and to avoid vice. And be not
surprised that he proves this point, not once or twice, but several times. For this
topic was very needful for him to prove owing to those who say, Why ever is it,
that Christ came but now? And where in times before was the (most manuscripts
this mighty) scheme of Providence? Now it is these that he is at present beating
off by the way, when he shows that even in former times, and before the Law
was given, the human race (Gr. nature) fully enjoyed the care of Providence. For
"that which may be known of God was manifest in them," and they knew what
was good, and what bad; by means whereof they judged others, which he
reproaches them with, when he says, "wherein you judge another, you condemn
yourself." But in the case of the Jews, besides what has been mentioned, there
was the Law, and not reason or conscience only. And why does he put the words
"accusing or else excusing?"— for, if they have a Law written, and show the
work of it in them, how comes reason to be able to accuse them still? But he is
not any longer speaking of those only who do well, but also of mankind (Gr. the

nature) universally. For then our reasonings stand up, some accusing and some
excusing. And at that tribunal a man needs no other accuser. Then to add to their
fear, he does not say the sins of men, but the secrets of men. For since he said,
"Do you think, that judgest them that do such things, and doest the same, that
you shall escape the judgment of God;" that you may not expect such a sentence
as you pass yourself, but may know, that that of God is far more exact than your
own, he brings in, "the secrets of men," and adds, "through Jesus Christ
according to my Gospel." For men sit in judgment upon overt acts alone. And
above too he spoke of the Father alone, but as soon as he had crushed them with
fear, he brought in the mention of Christ also. But he does not do barely this, but
even here, after having made mention of the Father, he so introduces Him. And
by the same things he raises the dignity of his preaching. For this preaching, he
means, openly speaks out what nature taught by anticipation. Do you see with
what wisdom he has bound them both to the Gospel and to Christ, and
demonstrated that our affairs come not here to a stand, but travel further. And
this he made good before also, when he said, "you store up to yourself wrath
against the day of wrath:" and here again, "God shall judge the secrets of men."
Now let each man enter into his own conscience, and reckoning up his
transgressions, let him call himself to a strict account, that we be not then
condemned with the world. [1 Corinthians 11:32] For fearful is that court, awful
the tribunal, full of trembling the accounts, a river of fire rolls along ([ἕ]
[λκεται]). "A brother does not redeem: shall man redeem?" [Psalm 49:8,
Septuagint] Call then to mind what is said in the Gospel, the Angels running to
and fro, of the bridechamber being shut, of the lamps going out, of the powers
which drag to the furnaces. And consider this, that if a secret deed of any one of
us were brought forth into the midst, today, before the Church only, what could
he do but pray to perish, and to have the earth to gape for him, rather than have
so many witnesses of his wickedness? How then shall we feel, when, before the
whole world, all things are brought into the midst, in a theatre so bright and
open, with both those known and those unknown to us seeing into everything?