"animals with an aerial body and a passive soul," as Apuleius says,
quoted by Augustine (De Civ. Dei viii, 16). And this is the second of
the opinions mentioned above: according to which it could be said
that demons are subject to heavenly bodies in the same way as we
have said man is subject thereto (Article 4). But this opinion is
proved to be false from what we have said above (Question 51,
Article 1): for we hold that demons are spiritual substances not
united to bodies. Hence it is clear that they are subject to the action
of heavenly bodies neither essentially nor accidentally, neither
directly nor indirectly.
Reply to Objection 1: That demons harass men, according to certain
phases of the moon, happens in two ways. Firstly, they do so in
order to "defame God's creature," namely, the moon; as Jerome (In
Matt. iv, 24) and Chrysostom (Hom. lvii in Matt.) say. Secondly,
because as they are unable to effect anything save by means of the
natural forces, as stated above (Question 114, Article 4, ad 2) they
take into account the aptitude of bodies for the intended result. Now
it is manifest that "the brain is the most moist of all the parts of the
body," as Aristotle says [De Part. Animal. ii, 7: De Sens. et Sensato ii:
De Somn. et Vigil. iii]: wherefore it is the most subject to the action
of the moon, the property of which is to move what is moist. And it is
precisely in the brain that animal forces culminate: wherefore the
demons, according to certain phases of the moon, disturb man's
imagination, when they observe that the brain is thereto disposed.
Reply to Objection 2: Demons when summoned through certain
constellations, come for two reasons. Firstly, in order to lead man
into the error of believing that there is some Divine power in the
stars. Secondly, because they consider that under certain
constellations corporeal matter is better disposed for the result for
which they are summoned.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 6), the
"demons are enticed through various kinds of stones, herbs, trees,
animals, songs, rites, not as an animal is enticed by food, but as a
spirit by signs"; that is to say, forasmuch as these things are offered
to them in token of the honor due to God, of which they are
covetous.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether heavenly bodies impose necessity on

things subject to their action?
Objection 1: It would seem that heavenly bodies impose necessity
on things subject to their action. For given a sufficient cause, the
effect follows of necessity. But heavenly bodies are a sufficient
cause of their effects. Since, therefore, heavenly bodies, with their
movements and dispositions, are necessary beings; it seems that
their effects follow of necessity.
Objection 2: Further, an agent's effect results of necessity in matter,
when the power of the agent is such that it can subject the matter to
itself entirely. But the entire matter of inferior bodies is subject to the
power of heavenly bodies, since this is a higher power than theirs.
Therefore the effect of the heavenly bodies is of necessity received
in corporeal matter.
Objection 3: Further, if the effect of the heavenly body does not
follow of necessity, this is due to some hindering cause. But any
corporeal cause, that might possibly hinder the effect of a heavenly
body, must of necessity be reducible to some heavenly principle:
since the heavenly bodies are the causes of all that takes place here
below. Therefore, since also that heavenly principle is necessary, it
follows that the effect of the heavenly body is necessarily hindered.
Consequently it would follow that all that takes place here below
happens of necessity.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Somn. et Vigil. [De Divin.
per Somn. ii]): "It is not incongruous that many of the signs
observed in bodies, of occurrences in the heavens, such as rain and
wind, should not be fulfilled." Therefore not all the effects of
heavenly bodies take place of necessity.
I answer that, This question is partly solved by what was said above
(Article 4); and in part presents some difficulty. For it was shown that
although the action of heavenly bodies produces certain inclinations
in corporeal nature, the will nevertheless does not of necessity
follow these inclinations. Therefore there is nothing to prevent the
effect of heavenly bodies being hindered by the action of the will, not
only in man himself, but also in other things to which human action
extends.