FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.4.

Accordingly the first kind of likeness causes love of friendship or
well-being. For the very fact that two men are alike, having, as it
were, one form, makes them to be, in a manner, one in that form:
thus two men are one thing in the species of humanity, and two
white men are one thing in whiteness. Hence the affections of one
tend to the other, as being one with him; and he wishes good to him
as to himself. But the second kind of likeness causes love of
concupiscence, or friendship founded on usefulness or pleasure:
because whatever is in potentiality, as such, has the desire for its
act; and it takes pleasure in its realization, if it be a sentient and
cognitive being.
Now it has been stated above (Question 26, Article 4), that in the love
of concupiscence, the lover, properly speaking, loves himself, in
willing the good that he desires. But a man loves himself more than
another: because he is one with himself substantially, whereas with
another he is one only in the likeness of some form. Consequently, if
this other's likeness to him arising from the participation of a form,
hinders him from gaining the good that he loves, he becomes hateful
to him, not for being like him, but for hindering him from gaining his
own good. This is why "potters quarrel among themselves," because
they hinder one another's gain: and why "there are contentions
among the proud," because they hinder one another in attaining the
position they covet.
Hence the Reply to the First Objection is evident.
Reply to Objection 2: Even when a man loves in another what he
loves not in himself, there is a certain likeness of proportion:
because as the latter is to that which is loved in him, so is the former
to that which he loves in himself: for instance, if a good singer love a
good writer, we can see a likeness of proportion, inasmuch as each
one has that which is becoming to him in respect of his art.
Reply to Objection 3: He that loves what he needs, bears a likeness
to what he loves, as potentiality bears a likeness to its act, as stated
above.
Reply to Objection 4: According to the same likeness of potentiality
to its act, the illiberal man loves the man who is liberal, in so far as
he expects from him something which he desires. The same applies
to the man who is constant in his friendship as compared to one who

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.4.

is inconstant. For in either case friendship seems to be based on
usefulness. We might also say that although not all men have these
virtues in the complete habit, yet they have them according to
certain seminal principles in the reason, in force of which principles
the man who is not virtuous loves the virtuous man, as being in
conformity with his own natural reason.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.27, C.5.