Gentiles? Because he wishes to persuade them that they also ought to draw close
to the Gentiles. Be not therefore dismayed at my sufferings. The sinews of death
are unstrung. It is not as a malefactor that I suffer, but because I am "a teacher of
the Gentiles." At the same time he makes his discourse worthy of credit.
Ver. 12. "For the which cause I also suffer these things, nevertheless I am
not ashamed. For I know Whom I have believed, and am persuaded that He is
able to keep that which I have committed unto Him against that day."
"I am not ashamed," he says. For are chains, are sufferings, a matter for
shame? Be not then ashamed! You see how he illustrates his teaching by his
works. "These things," he says, "I suffer": I am cast into prison, I am banished;
"For I know Whom I have believed, and am persuaded that He is able to keep
that which I have committed to Him against That Day." What is "that which is
committed"? The faith, the preaching of the Gospel. He, who committed this to
him, he says, will preserve it unimpaired. I suffer everything, that I may not be
despoiled of this treasure, and I am not ashamed at these things, so long as it is
preserved uninjured. Or he calls the Faithful the charge which God committed to
him, or which he committed to God. For he says, "Now I commit you to the
Lord." [Acts 20:32] That is, these things will not be unprofitable to me. And in
Timothy is seen the fruit of the charge thus "committed." You see that he is
insensible to sufferings, from the hope that he entertains of his disciples.
Moral. Such ought a Teacher to be, so to regard his disciples, to think them
everything. "Now we live," he says, "if you stand fast in the Lord." And again,
"What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even you in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ?" [1 Thessalonians 3:8, and 2:19] You see his
anxiety in this matter, his regard for the good of his disciples, not less than for
his own. For teachers ought to surpass natural parents, to be more zealous than
they. And it becomes their children to be kindly affectioned towards them. For
he says, "Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they
watch for your souls as they that must give account." [Hebrews 13:17] For say,
is he subject to so dangerous a responsibility, and are you not willing to obey

him, and that too, for your own benefit? For though his own state should be
good, yet as long as you are in a bad condition his anxiety continues, he has a
double account to render. And consider what it is to be responsible and anxious
for each of those who are under his rule. What honor would you have reckoned
equal, what service, in requital of such dangers? You can not offer an equivalent.
For you have not yet devoted your soul for him, but he lays down his life for
you, and if he lays it not down here, when the occasion requires it, he loses it
There. But you are not willing to submit even in words. This is the prime cause
of all these evils, that the authority of rulers is neglected, that there is no
reverence, no fear. He says, "Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
yourselves." But now all is turned upside down and confounded. And this I say
not for the sake of the rulers; (for what benefit will they have of the honor they
receive from us, except so far as we are rendered obedient;) but I say it for your
advantage. For with respect to the future, they will not be benefited by the honor
done them, but receive the greater condemnation, neither will they be injured as
to the future by ill treatment, but will have the more excuse. But all this I desire
to be done for your own sakes. For when rulers are honored by their people, this
too is reckoned against them; as in the case of Eli it is said, "Did I not choose
him out of his father's house?" [1 Samuel 2:27] But when they are insulted, as in
the instance of Samuel, God said, "They have not rejected you, but they have
rejected Me." [1 Samuel 8:7] Therefore insult is their gain, honor their burden.
What I say, therefore, is for your sakes, not for theirs. He that honors the Priest,
will honor God also; and he who has learned to despise the Priest, will in process
of time insult God. "He that receives you," He says, "receives Me." [Matthew
10:40] "Hold my priests in honor" [Sirach 7:31?], He says. The Jews learned to
despise God, because they despised Moses, and would have stoned him. For
when a man is piously disposed towards the Priest, he is much more so towards
God. And even if the Priest be wicked, God seeing that you respect him, though
unworthy of honor, through reverence to Him, will Himself reward you. For if
"he that receives a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's