because you enjoy them in common with others, and dost not possess them alone
like money; it is not money, but mere covetousness, which you seem to me to be
in love with: nor would even the money be an object of your desire, if it had
been placed within reach of all in common.
8. Therefore, since we have found the beloved object, I mean Covetousness,
come let me show you how she hates and abhors you, how many swords she
sharpens against you, how many pits she digs, how many nooses she ties, how
many precipices she prepares; that thus at any rate you may do away with the
charm. Whence then are we to obtain this knowledge? From the highways, from
the wars, from the sea, from the courts of justice. For she has both filled the sea
with blood, and the swords of the judges she often reddens contrary to law, and
arms those who on the highway lie in wait day and night, and persuades men to
forget nature, and makes parricides and matricides, and introduces all sorts of
evils into man's life. Which is the reason why Paul entitles her "a root of these
things." [1 Timothy 6:10] She suffers not her lovers to be in any better condition
than those who work in the mines. For as they, perpetually shut up in darkness
and in chains, labor unprofitably; so also these buried in the caves of avarice, no
one using any force with them, voluntarily draw on their punishment, binding on
themselves fetters that cannot be broken. And those condemned to the mines at
least when even comes on, are released from their toils; but these both by day
and night are digging in these wretched mines. And to those there is a definite
limit of that hard labor, but these know no limit, but the more they dig so much
the greater hardship do they desire. And what if those do it unwillingly, but these
of their own will? In that you tell me of the grievous part of the disease, that it is
even impossible for them to be rid of it, since they do not so much as hate their
wretchedness. But as a swine in mud, so also do these delight to wallow in the
noisome mire of avarice, suffering worse things than those condemned ones. As
to the fact that they are in a worse condition, hear the circumstances of the one,
and then you will know the state of the other.
Now it is said that that soil which is impregnated with gold has certain

clefts and recesses in those gloomy caverns. The malefactor then condemned to
labor in that place, taking for that purpose a lamp and a mattock, so, we are told,
enters within, and carries with him a cruse to drop oil from thence into the lamp,
because there is darkness even by day, without a ray of light, as I said before.
Then when the time of day calls him to his wretched meal, himself, they say, is
ignorant of the time, but his jailor from above striking violently on the cave, by
that clattering sound declares to those who are at work below the end of the day.
Do ye not shudder when you hear all this? Let us see now, whether there be
not things more grievous than these in the case of the covetous. For these too, in
the first place, have a severer jailor, viz. avarice, and so much severer, as that
besides their body he chains also their soul. And this darkness also is more awful
than that. For it is not subject to sense, but they producing it within, wherever
they go, carry it about with themselves. For the eye of their soul is put out:
which is the reason why more than all Christ calls them wretched, saying, "But if
the light that is in you be darkness, how great is that darkness." [Matthew 6:23]
And they for their part have at least a lamp shining, but these are deprived even
of this beam of light; and therefore every day they fall into countless pitfalls.
And the condemned when night overtakes them have a respite, sailing into that
calm port which is common to all the unfortunate, I mean the night: but against
the covetous even this harbor is blocked up by their own avarice: such grievous
thoughts have they even at night, since then, without disturbance from any one,
at full leisure they cut themselves to pieces.
Such are their circumstances in this world; but those in the next, what
discourse shall exhibit? The intolerable furnaces, the rivers burning with fire, the
gnashing of teeth, the chains never to be loosed, the envenomed worm, the
rayless gloom, the never-ending miseries. Let us fear them, beloved, let us fear
the fountain of so great punishments, the insatiate madness, the destroyer of our
salvation. For it is impossible at the same time to love both money and your
soul. Let us be convinced that wealth is dust and ashes, that it leaves us when we
depart hence, or rather that even before our departure it oftentimes darts away