passive power to the female. And as among animals there is a vital
operation nobler than generation, to which their life is principally
directed; therefore the male sex is not found in continual union with
the female in perfect animals, but only at the time of coition; so that
we may consider that by this means the male and female are one, as
in plants they are always united; although in some cases one of
them preponderates, and in some the other. But man is yet further
ordered to a still nobler vital action, and that is intellectual operation.
Therefore there was greater reason for the distinction of these two
forces in man; so that the female should be produced separately
from the male; although they are carnally united for generation.
Therefore directly after the formation of woman, it was said: "And
they shall be two in one flesh" (Gn. 2:24).
Reply to Objection 1: As regards the individual nature, woman is
defective and misbegotten, for the active force in the male seed
tends to the production of a perfect likeness in the masculine sex;
while the production of woman comes from defect in the active force
or from some material indisposition, or even from some external
influence; such as that of a south wind, which is moist, as the
Philosopher observes (De Gener. Animal. iv, 2). On the other hand,
as regards human nature in general, woman is not misbegotten, but
is included in nature's intention as directed to the work of
generation. Now the general intention of nature depends on God,
Who is the universal Author of nature. Therefore, in producing
nature, God formed not only the male but also the female.
Reply to Objection 2: Subjection is twofold. One is servile, by virtue
of which a superior makes use of a subject for his own benefit; and
this kind of subjection began after sin. There is another kind of
subjection which is called economic or civil, whereby the superior
makes use of his subjects for their own benefit and good; and this
kind of subjection existed even before sin. For good order would
have been wanting in the human family if some were not governed
by others wiser than themselves. So by such a kind of subjection
woman is naturally subject to man, because in man the discretion of
reason predominates. Nor is inequality among men excluded by the
state of innocence, as we shall prove (Question 96, Article 3).
Reply to Objection 3: If God had deprived the world of all those
things which proved an occasion of sin, the universe would have
been imperfect. Nor was it fitting for the common good to be
destroyed in order that individual evil might be avoided; especially

as God is so powerful that He can direct any evil to a good end.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether woman should have been made from

man?
Objection 1: It would seem that woman should not have been made
from man. For sex belongs both to man and animals. But in the other
animals the female was not made from the male. Therefore neither
should it have been so with man.
Objection 2: Further, things of the same species are of the same
matter. But male and female are of the same species. Therefore, as
man was made of the slime of the earth, so woman should have been
made of the same, and not from man.
Objection 3: Further, woman was made to be a helpmate to man in
the work of generation. But close relationship makes a person unfit
for that office; hence near relations are debarred from intermarriage,
as is written (Lev. 18:6). Therefore woman should not have been
made from man.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 17:5): "He created of him," that
is, out of man, "a helpmate like to himself," that is, woman.
I answer that, When all things were first formed, it was more suitable
for the woman to be made from man that (for the female to be from
the male) in other animals. First, in order thus to give the first man a
certain dignity consisting in this, that as God is the principle of the
whole universe, so the first man, in likeness to God, was the
principle of the whole human race. Wherefore Paul says that "God
made the whole human race from one" (Acts 17:26). Secondly, that
man might love woman all the more, and cleave to her more closely,
knowing her to be fashioned from himself. Hence it is written (Gn.
2:23,24): "She was taken out of man, wherefore a man shall leave
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife." This was most
necessary as regards the human race, in which the male and female
live together for life; which is not the case with other animals.
Thirdly, because, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 12), the human
male and female are united, not only for generation, as with other
animals, but also for the purpose of domestic life, in which each has
his or her particular duty, and in which the man is the head of the
woman. Wherefore it was suitable for the woman to be made out of
man, as out of her principle. Fourthly, there is a sacramental reason