in a thing bereft of movement, which is always the same, there is no
before or after. As therefore the idea of time consists in the
numbering of before and after in movement; so likewise in the
apprehension of the uniformity of what is outside of movement,
consists the idea of eternity.
Further, those things are said to be measured by time which have a
beginning and an end in time, because in everything which is moved
there is a beginning, and there is an end. But as whatever is wholly
immutable can have no succession, so it has no beginning, and no
end.
Thus eternity is known from two sources: first, because what is
eternal is interminable---that is, has no beginning nor end (that is, no
term either way); secondly, because eternity has no succession,
being simultaneously whole.
Reply to Objection 1: Simple things are usually defined by way of
negation; as "a point is that which has no parts." Yet this is not to be
taken as if the negation belonged to their essence, but because our
intellect which first apprehends compound things, cannot attain to
the knowledge of simple things except by removing the opposite.
Reply to Objection 2: What is truly eternal, is not only being, but also
living; and life extends to operation, which is not true of being. Now
the protraction of duration seems to belong to operation rather than
to being; hence time is the numbering of movement.
Reply to Objection 3: Eternity is called whole, not because it has
parts, but because it is wanting in nothing.
Reply to Objection 4: As God, although incorporeal, is named in
Scripture metaphorically by corporeal names, so eternity though
simultaneously whole, is called by names implying time and
succession.
Reply to Objection 5: Two things are to be considered in time: time
itself, which is successive; and the "now" of time, which is
imperfect. Hence the expression "simultaneously-whole" is used to
remove the idea of time, and the word "perfect" is used to exclude
the "now" of time.

Reply to Objection 6: Whatever is possessed, is held firmly and
quietly; therefore to designate the immutability and permanence of
eternity, we use the word "possession."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether God is eternal?

Objection 1: It seems that God is not eternal. For nothing made can
be predicated of God; for Boethius says (De Trin. iv) that, "The now
that flows away makes time, the now that stands still makes
eternity;" and Augustine says (Octog. Tri. Quaest. qu. 28) "that God
is the author of eternity." Therefore God is not eternal.
Objection 2: Further, what is before eternity, and after eternity, is not
measured by eternity. But, as Aristotle says (De Causis), "God is
before eternity and He is after eternity": for it is written that "the Lord
shall reign for eternity, and beyond" (Ex. 15:18). Therefore to be
eternal does not belong to God.
Objection 3: Further, eternity is a kind of measure. But to be
measured belongs not to God. Therefore it does not belong to Him to
be eternal.
Objection 4: Further, in eternity, there is no present, past or future,
since it is simultaneously whole; as was said in the preceding article.
But words denoting present, past and future time are applied to God
in Scripture. Therefore God is not eternal.
On the contrary, Athanasius says in his Creed: "The Father is
eternal, the Son is eternal, the Holy Ghost is eternal."
I answer that, The idea of eternity follows immutability, as the idea of
time follows movement, as appears from the preceding article.
Hence, as God is supremely immutable, it supremely belongs to Him
to be eternal. Nor is He eternal only; but He is His own eternity;
whereas, no other being is its own duration, as no other is its own
being. Now God is His own uniform being; and hence as He is His
own essence, so He is His own eternity.
Reply to Objection 1: The "now" that stands still, is said to make
eternity according to our apprehension. As the apprehension of time
is caused in us by the fact that we apprehend the flow of the "now,"
so the apprehension of eternity is caused in us by our apprehending
the "now" standing still. When Augustine says that "God is the
author of eternity," this is to be understood of participated eternity.
For God communicates His eternity to some in the same way as He