and ours: no indeed, but as the difference between angels and men. Say now, if
one could fetch down an angel from heaven, and should bid him stand here and
listen to our preaching, as one whose duty it is to conform himself thereto, would
it not be shameful and preposterous? But if to be yet, like children, under
teaching about these things be ridiculous; what must it be, not even to attend to
these things: how great the condemnation, how great the shame! To be Christians
still, and to have to learn that it is not right to swear! However, let us put up with
that, lest we incur even worse ridicule.
Well, then, let us speak to you today from the Old Testament. What does it
tell us? "Accustom not your mouth to swearing; neither use yourself to the
naming of the Holy One." And why? "For as a servant that is continually beaten
shall not be without a blue mark, so he that swears." [Sirach 23:10] See the
discernment of this wise man. He did not say, "Accustom not to swearing" your
mind, but "your mouth"; because being altogether an affair of the mouth, thus it
is easily remedied. For at last it becomes a habit without intention; as for
instance, there are many who entering the public baths, as soon as they have
passed the threshold, cross [Hom. in 1 Corinthians 11:7] themselves
([σφραγίζονται]). This the hand has got to do, without any one's bidding, by
force of habit. Again, at the lighting of a candle, often when the mind is intent on
something else, the hand makes the sign. In the same way also the mouth,
without concurrence of the mind, articulates the word, from mere habit, and the
whole affair is in the tongue. "Neither use yourself," he says, "to the naming of
the Holy One. For as a servant that is continually beaten shall not be without a
blue mark, so he that swears." He speaks not here of false oaths, but he cuts
down all oaths, and to them also assigns their punishment. Why then, swearing is
a sin. For such in truth is the soul; full of all these ulcers, all these scars. But you
do not see them? Yes, this is the mischief of it; and yet you might see if you
wished; for God has given you eyes. With eyes of this kind did the Prophet see,
when he said, "My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness."
[Psalm 38:5] We have despised God, we have hated that good Name, we have

trodden Christ under foot, we have lost all reverence, none names the Name of
God with honor. Yet if you love any one, even at his name you start to your feet;
but God you thus continually invoke, and make nothing of it. Call upon Him for
the benefit of your enemy; call upon Him for the salvation of your own soul;
then he will be present, then you will delight Him; whereas now you provoke
Him to anger. Call upon Him as Stephen did; "Lord," he said, "lay not this sin to
their charge." [Acts 7:59] Call upon Him as did the wife of Elkanah, with tears
and sobs, and prayers. [1 Samuel 1:10] I prevent you not, rather I earnestly
exhort you to it. Call upon him as Moses called upon Him, yea, cried,
interceding for those who had driven him into banishment. For you to make
mention at random of any person of consideration, is taken as an insult: and do
you bandy God about in your talk, in season, out of season? I do not want to
hinder you from keeping God always in your mind: nay, this I even desire and
pray for, only that you should do this, so as to honor Him. Great good would this
have done us, if we had called upon God only when we ought, and for what we
ought. And why, I would ask, were such miracles wrought in the Apostles' times,
and not in ours? And yet it is the same God, the same Name. But no, the case is
not the same. For then they called upon Him only for those objects which I have
mentioned; whereas we call upon Him not for these, but quite other purposes.—
If a man refuse to believe you, and that is why you swear, say to him, "Believe
me:" however, if you will needs make oath, swear by yourself. I say this, not to
set up a law against Christ's law; God forbid; for it is said. Let your yea be yea,
and your nay, nay [Matthew 5:37]: but by way of coming down to your present
level, that I may more easily lead you to the practice of this commandment, and
divert you from this tyrannical habit. How many who have done well in other
respects, have been undone by these practices! Shall I tell you why it was
permitted the ancients to take oaths? (for to take false oaths, was not permitted to
them either.) Because they swore by idols. But are you not ashamed to rest in
laws, by which they in their infirmity were led on to something better? It is true,
when I take a Gentile in hand, I do not immediately lay this injunction upon him,