honor which comes of the multitude, making them cowardly, ignoble, flatterers,
hypocrites.
Why, for instance, did the Pharisees say that Christ was possessed? Was it
not because they were greedy of the honor of the multitude?
And whence did the multitude pass the right judgment on Him? Was it not
because this disease had no hold on them? For nothing, nothing so much tends to
make men lawless and foolish, as gaping after the honor of the multitude.
Nothing makes them glorious and immoveable, like despising the same.
Wherefore also great vigor of soul is needed for him who is to hold out
against such an impulse, and so violent a blast. For as when things are
prosperous, he prefers himself to all, so when he undergoes the contrary, he
would fain bury himself alive: and this is to him both hell, and the kingdom,
when he has come to be overwhelmed by this passion.
Is all this then, I pray you, matter of envyings, and not rather of
lamentations and tears? Every one surely can see. But you do the same, in
envying one in that kind of credit, as if a person, seeing another bound and
scourged and torn by innumerable wild beasts, were to envy him his wounds and
stripes. For in fact, as many men as the multitude comprises, so many bonds
also, so many tyrants has he: and, what is yet more grievous, each of these has a
different mind: and they all judge whatever comes into their heads concerning
him that is a slave to them, without examining into anything; but whatever is the
decision of this or that person, this they also confirm.
What manner of waves then, what tempest so grievous as this? Yea, such a
one is both puffed up in a moment by the pleasure, and is under water again
easily, being ever in fluctuation, in tranquillity never. Thus, before the time of
the assembly, and of the contests in speaking, he is possessed with anxiety and
fear; but after the assembly he is either dead with despondency, or rejoices on the
contrary without measure; a worse thing than sorrow. For that pleasure is not a
less evil than sorrow is plain from the effect it has on the soul; how light it
makes it, and unsteady, and fluttering.

And this one may see even from those of former times. When, for instance,
was David to be admired; when he rejoiced, or when he was in anguish? When,
the people of the Jews? Groaning and calling upon God, or exulting in the
wilderness, and worshipping the calf? Wherefore Solomon too, who best of all
men knew what pleasure is, says, "It is better to go to the house of mourning,
than to the house of laughter." [Ecclesiastes 7:2] Wherefore Christ also blesses
the one, saying, "Blessed are they that mourn," [Matthew 5:4] but the other sort
He bewails, saying, "Woe unto you that laugh, for you shall weep." [Luke 6:25]
And very fitly. For in delight the soul is more relaxed and effeminate, but in
mourning it is braced up, and grows sober, and is delivered from the whole
swarm of passions, and becomes higher and stronger.
Knowing then all these things, let us shun the glory that comes from the
multitude, and the pleasure that springs therefrom, that we may win the real and
everlasting glory; unto which may we all attain, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might, forever and ever.
Amen.