SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.6.

the part of the good to which the human appetite is inordinately
subjected; and then the lesser the good, the more deformed is the
sin: for it is more shameful to be subject to a lower than to a higher
good. Now the good of external things is the lowest of human goods:
since it is less than the good of the body, and this is less than the
good of the soul, which is less than the Divine good. From this point
of view the sin of covetousness, whereby the human appetite is
subjected even to external things, has in a way a greater deformity.
Since, however, corruption or privation of good is the formal element
in sin, while conversion to a mutable good is the material element,
the gravity of the sin is to be judged from the point of view of the
good corrupted, rather than from that of the good to which the
appetite is subjected. Hence we must assert that covetousness is
not simply the most grievous of sins.
Reply to Objection 1: These authorities speak of covetousness on
the part of the good to which the appetite is subjected. Hence
(Ecclus. 10:10) it is given as a reason that the covetous man "setteth
his own soul to sale"; because, to wit, he exposes his soul---that is,
his life---to danger for the sake of money. Hence the text continues:
"Because while he liveth he hath cast away"---that is, despised---"his
bowels," in order to make money. Tully also adds that it is the mark
of a "narrow mind," namely, that one be willing to be subject to
money.
Reply to Objection 2: Augustine is taking greed generally, in
reference to any temporal good, not in its special acceptation for
covetousness: because greed for any temporal good is the bane of
charity, inasmuch as a man turns away from the Divine good through
cleaving to a temporal good.
Reply to Objection 3: The sin against the Holy Ghost is incurable in
one way, covetousness in another. For the sin against the Holy
Ghost is incurable by reason of contempt: for instance, because a
man contemns God's mercy, or His justice, or some one of those
things whereby man's sins are healed: wherefore incurability of this
kind points to the greater gravity of the sin. on the other hand,
covetousness is incurable on the part of a human defect; a thing
which human nature ever seeks to remedy, since the more deficient
one is the more one seeks relief from external things, and
consequently the more one gives way to covetousness. Hence
incurability of this kind is an indication not of the sin being more
grievous, but of its being somewhat more dangerous.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.117, C.6.

Reply to Objection 4: Covetousness is compared to idolatry on
account of a certain likeness that it bears to it: because the covetous
man, like the idolater, subjects himself to an external creature,
though not in the same way. For the idolater subjects himself to an
external creature by paying it Divine honor, whereas the covetous
man subjects himself to an external creature by desiring it
immoderately for use, not for worship. Hence it does not follow that
covetousness is as grievous a sin as idolatry.