proof that if on any occasion he did retire, it was because he had sown the word,
and because it was not right to inflame their wrath. (h) Then they went over all
the cities in which they had been in danger. "And on the morrow," it says, "he
went forth with Barnabas to Derbe. And when they had preached the Gospel to
that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium,
and Antioch, confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to
continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God." (v. 21, 22.) This they said, this they showed. But it is
purposely so done, not only by the Apostles, but by the disciples also, that they
may learn from the very outset both the might of the preaching, and that they
must themselves also suffer such things, that they may stand nobly, not idly
gaping for the miracles, but much more (ready) for the trials. Therefore also the
Apostle himself said, "Having the same conflict which you saw in me and
heard." [Philippians 1:30] Persecutions succeeded to persecutions: wars,
fightings, stonings. (g) These things, not less than the miracles, both made them
more illustrious, and prepared for them a greater rejoicing. The Scripture
nowhere says that they returned rejoicing because they had done miracles, but (it
does say that they rejoiced), that "they were counted worthy for that Name to
suffer shame." [Acts 5:41] And this they were taught of Christ, saying, "Rejoice
not that the devils obey you." [Luke 10:20] For the joy indeed and without alloy
is this, to suffer anything for Christ's sake. (i) "And that through much
tribulation:" what sort of cheering ([προτροπή]) is this? How did they persuade
them, by telling them at the outset of tribulations? Then also another consolation.
"And when they had appointed for them elders in every Church, and had prayed
with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed." [Acts
14:23] Do you mark Paul's ardor?— Then other consolation: "Commended
them," it says, "to the Lord. And after they had passed throughout Pisidia, they
came to Pamphylia. And when they had preached the word in Perga, they went
down into Attalia (v. 24, 25): (l) and thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they
had been recommended to the grace of God for the work which they fulfilled."

[Acts 14:26] Why do they come back to Antioch? To report what had taken
place yonder. And besides, there is a great purpose of Providence concerned: for
it was needful that they should thenceforth preach with boldness to the Gentiles.
They come therefore, reporting these things, that they may be able to know
them: and it is providentially ordered, that just then came those who forbade to
keep company with the Gentiles in order that from Jerusalem they might obtain
great encouragement, and so go their ways with boldness. And besides, it shows
that in their temper there was nothing of self-will: for they come, at the same
time showing their boldness, in that without the authority of those (at Jerusalem)
they had preached to the Gentiles, and their obedience, in that they refer the
matter to them: for they were not made arrogant, as ([ἀ] [πενοήθησαν]) having
achieved so great successes. "Whence," it says, "they had been recommended to
the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled." And yet moreover the
Spirit had said, "Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have
called them." [Acts 13:2] "And when they had come, and had gathered the
Church together, they rehearsed all that God had done with them, and how He
had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles. And there they abode long time
with the disciples." (v. 27, 28.) For the city being great had need of teachers.—
But let us look over again what has been said.
(Recapitulation.) "Which when the Apostles," etc. [Acts 14:14]. First by the
sight they checked them, by rending their garments. This did Joshua the son of
Nun upon the occasion of the defeat of the people. Then think not that this action
was unworthy of them: for such was the eagerness, they would not otherwise
have restrained it would not otherwise have quenched the conflagration
([πύραν]). Therefore when need is to do something that is fit to be done, let us
not decline it. For if even after all this they hardly persuaded them, if they had
not acted thus, what might have been the consequence? For if they had not done
thus, they would have been thought to make a show of humility
([ταπεινοθρονεἵν]), and to be all the more desirous of the honor. And observe
their language, how in rebuking it is moderated, alike full of wonder and of