with the profit. For I suppose that by the grace of God they that assemble
themselves here amount to the number of one hundred thousand; and if each
bestowed one loaf to some one of the poor, all would be in plenty; but if one
farthing only, no one would be poor; and we should not undergo so many
revilings and jeers, in consequence of our care about the money. For indeed the
saying, "Sell your goods, and give to the poor, and come and follow me," might
be seasonably addressed to the prelates of the church with respect to the property
of the church. For in any other way it is not possible to follow Him as we ought,
not being freed from all grosser and more worldly care.
But now the priests of God attend at the vintage and harvest, and at the sale
and purchase of the produce; and whereas they that served the shadow had an
entire immunity from such matters, although entrusted with a more carnal
service; we, who are invited to the very inmost shrines of the heavens, and who
enter into the true holy of holies, take upon ourselves the cares of tradesmen and
retail dealers.
Hence great neglect of the Scriptures, and remissness in prayers, and
indifference about all the other duties; for it is not possible to be split into the
two things with due zeal. Where I pray and beseech you that many fountains
may spring up to us from all quarters, and that your forwardness may be to us
the threshing floor and the wine press.
For in this way both the poor will more easily be supported, and God will
be glorified, and you will advance unto a greater degree of love to mankind, and
will enjoy the good things eternal; unto which God grant we may all attain, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
world without end. Amen.

## Homily 86 on Matthew

Matthew 27:11-12.
"And Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked Him, saying,
Are you the king of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, You say. And when He
was accused of the chief priests and elders, He answered nothing."
Do you see what He is first asked? Which thing most of all they were
continually bringing forward in every way? For since they saw Pilate making no
account of the matters of the law, they direct their accusation to the state charges.
So likewise did they in the case of the apostles, ever bringing forward these
things, and saying that they were going about proclaiming king one Jesus,
[Acts 17:7] speaking as of a mere man, and investing them with a suspicion of
usurpation.
Whence it is manifest, that both the rending the garment and the amazement
were a pretense. But all things they got up, and plied, in order to bring Him to
death.
This at any rate Pilate then asked. What then said Christ? "You say." He
confessed that He was a king, but a heavenly king, which elsewhere also He
spoke more clearly, replying to Pilate, "My kingdom is not of this world;"
[John 18:36] that neither they nor this man should have an excuse for accusing
Him of such things. And He gives a reason that cannot be gainsaid, saying, "If I
were of this world, my servants would fight, that I should not be delivered." For
this purpose I say, in order to refute this suspicion, He both paid tribute,
[Matthew 22:17] and commanded others to pay it, and when they would make
Him a king, He fled. [John 6:15]
Wherefore then did he not bring forward these things, it may be said, at that
time, when accused of usurpation? Because having the proofs from His acts, of
His power, His meekness, His gentleness, beyond number, they were willfully