THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.8.

Hence others say that it is the same instant in fact, but another
according to reason. But according to this it would follow that things
really opposite would exist together; for diversity of reason does not
change a thing objectively.
And therefore it must be said that this change, as stated above, is
wrought by Christ's words which are spoken by the priest, so that
the last instant of pronouncing the words is the first instant in which
Christ's body is in the sacrament; and that the substance of the
bread is there during the whole preceding time. Of this time no
instant is to be taken as proximately preceding the last one, because
time is not made up of successive instants, as is proved in Phys. vi.
And therefore a first instant can be assigned in which Christ's body
is present; but a last instant cannot be assigned in which the
substance of bread is there, but a last time can be assigned. And the
same holds good in natural changes, as is evident from the
Philosopher (Phys. viii).
Reply to Objection 2: In instantaneous changes a thing is "in
becoming," and is "in being" simultaneously; just as becoming
illuminated and to be actually illuminated are simultaneous: for in
such, a thing is said to be "in being" according as it now is; but to be
"in becoming," according as it was not before.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (ad 1), this change comes
about in the last instant of the pronouncing of the words. for then the
meaning of the words is finished, which meaning is efficacious in the
forms of the sacraments. And therefore it does not follow that this
change is successive.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.9.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether this proposition is false: "The body of

Christ is made out of bread"?
Objection 1: It seems that this proposition is false: "The body of
Christ is made out of bread." For everything out of which another is
made, is that which is made the other; but not conversely: for we say
that a black thing is made out of a white thing, and that a white thing
is made black: and although we may say that a man becomes black
still we do not say that a black thing is made out of a man, as is
shown in Phys. i. If it be true, then, that Christ's body is made out of
bread, it will be true to say that bread is made the body of Christ. But
this seems to be false, because the bread is not the subject of the
making, but rather its term. Therefore, it is not said truly that Christ's
body is made out of bread.
Objection 2: Further, the term of "becoming" is something that is, or
something that is "made." But this proposition is never true: "The
bread is the body of Christ"; or "The bread is made the body of
Christ"; or again, "The bread will be the body of Christ." Therefore it
seems that not even this is true: "The body of Christ is made out of
bread."
Objection 3: Further, everything out of which another is made is
converted into that which is made from it. But this proposition
seems to be false: "The bread is converted into the body of Christ,"
because such conversion seems to be more miraculous than the
creation of the world, in which it is not said that non-being is
converted into being. Therefore it seems that this proposition
likewise is false: "The body of Christ is made out of bread."
Objection 4: Further, that out of which something is made, can be
that thing. But this proposition is false: "Bread can be the body of
Christ." Therefore this is likewise false: "The body of Christ is made
out of bread."
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv): "When the
consecration takes place, the body of Christ is made out of the
bread."
I answer that, This conversion of bread into the body of Christ has
something in common with creation, and with natural transmutation,