THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.42, C.4.

out of His wisdom He judged it right to make known to others, He
expounded, not in secret, but openly; although He was not
understood by all. Hence Augustine says on Jn. 18:20: "We must
understand this, 'I have spoken openly to the world,' as though our
Lord had said, 'Many have heard Me' . . . and, again, it was not
'openly,' because they did not understand."
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above, our Lord spoke to the
multitudes in parables, because they were neither able nor worthy to
receive the naked truth, which He revealed to His disciples.
And when it is said that "without parables He did not speak to them,"
according to Chrysostom (Hom. xlvii in Matth.), we are to understand
this of that particular sermon, since on other occasions He said
many things to the multitude without parables. Or, as Augustine
says (De Qq. Evang., qu. xvii), this means, "not that He spoke
nothing literally, but that He scarcely ever spoke without introducing
a parable, although He also spoke some things in the literal sense."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.42, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ should have committed His

doctrine to writing?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ should have committed His
doctrine to writing. For the purpose of writing is to hand down
doctrine to posterity. Now Christ's doctrine was destined to endure
for ever, according to Lk. 21:33: "Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but My words shall not pass away." Therefore it seems that Christ
should have committed His doctrine to writing.
Objection 2: Further, the Old Law was a foreshadowing of Christ,
according to Heb. 10:1: "The Law has a shadow of the good things to
come." Now the Old Law was put into writing by God, according to
Ex. 24:12: "I will give thee" two "tables of stone and the law, and the
commandments which I have written." Therefore it seems that Christ
also should have put His doctrine into writing.
Objection 3: Further, to Christ, who came to enlighten them that sit in
darkness (Lk. 1:79), it belonged to remove occasions of error, and to
open out the road to faith. Now He would have done this by putting
His teaching into writing: for Augustine says (De Consensu Evang. i)
that "some there are who wonder why our Lord wrote nothing, so
that we have to believe what others have written about Him.
Especially do those pagans ask this question who dare not blame or
blaspheme Christ, and who ascribe to Him most excellent, but
merely human, wisdom. These say that the disciples made out the
Master to be more than He really was when they said that He was the
Son of God and the Word of God, by whom all things were made."
And farther on he adds: "It seems as though they were prepared to
believe whatever He might have written of Himself, but not what
others at their discretion published about Him." Therefore it seems
that Christ should have Himself committed His doctrine to writing.
On the contrary, No books written by Him were to be found in the
canon of Scripture.
I answer that, It was fitting that Christ should not commit His
doctrine to writing. First, on account of His dignity: for the more
excellent the teacher, the more excellent should be his manner of
teaching. Consequently it was fitting that Christ, as the most
excellent of teachers, should adopt that manner of teaching whereby