SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.2.

of a command.
Yet the precepts of hope and faith were not to be given under the
form of a command, since, unless man already believed and hoped,
it would be useless to give him the Law: but, just as the precept of
faith had to be given under the form of an announcement or
reminder, as stated above (Question 16, Article 1), so too, the
precept of hope, in the first promulgation of the Law, had to be given
under the form of a promise. For he who promises rewards to them
that obey him, by that very fact, urges them to hope: hence all the
promises contained in the Law are incitements to hope.
Since, however, when once the Law has been given, it is for a wise
man to induce men not only to observe the precepts, but also, and
much more, to safeguard the foundation of the Law, therefore, after
the first promulgation of the Law, Holy Writ holds out to man many
inducements to hope, even by way of warning or command, and not
merely by way of promise, as in the Law; for instance, in the Ps.
61:9: "Hope in Him all ye congregation of the people," and in many
other passages of the Scriptures.
Reply to Objection 1: Nature inclines us to hope for the good which
is proportionate to human nature; but for man to hope for a
supernatural good he had to be induced by the authority of the
Divine law, partly by promises, partly by admonitions and
commands. Nevertheless there was need for precepts of the Divine
law to be given even for those things to which natural reason
inclines us, such as the acts of the moral virtues, for sake of insuring
a greater stability, especially since the natural reason of man was
clouded by the lusts of sin.
Reply to Objection 2: The precepts of the law of the decalogue
belong to the first promulgation of the Law: hence there was no need
for a precept of hope among the precepts of the decalogue, and it
was enough to induce men to hope by the inclusion of certain
promises, as in the case of the first and fourth commandments.
Reply to Objection 3: In those observances to which man is bound
as under a duty, it is enough that he receive an affirmative precept as
to what he has to do, wherein is implied the prohibition of what he
must avoid doing: thus he is given a precept concerning the honor
due to parents, but not a prohibition against dishonoring them,

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.2.

except by the law inflicting punishment on those who dishonor their
parents. And since in order to be saved it is man's duty to hope in
God, he had to be induced to do so by one of the above ways,
affirmatively, so to speak, wherein is implied the prohibition of the
opposite.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.21, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether there should have been given a precept

of fear?
Objection 1: It would seem that, in the Law, there should not have
been given a precept of fear. For the fear of God is about things
which are a preamble to the Law, since it is the "beginning of
wisdom." Now things which are a preamble to the Law do not come
under a precept of the Law. Therefore no precept of fear should be
given in the Law.
Objection 2: Further, given the cause, the effect is also given. Now
love is the cause of fear, since "every fear proceeds from some kind
of love," as Augustine states (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 33). Therefore given the
precept of love, it would have been superfluous to command fear.
Objection 3: Further, presumption, in a way, is opposed to fear. But
the Law contains no prohibition against presumption. Therefore it
seems that neither should any precept of fear have been given.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 10:12): "And now, Israel, what doth
the Lord thy God require of thee, but that thou fear the Lord thy
God?" But He requires of us that which He commands us to do.
Therefore it is a matter of precept that man should fear God.
I answer that, Fear is twofold, servile and filial. Now just as man is
induced, by the hope of rewards, to observe precepts of law, so too
is he induced thereto by the fear of punishment, which fear is servile.
And just as according to what has been said (Article 1), in the
promulgation of the Law there was no need for a precept of the act of
hope, and men were to be induced thereto by promises, so neither
was there need for a precept, under form of command, of fear which
regards punishment, and men were to be induced thereto by the
threat of punishment: and this was realized both in the precepts of
the decalogue, and afterwards, in due sequence, in the secondary
precepts of the Law.
Yet, just as wise men and the prophets who, consequently, strove to
strengthen man in the observance of the Law, delivered their
teaching about hope under the form of admonition or command, so
too did they in the matter of fear.