alternative; and again the error is shut out of those who say that the order of
causes springs from divine providence by way of necessity.
There are certain words of Holy Scripture which appear to put down all things to the
mere will of God. Their meaning is not to take away all rational character from the
dispensations of Providence, but to show that the will of God is the first principle of all
things. Such texts are: All things, whatsoever he hath willed, the Lord hath done (Ps.
cxxxiv, 6:) Who can say to him, Why doth thou so? (Job ix, 12:) Who resisteth his will?
(Rom. ix, 19.) And Augustine ( De Trin. III:) "Nothing but the will of God is the prime
cause of health and sickness, of rewards and punishments, of graces and
recompenses."
Thus in answer to the question, Why? asked of any natural effect, we can render a
reason from some proximate cause, yet so that we reduce all things to the prime cause.
Thus if it is asked why wood gets hot in presence of fire, it is answered [etc., etc., in
terms of Aristotelian physics], and so on till we come to the will of God [who willed to
create matter and energy, such as we know them, from the beginning]. Hence whoever
answers the question, why the wood got hot, Because God has willed it so, answers
appropriately, if he intends to carry back the question to the prime cause; but
inappropriately, if he intends to exclude all other causes.

and thought-processes of Deity. On the other hand God's power of creating is not an
arbitrary power to create anything and everything that a foolish fancy may call up. He
cannot give reality to intrinsic absurdities. He cannot, we may venture to think, create a
race of mortal men without stomachs, or animals whose natural food should be stones,
or a circle having the properties of a cycloid, or a politician licensed to lie. If He creates,
He must create according to the eternal exemplars, the natures of things, as He views
them in order of possibility in Himself. These eternal exemplars, or `intelligible essences'
as the schoolmen call them, represent whatever of truth there was in Plato's Ideas.
They are founded upon the divine nature, as imitable outside of God: they are discerned
in the divine intellect: they do not depend, formally speaking, on the divine will. God's
will and decree does not make and unmake possibilities. These intelligibilia, on the lines
of which creation must take place, if creation there is to be at all, are treated of in B. I,
Chapp.XLIX-LIV. They were ignored by the ultra-Nominalists, who took all
meaning out of the phrase `the nature of things,' and, like those `doctors of the
Mohammedan law' whom St Thomas mentions, ascribed all events without distinction to
the arbitrary will of the Creator. With these archetypal Ideas, according to which creation
is laid out, and athwart of which it cannot run, we are very imperfectly acquainted.
Consequently our predication cannot travel far, when we undertake to pronounce what
things are intrinsically possible and what impossible, what things absolutely God could
do, and what things He absolutely could not. More things probably are intrinsically
impossible than we are aware of. Among the meshes of this necessary system of the
nature of things (a necessity founded upon the divine nature itself) the divine will ranges
free, electing to actualise this possibility in creation, and to leave that unactualised.
From this chapter of St Thomas I have been constrained to excise much obsolete
physics. To examine the plan of creation, in an age when men knew nothing of physical
nature, microscopic and telescopic, molecular and sidereal, beyond what their
unassisted senses could detect, and knew that little ill, -- was a laudable effort, but
could lead to no more than provisional results. A modern Aquinas, dwelling, as St
Thomas loved to dwell, on the variety of creation and the differences of things, cannot
but feel himself in face of the question, how all these differences arose; whether they
were explicit in the first creation, or whether, out of a creation originally homogeneous,
things came to be differentiated by a primitive plastic power, called Evolution, which has
turned out an oak, or a sycamore, to be head and representative of one line of
development, and a lion, or an eagle, of another. And, if he chooses Evolution, he will
have to consider the part of God's providence therein. This chapter should be read in
the light of the teleological Psalm ciii, and of St Thomas's own declaration of his
purpose in B. II, Chap.IV. In the untranslated portion occurs this curious aphorism:
"The first thing aimed at in creatures is their multiplication (prima ratio in creaturis est
eorum numerositas), and to the gaining and securing of this end all things else seem to
be subordinate."