whole of our time. Wherefore says Paul, [Philippians 4:4] "Rejoice in the Lord
always; again I say, Rejoice." Upon the festival days no one puts on filthy
garments. Neither then let us do so. For a marriage has been made, a spiritual
marriage. For, "the kingdom of Heaven," says He, "is likened unto a certain king
which would make [Matthew 22:1. ἠθέλησε ποιῆσαι], rec. text [ἐποίησε] a
marriage feast for his son." Now where it is a king making a marriage, and a
marriage for his son, what can be greater than this feast? Let no one then enter in
clad in rags. Not about garments is our discourse but about unclean actions. For
if where all wore bright apparel one alone, being found at the marriage in filthy
garments, was cast out with dishonor, consider how great strictness and purity
the entrance into that marriage feast requires.
7. However, not on this account only does he remind them of the
"unleavened bread," but also to point out the affinity of the Old Testament with
the New; and to point out also that it was impossible, after the "unleavened
bread," again to enter into Egypt; but if any one chose to return, he would suffer
the same things as did they. For those things were a shadow of these; however
obstinate the Jew may be. Wherefore should you enquire of him, he will speak,
no great thing, rather it is great which he will speak of, but nothing like what we
speak of: because he knows not the truth. For he for his part will say, "the
Egyptians who detained us were so changed by the Almighty that they themselves
urged and drove us out, who before held us forcibly; they did not suffer us so
much as to leaven our dough." But if a man asks me, he shall hear not of Egypt
nor of Pharaoh; but of our deliverance from the deceit of demons and the
darkness of the devil: not of Moses but of the Son of God; not of a Red Sea but
of a Baptism overflowing with ten thousand blessings, where the "old man" is
drowned.
Again, should you ask the Jew why he expels all leaven from all his
borders; here he will even be silent and will not so much as state any reason.
And this is because, although some indeed of the circumstances were both types
of things to come, and also due to things then happening; yet others were not so,

that the Jews might not deal deceitfully; that they might not abide in the shadow.
For tell me, what is the meaning of the Lamb's being a "Male," and
"Unblemished," and a "year old," and of, "a bone shall not be broken?" and what
means the command to call the neighbors also, [Exodus 12:4] and that it should
be eaten "standing" and "in the evening;" or the fortifying the house with blood?
He will have nothing else to say but over and over all about Egypt. But I can tell
you the meaning both of the Blood, and of the Evening, and the Eating all
together, and of the rule that all should be standing.
8. But first let us explain why the leaven is cast out of all their borders.
What then is the hidden meaning? The believer must be freed from all iniquity.
For as among them he perishes with whomsoever is found old leaven, so also
with us wheresoever is found iniquity: since of course the punishment being so
great in that which is a shadow, in our case it cannot choose but be much greater.
For if they so carefully clear their houses of leaven , and pry into mouse-holes;
much more ought we to search through the soul so as to cast out every unclean
thought.
This however was done by them of late ; but now no longer. For every
where there is leaven, where a Jew is found. For it is in the midst of cities that
the feast of unleavened bread is kept: a thing which is now rather a game at play
than a law. For since the Truth has come, the Types have no longer any place.
So that by means of this example also he mightily drives the fornicator out
of the Church. For, says he, so far from his presence profiting, he even does
harm, injuring the common estate of the body. For one knows not whence is the
evil savor while the corrupt part is concealed, and so one imputes it to the whole.
Wherefore he urges upon them strongly to "purge out the leaven, that you may
be," says he, "a new lump, even as you are unleavened."
"For our Passover has been sacrificed for us even Christ." He said not, has
died, but more in point to the subject in hand, "has been sacrificed." Seek not
then unleavened bread of this kind, since neither have you a lamb of the same
kind. Seek not leaven of this description, seeing that your unleavened bread is