artisan works through love of gain. It is a formal cause when we say
that he works through his art. It is a motive cause when we say that
he works through the command of another. Sometimes, however,
that which is covered by this preposition "through" is the cause of
the action regarded as terminated in the thing done; as, for instance,
when we say, the artisan acts through the mallet, for this does not
mean that the mallet is the cause why the artisan acts, but that it is
the cause why the thing made proceeds from the artisan, and that it
has even this effect from the artisan. This is why it is sometimes said
that this preposition "through" sometimes denotes direct authority,
as when we say, the king works through the bailiff; and sometimes
indirect authority, as when we say, the bailiff works through the king.
Therefore, because the Son receives from the Father that the Holy
Ghost proceeds from Him, it can be said that the Father spirates the
Holy Ghost through the Son, or that the Holy Ghost proceeds from
the Father through the Son, which has the same meaning.
Reply to Objection 1: In every action two things are to be considered,
the "suppositum" acting, and the power whereby it acts; as, for
instance, fire heats through heat. So if we consider in the Father and
the Son the power whereby they spirate the Holy Ghost, there is no
mean, for this is one and the same power. But if we consider the
persons themselves spirating, then, as the Holy Ghost proceeds
both from the Father and from the Son, the Holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father immediately, as from Him, and mediately, as from the
Son; and thus He is said to proceed from the Father through the Son.
So also did Abel proceed immediately from Adam, inasmuch as
Adam was his father; and mediately, as Eve was his mother, who
proceeded from Adam; although, indeed, this example of a material
procession is inept to signify the immaterial procession of the divine
persons.
Reply to Objection 2: If the Son received from the Father a
numerically distinct power for the spiration of the Holy Ghost, it
would follow that He would be a secondary and instrumental cause;
and thus the Holy Ghost would proceed more from the Father than
from the Son; whereas, on the contrary, the same spirative power
belongs to the Father and to the Son; and therefore the Holy Ghost
proceeds equally from both, although sometimes He is said to
proceed principally or properly from the Father, because the Son has
this power from the Father.

Reply to Objection 3: As the begetting of the Son is co-eternal with
the begetter (and hence the Father does not exist before begetting
the Son), so the procession of the Holy Ghost is co-eternal with His
principle. Hence, the Son was not begotten before the Holy Ghost
proceeded; but each of the operations is eternal.
Reply to Objection 4: When anyone is said to work through anything,
the converse proposition is not always true. For we do not say that
the mallet works through the carpenter; whereas we can say that the
bailiff acts through the king, because it is the bailiff's place to act,
since he is master of his own act, but it is not the mallet's place to
act, but only to be made to act, and hence it is used only as an
instrument. The bailiff is, however, said to act through the king,
although this preposition "through" denotes a medium, for the more
a "suppositum" is prior in action, so much the more is its power
immediate as regards the effect, inasmuch as the power of the first
cause joins the second cause to its effect. Hence also first principles
are said to be immediate in the demonstrative sciences. Therefore,
so far as the bailiff is a medium according to the order of the
subject's acting, the king is said to work through the bailiff; but
according to the order of powers, the bailiff is said to act through the
king, forasmuch as the power of the king gives the bailiff's action its
effect. Now there is no order of power between Father and Son, but
only order of 'supposita'; and hence we say that the Father spirates
through the Son; and not conversely.