SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.10.

community: and the fulfilment of the precept requires that we should
show such like favors or signs of love towards our enemies. For if
we did not so, it would be a proof of vengeful spite, and contrary to
what is written (Lev. 19:18): "Seek not revenge, nor be mindful of the
injury of thy citizens." But there are other favors or signs of love,
which one shows to certain persons in particular: and it is not
necessary for salvation that we show our enemies such like favors
and signs of love, except as regards being ready in our minds, for
instance to come to their assistance in a case of urgency, according
to Prov. 25:21: "If thy enemy be hungry, give him to eat; if he thirst,
give him . . . drink." Outside cases of urgency, to show such like
favors to an enemy belongs to the perfection of charity, whereby we
not only beware, as in duty bound, of being overcome by evil, but
also wish to overcome evil by good [Rm. 12:21], which belongs to
perfection: for then we not only beware of being drawn into hatred
on account of the hurt done to us, but purpose to induce our enemy
to love us on account of our kindliness.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.24, C.11.

### ARTICLE 10. Whether we ought to love the angels out of

charity?
Objection 1: It would seem that we are not bound to love the angels
out of charity. For, as Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i), charity is
a twofold love: the love of God and of our neighbor. Now love of the
angels is not contained in the love of God, since they are created
substances; nor is it, seemingly, contained in the love of our
neighbor, since they do not belong with us to a common species.
Therefore we are not bound to love them out of charity.
Objection 2: Further, dumb animals have more in common with us
than the angels have, since they belong to the same proximate
genus as we do. But we have not charity towards dumb animals, as
stated above (Article 3). Neither, therefore, have we towards the
angels.
Objection 3: Further, nothing is so proper to friends as
companionship with one another (Ethic. viii, 5). But the angels are
not our companions; we cannot even see them. Therefore we are
unable to give them the friendship of charity.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 30): "If the name
of neighbor is given either to those whom we pity, or to those who
pity us, it is evident that the precept binding us to love our neighbor
includes also the holy angels from whom we receive many merciful
favors."
I answer that, As stated above (Question 23, Article 1), the friendship
of charity is founded upon the fellowship of everlasting happiness,
in which men share in common with the angels. For it is written (Mt.
22:30) that "in the resurrection . . . men shall be as the angels of God
in heaven." It is therefore evident that the friendship of charity
extends also to the angels.
Reply to Objection 1: Our neighbor is not only one who is united to
us in a common species, but also one who is united to us by sharing
in the blessings pertaining to everlasting life, and it is on the latter
fellowship that the friendship of charity is founded.
Reply to Objection 2: Dumb animals are united to us in the proximate