influenced by the knowledge of the reward prepared for him, namely, that he may attain to the
habitation of his mother.
5. They conceive, then, of three kinds of men, spiritual, material, and animal, represented by
Cain, Abel, and Seth. These three natures are no longer found in one person, but constitute
various kinds [of men]. The material goes, as a matter of course, into corruption. The animal, if it
make choice of the better part, finds repose in the intermediate place; but if the worse, it too shall
pass into destruction. But they assert that the spiritual principles which have been sown by Achamoth,
being disciplined and nourished here from that time until now in righteous souls (because when
given forth by her they were yet but weak), at last attaining to perfection, shall be given as brides
to the angels of the Saviour, while their animal souls of necessity rest for ever with the Demiurge
in the intermediate place. And again subdividing the animal souls themselves, they say that some
are by nature good, and others by nature evil. The good are those who become capable of receiving
the [spiritual] seed; the evil by nature are those who are never able to receive that seed.

### Chapter VIII.—How the Valentinians pervert the Scriptures to support their own pious
opinions.
1. Such, then, is their system, which neither the prophets announced, nor the Lord taught, nor
the apostles delivered, but of which they boast that beyond all others they have a perfect knowledge.
They gather their views from other sources than the Scriptures; and, to use a common proverb,
they strive to weave ropes of sand, while they endeavour to adapt with an air of probability to their
own peculiar assertions the parables of the Lord, the sayings of the prophets, and the words of the
apostles, in order that their scheme may not seem altogether without support. In doing so, however,
they disregard the order and the connection of the Scriptures, and so far as in them lies, dismember
and destroy the truth. By transferring passages, and dressing them up anew, and making one thing
out of another, they succeed in deluding many through their wicked art in adapting the oracles of
the Lord to their opinions. Their manner of acting is just as if one, when a beautiful image of a king
has been constructed by some skilful artist out of precious jewels, should then take this likeness of
the man all to pieces, should rearrange the gems, and so fit them together as to make them into the
form of a dog or of a fox, and even that but poorly executed; and should then maintain and declare
that this was the beautiful image of the king which the skilful artist constructed, pointing to the
jewels which had been admirably fitted together by the first artist to form the image of the king,
but have been with bad effect transferred by the latter one to the shape of a dog, and by thus
exhibiting the jewels, should deceive the ignorant who had no conception what a king's form was
like, and persuade them that that miserable likeness of the fox was, in fact, the beautiful image of