he gained by his washing?" Even so if a man fasts because of his sins, and goes
his way again, and does the same things, who will hearken to his prayer? And
again we read "if a man goes back from righteousness to sin the Lord will
prepare him for the sword," [Sirach 26:28] and, "as a dog when he has returned
to his vomit, and become odious, so is a fool who by his wickedness has returned
to his sin." [Proverbs 26:11]
19. Do not then merely set forth your sins being your own accuser, but as
one who ought to be justified by the method of repentance; for thus you will be
able to put your soul, which makes its confession, to shame, so that it falls no
more into the same sins. For to accuse ourselves vehemently and call ourselves
sinners is common, so to say, to unbelievers also. Many at least of those who
belong to the stage, both men and women, who habitually practise the greatest
shamelessness, call themselves miserable, but not with the proper aim.
Wherefore I would not even call this confession; for the publication of their sins
is not accompanied with compunction of soul, nor with bitter tears, nor with
conversion of life, but in fact some of them make it in quest of a reputation for
the hearers for candor of speech. For offenses do not seem so grievous when
some other person announces them as when the perpetrator himself reports them.
And they who under the influence of strong despair have lapsed into a state of
insensibility, and treat the opinion of their fellowmen with contempt proclaim
their own evil deeds with much effrontery, as if they were the doings of others.
But I do not wish you to be any of these, nor to be brought out of despair to
confession, but with a good expectation, after cutting away the whole root of
despair, to manifest zeal in the contrary direction. And what is the root and
mother of this despair? It is indolence; or rather one would not call it the root
only, but also the nurse and mother. For as in the case of wool decay breeds
moths, and is in turn increased by them; so here also indolence breeds despair,
and is itself nourished in turn by despair; and thus supplying each other with this
accursed exchange, they acquire no small additional power. If any one then cuts
one of these off, and hews it in pieces, he will easily be able to get the better of

the remaining one. For on the one hand he who is not indolent will never fall
into despair, and on the other he who is supported by good hopes, and does not
despair of himself, will not be able to fall into indolence. Pray then, wrench this
pair asunder, and break the yoke in pieces, by which I mean a variable and yet
depressing habit of thought; for that which holds these two things together is not
uniform, but manifold in shame and character. And what is this? It happens that
one who has repented has done many great and good deeds, but meanwhile he
has committed some sin equivalent to those good deeds, and this especially is
sufficient to plunge him into despair, as if the buildings which had been set up
were all pulled down, and all the labor which he had bestowed upon them had
been vain and come to naught. But this must be taken into account, and such
reasoning must be repelled, because, if we do not store up in good time a
measure of good deeds equivalent to the sins which are committed after them,
nothing can hinder us from sinking grievously and completely. But as it is, (right
action ) like some stout breastplate does not suffer the sharp and bitter dart to
accomplish its work, but even if it is itself cut through, it averts much danger
from the body. For he who departs to the other world with many deeds both good
and bad, will have some alleviation in respect of the punishment and the torment
there; but if a man is destitute of these good works, and takes only the evil with
him, it is impossible to say what great sufferings he will undergo, when he is
conducted to everlasting punishment. For a balance will be struck there between
the evil deeds and those which are not such; and should the latter weigh down
the scale they will to no small extent have saved the doer of them, and the injury
arising from the doing of evil deeds is not so strong as to drag the man down
from the foremost place; but if the evil deeds exceed, they carry him off into hell
fire, because the number of his good actions is not so great as to be able to make
a stand against this violent impulse. And these things are not merely suggested
by our own reasoning, but declared also by the divine oracles; for He Himself
says, "He shall reward every man according to his works." [Romans 2:6] And
not only in hell, but also in the kingdom one will find many differences; for He