SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.5.

may be punished in punishment of the latter: thus children, as to the
body, are a belonging of their father, and slaves are a possession of
their master. Secondly, when one person's sin is transmitted to
another, either by "imitation," as children copy the sins of their
parents, and slaves the sins of their masters, so as to sin with
greater daring; or by way of "merit," as the sinful subjects merit a
sinful superior, according to Job 34:30, "Who maketh a man that is a
hypocrite to reign for the sins of the people?" Hence the people of
Israel were punished for David's sin in numbering the people (2 Kgs.
24). This may also happen through some kind of "consent" or
"connivance": thus sometimes even the good are punished in
temporal matters together with the wicked, for not having
condemned their sins, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 9). Thirdly, in
order to mark the unity of human fellowship, whereby one man is
bound to be solicitous for another, lest he sin; and in order to
inculcate horror of sin, seeing that the punishment of one affects all,
as though all were one body, as Augustine says in speaking of the
sin of Achan (Questions. sup. Josue viii). The saying of the Lord,
"Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third
and fourth generation," seems to belong to mercy rather than to
severity, since He does not take vengeance forthwith, but waits for
some future time, in order that the descendants at least may mend
their ways; yet should the wickedness of the descendants increase,
it becomes almost necessary to take vengeance on them.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine states (Questions. sup. Josue
viii), human judgment should conform to the divine judgment, when
this is manifest, and God condemns men spiritually for their own
sins. But human judgment cannot be conformed to God's hidden
judgments, whereby He punishes certain persons in temporal
matters without any fault of theirs, since man is unable to grasp the
reasons of these judgments so as to know what is expedient for
each individual. Wherefore according to human judgment a man
should never be condemned without fault of his own to an inflictive
punishment, such as death, mutilation or flogging. But a man may be
condemned, even according to human judgment, to a punishment of
forfeiture, even without any fault on his part, but not without cause:
and this in three ways.
First, through a person becoming, without any fault of his,
disqualified for having or acquiring a certain good: thus for being
infected with leprosy a man is removed from the administration of
the Church: and for bigamy, or through pronouncing a death

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.5.

sentence a man is hindered from receiving sacred orders.
Secondly, because the particular good that he forfeits is not his own
but common property: thus that an episcopal see be attached to a
certain church belongs to the good of the whole city, and not only to
the good of the clerics.
Thirdly, because the good of one person may depend on the good of
another: thus in the crime of high treason a son loses his inheritance
through the sin of his parent.
Reply to Objection 3: By the judgment of God children are punished
in temporal matters together with their parents, both because they
are a possession of their parents, so that their parents are punished
also in their person, and because this is for their good lest, should
they be spared, they might imitate the sins of their parents, and thus
deserve to be punished still more severely. Vengeance is wrought on
dumb animals and any other irrational creatures, because in this way
their owners are punished; and also in horror of sin.
Reply to Objection 4: An act done through compulsion of fear is not
involuntary simply, but has an admixture of voluntariness, as stated
above (FS, Question 6, Articles 5,6).
Reply to Objection 5: The other apostles were distressed about the
sin of Judas, in the same way as the multitude is punished for the
sin of one, in commendation of unity, as state above (Reply
Objection 1,2).