FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.2.

every agent acts for an end, as was shown above (Question 1, Article
2), the principle of this motion lies in the end. And hence it is that the
art which is concerned with the end, by its command moves the art
which is concerned with the means; just as the "art of sailing
commands the art of shipbuilding" (Phys. ii, 2). Now good in general,
which has the nature of an end, is the object of the will.
Consequently, in this respect, the will moves the other powers of the
soul to their acts, for we make use of the other powers when we will.
For the end and perfection of every other power, is included under
the object of the will as some particular good: and always the art or
power to which the universal end belongs, moves to their acts the
arts or powers to which belong the particular ends included in the
universal end. Thus the leader of an army, who intends the common
good---i.e. the order of the whole army---by his command moves one
of the captains, who intends the order of one company.
On the other hand, the object moves, by determining the act, after
the manner of a formal principle, whereby in natural things actions
are specified, as heating by heat. Now the first formal principle is
universal "being" and "truth," which is the object of the intellect. And
therefore by this kind of motion the intellect moves the will, as
presenting its object to it.
Reply to Objection 1: The passage quoted proves, not that the
intellect does not move, but that it does not move of necessity.
Reply to Objection 2: Just as the imagination of a form without
estimation of fitness or harmfulness, does not move the sensitive
appetite; so neither does the apprehension of the true without the
aspect of goodness and desirability. Hence it is not the speculative
intellect that moves, but the practical intellect (De Anima iii, 9).
Reply to Objection 3: The will moves the intellect as to the exercise
of its act; since even the true itself which is the perfection of the
intellect, is included in the universal good, as a particular good. But
as to the determination of the act, which the act derives from the
object, the intellect moves the will; since the good itself is
apprehended under a special aspect as contained in the universal
true. It is therefore evident that the same is not mover and moved in
the same respect.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.2.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.9, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the will is moved by the sensitive

appetite?
Objection 1: It would seem that the will cannot be moved by the
sensitive appetite. For "to move and to act is more excellent than to
be passive," as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 16). But the sensitive
appetite is less excellent than the will which is the intellectual
appetite; just as sense is less excellent than intellect. Therefore the
sensitive appetite does not move the will.
Objection 2: Further, no particular power can produce a universal
effect. But the sensitive appetite is a particular power, because it
follows the particular apprehension of sense. Therefore it cannot
cause the movement of the will, which movement is universal, as
following the universal apprehension of the intellect.
Objection 3: Further, as is proved in Phys. viii, 5, the mover is not
moved by that which it moves, in such a way that there be reciprocal
motion. But the will moves the sensitive appetite, inasmuch as the
sensitive appetite obeys the reason. Therefore the sensitive appetite
does not move the will.
On the contrary, It is written (James 1:14): "Every man is tempted by
his own concupiscence, being drawn away and allured." But man
would not be drawn away by his concupiscence, unless his will were
moved by the sensitive appetite, wherein concupiscence resides.
Therefore the sensitive appetite moves the will.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), that which is apprehended
as good and fitting, moves the will by way of object. Now, that a
thing appear to be good and fitting, happens from two causes:
namely, from the condition, either of the thing proposed, or of the
one to whom it is proposed. For fitness is spoken of by way of
relation; hence it depends on both extremes. And hence it is that
taste, according as it is variously disposed, takes to a thing in
various ways, as being fitting or unfitting. Wherefore as the
Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 5): "According as a man is, such does
the end seem to him."
Now it is evident that according to a passion of the sensitive appetite
man is changed to a certain disposition. Wherefore according as