injuries, beloved, in order that we may both be freed from the tumult of this
present life, and cast out all unprofitable sadness of spirit, and may obtain the joy
to come; through the grace and loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
Whom to the Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, power, honor, now, henceforth,
and for ever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 17 on First Corinthians

1 Corinthians 6:12
All things are lawful for me, but not all things are expedient. All things are
lawful for me, but I will not be brought into the power of any.
Here he glances at the gluttons. For since he intends to assail the fornicator
again, and fornication arises from luxuriousness and want of moderation, he
strongly chastises this passion. It cannot be that he speaks thus with regard to
things forbidden, such not being "lawful:" but of things which seem to be
indifferent. To illustrate my meaning: "It is lawful," he says, "to eat and to drink;
but it is not expedient with excess." And so that marvellous and unexpected turn
of his, which he is often wont to adopt; [Cf. Romans 12:21; 1 Corinthians 7:23]
bringing his argument clear round to its contrary, this he manages to introduce
here also; and he signifies that to do what is in one's power not only is not
expedient, but even is not a part of power, but of slavery.
And first, he dissuades them on the ground of the inexpediency of the thing,
saying, "they are not expedient:" in the next place, on that of its contrariety to
itself, saying, "I will not be brought under the power of any." This is his
meaning: "You are at liberty to eat," says he; "well then, remain in liberty, and
take heed that you do not become a slave to this appetite: for he who uses it
properly, he is master of it; but he that exceeds the proper measure is no longer
its master but its slave, since gluttony reigns paramount within him." Do you
perceive how, where the man thought he had authority Paul points out that he is
under authority? For this is his custom, as I was saying before, to give all
objections a turn the contrary way. It is just this which he has done here. For
mark; each of them was saying, "I have power to live luxuriously." He replies,
"In doing so, you are not so much acting as one who had power over a thing, but

rather as being yourself subject to some such power. For you have not power
even over your own belly, so long as you are dissolute, but it has power over
you." And the same we may say both of riches and of other things.

1 Corinthians 6:13
"Meats for the belly." By "the belly" here he means not the stomach, but the
stomach's voraciousness. As when he says, [Philippians 3:19] "Whose God is
their belly:" not speaking about that part of the body, but about greediness. To
prove that so it is, hear what follows: "And the belly for meats; but the body is
not for fornication, but for the Lord." And yet "the belly" also is of "the body."
But he puts down two pairs of things, "meats" and gluttony, (which he terms "the
belly;") "Christ," and "the body."
What then is the meaning of, "Meats for the belly?" "Meats," he says, are
on good terms with gluttony, and it with them. It cannot therefore lead us unto
Christ, but drags towards these. For it is a strong and brutal passion, and makes
us slaves, and puts us upon ministering to the belly. Why then are you excited
and gaping after food, O man? For the end of that service is this, and nothing
further shall be seen of it: but as one was waiting on some mistress, it abides
keeping up this slavery, and advances no further, and has no other employment
but this same fruitless one. And the two are connected together and destroyed
together; "the belly" with "the meats," and "the meats" with "the belly;" winding
out a sort of interminable course; just as from a corrupt body worms may be
produced, and again by worms the body consumed; or as it were a wave swoln
high and breaking, and having no further effect. But these things he says not
concerning food and the body, but it is the passion of greediness and excess in
eatables which he is censuring: and what follows shows it. For he proceeds:
"But God shall bring to nought both it and them:" speaking not of the
stomach, but of immoderate desire: not of food but of high feeding. For with the
former he is not angry, but even lays down rules about them, saying, [1 Timothy
6:8] "Having food and covering we shall be therewith content." However, thus
he stigmatizes the whole thing; its amendment (after advice given) being left by