SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.3.

is the medium on account of which we assent to such and such a
point of faith; and thus an act of faith is "to believe God," since, as
stated above (Question 1, Article 1) the formal object of faith is the
First Truth, to Which man gives his adhesion, so as to assent to Its
sake to whatever he believes.
Thirdly, if the object of faith be considered in so far as the intellect is
moved by the will, an act of faith is "to believe in God." For the First
Truth is referred to the will, through having the aspect of an end.
Reply to Objection 1: These three do not denote different acts of
faith, but one and the same act having different relations to the
object of faith.
This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.
Reply to Objection 3: Unbelievers cannot be said "to believe in a
God" as we understand it in relation to the act of faith. For they do
not believe that God exists under the conditions that faith
determines; hence they do not truly imply believe in a God, since, as
the Philosopher observes (Metaph. ix, text. 22) "to know simple
things defectively is not to know them at all."
Reply to Objection 4: As stated above (FS, Question 9, Article 1) the
will moves the intellect and the other powers of the soul to the end:
and in this respect an act of faith is "to believe in God."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.1, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether it is necessary for salvation to believe

anything above the natural reason?
Objection 1: It would seem unnecessary for salvation to believe
anything above the natural reason. For the salvation and perfection
of a thing seem to be sufficiently insured by its natural endowments.
Now matters of faith, surpass man's natural reason, since they are
things unseen as stated above (Question 1, Article 4). Therefore to
believe seems unnecessary for salvation.
Objection 2: Further, it is dangerous for man to assent to matters,
wherein he cannot judge whether that which is proposed to him be
true or false, according to Job 12:11: "Doth not the ear discern
words?" Now a man cannot form a judgment of this kind in matters
of faith, since he cannot trace them back to first principles, by which
all our judgments are guided. Therefore it is dangerous to believe in
such matters. Therefore to believe is not necessary for salvation.
Objection 3: Further, man's salvation rests on God, according to Ps.
36:39: "But the salvation of the just is from the Lord." Now "the
invisible things" of God "are clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made; His eternal power also and Divinity," according
to Rm. 1:20: and those things which are clearly seen by the
understanding are not an object of belief. Therefore it is not
necessary for man's salvation, that he should believe certain things.
On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 11:6): "Without faith it is
impossible to please God."
I answer that, Wherever one nature is subordinate to another, we find
that two things concur towards the perfection of the lower nature,
one of which is in respect of that nature's proper movement, while
the other is in respect of the movement of the higher nature. Thus
water by its proper movement moves towards the centre (of the
earth), while according to the movement of the moon, it moves round
the centre by ebb and flow. In like manner the planets have their
proper movements from west to east, while in accordance with the
movement of the first heaven, they have a movement from east to
west. Now the created rational nature alone is immediately
subordinate to God, since other creatures do not attain to the
universal, but only to something particular, while they partake of the