man's dispositions, not only when expressed by speech, but even
when conceived in thought, when the soul expresses them by
certain signs in the body"; although (Retract. ii, 30) he says "it
cannot be asserted how this is done."
In another way thoughts can be known as they are in the mind, and
affections as they are in the will: and thus God alone can know the
thoughts of hearts and affections of wills. The reason of this is,
because the rational creature is subject to God only, and He alone
can work in it Who is its principal object and last end: this will be
developed later (Question 63, Article 1; Question 105, Article 5).
Consequently all that is in the will, and all things that depend only on
the will, are known to God alone. Now it is evident that it depends
entirely on the will for anyone actually to consider anything; because
a man who has a habit of knowledge, or any intelligible species, uses
them at will. Hence the Apostle says (1 Cor. 2:11): "For what man
knoweth the things of a man, but the spirit of a man that is in him?"
Reply to Objection 1: In the present life one man's thought is not
known by another owing to a twofold hindrance; namely, on account
of the grossness of the body, and because the will shuts up its
secrets. The first obstacle will be removed at the Resurrection, and
does not exist at all in the angels; while the second will remain, and
is in the angels now. Nevertheless the brightness of the body will
show forth the quality of the soul; as to its amount of grace and of
glory. In this way one will be able to see the mind of another.
Reply to Objection 2: Although one angel sees the intelligible
species of another, by the fact that the species are proportioned to
the rank of these substances according to greater or lesser
universality, yet it does not follow that one knows how far another
makes use of them by actual consideration.
Reply to Objection 3: The appetite of the brute does not control its
act, but follows the impression of some other corporeal or spiritual
cause. Since, therefore, the angels know corporeal things and their
dispositions, they can thereby know what is passing in the appetite
or in the imaginative apprehension of the brute beasts, and even of
man, in so far as the sensitive appetite sometimes, through following
some bodily impression, influences his conduct, as always happens
in brutes. Yet the angels do not necessarily know the movement of
the sensitive appetite and the imaginative apprehension of man in so
far as these are moved by the will and reason; because, even the

lower part of the soul has some share of reason, as obeying its ruler,
as is said in Ethics iii, 12. But it does not follow that, if the angel
knows what is passing through man's sensitive appetite or
imagination, he knows what is in the thought or will: because the
intellect or will is not subject to the sensitive appetite or the
imagination, but can make various uses of them.