so here the largeness of the Spirit was shown, in that each one received a
fountain of the Spirit; as indeed He Himself had foretold, that those who believe
in Him, should have "a well of water springing up into everlasting life." [John
4:14] And good reason that it should be so. For they did not go forth to argue
with Pharaoh, but to wrestle with the devil. But the wonder is this, that when
sent they made no objections; they said not, they were "weak in voice, and of a
slow tongue." [Exodus 4:10] For Moses had taught them better. They said not,
they were too young. [Jeremiah 1:6] Jeremiah had made them wise. And yet they
had heard of many fearful things, and much greater than were theirs of old time;
but they feared to object.— And because they were angels of light, and ministers
of things above ["Suddenly there came from heaven," etc.] To them of old, no
one "from heaven" appears, while they as yet follow after a vocation on earth;
but now that Man has gone up on high, the Spirit also descends mightily from on
high. "As it were a rushing mighty wind;" making it manifest by this, that
nothing shall be able to withstand them, but they shall blow away all adversaries
like a heap of dust. "And it filled all the house." The house also was a symbol of
the world. "And it sat upon each of them," [etc.] and "the multitude came
together, and were confounded." Observe their piety; they pronounce no hasty
judgment, but are perplexed: whereas those reckless ones pronounce at once,
saying, "These men are full of new wine." Now it was in order that they might
have it in their power, in compliance with the Law, to appear thrice in the year in
the Temple, that they dwelt there, these "devout men from all nations." Observe
here, the writer has no intention of flattering them. For he does not say that they
pronounced any opinion: but what? "Now when this was noised abroad, the
multitude came together, and were confounded." And well they might be; for
they supposed the matter was now coming to an issue against them, on account
of the outrage committed against Christ. Conscience also agitated their souls, the
very blood being yet upon their hands, and every thing alarmed them. "Behold,
are not all these which speak Galileans?" For indeed this was confessed. ["And
how hear we"] so much did the sound alarm them. ["Every man in our own

tongue," etc.] for it found the greater part of the world assembled there.
["Parthians and Medes," etc.] This nerved the Apostles: for, what it was to speak
in the Parthian tongue, they knew not but now learned from what those said.
Here is mention made of nations that were hostile to them, Cretans, Arabians,
Egyptians, Persians: and that they would conquer them all was here made
manifest. But as to their being in those countries, they were there in captivity,
many of them: or else, the doctrines of the Law had become disseminated
[among] the Gentiles in those countries. So then the testimony comes from all
quarters: from citizens, from foreigners, from proselytes. "We do hear them
speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God." For it was not only that they
spoke (in their tongues), but the things they spoke were wonderful. Well then
might they be in doubt: for never had the like occurred. Observe the
ingenuousness of these men. They were amazed and were in doubt, saying,
"What means this?" But "others mocking said, 'These men are full of new wine'"
[John 8:48], and therefore mocked. O the effrontery! And what wonder is it?
Since even of the Lord Himself, when casting out devils, they said that He had a
devil! For so it is; wherever impudent assurance exists, it has but one object in
view, to speak at all hazards, it cares not what; not that the man should say
something real and relevant to the matter of discourse, but that he should speak
no matter what. ["They are full of new wine."] Quite a thing of course (is not it?),
that men in the midst of such dangers, and dreading the worst, and in such
despondency, have the courage to utter such things! And observe: since this was
unlikely; because they would not have been drinking much [at that early hour],
they ascribe the whole matter to the quality (of the wine), and say, "They are
full" of it. "But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and said
unto them." In a former place you saw his provident forethought, here you see
his manly courage. For if they were astonished and amazed, was it not as
wonderful that he should be able in the midst of such a multitude to find
language, he, an unlettered and ignorant man? If a man is troubled when he
speaks among friends, much more might he be troubled among enemies and