he that knows not the cause, will come soon to the right one; but he who because
he does not know the real cause, feigns one that is untrue, will not be able easily
to receive the real; but he needs more both of labors and toil, in order to take
away the former. For indeed on a tablet, if it have been wiped smooth, any one
may easily write what he will, but when it is written upon, no longer in the same
way, for we must first wipe out what has been ill written. And among physicians
again, he that applies nothing, is far better than he that applies hurtful things; and
he who builds unsoundly, is worse than he who does not so much as build at all;
like as the land is far better that bears nothing, than that which bears thorns.
Let us not then be impatient to learn all things, but let us endure to be even
ignorant of some things, that when we have found a teacher, we may not afford
him double toil. Or rather many oftentimes have remained even incurably
diseased, by carelessly entangling themselves in evil opinions. For neither is the
toil the same to pluck up first what has taken root amiss, and then to sow, as to
plant a clear ground. For in that case, he must overthrow first, and then put in
other things; but in this, the hearing is ready.
Whence then is such a one rich? I will say, now; many acquire wealth, by
God's gift; and many by His permission. For this is the short and simple account.
What then? It is said, does He make the whoremongers to be rich, and the
adulterers, and him that has abused himself with mankind, and him that has
made a bad use of his possessions? He does not make them, but permits them to
be rich; and great is the difference, and quite infinite between making and
permitting. But wherefore does He suffer it at all? Because it is not yet the time
for judgment, that every one may receive according to his merits.
For what more worthless than that rich man, who gives not to Lazarus so
much as of his crumbs? Nevertheless, he was more wretched than all, for he
came to be possessed not even of a drop of water, and for this very cause most
especially, that being rich he was cruel. For if there are two wicked men, who
have not had the same portion here, but one in wealth, the other in poverty, they
will not be similarly punished there, but the wealthier more grievously.

5. Do you not see at least even this man, suffering more fearfully because
he had "received his good things?" Do thou also therefore, when you see in
prosperity one who has become rich by injustice, groan, weep; for indeed this
wealth is to him an addition of punishment. For like as they who sin much, and
are not minded to repent, treasure up to themselves a treasure of wrath; even so
they, who, besides not being punished, are even enjoying prosperity, will
undergo the greater punishment.
And the proof of this, if you will, I will show you, not from the things to
come only, but also from the present life. For the blessed David, when he sinned
that sin of Bathsheba, and was convicted by the prophet, for this cause most of
all was he more severely reproved, that even when he had enjoyed such security,
he was like this. Hear at least God upbraiding him with this especially. "Did not I
anoint you for a king, and delivered you from the hand of Saul, and give you all
that pertained to your master, and all the house of Israel and Judah, and if it had
been little for you, I would have added thus and thus; and wherefore have you
done that which was evil in my sight?" [2 Samuel 12:7-9] For not for all sins are
there the same punishments, but many and diverse, according to the times,
according to the persons, according to their rank, according to their
understanding, according to other things besides. And that what I say may be
more clear, let one sin be set forth, fornication; and mark how many different
punishments I find not from myself, but from the divine Scriptures. Did any one
commit fornication before the law, he is differently punished; and this Paul
shows, "For as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law."
[Romans 2:12] Did any one commit fornication after the law? He shall suffer
more grievous things. "For as many as have sinned in the law shall be judged by
the law." Did any one commit fornication being a priest, he receives from his
dignity a very great addition to his punishment. So for this cause, whereas the
other women were slain for fornication, the daughters of the priests were burnt;
the lawgiver showing the more amply, how great punishment await the priest if
he commits this sin. For if on the daughter he inflicts a greater punishment,