Comp. 1 Pet. iv. 14.

Luke xviii. 8. There is nothing to correspond with "putas" in the received text.

burning furnace, [to] the day of the Lord, who "gathers the wheat into His barn, but will burn up
the chaff with unquenchable fire," were accustomed to threaten those who were unbelieving,
concerning whom also the Lord Himself declares, "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, which my Father has prepared for the devil and his angels." And the apostle in like manner
says [of them], "Who shall be punished with everlasting death from the face of the Lord, and from
the glory of His power, when He shall come to be glorified in His saints, and to be admired in those
who believe in Him." There are also some [of them] who declare, "Thou art fairer than the
children of men;" and, "God, Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of gladness above Thy
fellows;" and, "Gird Thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Most Mighty, with Thy beauty and Thy
fairness, and go forward and proceed prosperously; and rule Thou because of truth, and meekness,
and righteousness." And whatever other things of a like nature are spoken regarding Him, these
indicated that beauty and splendour which exist in His kingdom, along with the transcendent and
pre-eminent exaltation [belonging] to all who are under His sway, that those who hear might desire
to be found there, doing such things as are pleasing to God. Again, there are those who say, "He
is a man, and who shall know him?" and, "I came unto the prophetess, and she bare a son, and
His name is called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God;" and those [of them] who proclaimed
Him as Immanuel, [born] of the Virgin, exhibited the union of the Word of God with His own
workmanship, [declaring] that the Word should become flesh, and the Son of God the Son of man
(the pure One opening purely that pure womb which regenerates men unto God, and which He
Himself made pure); and having become this which we also are, He [nevertheless] is the Mighty
God, and possesses a generation which cannot be declared. And there are also some of them who
say, "The Lord hath spoken in Zion, and uttered His voice from Jerusalem;" and, "In Judah is
God known;"— these indicated His advent which took place in Judea. Those, again, who declare
that "God comes from the south, and from a mountain thick with foliage," announced His advent

Ps. xlv. 2.

Hab. iii. 3.

at Bethlehem, as I have pointed out in the preceding book. From that place, also, He who rules,
and who feeds the people of His Father, has come. Those, again, who declare that at His coming
"the lame man shall leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall [speak] plainly, and the eyes
of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear," and that "the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees, shall be strengthened," and that "the dead which are in the grave
shall arise," and that He Himself "shall take [upon Him] our weaknesses, and bear our
sorrows,"— [all these] proclaimed those works of healing which were accomplished by Him.
12. Some of them, moreover—[when they predicted that] as a weak and inglorious man, and
as one who knew what it was to bear infirmity, and sitting upon the foal of an ass, He should
come to Jerusalem; and that He should give His back to stripes, and His cheeks to palms [which
struck Him]; and that He should be led as a sheep to the slaughter; and that He should have
vinegar and gall given Him to drink; and that He should be forsaken by His friends and those
nearest to Him; and that He should stretch forth His hands the whole day long; and that He
should be mocked and maligned by those who looked upon Him; and that His garments should
be parted, and lots cast upon His raiment; and that He should be brought down to the dust of
death with all [the other] things of a like nature—prophesied His coming in the character of a
man as He entered Jerusalem, in which by His passion and crucifixion He endured all the things
which have been mentioned. Others, again, when they said, "The holy Lord remembered His own
dead ones who slept in the dust, and came down to them to raise them up, that He might save
them," furnished us with the reason on account of which He suffered all these things. Those,
moreover, who said, "In that day, saith the Lord, the sun shall go down at noon, and there shall be