mouth, and taught them." And wherefore is the clause added, "He opened His
mouth"? To inform you that in His very silence He gave instruction, and not
when He spoke only: but at one time by "opening His mouth," at another uttering
His voice by the works which He did.
But when you hear that He taught them, do not think of Him as discoursing
with His disciples only, but rather with all through them.
For since the multitude was such as a multitude ever is, and consisted
moreover of such as creep on the ground, He withdraws the choir of His
disciples, and makes His discourse unto them: in His conversation with them
providing that the rest also, who were yet very far from the level of His sayings,
might find His lesson of self-denial no longer grievous unto them. Of which
indeed both Luke gave intimation, when he said, that He directed His words unto
them: and Matthew too, clearly declaring the same, wrote, "His disciples came
unto Him, and He taught them." For thus the others also were sure to be more
eagerly attentive to Him, than they would have been, had He addressed Himself
unto all.
2. Whence then does He begin? And what kind of foundations of His new
polity does He lay for us?
Let us hearken with strict attention unto what is said. For though it was
spoken unto them, it was written for the sake also of all men afterwards. And
accordingly on this account, though He had His disciples in His mind in His
public preaching, yet unto them He limits not His sayings, but applies all His
words of blessing without restriction. Thus He said not, "Blessed are you, if you
become poor," but "Blessed are the poor." And I may add that even if He had
spoken of them, the advice would still be common to all. For so, when He says,
"Lo! I am with you always, even unto the end of the world," [Matthew 28:20] He
is discoursing not with them only, but also, through them, with all the world.
And in pronouncing them blessed, who are persecuted, and chased, and suffer all
intolerable things; not for them only, but also for all who arrive at the same
excellency, He weaves His crown.

However, that this may be yet plainer, and to inform you that you have
great interest in His sayings, and so indeed has all mankind, if any choose to
give heed; hear how He begins these wondrous words.
"Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven."
[Matthew 5:3]
What is meant by "the poor in spirit?" The humble and contrite in mind.
For by "spirit" He has here designated the soul, and the faculty of choice. That
is, since many are humble not willingly, but compelled by stress of
circumstances; letting these pass (for this were no matter of praise), He blesses
them first, who by choice humble and contract themselves.
But why said he not, "the humble," but rather "the poor?" Because this is
more than that. For He means here them who are awestruck, and tremble at the
commandments of God. Whom also by His prophet Isaiah God earnestly
accepting said, "To whom will I look, but to him who is meek and quiet, and
trembles at My words?" For indeed there are many kinds of humility: one is
humble in his own measure, another with all excess of lowliness. It is this last
lowliness of mind which that blessed prophet commends, picturing to us the
temper that is not merely subdued, but utterly broken, when he says, "The
sacrifice for God is a contrite spirit, a contrite and an humble heart God will not
despise." And the Three Children also offer this unto God as a great sacrifice,
saying, "Nevertheless, in a contrite soul, and in a spirit of lowliness, may we be
accepted." This Christ also now blesses.
3. For whereas the greatest of evils, and those which make havoc of the
whole world, had their entering in from pride:— for both the devil, not being
such before, did thus become a devil; as indeed Paul plainly declared, saying,
"Lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the devil:"
[1 Timothy 3:6] — and the first man, too, puffed up by the devil with these
hopes, was made an example of, and became mortal (for expecting to become a
god, he lost even what he had; and God also upbraiding him with this, and
mocking his folly, said, "Behold, Adam has become as one of us" [Genesis 3:22];