SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.5.

thereof, it follows that vainglory is a capital vice.
Reply to Objection 1: It is not impossible for a capital vice to arise
from pride, since as stated above (in the body of the Article and FS,
Question 84, Article 2) pride is the queen and mother of all the vices.
Reply to Objection 2: Praise and honor, as stated above (Article 2),
stand in relation to glory as the causes from which it proceeds, so
that glory is compared to them as their end. For the reason why a
man loves to be honored and praised is that he thinks thereby to
acquire a certain renown in the knowledge of others.
Reply to Objection 3: Vainglory stands prominent under the aspect
of desirability, for the reason given above, and this suffices for it to
be reckoned a capital vice. Nor is it always necessary for a capital
vice to be a mortal sin; for mortal sin can arise from venial sin,
inasmuch as venial sin can dispose man thereto.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.131, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether the daughters of vainglory are suitably

reckoned to be disobedience, boastfulness, hypocrisy,
contention, obstinacy, discord, and love of novelties?
Objection 1: It seems that the daughters of vainglory are unsuitably
reckoned to be "disobedience, boastfulness, hypocrisy, contention,
obstinacy, discord, and eccentricity [Praesumptio novitatum, literally
'presumption of novelties']." For according to Gregory (Moral. xxiii)
boastfulness is numbered among the species of pride. Now pride
does not arise from vainglory, rather is it the other way about, as
Gregory says (Moral. xxxi). Therefore boastfulness should not be
reckoned among the daughters of vainglory.
Objection 2: Further, contention and discord seem to be the outcome
chiefly of anger. But anger is a capital vice condivided with
vainglory. Therefore it seems that they are not the daughters of
vainglory.
Objection 3: Further, Chrysostom says (Hom. xix in Matth.) that
vainglory is always evil, but especially in philanthropy, i.e. mercy.
And yet this is nothing new, for it is an established custom among
men. Therefore eccentricity should not be specially reckoned as a
daughter of vainglory.
On the contrary, stands the authority of Gregory (Moral. xxxi), who
there assigns the above daughters to vainglory.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 34, Article 5; Question 35,
Article 4; FS, Question 84, Articles 3,4), the vices which by their very
nature are such as to be directed to the end of a certain capital vice,
are called its daughters. Now the end of vainglory is the
manifestation of one's own excellence, as stated above (Articles 1,4):
and to this end a man may tend in two ways. In one way directly,
either by words, and this is boasting, or by deeds, and then if they be
true and call for astonishment, it is love of novelties which men are
wont to wonder at most; but if they be false, it is hypocrisy. In
another way a man strives to make known his excellence by showing
that he is not inferior to another, and this in four ways. First, as
regards the intellect, and thus we have "obstinacy," by which a man
is too much attached to his own opinion, being unwilling to believe
one that is better. Secondly, as regards the will, and then we have