SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.137, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether pertinacity is opposed to perseverance?

Objection 1: It seems that pertinacity is not opposed to
perseverance. For Gregory says (Moral. xxxi) that pertinacity arises
from vainglory. But vainglory is not opposed to perseverance but to
magnanimity, as stated above (Question 132, Article 2). Therefore
pertinacity is not opposed to perseverance.
Objection 2: Further, if it is opposed to perseverance, this is so
either by excess or by deficiency. Now it is not opposed by excess:
because the pertinacious also yield to certain pleasure and sorrow,
since according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 9) "they rejoice when
they prevail, and grieve when their opinions are rejected." And if it be
opposed by deficiency, it will be the same as effeminacy, which is
clearly false. Therefore pertinacity is nowise opposed to
perseverance.
Objection 3: Further, just as the persevering man persists in good
against sorrow, so too do the continent and the temperate against
pleasures, the brave against fear, and the meek against anger. But
pertinacity is over-persistence in something. Therefore pertinacity is
not opposed to perseverance more than to other virtues.
On the contrary, Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that pertinacity is to
perseverance as superstition is to religion. But superstition is
opposed to religion, as stated above (Question 92, Article 1).
Therefore pertinacity is opposed to perseverance.
I answer that, As Isidore says (Etym. x) "a person is said to be
pertinacious who holds on impudently, as being utterly tenacious."
"Pervicacious" has the same meaning, for it signifies that a man
"perseveres in his purpose until he is victorious: for the ancients
called 'vicia' what we call victory." These the Philosopher (Ethic. vii,
9) calls ischyrognomones, that is "head-strong," or idiognomones,
that is "self-opinionated," because they abide by their opinions more
than they should; whereas the effeminate man does so less than he
ought, and the persevering man, as he ought. Hence it is clear that
perseverance is commended for observing the mean, while
pertinacity is reproved for exceeding the mean, and effeminacy for
falling short of it.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.137, C.3.

Reply to Objection 1: The reason why a man is too persistent in his
own opinion, is that he wishes by this means to make a show of his
own excellence: wherefore this is the result of vainglory as its cause.
Now it has been stated above (Question 127, Article 2, ad 1; Question
133, Article 2), that opposition of vices to virtues depends, not on
their cause, but on their species.
Reply to Objection 2: The pertinacious man exceeds by persisting
inordinately in something against many difficulties: yet he takes a
certain pleasure in the end, just as the brave and the persevering
man. Since, however, this pleasure is sinful, seeing that he desires it
too much, and shuns the contrary pain, he is like the incontinent or
effeminate man.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the other virtues persist against the
onslaught of the passions, they are not commended for persisting in
the same way as perseverance is. As to continence, its claim to
praise seems to lie rather in overcoming pleasures. Hence
pertinacity is directly opposed to perseverance.