John 5:37
"And the Father Himself, which has sent Me, has borne witness of Me."
Where did He "bear witness of" Him? In Jordan: "This is My beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased" [Matthew 3:16]; hear Him. Yet even this needed
proof. The testimony of John then was clear, for they themselves had sent to
him, and could not deny it. The testimony from miracles was in like manner
clear, for they had seen them wrought, and had heard from him who was healed,
and had believed; whence also they drew their accusation. It therefore remained
to give proof to the testimony of the Father. Next in order to effect this, He
added,
"You have neither heard His voice at any time":
How then says Moses, "The Lord spoke, and Moses answered"? [Exodus
19:19]; and David, "He had heard a tongue which he knew not" [Psalm 81:5];
and Moses again, "Is there any such people which has 'heard the voice of
God?'?" [Deuteronomy 4:33]
"Nor seen His shape."
Yet Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, are said to have seen Him, and many
others. What then is that which Christ says now? He guides them by degrees to a
philosophical doctrine, showing that with God is neither voice nor shape, but
that He is higher than such forms or sounds like these. For as when He says,
"You have not heard His voice," He does not mean that God does indeed utter a
voice, but one which cannot be heard; so when He says, "Nor seen His shape,"
He does not mean that God has a shape though one invisible, but that neither of
these things belongs to God. And in order that they might not say, "You are a
boaster, God spoke to Moses only"; (this at least they did say, "We know that God
spoke with Moses: as for this fellow, we know not whence He is" [John 9:29]) on
this account He spoke as He did, to show that there is neither voice nor shape
with God. "But why," He says, "name I these things? Not only have ye 'neither

heard His voice nor seen His shape,' but it is not even in your power to assert
that of which you most boast and of which you are all most fully assured, namely,
that you have received and keep His commandments." Wherefore He adds,

John 5:38
"And you have not His word abiding in you."
That is, the ordinances, the commandments, the Law, and the Prophets. For
even if God ordained these, still they are not with you, since you believe not on
Me. Because, if the Scriptures everywhere say that it is necessary to give heed to
Me, and yet ye believe not, it is quite clear that His word is removed from you.
Wherefore again He adds,
"For whom He has sent, Him ye believe not."
Then that they may not argue, "How, if we have not heard His voice, has He
testified unto you?" He says,

John 5:39
"Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of Me."
Since by these the Father gave His testimony. He gave it indeed by Jordan
also and in the mount, but Christ brings not forward those voices; perhaps by
doing so He would have been disbelieved; for one of them, that in the mount,
they did not hear, and the other they heard indeed, but heeded not. For this
reason He referrs them to the Scriptures, showing that from them comes the
Father's testimony, having first removed the old grounds on which they used to
boast, either as having seen God or as having heard His voice. For as it was
likely that they would disbelieve His voice, and picture to themselves what took
place on Sinai, after first correcting their suspicions on these points, and showing
that what had been done was a condescension, He then referrs them to the
testimony of the Scriptures.
4. And from these too let us also, when we war against heretics, arm and
fortify ourselves. For "all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
every good work" [2 Timothy 3:16-17]; not that he may have some and not
others, for such a man is not "perfect." For tell me what profit is it, if a man pray
continually, but give not liberal alms? Or if he give liberal alms, but be covetous
or violent? Or if he be not covetous nor violent, but (is liberal) to make a show
before men, and to gain the praise of the beholders? Or if he give alms with
exactness and according to God's pleasure, yet be lifted up by this very thing,
and be highminded? Or if he be humble and constant in fasting, but covetous,
greedy of gain, and nailed to earth, and one who introduces into his soul the
mother of mischief? For the love of money is the root of all evils. Let us then
shudder at the action, let us flee the sin; this has made the world a waste, this has
brought all things into confusion, this seduces us from the most blessed service