thereto; still we have need of great alacrity. The things therefore to be avoided he
tells them in the order of commandment. And justly. For these things indeed
being done bring punishment, but not being done, yet bring no praise. The acts
of virtue however, such as to give away our goods, and such like, are not of the
order of commandment, he says. But what? "He that is able to receive, let him
receive." [Matthew 19:12] It is profitable, therefore, that as he with much fear
and trembling had given these commandments to them, he also by these letters
reminds them of that his care. Wherefore he does not repeat them, but reminds
them of them.
"For you know," he says, "what charge we gave you through our Lord Jesus
Christ. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification." And observe how
he nowhere so vehemently glances at any other thing, as at this. As elsewhere
also he writes to this effect; "Follow after peace with all men, and the
sanctification without which no man shall see the Lord." [Hebrews 12:14] And
why do you wonder, if he everywhere writes to his disciples upon this subject,
when even in his Epistle to Timothy he has said, "Keep yourself pure." [1
Timothy 5:22] Also in his second Epistle to the Corinthians he has said, "In
much patience, in fastings, by pureness." [2 Corinthians 6:5-6] And one may
find this in many places, both in this Epistle to the Romans, and everywhere, and
in all his Epistles. For in truth this is an evil pernicious to all. And as a swine full
charged with mire, wherever he enters, fills all places with his ill odor, and
chokes the senses with dung, so too does fornication; it is an evil not easy to be
washed away. But when some even who have wives practice this, how excessive
is the outrage! "For this," he says, "is the will of God, even your sanctification,
that you abstain from all fornication." For there are many forms of disorderly
conduct. The pleasures of wantonness are of many kinds and various, it were not
tolerable to mention them. But having said "from all fornication," he leaves it to
those who know them.
Ver. 4, 5. "That each one of you know how to possess himself of his own
vessel in sanctification and honor, not in the passion of lust, even as the Gentiles

which know not God."
He says, "That each one of you know how to possess himself of his own
vessel." It is, then, a matter to be learned, and that diligently, not to be wanton.
But we possess our vessel, when it is pure; when it is impure, sin possesses it.
And reasonably. For it does not do the things which we wish, but what sin
commands. "Not in the passion of lust," he says. Here he shows also the manner,
according to which one ought to be temperate; that we should cut off the
passions of lust. For luxury, and wealth, and idleness, and sloth, and ease, and all
such things, lead us on to irregular lust. "Even as the Gentiles," he says, "which
know not God." For such are they who do not expect that they shall suffer
punishment.
Ver. 6. "That no man transgress, and wrong his brother in the matter."
He has well said, "that no man transgress." To each man God has assigned
a wife, he has set bounds to nature, that intercourse with one only: therefore
intercourse with another is transgression, and the taking of more than belongs to
one, and robbery; or rather it is more cruel than any robbery; for we grieve not
so much, when our riches are carried off, as when marriage is invaded. Do you
call him brother, and wrongest him, and that in things which are unlawful? Here
he speaks concerning adultery, but above also concerning "all fornication." For
since he was about to say, "That no man transgress and wrong his brother," Do
not think, he says, that I say this only in the case of brethren; you must not have
the wives of others at all, nor even women that have no husbands, and that are
common. You must abstain from "all fornication"; "Because," he says, "the Lord
is an avenger in all these things." He exhorted them first, he shamed them,
saying, "even as the Gentiles." Then from reasonings he showed the impropriety
of defrauding a brother. Afterwards he adds the principal thing; "Because," he
says, "the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as also we forewarned you and
testified." For we do not these things without being punished, neither do we
enjoy so much pleasure, as we undergo punishment.
Ver. 7. "For God called us not for uncleanness, but in sanctification."