THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.6.

still living in this world. while the part kept outside the chalice
denotes those fully blessed both in soul and body; while the part
consumed means the others.
Reply to Objection 9: Two things can be signified by the chalice:
first, the Passion itself, which is represented in this sacrament, and
according to this, by the part put into the chalice are denoted those
who are still sharers of Christ's sufferings; secondly, the enjoyment
of the Blessed can be signified, which is likewise foreshadowed in
this sacrament; and therefore those whose bodies are already in full
beatitude, are denoted by the part put into the chalice. And it is to be
observed that the part put into the chalice ought not to be given to
the people to supplement the communion, because Christ gave
dipped bread only to Judas the betrayer.
Reply to Objection 1:: Wine, by reason of its humidity, is capable of
washing, consequently it is received in order to rinse the mouth after
receiving this sacrament, lest any particles remain: and this belongs
to reverence for the sacrament. Hence (Extra, De Celebratione
missae, chap. Ex parte), it is said: "The priest should always cleanse
his mouth with wine after receiving the entire sacrament of
Eucharist: except when he has to celebrate another mass on the
same day, lest from taking the ablution-wine he be prevented from
celebrating again"; and it is for the same reason that wine is poured
over the fingers with which he had touched the body of Christ.
Reply to Objection 1:: The truth ought to be conformable with the
figure, in some respect: namely, because a part of the host
consecrated, of which the priest and ministers or even the people
communicate, ought not to be reserved until the day following.
Hence, as is laid down (De Consecr., dist. ii), Pope Clement I ordered
that "as many hosts are to be offered on the altar as shall suffice for
the people; should any be left over, they are not to be reserved until
the morrow, but let the clergy carefully consume them with fear and
trembling." Nevertheless, since this sacrament is to be received
daily, whereas the Paschal Lamb was not, it is therefore necessary
for other hosts to be reserved for the sick. Hence we read in the
same distinction: "Let the priest always have the Eucharist ready, so
that, when anyone fall sick, he may take Communion to him at once,
lest he die without it."
Reply to Objection 1:: Several persons ought to be present at the
solemn celebration of the mass. Hence Pope Soter says (De

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.6.

Consecr., dist. 1): "It has also been ordained, that no priest is to
presume to celebrate solemn mass, unless two others be present
answering him, while he himself makes the third; because when he
says in the plural, 'The Lord be with you,' and again in the Secrets,
'Pray ye for me,' it is most becoming that they should answer his
greeting." Hence it is for the sake of greater solemnity that we find it
decreed (De Consecr. dist. 1) that a bishop is to solemnize mass with
several assistants. Nevertheless, in private masses it suffices to
have one server, who takes the place of the whole Catholic people,
on whose behalf he makes answer in the plural to the priest.