blessed Paul endeavored. "Perfect." This then is perfection, the other is
imperfect: so that if one have not even the whole of wisdom, he is imperfect.
"Perfect in Christ Jesus," not in the Law, nor in Angels, for that is not
perfection. "In Christ," that is, in the knowledge of Christ. For he that knows
what Christ has done, will have higher thoughts than to be satisfied with Angels.
"In Christ Jesus"; Ver. 29. "Whereunto I labor also, striving." And he said
not, "I am desirous" merely, nor in any indifferent way, but "I labor, striving,"
with great earnestness, with much watching. If I, for your good, thus watch,
much more ought ye. Then again, showing that it is of God, he says, "according
to His working which works in me mightily." He shows that this is the work of
God. He, now, that makes me strong for this, evidently wills it. Wherefore also
when beginning he says, "Through the will of God." [Colossians 1:1] So that it is
not only out of modesty he so expresses himself, but insisting on the truth of the
Word as well. "And striving." In saying this, he shows that many are fighting
against him. Then great is his tender affection.
Chap. ii. v. 1. "For I would have you know how greatly I strive for you, and
for them at Laodicea."
Then lest this should seem owing to their peculiar weakness, he joined
others also with them, and as yet condemned them not. But why does he say,
"And as many as have not seen my face in the flesh"? He shows here after a
divine manner, that they saw him constantly in the Spirit. And he bears witness
to their great love.
Ver. 2, 3. "That their hearts may be comforted, they being knit together in
love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, that they may
know the mystery of God the Father, and of Christ: in whom are all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge hidden."
Now henceforward he is hastening and in pangs to enter upon the doctrine,
neither accusing them, nor clearing them of accusation. "I strive," he says. To
what end? That they may be knit together. What he means is something like this;
that they may stand firm in the faith. He does not however so express himself;

but extenuates the matter of accusation. That is, that they may be united with
love, not with necessity nor with force. For as I have said, he always avoids
offending, by leaving it to themselves; and therefore "striving," because I wish it
to be with love, and willingly. For I do not wish it to be with the lips merely, nor
merely that they shall be brought together, but "that their hearts may be
comforted."
"Being knit together in love unto all riches of the full assurance of
understanding." That is, that they may doubt about nothing, that they may be
fully assured in all things. But I meant full assurance which is by faith, for there
is a full assurance which comes by arguments, but that is worthy of no
consideration. I know, he says, that you believe, but I would have you fully
assured: not "unto riches" only, but "unto all riches"; that your full assurance
may be intense, as well as in all things. And observe the wisdom of this blessed
one. He said not, "You do ill that you are not fully assured," nor accused them;
but, you know not how desirous I am that you may be fully assured, and not
merely so, but with understanding. For seeing he spoke of faith; suppose not, he
says, that I meant barely and unprofitably, but with understanding and love.
"That they may know the mystery of God the Father and of Christ." So that this
is the mystery of God, the being brought unto Him by the Son. "And of Christ, in
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." But if they are in
Him, then wisely also no doubt He came at this time. Wherefore then do some
foolish persons object to Him, "See how He discourses with the simpler sort."
"In whom are all the treasures." He himself knows all things. "Hid," for think
not in truth that you already have all; they are hidden also even from Angels,
not, from you only; so that you ought to ask all things from Him. He himself
gives wisdom and knowledge. Now by saying, "treasures," he shows their
largeness, by "All," that He is ignorant of nothing, by "hid," that He alone
knows.
Ver. 4. "This I say, that no one may delude you with persuasiveness of
speech."