SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.5.

pleasures of touch, not principally but consequently: while in so far
as the sensible objects of the other senses are pleasant on account
of their becomingness, as when a man is pleased at a wellharmonized sound, this pleasure has nothing to do with the
preservation of nature. Hence these passions are not of such
importance that temperance can be referred to them
antonomastically.
Reply to Objection 4: Although spiritual pleasures are by their nature
greater than bodily pleasures, they are not so perceptible to the
senses, and consequently they do not so strongly affect the
sensitive appetite, against whose impulse the good of reason is
safeguarded by moral virtue. We may also reply that spiritual
pleasures, strictly speaking, are in accordance with reason,
wherefore they need no control, save accidentally, in so far as one
spiritual pleasure is a hindrance to another greater and more
binding.
Reply to Objection 5: Not all pleasures of touch regard the
preservation of nature, and consequently it does not follow that
temperance is about all pleasures of touch.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.140, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether temperance is about the pleasures

proper to the taste?
Objection 1: It would seem that temperance is about pleasures
proper to the taste. For pleasures of the taste result from food and
drink, which are more necessary to man's life than sexual pleasures,
which regard the touch. But according to what has been said (Article
4), temperance is about pleasures in things that are necessary to
human life. Therefore temperance is about pleasures proper to the
taste rather than about those proper to the touch.
Objection 2: Further, temperance is about the passions rather than
about things themselves. Now, according to De Anima ii, 3, "the
touch is the sense of food," as regards the very substance of the
food, whereas "savor" which is the proper object of the taste, is "the
pleasing quality of the food." Therefore temperance is about the
taste rather than about the touch.
Objection 3: Further, according to Ethic. vii, 4,7: "temperance and
intemperance are about the same things, and so are continence and
incontinence, perseverance, and effeminacy," to which delicacy
pertains. Now delicacy seems to regard the delight taken in savors
which are the object of the taste. Therefore temperance is about
pleasures proper to the taste.
On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 10) that "seemingly
temperance and intemperance have little if anything to do with the
taste."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 4), temperance is about the
greatest pleasures, which chiefly regard the preservation of human
life either in the species or in the individual. In these matters certain
things are to be considered as principal and others as secondary.
The principal thing is the use itself of the necessary means, of the
woman who is necessary for the preservation of the species, or of
food and drink which are necessary for the preservation of the
individual: while the very use of these necessary things has a certain
essential pleasure annexed thereto.
In regard to either use we consider as secondary whatever makes
the use more pleasurable, such as beauty and adornment in woman,