1 Corinthians 14:39
"Wherefore, brethren, desire earnestly to prophesy, and forbid not to speak
with tongues."
For this too is his wont, not only to work out what is before him, but also
starting from that to set right whatever seems to him in any way akin to it, and
again to return to the former, so as not to appear to wander from the subject. For
so when he was discoursing of their concord in their banquets, he digressed to
their Communion in the Mysteries, and having thence put them to shame, he
returns again to the former, saying, "Wherefore, when you come together to eat,
wait one for another." [1 Corinthians 11:33]
And here, accordingly, having discoursed of good order in their gifts, and of
its being a duty neither to faint in the lesser, nor to be puffed up on account of
the greater; then having made an excursion from thence to the sobriety becoming
women and having established it, he returns again to his subject, saying,
"Wherefore, brethren, desire earnestly to prophesy, and forbid not to speak with
tongues." Do you see how to the end he preserved the difference of these? And
how he signifies that the one is very necessary, the other not so? Wherefore of
the one he says, "desire earnestly ," but of the other, "forbid not."
4. Then, as in brief summary, setting all things right, he adds the words,

1 Corinthians 14:40
"Let all things be done decently and in order."
Again giving a blow to them who chose to behave themselves unseemly
without cause, and to incur the imputation of madness; and who keep not their
proper rank. For nothing does so build up as good order, as peace, as love; even
as their contraries tend to pull down. And not only in things spiritual, but also in
all others one may observe this. Thus whether it be in a dance, or a ship, or in a
chariot, or a camp, if you should confound the order, and casting the greater out
of their proper place, should bring in the lesser into their rank, you destroy all,
and thus things are turned upside down. Neither let us then destroy our order, nor
place the head below and the feet above: now this is done when we cast down
right reason, and set our lusts, passions, and pleasure, over the rational part:
whence violent are the billows, and great the confusion, and intolerable the
tempest, all things being wrapt in darkness.
And, if you will, let us first examine the unseemliness which arises
herefrom, and then the loss. How then may this be clear to us, and thoroughly
known? Let us bring forward a man in that frame of mind; enamoured of a harlot
and overcome by a dishonorable passion; and then we shall see the mockery
which this comes to. For what can be baser than a man watching the doors
before the harlots' chambers, and beaten by a whorish woman, and weeping, and
lamenting, and turning his glory into shame? And if you will also see the loss,
call to mind, I pray, the expenditure of money, the extreme risks, the contests
with rival lovers, the wounds, the stripes received in such affrays.
Such also are they who are holden by the lust of wealth; or rather they
behave themselves more unseemly. For whereas these are wholly occupied about
one person; the covetous busy themselves about all men's substance alike, both
poor and rich, and long for things that are not; a thing which above all denotes