this house, but here we must needs remain until we depart from this present life.
"Receive us" [2 Corinthians 7:2] therefore, as Paul commanded. For his language
in that place related not to a meal, but to the temper and mind. This we also seek
of you, even love, that fervent and genuine affection. But if you endure not even
this, at least love yourselves, and lay aside your present remissness. This is
sufficient for our consolation, if we see you approving yourselves, and becoming
better men. So will I also myself show forth increased love, even "though the
more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved."
For indeed there are many things to bind us together. One table is set before
all, one Father begot us, we are all the issue of the same throes, the same drink
has been given to all; or rather not only the same drink, but also to drink out of
one cup. For our Father desiring to lead us to a kindly affection, has devised this
also, that we should drink out of one cup; a thing which belongs to intense love.
But "there is no comparison between the apostles and us." I confess it too,
and would never deny it. For I say not, to themselves, but not even to their
shadows are we comparable.
But nevertheless, let your part be done. This will have no tendency to
disgrace you but rather to profit you the more. For when even to unworthy
persons ye show so much love and obedience, then shall you receive the greater
reward.
For neither are they our own words which we speak, since you have no
teacher at all on earth; but what we have received, that we also give, and in
giving we seek for nothing else from you, but to be loved only. And if we be
unworthy even of this, yet by our loving you we shall quickly be worthy.
Although we are commanded to love not them only that love us, but even our
enemies. Who then is so hardhearted, who so savage, that after having received
such a law, he should abhor and hate even them that love him, full as he may be
of innumerable evils?
We have partaken of a spiritual table, let us be partakers also of spiritual
love. For if robbers, on partaking of salt, forget their character; what excuse shall

we have, who are continually partaking of the Lord's body, and do not imitate
even their gentleness? And yet to many, not one table only, but even to be of one
city, has sufficed for friendship; but we, when we have the same city, and the
same house, and table, and way, and door, and root, and life, and head, and the
same shepherd, and king, and teacher, and judge, and maker, and father, and to
whom all things are common; what indulgence can we deserve, if we be divided
one from another?
11. But the miracles, perhaps, are what ye seek after, such as they wrought
when they entered in; the lepers cleansed, the devils driven out, and the dead
raised? Nay, but this is the great indication of your high birth, and of your love,
that you should believe God without pledges. And in fact this, and one other
thing, were the reasons why God made miracles to cease. I mean, that if when
miracles are not performed, they that plume themselves on other advantages—
for instance, either on the word of wisdom, or on show of piety—grow
vainglorious, are puffed up, are separated one from another; did miracles also
take place, how could there but be violent rendings? And that what I say is not
mere conjecture, the Corinthians bear witness, who from this cause were divided
into many parties.
Do not thou therefore seek signs, but the soul's health. Seek not to see one
dead man raised; nay, for you have learned that the whole world is arising. Seek
not to see a blind man healed, but behold all now restored unto that better and
more profitable sight; and do thou too learn to look chastely, and amend your
eye.
For in truth, if we all lived as we ought, workers of miracles would not be
admired so much as we by the children of the heathen. For as to the signs, they
often carry with them either a notion of mere fancy, or another evil suspicion,
although ours be not such. But a pure life cannot admit of any such reproach;
yea, all men's mouths are stopped by the acquisition of virtue.
Let virtue then be our study: for abundant are her riches, and great the
wonder wrought in her. She bestows the true freedom, and causes the same to be