166. Another aspect of catechesis which has developed in recent decades is mystagogic
initiation. This basically has to do with two things: a progressive experience of formation
involving the entire community and a renewed appreciation of the liturgical signs of Christian
initiation. Many manuals and programmes have not yet taken sufficiently into account the need for
a mystagogical renewal, one which would assume very different forms based on each educational
community’s discernment. Catechesis is a proclamation of the word and is always centred on that
word, yet it also demands a suitable environment and an attractive presentation, the use of
eloquent symbols, insertion into a broader growth process and the integration of every dimension
of the person within a communal journey of hearing and response.

167. Every form of catechesis would do well to attend to the “way of beauty” (via
pulchritudinis). Proclaiming Christ means showing that to believe in and to follow him is not
only something right and true, but also something beautiful, capable of filling life with new
splendour and profound joy, even in the midst of difficulties. Every expression of true beauty can
thus be acknowledged as a path leading to an encounter with the Lord Jesus. This has nothing to
do with fostering an aesthetic relativism which would downplay the inseparable bond between
truth, goodness and beauty, but rather a renewed esteem for beauty as a means of touching the
human heart and enabling the truth and goodness of the Risen Christ to radiate within it. If, as
Saint Augustine says, we love only that which is beautiful, the incarnate Son, as the
revelation of infinite beauty, is supremely lovable and draws us to himself with bonds of love. So a
formation in the via pulchritudinis ought to be part of our effort to pass on the faith. Each particular
Church should encourage the use of the arts in evangelization, building on the treasures of the
past but also drawing upon the wide variety of contemporary expressions so as to transmit the
faith in a new “language of parables”. We must be bold enough to discover new signs and
new symbols, new flesh to embody and communicate the word, and different forms of beauty
which are valued in different cultural settings, including those unconventional modes of beauty
which may mean little to the evangelizers, yet prove particularly attractive for others.

168. As for the moral component of catechesis, which promotes growth in fidelity to the Gospel
way of life, it is helpful to stress again and again the attractiveness and the ideal of a life of
wisdom, self-fulfilment and enrichment. In the light of that positive message, our rejection of the
evils which endanger that life can be better understood. Rather than experts in dire predictions,
dour judges bent on rooting out every threat and deviation, we should appear as joyful
messengers of challenging proposals, guardians of the goodness and beauty which shine forth in
a life of fidelity to the Gospel.