FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.2.

being polished. This was the opinion of the Platonists. Others said
that they are wholly from without, being due to the inflow of the
active intellect, as Avicenna maintained. Others said that sciences
and virtues are within us by nature, so far as we are adapted to them,
but not in their perfection: this is the teaching of the Philosopher
(Ethic. ii, 1), and is nearer the truth.
To make this clear, it must be observed that there are two ways in
which something is said to be natural to a man; one is according to
his specific nature, the other according to his individual nature. And,
since each thing derives its species from its form, and its
individuation from matter, and, again, since man's form is his
rational soul, while his matter is his body, whatever belongs to him
in respect of his rational soul, is natural to him in respect of his
specific nature; while whatever belongs to him in respect of the
particular temperament of his body, is natural to him in respect of
his individual nature. For whatever is natural to man in respect of his
body, considered as part of his species, is to be referred, in a way, to
the soul, in so far as this particular body is adapted to this particular
soul.
In both these ways virtue is natural to man inchoatively. This is so in
respect of the specific nature, in so far as in man's reason are to be
found instilled by nature certain naturally known principles of both
knowledge and action, which are the nurseries of intellectual and
moral virtues, and in so far as there is in the will a natural appetite
for good in accordance with reason. Again, this is so in respect of
the individual nature, in so far as by reason of a disposition in the
body, some are disposed either well or ill to certain virtues: because,
to wit, certain sensitive powers are acts of certain parts of the body,
according to the disposition of which these powers are helped or
hindered in the exercise of their acts, and, in consequence, the
rational powers also, which the aforesaid sensitive powers assist. In
this way one man has a natural aptitude for science, another for
fortitude, another for temperance: and in these ways, both
intellectual and moral virtues are in us by way of a natural aptitude,
inchoatively, but not perfectly, since nature is determined to one,
while the perfection of these virtues does not depend on one
particular mode of action, but on various modes, in respect of the
various matters, which constitute the sphere of virtue's action, and
according to various circumstances.
It is therefore evident that all virtues are in us by nature, according to

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.63, C.2.

aptitude and inchoation, but not according to perfection, except the
theological virtues, which are entirely from without.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections. For the first two argue
about the nurseries of virtue which are in us by nature, inasmuch as
we are rational beings. The third objection must be taken in the
sense that, owing to the natural disposition which the body has from
birth, one has an aptitude for pity, another for living temperately,
another for some other virtue.