[matter] for the forms. They seem to have been deceived on this
point, through supposing a form to be something made "per se," so
that it would be the effect of a formal principle. But, as the
Philosopher proves (Metaph. vii, Did. vi, 8), what is made, properly
speaking, is the "composite": for this properly speaking, is, as it
were, what subsists. Whereas the form is called a being, not as that
which is, but as that by which something is; and consequently
neither is a form, properly speaking, made; for that is made which is;
since to be is nothing but the way to existence.
Now it is manifest that what is made is like to the maker, forasmuch
as every agent makes its like. So whatever makes natural things, has
a likeness to the composite; either because it is composite itself, as
when fire begets fire, or because the whole "composite" as to both
matter and form is within its power; and this belongs to God alone.
Therefore every informing of matter is either immediately from God,
or form some corporeal agent; but not immediately from an angel.
Reply to Objection 1: Our soul is united to the body as the form; and
so it is not surprising for the body to be formally changed by the
soul's concept; especially as the movement of the sensitive appetite,
which is accompanied with a certain bodily change, is subject to the
command of reason. An angel, however, has not the same
connection with natural bodies; and hence the argument does not
hold.
Reply to Objection 2: Whatever an inferior power can do, that a
superior power can do, not in the same way, but in a more excellent
way; for example, the intellect knows sensible things in a more
excellent way than sense knows them. So an angel can change
corporeal matter in a more excellent way than can corporeal agents,
that is by moving the corporeal agents themselves, as being the
superior cause.
Reply to Objection 3: There is nothing to prevent some natural effect
taking place by angelic power, for which the power of corporeal
agents would not suffice. This, however, is not to obey an angel's
will (as neither does matter obey the mere will of a cook, when by
regulating the fire according to the prescription of his art he
produces a dish that the fire could not have produced by itself);
since to reduce matter to the act of the substantial form does not
exceed the power of a corporeal agent; for it is natural for like to
make like.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether bodies obey the angels as regards local

motion?
Objection 1: It would seem that bodies do not obey the angels in
local motion. For the local motion of natural bodies follows on their
forms. But the angels do not cause the forms of natural bodies, as
stated above (Article 2). Therefore neither can they cause in them
local motion.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher (Phys. viii, 7) proves that local
motion is the first of all movements. But the angels cannot cause
other movements by a formal change of the matter. Therefore neither
can they cause local motion.
Objection 3: Further, the corporeal members obey the concept of the
soul as regards local movement, as having in themselves some
principle of life. In natural bodies, however, there is not vital
principle. Therefore they do not obey the angels in local motion.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 8,9) that the angels use
corporeal seed to produce certain effects. But they cannot do this
without causing local movement. Therefore bodies obey them in
local motion.
I answer that, As Dionysius says (Div. Nom. vii): "Divine wisdom has
joined the ends of the first to the principles of the second." Hence it
is clear that the inferior nature at its highest point is in conjunction
with superior nature. Now corporeal nature is below the spiritual
nature. But among all corporeal movements the most perfect is local
motion, as the Philosopher proves (Phys. viii, 7). The reason of this
is that what is moved locally is not as such in potentiality to anything
intrinsic, but only to something extrinsic---that is, to place. Therefore
the corporeal nature has a natural aptitude to be moved immediately
by the spiritual nature as regards place. Hence also the philosophers
asserted that the supreme bodies are moved locally by the spiritual
substances; whence we see that the soul moves the body first and
chiefly by a local motion.
Reply to Objection 1: There are in bodies other local movements
besides those which result from the forms; for instance, the ebb and
flow of the sea does not follow from the substantial form of the