FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.2.

Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (Question 106, Articles 1,2),
the New Law is called the law of faith, in so far as its pre-eminence is
derived from that very grace which is given inwardly to believers,
and for this reason is called the grace of faith. Nevertheless it
consists secondarily in certain deeds, moral and sacramental: but
the New Law does not consist chiefly in these latter things, as did
the Old Law. As to those under the Old Testament who through faith
were acceptable to God, in this respect they belonged to the New
Testament: for they were not justified except through faith in Christ,
Who is the Author of the New Testament. Hence of Moses the
Apostle says (Heb. 11:26) that he esteemed "the reproach of Christ
greater riches than the treasure of the Egyptians."

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.107, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the New Law fulfils the Old?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law does not fulfil the Old.
Because to fulfil and to void are contrary. But the New Law voids or
excludes the observances of the Old Law: for the Apostle says (Gal.
5:2): "If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing."
Therefore the New Law is not a fulfilment of the Old.
Objection 2: Further, one contrary is not the fulfilment of another.
But Our Lord propounded in the New Law precepts that were
contrary to precepts of the Old Law. For we read (Mt. 5:27-32): You
have heard that it was said to them of old: . . . "Whosoever shall put
away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorce. But I say to you that
whosoever shall put away his wife . . . maketh her to commit
adultery." Furthermore, the same evidently applies to the prohibition
against swearing, against retaliation, and against hating one's
enemies. In like manner Our Lord seems to have done away with the
precepts of the Old Law relating to the different kinds of foods (Mt.
15:11): "Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth the man: but
what cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man." Therefore the
New Law is not a fulfilment of the Old.
Objection 3: Further, whoever acts against a law does not fulfil the
law. But Christ in certain cases acted against the Law. For He
touched the leper (Mt. 8:3), which was contrary to the Law. Likewise
He seems to have frequently broken the sabbath; since the Jews
used to say of Him (Jn. 9:16): "This man is not of God, who keepeth
not the sabbath." Therefore Christ did not fulfil the Law: and so the
New Law given by Christ is not a fulfilment of the Old.
Objection 4: Further, the Old Law contained precepts, moral,
ceremonial, and judicial, as stated above (Question 99, Article 4). But
Our Lord (Mt. 5) fulfilled the Law in some respects, but without
mentioning the judicial and ceremonial precepts. Therefore it seems
that the New Law is not a complete fulfilment of the Old.
On the contrary, Our Lord said (Mt. 5:17): "I am not come to destroy,
but to fulfil": and went on to say (Mt. 5:18): "One jot or one tittle shall
not pass of the Law till all be fulfilled."
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), the New Law is compared