Incarnation, and expect to see It with their eyes, He sets them right by saying,
"Whom the world cannot receive, because it sees Him not." "He will not be with
you as I have been, but will dwell in your very souls"; for this is the, "shall be in
you." He calls it the "Spirit of truth"; thus explaining the types in the Old
Testament. "That He may be with you." What is, "may be with you"? That which
He says Himself, that "I am with you." [Matthew 28:20] Besides, He also implies
something else, that "the case of the Spirit shall not be the same as Mine, He
shall never leave you." "Whom the world cannot receive, because it sees Him
not." "Why, what is there belonging to the other Persons that is visible?"
Nothing; but He speaks here of knowledge; at least He adds, "neither knows
Him." For He is wont, in the case of exact knowledge, to call it "sight"; because
sight is clearer than the other senses, by this He always represents exact
knowledge. By "world," He here speaks of "the wicked," thus too comforting
the disciples by giving to them a special gift. See in how many particulars He
raised His discourse concerning It. He said, "He is Another like Me"; He said,
"He will not leave you"; He said, "Unto you alone He comes, as also did I"; He
said, that "He remains in you"; but not even so did He drive out their
despondency. For they still sought Him and His society. To cure then this
feeling, He says,

John 14:18
"I will not leave you orphans, I will come unto you."
2. "Fear not," He says, "I said not that I would send you another Comforter,
as though I were Myself withdrawing from you for ever; I said not that He
remains with you, as though I should see you no more. For I also Myself will
come to you, I will not leave you orphans." Because when commencing He said,
"Little children," therefore He says also here, "I will not leave you orphans." At
first then He told them, "You shall come whither I go"; and, "In My Father's
house there are many mansions"; but here, since that time was long, He gives
them the Spirit; and when, not knowing what it could be of which He spoke,
they were not sufficiently comforted, "I will not leave you orphans," He says; for
this they chiefly required. But since the, "I will come to you," was the saying of
one declaring a "presence," observe how in order that they might not again seek
for the same kind of presence as before, He did not clearly tell them this thing,
but hinted at it; for having said,

John 14:19
"Yet a little while, and the world sees Me not"; He added, "but you see Me."
As though He had said, "I come indeed to you, but not in the same way as
before, ever being with you day by day." And lest they should say, "How then did
You say to the Jews, Henceforth you shall not see Me?" He solves the
contradiction by saying, "to you alone"; for such also is the nature of the Spirit.
"Because I live, you shall live also."
For the Cross does not finally separate us, but only hides for a little
moment; and by "life" He seems to me to mean not the present only, but the
future also.