7. Hearing therefore these things, let us fortify ourselves on all sides,
regarding His instructions, and striking our roots deep, and cleansing ourselves
from all worldly things. But if we do the one, neglecting the other, we shall be
nothing bettered; for though we perish not in one way, yet shall we in some
other. For what signifies our not being ruined by riches, if we are by indolence:
or not by indolence, if we are by softness. For so the husbandman, whether this
way or that way he lose his crop, equally bewails himself. Let us not then soothe
ourselves upon our not perishing in all these ways, but let it be our grief, in
whichever way we are perishing.
And let us burn up the thorns, for they choke the word. And this is known
to those rich men, who not for these matters alone, but for others also prove
unprofitable. For having become slaves and captives of their pleasures, they are
useless even for civil affairs, and if for them, much more for those of Heaven.
Yea, and in two ways hereby our thoughts are corrupted; both by the luxury, and
by the anxiety too. For either of these by itself were enough to overwhelm the
bark; but when even both concur, imagine how high the billow swells.
And marvel not at His calling our luxury, "thorns." For thou indeed art not
aware of it, being intoxicated with your passion, but they that are in sound health
know that it pricks sharper than any thorn, and that luxury wastes the soul worse
than care, and causes more grievous pains both to body and soul. For one is not
so sorely smitten by anxiety, as by surfeiting. Since when watchings, and
throbbings of the temples, and heaviness in the head, and pangs of the bowels,
lay hold of such a man, you may imagine how many thorns these surpass in
grievousness. And as the thorns, on whichever side they are laid hold of, draw
blood from the hands that seize them, just so does luxury plague both feet, and
hands, and head, and eyes, and in general all our members; and it is withered
also, and unfruitful, like the thorn, and hurts much more than it, and in our vital
parts. Yea, it brings on premature old age, and dulls the senses, and darkens our
reasoning, and blinds the keen-sighted mind, and makes the body tumid,
rendering excessive the deposition of that which is cast away, and gathering

together a great accumulation of evils; and it makes the burden too great, and the
load overwhelming; whence our falls are many and continual, and our
shipwrecks frequent.
For tell me, why pamper your body? What? Are we to slay you in sacrifice,
to set you on the table? The birds it is well for you to pamper: or rather, not so
well even for them; for when they are fattened, they are unprofitable for
wholesome food. So great an evil is luxury, that its mischief is shown even in
irrational beings. For even them by luxury we make unprofitable, both to
themselves and to us. For their superfluous flesh is indigestible, and the moister
kind of corruption is engendered by that kind of fatness. Whereas the creatures
that are not so fed, but live, as one may say, in abstinence, and moderate diet,
and in labor and hardship, these are most serviceable both to themselves and to
others, as well for food, as for everything else. Those, at any rate, who live on
them, are in better health; but such as are fed on the others are like them,
growing dull and sickly, and rendering their chain more grievous. For nothing is
so hostile and hurtful to the body, as luxury; nothing so tears it in pieces, and
overloads and corrupts it, as intemperance.
Wherefore above all may this circumstance make one amazed at them for
their folly, that not even so much care as others show towards their wine skins,
are these willing to evince towards themselves. For those the wine merchants do
not allow to receive more than is fit, lest they should burst; but to their own
wretched belly these men do not vouchsafe even so much forethought, but when
they have stuffed it and distended it, they fill all, up to the ears, up to the nostrils,
to the very throat itself, thereby pressing into half its room the spirit, and the
power that directs the living being. What? Was your throat given you for this
end, that you should fill it up to the very mouth, with wine turned sour, and all
other corruption? Not for this, O man, but that you should above all things sing
to God, and offer up the holy prayers, and read out the divine laws, and give to
your neighbors profitable counsel. But you, as if you had received it for this end,
dost not suffer it to have leisure for that ministry, so much as for a short season,