FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

garments to be appointed to the higher and lower priests, as related
in Ex. 28 [Lev. 8:7, seqq.]. It seems, moreover, unreasonable that
anyone should be debarred from the priesthood on account of
defects in the body, as stated in Lev. 21:17, seqq.: "Whosoever of thy
seed throughout their families, hath a blemish, he shall not offer
bread to his God . . . if he be blind, if he be lame," etc. It seems,
therefore, that the sacraments of the Old Law were unreasonable.
On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 20:8): "I am the Lord that sanctify
you." But nothing unreasonable is done by God, for it is written (Ps.
103:24): "Thou hast made all things in wisdom." Therefore there was
nothing without a reasonable cause in the sacraments of the Old
Law, which were ordained to the sanctification of man.
I answer that, As stated above (Question 101, Article 4), the
sacraments are, properly speaking, things applied to the
worshippers of God for their consecration so as, in some way, to
depute them to the worship of God. Now the worship of God
belonged in a general way to the whole people; but in a special way,
it belonged to the priests and Levites, who were the ministers of
divine worship. Consequently, in these sacraments of the Old Law,
certain things concerned the whole people in general; while others
belonged to the ministers.
In regard to both, three things were necessary. The first was to be
established in the state of worshipping God: and this institution was
brought about---for all in general, by circumcision, without which no
one was admitted to any of the legal observances---and for the
priests, by their consecration. The second thing required was the
use of those things that pertain to divine worship. And thus, as to the
people, there was the partaking of the paschal banquet, to which no
uncircumcised man was admitted, as is clear from Ex. 12:43, seqq.:
and, as to the priests, the offering of the victims, and the eating of
the loaves of proposition and of other things that were allotted to the
use of the priests. The third thing required was the removal of all
impediments to divine worship, viz. of uncleannesses. And then, as
to the people, certain purifications were instituted for the removal of
certain external uncleannesses; and also expiations from sins; while,
as to the priests and Levites, the washing of hands and feet and the
shaving of the hair were instituted.
And all these things had reasonable causes, both literal, in so far as
they were ordained to the worship of God for the time being, and

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

figurative, in so far as they were ordained to foreshadow Christ: as
we shall see by taking them one by one.
Reply to Objection 1: The chief literal reason for circumcision was in
order that man might profess his belief in one God. And because
Abraham was the first to sever himself from the infidels, by going
out from his house and kindred, for this reason he was the first to
receive circumcision. This reason is set forth by the Apostle (Rm.
4:9, seqq.) thus: "He received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
justice of the faith which he had, being uncircumcised"; because, to
wit, we are told that "unto Abraham faith was reputed to justice," for
the reason that "against hope he believed in hope," i.e. against the
hope that is of nature he believed in the hope that is of grace, "that
he might be made the father of many nations," when he was an old
man, and his wife an old and barren woman. And in order that this
declaration, and imitation of Abraham's faith, might be fixed firmly in
the hearts of the Jews, they received in their flesh such a sign as
they could not forget, wherefore it is written (Gn. 17:13): "My
covenant shall be in your flesh for a perpetual covenant." This was
done on the eighth day, because until then a child is very tender, and
so might be seriously injured; and is considered as something not
yet consolidated: wherefore neither are animals offered before the
eighth day. And it was not delayed after that time, lest some might
refuse the sign of circumcision on account of the pain: and also lest
the parents, whose love for their children increases as they become
used to their presence and as they grow older, should withdraw their
children from circumcision. A second reason may have been the
weakening of concupiscence in that member. A third motive may
have been to revile the worship of Venus and Priapus, which gave
honor to that part of the body. The Lord's prohibition extended only
to the cutting of oneself in honor of idols: and such was not the
circumcision of which we have been speaking.
The figurative reason for circumcision was that it foreshadowed the
removal of corruption, which was to be brought about by Christ, and
will be perfectly fulfilled in the eighth age, which is the age of those
who rise from the dead. And since all corruption of guilt and
punishment comes to us through our carnal origin, from the sin of
our first parent, therefore circumcision was applied to the generative
member. Hence the Apostle says (Col. 2:11): "You are circumcised"
in Christ "with circumcision not made by hand in despoiling of the
body of the flesh, but in the circumcision of" Our Lord Jesus
"Christ."