of the just man than the halls of kings. Therefore also when he went up to
heaven, he left nothing to his disciple save the sheepskin. "By the help of this,"
said he, "I have wrestled with the devil, and taking this, be thou armed against
him!" For indigence is a powerful weapon, an unassailable retreat, an unshaken
fortress! Elisha received the sheepskin as the greatest inheritance; for it was truly
such; a more precious one than all gold. And thenceforth that Elias was a
twofold person; an Elias above and an Elias below! I know ye account that just
person blessed, and you would each desire to be that person. What then if I show
you that all among us, who are initiated, have received something far greater
than he did? For Elias left a sheepskin to his disciple, but the Son of God
ascending left to us His own flesh! Elias indeed, cast off his mantle, before he
went up; but Christ left it behind for our sakes; and yet retained it when He
ascended. Let us not then be cast down. Let us not lament, nor fear the difficulty
of the times, for He who did not refuse to pour out His blood for all, and has
suffered us to partake of His flesh and of His blood again, what will He refuse to
do for our safety? Confident then in these hopes, let us beseech Him continually;
let us be earnest in prayers and supplications; and let us with all strictness give
our attention to every other virtue; that so we may escape the danger that now
threatens, and obtain the good things to come; which God grant we may all be
worthy of, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
Whom, and with Whom be glory to the Father together with the Holy Ghost,
forever and ever. Amen.

## Homily 3 on the Statues
On the departure of Flavian, Bishop of Antioch, who had gone on an
embassy to the Emperor Theodosius, on behalf of the city. Of the dignity of the
Priesthood. What is true fasting. Slander worse than devouring the human
body. And finally of those who had been put to death on account of the
sedition; and against those who complained that many innocent persons were
apprehended.
1. When I look on that throne, deserted and bereft of our teacher, I rejoice
and weep at the same time. I weep, because I see not our father with us! But I
rejoice that he has set out on a journey for our preservation; that he is gone to
snatch so great a multitude from the wrath of the Emperor! Here is both an
ornament to you, and a crown to him! An ornament to you, that such a father has
been allotted to you; a crown to him, because he is so affectionate towards his
children, and has confirmed by actual deeds what Christ said. For having learned
that "the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep," [John 10:11] he took
his departure; venturing his own life for us all, notwithstanding there were many
things to hinder his absence, and enforce his stay. And first, his time of life,
extended as it is to the utmost limits of old age; next, his bodily infirmity, and
the season of the year, as well as the necessity for his presence at the holy
festival; and besides these reasons, his only sister even now at her last breath! He
has disregarded, however, the ties of kindred, of old age, of infirmity, and the
severity of the season, and the toils of the journey; and preferring you and your
safety above all things, he has broken through all these restraints. And, even as a
youth, the aged man is now hastening along, borne upon the wings of zeal! For if
Christ (says he) gave Himself for us, what excuse or pardon should we deserve,
having undertaken the charge of so numerous a people, if we were not ready to
do and to suffer anything for the security of those committed into our hands. For