SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.28, C.3.

connaturalness," where "consent" denotes the union of appetites
proceeding from knowledge, and "connaturalness," the union of
natural appetites.
Reply to Objection 2: Even those who seek war and dissension,
desire nothing but peace, which they deem themselves not to have.
For as we stated above, there is no peace when a man concords with
another man counter to what he would prefer. Consequently men
seek by means of war to break this concord, because it is a defective
peace, in order that they may obtain peace, where nothing is
contrary to their will. Hence all wars are waged that men may find a
more perfect peace than that which they had heretofore.
Reply to Objection 3: Peace gives calm and unity to the appetite.
Now just as the appetite may tend to what is good simply, or to what
is good apparently, so too, peace may be either true or apparent.
There can be no true peace except where the appetite is directed to
what is truly good, since every evil, though it may appear good in a
way, so as to calm the appetite in some respect, has, nevertheless
many defects, which cause the appetite to remain restless and
disturbed. Hence true peace is only in good men and about good
things. The peace of the wicked is not a true peace but a semblance
thereof, wherefore it is written (Wis. 14:22): "Whereas they lived in a
great war of ignorance, they call so many and so great evils peace."
Reply to Objection 4: Since true peace is only about good things, as
the true good is possessed in two ways, perfectly and imperfectly,
so there is a twofold true peace. One is perfect peace. It consists in
the perfect enjoyment of the sovereign good, and unites all one's
desires by giving them rest in one object. This is the last end of the
rational creature, according to Ps. 147:3: "Who hath placed peace in
thy borders." The other is imperfect peace, which may be had in this
world, for though the chief movement of the soul finds rest in God,
yet there are certain things within and without which disturb the
peace.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.28, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether peace is the proper effect of charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that peace is not the proper effect of
charity. For one cannot have charity without sanctifying grace. But
some have peace who have not sanctifying grace, thus heathens
sometimes have peace. Therefore peace is not the effect of charity.
Objection 2: Further, if a certain thing is caused by charity, its
contrary is not compatible with charity. But dissension, which is
contrary to peace, is compatible with charity, for we find that even
holy doctors, such as Jerome and Augustine, dissented in some of
their opinions. We also read that Paul and Barnabas dissented from
one another (Acts 15). Therefore it seems that peace is not the effect
of charity.
Objection 3: Further, the same thing is not the proper effect of
different things. Now peace is the effect of justice, according to Is.
32:17: "And the work of justice shall be peace." Therefore it is not
the effect of charity.
On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 118:165): "Much peace have they
that love Thy Law."
I answer that, Peace implies a twofold union, as stated above (Article
1). The first is the result of one's own appetites being directed to one
object; while the other results from one's own appetite being united
with the appetite of another: and each of these unions is effected by
charity---the first, in so far as man loves God with his whole heart, by
referring all things to Him, so that all his desires tend to one object--the second, in so far as we love our neighbor as ourselves, the result
being that we wish to fulfil our neighbor's will as though it were ours:
hence it is reckoned a sign of friendship if people "make choice of
the same things" (Ethic. ix, 4), and Tully says (De Amicitia) that
friends "like and dislike the same things" (Sallust, Catilin.)
Reply to Objection 1: Without sin no one falls from a state of
sanctifying grace, for it turns man away from his due end by making
him place his end in something undue: so that his appetite does not
cleave chiefly to the true final good, but to some apparent good.
Hence, without sanctifying grace, peace is not real but merely
apparent.