FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.5.

of science, in which men differ from one another, could not be in the
"possible" intellect as their subject, but would be in the interior
sensitive powers, which differ in various men.
Now, in the first place, this supposition is contrary to the mind of
Aristotle. For it is manifest that the sensitive powers are rational, not
by their essence, but only by participation (Ethic. i, 13). Now the
Philosopher puts the intellectual virtues, which are wisdom, science
and understanding, in that which is rational by its essence.
Wherefore they are not in the sensitive powers, but in the intellect
itself. Moreover he says expressly (De Anima iii, text. 8,18) that when
the "possible" intellect "is thus identified with each thing," that is,
when it is reduced to act in respect of singulars by the intelligible
species, "then it is said to be in act, as the knower is said to be in
act; and this happens when the intellect can act of itself," i.e. by
considering: "and even then it is in potentiality in a sense; but not in
the same way as before learning and discovering." Therefore the
"possible" intellect itself is the subject of the habit of science, by
which the intellect, even though it be not actually considering, is
able to consider. In the second place, this supposition is contrary to
the truth. For as to whom belongs the operation, belongs also the
power to operate, belongs also the habit. But to understand and to
consider is the proper act of the intellect. Therefore also the habit
whereby one considers is properly in the intellect itself.
Reply to Objection 1: Some said, as Simplicius reports in his
Commentary on the Predicaments, that, since every operation of
man is to a certain extent an operation of the "conjunctum," as the
Philosopher says (De Anima i, text. 64); therefore no habit is in the
soul only, but in the "conjunctum." And from this it follows that no
habit is in the intellect, for the intellect is separate, as ran the
argument, given above. But the argument is no cogent. For habit is
not a disposition of the object to the power, but rather a disposition
of the power to the object: wherefore the habit needs to be in that
power which is principle of the act, and not in that which is
compared to the power as its object.
Now the act of understanding is not said to be common to soul and
body, except in respect of the phantasm, as is stated in De Anima,
text. 66. But it is clear that the phantasm is compared as object to
the passive intellect (De Anima iii, text. 3,39). Whence it follows that
the intellective habit is chiefly on the part of the intellect itself; and
not on the part of the phantasm, which is common to soul and body.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.50, C.5.

And therefore we must say that the "possible" intellect is the subject
of habit, which is in potentiality to many: and this belongs, above all,
to the "possible" intellect. Wherefore the "possible" intellect is the
subject of intellectual habits.
Reply to Objection 2: As potentiality to sensible being belongs to
corporeal matter, so potentiality to intellectual being belongs to the
"possible" intellect. Wherefore nothing forbids habit to be in the
"possible" intellect, for it is midway between pure potentiality and
perfect act.
Reply to Objection 3: Because the apprehensive powers inwardly
prepare their proper objects for the "possible intellect," therefore it
is by the good disposition of these powers, to which the good
disposition of the body cooperates, that man is rendered apt to
understand. And so in a secondary way the intellective habit can be
in these powers. But principally it is in the "possible" intellect.