SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.187, C.8.

Accordingly the first of these three cannot be altogether separated
from riches whether great or small. For man must needs take a
certain amount of care in acquiring or keeping external things. But
so long as external things are sought or possessed only in a small
quantity, and as much as is required for a mere livelihood, such like
care does not hinder one much; and consequently is not
inconsistent with the perfection of Christian life. For our Lord did not
forbid all care, but only such as is excessive and hurtful; wherefore
Augustine, commenting on Mt. 6:25, "Be not solicitous for your life,
what you shall eat," says (De Serm. in Monte;De Operibus Monach.
xxvi): "In saying this He does not forbid them to procure these things
in so far as they needed them, but to be intent on them, and for their
sake to do whatever they are bidden to do in preaching the Gospel."
Yet the possession of much wealth increases the weight of care,
which is a great distraction to man's mind and hinders him from
giving himself wholly to God's service. The other two, however,
namely the love of riches and taking pride or glorying in riches,
result only from an abundance of wealth.
Nevertheless it makes a difference in this matter if riches, whether
abundant or moderate, be possessed in private or in common. For
the care that one takes of one's own wealth, pertains to love of self,
whereby a man loves himself in temporal matters; whereas the care
that is given to things held in common pertains to the love of charity
which "seeketh not her own," but looks to the common good. And
since religion is directed to the perfection of charity, and charity is
perfected in "the love of God extending to contempt of
self" [Augustine, De Civ. Dei xiv, 28], it is contrary to religious
perfection to possess anything in private. But the care that is given
to common goods may pertain to charity, although it may prove an
obstacle to some higher act of charity, such as divine contemplation
or the instructing of one's neighbor. Hence it is evident that to have
excessive riches in common, whether in movable or in immovable
property, is an obstacle to perfection, though not absolutely
incompatible with it; while it is not an obstacle to religious perfection
to have enough external things, whether movables or immovables,
as suffice for a livelihood, if we consider poverty in relation to the
common end of religious orders, which is to devote oneself to the
service of God. But if we consider poverty in relation to the special
end of any religious order, then this end being presupposed, a
greater or lesser degree of poverty is adapted to that religious order;
and each religious order will be the more perfect in respect of
poverty, according as it professes a poverty more adapted to its end.