condescension both in words and actions.
Ver. 13. "Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the
faith."
This he says, because their disposition was froward, deceitful, and
dissolute. They have these numberless bad qualities; and because they are prone
to lying, deceiving, gluttonous, and slothful, severe reproof is necessary. For
such characters will not be managed by mildness, "therefore rebuke them." He
speaks not here of Gentiles, but of his own people. "Sharply." Give them, he
says, a stroke that cuts deep. For one method is not to be employed with all, but
they are to be differently dealt with, according to their various characters and
dispositions. He does not here have recourse to exhortation. For as he who treats
with harshness the meek and ingenuous, may destroy them; so he who flatters
one that requires severity, causes him to perish, and does not suffer him to be
reclaimed.
"That they may be sound in the faith."
This then is soundness, to introduce nothing spurious, nor foreign. But if
they who are scrupulous about meats are not sound, but are sick and weak; for,
"Them that are weak," he says, "receive, but not to doubtful disputations"
[Romans 14:1]; what can be said of those who observe the same fasts, (with the
Jews,) who keep the sabbaths, who frequent the places that are consecrated by
them? I speak of that at Daphne, of that which is called the cave of Matrona, and
of that plain in Cilicia, which is called Saturn's. How are these sound? With them
a heavier stroke is necessary. Why then does he not do the same with the
Romans? Because their dispositions were different, they were of a nobler
character.
Ver. 14. "Not giving heed," he says, "to Jewish fables."
The Jewish tenets were fables in two ways, because they were imitations,
and because the thing was past its season, for such things become fables at last.
For when a thing ought not to be done, and being done, is injurious, it is a fable
even as it is useless. As then those ought not to be regarded, so neither ought

these. For this is not being sound. For if you believe the Faith, why do you add
other things, as if the faith were not sufficient to justify? Why do you enslave
yourself by subjection to the Law? Have you no confidence in what you believe?
This is a mark of an unsound and unbelieving mind. For one who is faithful does
not doubt, but such an one evidently doubts.
Ver. 15. "Unto the pure," he says, "all things are pure."
You see that this is said to a particular purpose.
"But unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure."
Things then are not clean or unclean from their own nature, but from the
disposition of him who partakes of them.
"But even their mind and conscience is defiled."
Ver. 16. "They profess that they know God; but in works they deny Him,
being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate."
The swine therefore is clean. Why then was it forbidden as unclean? It was
not unclean by nature; for, "all things are pure." Nothing is more unclean than a
fish, inasmuch as it even feeds upon human flesh. But it was permitted and
considered clean. Nothing is more unclean than a bird, for it eats worms; or than
a stag, which is said to have its name from eating serpents. Yet all these were
eaten. Why then was the swine forbidden, and many other things? Not because
they were unclean, but to check excessive luxury. But had this been said, they
would not have been persuaded; they were restrained therefore by the fear of
uncleanness. For tell me, if we enquire nicely into these things, what is more
unclean than wine; or than water, with which they mostly purified themselves?
They touched not the dead, and yet they were cleansed by the dead, for the
victim was dead, and with that they were cleansed. This therefore was a doctrine
for children. In the composition of wine, does not dung form a part? For as the
vine draws moisture from the earth, so does it from the dung that is thrown upon
it. In short, if we wish to be very nice, everything is unclean, otherwise if we
please not to be nice, nothing is unclean. Yet all things are pure. God made
nothing unclean, for nothing is unclean, except sin only. For that reaches to the