sake of saving this man. Of you, the twelve, says He, that are everywhere present
with me, whose feet I washed, to whom I promised so many things.
Intolerable sorrow thereupon seized that holy company. And John indeed
says, they "were in doubt, and looked one upon another," and each of them asked
in fear concerning himself, although conscious to themselves of no such thing.
But this evangelist says, that "being exceeding sorrowful, they began every one
of them to say unto Him, Is it I, Lord? [Matthew 26:22] And He answered and
said, He it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it."
Mark at what time He discovered him. It was when it was His will to
deliver the rest from this trouble, for they were even dead with the fear,
wherefore also they were instant with their questions. But not only as desiring to
deliver them from their distress He did this, but also as willing to amend the
traitor. For since after having often heard it generally, he continued incorrigible,
being past feeling, He being minded to make him feel more, takes off his mask.
For when being sorrowful they began to say, "Is it I, Lord? He answered
and said, He that dips with me in the dish, the same shall betray me. The Son of
Man goes, as it is written of Him, but woe to the man by whom the Son of Man is
betrayed. It had been good for that man if he had not been born."
Now some say that he was so bold as not to honor his Master, but to dip
with Him: but to me Christ seems to have done this too, to shame him the more,
and bring him over to a better disposition. For this act again has something more
in it.
2. But these things we ought not to pass by at random, but they should be
instilled in our minds, and wrath would find no place at any time.
For who, bearing in mind that supper, and the traitor sitting at meat with the
Saviour of all, and Him who was to be betrayed thus meekly reasoning, would
not put away all venom of wrath and anger? See at any rate how meekly He
conducts Himself towards him, "The Son of Man goes, as it is written of Him."
And these things again He said, both to restore the disciples, that they might
not think the thing was a sign of weakness, and to amend the traitor.

"But woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It had been
good for that man if he had not been born." See again in His rebukes His
unspeakable meekness. For not even here with invective, but more in the way of
compassion, does He apply what He says, but in a disguised way again; and yet
not his former senselessness only, but his subsequent shamelessness was
deserving of the utmost indignation. For after this conviction he says, "Is it I,
Lord?" Oh insensibility! He inquires, when conscious to himself of such things.
For the evangelist too, marvelling at his boldness, says this. What then says the
most mild and gentle Jesus? "You say." And yet He might have said, O thou
unholy, thou all unholy one; accursed, and profane; so long a time in travail with
mischief, who hast gone your way, and made satanical compacts, and hast agreed
to receive money, and hast been convicted by me too, do you yet dare to ask?
But none of these things did He say; but how? "You say?" fixing for us bounds
and rules of long suffering.
But some one will say, Yet if it was written that He was to suffer these
things, wherefore is Judas blamed, for he did the things that were written? But
not with this intent, but from wickedness. For if you inquire not concerning the
motive, you will deliver even the devil from the charges against him. But these
things are not, they are not so. For both the one and the other are deserving of
countless punishments, although the world was saved. For neither did the treason
of Judas work out salvation for us, but the wisdom of Christ, and the good
contrivance of His fair skill, using the wickednesses of others for our advantage.
"What then," one may say, "though Judas had not betrayed Him, would not
another have betrayed Him?" And what has this to do with the question?
"Because if Christ must needs be crucified, it must be by the means of some one,
and if by some one, surely by such a person as this. But if all had been good, the
dispensation in our behalf had been impeded." Not so. For the Allwise knows
how He shall bring about our benefits, even had this happened. For His wisdom
is rich in contrivance, and incomprehensible. So for this reason, that no one
might suppose that Judas had become a minister of the dispensation, He declares