SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.2.

Reply to Objection 1: An act that is virtuous generically may be
rendered vicious by its connection with certain circumstances.
Hence the text goes on to say: "Behold in the day of your fast your
own will is founded," and a little further on (Is. 58:4): "You fast for
debates and strife and strike with the fist wickedly." These words are
expounded by Gregory (Pastor. iii, 19) as follows: "The will indicates
joy and the fist anger. In vain then is the flesh restrained if the mind
allowed to drift to inordinate movements be wrecked by vice." And
Augustine says (in the same sermon) that "fasting loves not many
words, deems wealth superfluous, scorns pride, commends humility,
helps man to perceive what is frail and paltry."
Reply to Objection 2: The mean of virtue is measured not according
to quantity but according to right reason, as stated in Ethic. ii, 6.
Now reason judges it expedient, on account of some special motive,
for a man to take less food than would be becoming to him under
ordinary circumstances, for instance in order to avoid sickness, or in
order to perform certain bodily works with greater ease: and much
more does reason direct this to the avoidance of spiritual evils and
the pursuit of spiritual goods. Yet reason does not retrench so much
from one's food as to refuse nature its necessary support: thus
Jerome says: "It matters not whether thou art a long or a short time
in destroying thyself, since to afflict the body immoderately, whether
by excessive lack of nourishment, or by eating or sleeping too little,
is to offer a sacrifice of stolen goods" [Corpus of Canon Law, Cap.
Non mediocriter, De Consecrationibus, dist. 5]. In like manner right
reason does not retrench so much from a man's food as to render
him incapable of fulfilling his duty. Hence Jerome says (in the same
reference) "Rational man forfeits his dignity, if he sets fasting before
chastity, or night-watchings before the well-being of his senses."
Reply to Objection 3: The fasting of nature, in respect of which a
man is said to be fasting until he partakes of food, consists in a pure
negation, wherefore it cannot be reckoned a virtuous act. Such is
only the fasting of one who abstains in some measure from food for
a reasonable purpose. Hence the former is called natural fasting
[jejunium jejunii] ['fast of fasting']: while the latter is called the
faster's fast, because he fasts for a purpose.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.2.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.146, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether fasting is an act of abstinence?

Objection 1: It would seem that fasting is not an act of abstinence.
For Jerome [Ordinary Gloss] commenting on Mt. 17:20, "This kind of
devil" says: "To fast is to abstain not only from food but also from all
manner of lusts." Now this belongs to every virtue. Therefore fasting
is not exclusively an act of abstinence.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says in a Lenten Homily (xvi in Evang.)
that "the Lenten fast is a tithe of the whole year." Now paying tithes
is an act of religion, as stated above (Question 87, Article 1).
Therefore fasting is an act of religion and not of abstinence.
Objection 3: Further, abstinence is a part of temperance, as stated
above (Questions 143,146, Article 1, ad 3). Now temperance is
condivided with fortitude, to which it belongs to endure hardships,
and this seems very applicable to fasting. Therefore fasting is not an
act of abstinence.
On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. vi, 19) that "fasting is frugality of
fare and abstinence from food."
I answer that, Habit and act have the same matter. Wherefore every
virtuous act about some particular matter belongs to the virtue that
appoints the mean in that matter. Now fasting is concerned with
food, wherein the mean is appointed by abstinence. Wherefore it is
evident that fasting is an act of abstinence.
Reply to Objection 1: Properly speaking fasting consists in
abstaining from food, but speaking metaphorically it denotes
abstinence from anything harmful, and such especially is sin.
We may also reply that even properly speaking fasting is abstinence
from all manner of lust, since, as stated above (Article 1, ad 1), an act
ceases to be virtuous by the conjunction of any vice.
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing prevents the act of one virtue
belonging to another virtue, in so far as it is directed to the end of
that virtue, as explained above (Question 32, Article 1, ad 2; Question
85, Article 3). Accordingly there is no reason why fasting should not
be an act of religion, or of chastity, or of any other virtue.