administers the requisite correction in his own person first.
5. But that those who addicted themselves to this or that man were in error,
is evident. And rightly he rebukes them, saying, "You do not well in that you say,
'I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas.'" But why did he add, "And I of
Christ?" For although these who addicted themselves to men were in error, not
surely ([οὔδε που] Bened. [οὐ δήπου] Savil.) those who dedicated themselves
unto Christ. But this was not his charge, that they called themselves by the Name
of Christ, but that they did not all call themselves by that Name alone. And I
think that he added this of himself, wishing to make the accusation more
grievous, and to point out that by this rule Christ must be considered as
belonging to one party only: although they were not so using the Name
themselves. For that this was what he hinted at he declared in the sequel, saying,

1 Corinthians 1:13
"Is Christ divided." What he says comes to this: "You have cut in pieces
Christ, and distributed His body." Here is anger! Here is chiding! Here are words
full of indignation! For whenever instead of arguing he interrogates only, his
doing so implies a confessed absurdity.
But some say that he glanced at something else, in saying, "Christ is
divided:" as if he had said, "He has distributed to men and parted the Church,
and taken one share Himself, giving them the other." Then in what follows, he
labors to overthrow this absurdity, saying, "Was Paul crucified for you, or were
ye baptized into the name of Paul?" Observe his Christ-loving mind; how
thenceforth he brings the whole matter to a point in his own name, showing, and
more than showing, that this honor belongs to no one. And that no one might
think it was envy which moved him to say these things, therefore he is
constantly putting himself forward. Observe, too, his considerate way, in that he
says not, "Did Paul make the world? Did Paul from nothing produce you into
being?" But only those things which belonged as choice treasures to the faithful,
and were regarded with great solicitude— those he specifies, the Cross, and
Baptism, and the blessings following on these. For the loving-kindness of God
towards men is shown by the creation of the world also: in nothing, however, so
much as by the ([τῆς συγκαταβάσεως]) condescension through the Cross. And he
said not, "did Paul die for you?" but, "was Paul crucified?" setting down also
the kind of death.
"Or were ye baptized into the name of Paul?" Again, he says not, "did Paul
baptize you?" For he did baptize many: but this was not the question, by whom
they had been baptized, but, into whose name they had been baptized! For since
this also was a cause of schisms, their being called after the name of those who
baptized them, he corrects this error likewise saying, "Were ye baptized into the