THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.11.

immolation five days before the Pasch, which is the tenth day of the
moon.
Secondly, because the virtue of His Passion was to be spread over
the whole world, He wished to suffer in the center of the habitable
world---that is, in Jerusalem. Accordingly it is written (Ps. 73:12):
"But God is our King before ages: He hath wrought salvation in the
midst of the earth"---that is, in Jerusalem, which is called "the navel
of the earth" [Jerome's comment on Ezech. 5:5].
Thirdly, because it was specially in keeping with His humility: that,
as He chose the most shameful manner of death, so likewise it was
part of His humility that He did not refuse to suffer in so celebrated a
place. Hence Pope Leo says (Serm. I in Epiph.): "He who had taken
upon Himself the form of a servant chose Bethlehem for His nativity
and Jerusalem for His Passion."
Fourthly, He willed to suffer in Jerusalem, where the chief priests
dwelt, to show that the wickedness of His slayers arose from the
chiefs of the Jewish people. Hence it is written (Acts 4:27): "There
assembled together in this city against Thy holy child Jesus whom
Thou hast anointed, Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and
the people of Israel."
Reply to Objection 2: For three reasons Christ suffered outside the
gate, and not in the Temple nor in the city. First of all, that the truth
might correspond with the figure. For the calf and the goat which
were offered in most solemn sacrifice for expiation on behalf of the
entire multitude were burnt outside the camp, as commanded in Lev.
16:27. Hence it is written (Heb. 13:27): "For the bodies of those
beasts, whose blood is brought into the holies by the high-priest for
sin, are burned without the camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that He
might sanctify the people by His own blood, suffered without the
gate."
Secondly, to set us the example of shunning worldly conversation.
Accordingly the passage continues: "Let us go forth therefore to Him
without the camp, bearing His reproach."
Thirdly, as Chrysostom says in a sermon on the Passion (Hom. i De
Cruce et Latrone): "The Lord was not willing to suffer under a roof,
nor in the Jewish Temple, lest the Jews might take away the saving

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.11.

sacrifice, and lest you might think He was offered for that people
only. Consequently, it was beyond the city and outside the walls,
that you may learn it was a universal sacrifice, an oblation for the
whole world, a cleansing for all."
Reply to Objection 3: According to Jerome, in his commentary on Mt.
27:33, "someone explained 'the place of Calvary' as being the place
where Adam was buried; and that it was so called because the skull
of the first man was buried there. A pleasing interpretation indeed,
and one suited to catch the ear of the people, but, still, not the true
one. For the spots where the condemned are beheaded are outside
the city and beyond the gates, deriving thence the name of Calvary--that is, of the beheaded. Jesus, accordingly, was crucified there, that
the standards of martyrdom might be uplifted over what was
formerly the place of the condemned. But Adam was buried close by
Hebron and Arbe, as we read in the book of Jesus Ben Nave." But
Jesus was to be crucified in the common spot of the condemned
rather than beside Adam's sepulchre, to make it manifest that
Christ's cross was the remedy, not only for Adam's personal sin, but
also for the sin of the entire world.