Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, in doing such things, in order
that He might teach better things to those who marvelled at them, and
might turn those who were intent and in doubt about unusual temporal
things to eternal and inner things, says, "Come unto me, all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you."
And He does not say, Learn of me, because I raise those who have been
dead four days; but He says, "Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in
heart." For humility, which is most solid, is more powerful and safer than
pride, that is most inflated. And so He goes on to say, "And ye shall find
rest unto your souls," for "Love2 is not puffed up;" and "God is Love;"
and "such as be faithful in love shall rest in Him," called back from the
din which is without to silent joys. Behold, "God is Love:" why do we go
forth and run to the heights of the heavens and the lowest parts of the
earth, seeking Him who is within us, if we wish to be with Him?

### CHAP. 8.—THAT HE WHO LOVES HIS BROTHER, LOVES GOD; BECAUSE HE LOVES LOVE ITSELF, WHICH IS OF GOD, AND IS GOD.

12. Let no one say, I do not know what I love. Let him love his brother,
and he will love the same love. For he knows the love with which he loves,
more than the brother whom he loves. So now he can know God more
than he knows his brother: clearly known more, because more present;
known more, because more within him; known more, because more
certain. Embrace the love of God, and by love embrace God. That is love
itself, which associates together all good angels and all the servants of
God by the bond of sanctity, and joins together us and them mutually
with ourselves, and joins us subordinately to Himself. In proportion,
therefore, as we are healed from the swelling of pride, in such proportion
are we more filled with love; and with what is he fall, who is full of love,
except with God? Well, but you will say, I see love, and, as far as I am
able, I gaze upon it with my mind, and I believe the Scripture, saying, that
"God is love; and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God;" but when I
see love, I do not see in it the Trinity. Nay, but thou dost see the Trinity if
thou seest love. But if I can I will put you in mind, that thou mayest see
that thou seest it; only let itself be present, that we may be moved by love
to something good. Since, when we love love, we love one who loves
something, and that on account of this very thing, that he does love

something; therefore what does love love, that love itself also may be
loved? For that is not love which loves nothing. But if it loves itself it must
love something, that it may love itself as love. For as a word indicates
something, and indicates also itself, but does not indicate itself to be a
word, unless it indicates that it does indicate something; so love also
loves indeed itself, but except it love itself as loving something, it loves
itself not as love. What therefore does love love, except that which we love
with love? But this, to begin from that which is nearest to us, is our
brother. And listen how greatly the Apostle John commends brotherly
love: "He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is none
occasion of stumbling in him." It is manifest that he placed the
perfection of righteousness in the love of our brother; for he certainly is
perfect in whom "there is no occasion of stumbling." And yet he seems to
have passed by the love of God in silence; which he never would have
done, unless because he intends God to be understood in brotherly love
itself. For in this same epistle, a little further on, he says most plainly
thus: "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one
that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth
not God; for God is love." And this passage declares sufficiently and
plainly, that this same brotherly love itself (for that is brotherly love by
which we love each other) is set forth by so great authority, not only to be
from God, but also to be God. When, therefore, we love our brother from
love, we love our brother from God; neither can it be that we do not love
above all else that same love by which we love our brother: whence it may
be gathered that these two commandments cannot exist unless
interchangeably. For since "God is love," he who loves love certainly loves
God; but he must needs love love, who loves his brother. And so a little
after he says, "For he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how
can he love God whom he hath not seen"? because the reason that he
does not see God is, that he does not love his brother. For he who does
not love his brother, abideth not in love; and he who abideth not in love,
abideth not in God, because God is love. Further, he who abideth not in
God, abideth not in light; for "God is light, and in Him is no darkness at
all." He therefore who abideth not in light, what wonder is it if he does
not see light, that is, does not see God, because he is in darkness? But he
sees his brother with human sight, with which God cannot be seen. But if
he loved with spiritual love him whom he sees with human sight, he