longer speak to you in proverbs, but will tell you openly of my Father (John xvi, 25):
hence [the] word thunder in the text, indicative of this plain showing.
The words of the above text are adapted to our purpose: for whereas in the previous
books we have spoken of divine things according as natural reason can arrive through
creatures to the knowledge of them, -- but that imperfectly, according to the limitations
of the author's capacity, so that we can say with Job: Lo, these things that have been
said are but a part of his ways; it remains now to treat of truths divinely revealed for our
belief, truths transcending human understanding. And the words of the text are a guide
to our procedure in this matter. As we have scarce heard the truth in the statements of
Holy Scripture, those being as it were one little drop coming down to us, and no man in
this life can look upon the thunder of his greatness, our method will be as follows.
Taking as first principles the statements of Holy Scripture, we will endeavour to
penetrate their hidden meaning to the best of our ability, without presuming to claim
perfect knowledge of the matter. Our proofs will rest on the authority of Holy Scripture,
not on natural reason: still it will be our duty to show that our assertions are not contrary
to natural reason, and thereby defend them against the assaults of unbelievers. And
since natural reason ascends by creatures to the knowledge of God, while the
knowledge of faith descends by divine revelation from God to us, and it is the same way
up and down, we must proceed in these matters of supra-rational belief by the same
way in which we proceeded in our rational enquiries concerning God. Thus we shall
treat first of the supra-rational truths that are proposed for our belief concerning God
Himself, as the confession of the Trinity [Chapp. I - XXVI: cf. I, Chap.IX: this
answers to Book I]. Secondly, of the supra-rational works done by God, as the work of
the Incarnation and its consequences [Chapp. XXVII - LXXVIII: answering to Book II].
Thirdly, of the supra-rational events expected at the end of human history, as the
resurrection and glorification of bodies, the everlasting bliss of souls, and events
therewith connected [Chapp. LXXIX - XCVII: answering to Book III].

multiplicity with little of unity, as in a heap of stones, e.g., the moraine on the side of a
high hill; or unity with little of multiplicity, as in the first elements of matter, -- `electrons,'
or what ever else they may be. God, the Sovereign Unity, is likewise virtually all things
(B. I, Chapp. XXXI, LIII, LIV).

them, not considering the advance of physical science, or of history, since the authors
whom they follow lived and wrote. Now if it were mere matter of dogmatic, or revealed,
theology, this disregard of physics would be justified; but when it is question of
providing, say, a biological setting for a theological truth, this neglect of modern
progress in biology becomes deplorable. On the other hand, it goes without saying that
some votaries of physics, or history, or criticism, cherish an acrimonious hatred for
divine revelation, and even the very name of God; and chiefly value science as a
weapon of offence against theology, -- thereby assuming a mental attitude the reverse
of scientific. For the provisional adjustment of the contested frontier, we seem to require
a sort of boundary commission of physicists, historians, critics, philosophers, and
theologians working with one common endeavour, as the Jesuit rule lays it down, ut
suus veritati sit locus, non ut in ea re superiores videantur. Such a commission would sit
permanently in a Catholic University, if ever such an institution could be planted
anywhere in the British Isles.