John 19:28
"After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished."
That is, "that nothing was wanting to the Dispensation." For He was
everywhere desirous to show, that this Death was of a new kind, if indeed the
whole lay in the power of the Person dying, and death came not on the Body
before He willed it; and He willed it after He had fulfilled all things. Therefore
also He said, "I have power to lay down My life; and I have power to take it
again." [John 10:18] Knowing therefore that all things were fulfilled, He says,

John 19:28
"I thirst."
Here again fulfilling a prophecy. But consider, I pray, the accursed nature of
the bystanders. Though we have ten thousand enemies, and have suffered
intolerable things at their hands, yet when we see them perishing, we relent; but
they did not even so make peace with Him, nor were tamed by what they saw,
but rather became more savage, and increased their irony; and having brought to
Him vinegar on a sponge, as men bring it to the condemned, thus they gave Him
to drink; since it is on this account that the hyssop is added.

John 19:30
"Having therefore received it, He says, It is finished."
Do you see how He does all things calmly, and with power? And what
follows shows this. For when all had been completed,
"He bowed His head, (this had not been nailed,) and gave up the ghost."
That is, "died." Yet to expire does not come after the bowing the head; but
here, on the contrary, it does. For He did not, when He had expired, bow His
head, as happens with us, but when He had bent His head, then He expired. By
all which things the Evangelist has shown, that He was Lord of all.
But the Jews, on the other hand, who swallowed the camel and strained at
the gnat, having wrought so atrocious a deed, are very precise concerning the
day.

John 19:31
"Because it was the Preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the
cross —they besought Pilate that their legs might be broken."
Do you see how strong a thing is truth? By means of the very things which
are the objects of their zeal, prophecy is fulfilled, for by occasion of those things,
this plain prediction, unconnected with them, receives its accomplishment. For
the soldiers when they came, broke the legs of the others, but not those of Christ.
Yet these to gratify the Jews pierced His side with a spear, and now insulted the
dead body. O abominable and accursed purpose! Yet, beloved, be not thou
confounded, be not thou desponding; for the things which these men did from a
wicked will, fought on the side of the truth. Since there was a prophecy, saying,
(from this circumstance, "They shall look on Him whom they pierced." [Ver. 37;
Zechariah 12:10] And not this only, but the deed then dared was a demonstration
of the faith, to those who should afterwards disbelieve; as to Thomas, and those
like him. With this too an ineffable mystery was accomplished. For "there came
forth water and blood." Not without a purpose, or by chance, did those founts
come forth, but because by means of these two together the Church consists.
And the initiated know it, being by water indeed regenerate, and nourished by
the Blood and the Flesh. Hence the Mysteries take their beginning; that when
you approach to that awful cup, you may so approach, as drinking from the very
side.