God knows no man, but the Spirit of God." Thus Christ's meaning is no other
than this: "I have not a will different and apart from that of the Father, but if He
desires anything, then I also; if I, then He also. As therefore none could object to
the Father judging, so neither may any to Me, for the sentence of Each is given
from the same Mind." And if He utters these words rather as a man, marvel not,
seeing that they still deemed Him to be mere man. Therefore in passages like
these it is necessary not merely to enquire into the meaning of the words, but
also to take into account the suspicion of the hearers, and listen to what is said as
being addressed to that suspicion. Otherwise many difficulties will follow.
Consider for instance, He says, "I seek not My own will": according to this then
His will is different (from that of the Father), is imperfect, nay, not merely
imperfect, but even unprofitable. "For if it be saving, if it agree with that of the
Father, why do You not seek it?" Mortals might with reason say so because they
have many wills contrary to what seems good to the Father, but Thou, wherefore
sayest Thou this, who art in all things like the Father? For this none would say is
the language even of a "man" made perfect and crucified. For if Paul so blended
himself with the will of God as to say, "I live, yet no longer I, but Christ lives in
me" [Galatians 2:20], how says the Lord of all, "I seek not My own will, but the
will of Him that sent Me," as though that will were different? What then is His
meaning? He applies His discourse as if the case were that of a mere man, and
suits His language to the suspicion of His hearers. For when He had, by what
had gone before, given proof of His sayings, speaking partly as God, partly as a
mere man, He again as a man endeavors to establish the same, and says, "My
judgment is just." And whence is this seen? "Because I seek not My own will, but
the will of Him that sent Me." "For as in the case of men, he that is free from
selfishness cannot be justly charged with having given an unfair decision, so
neither will you now be able to accuse Me. He that desires to establish his own,
may perhaps by many be suspected of corrupting justice with this intent; but he
that looks not to his own, what reason can he have for not deciding justly? Apply
now this reasoning to My case. Had I said that I was not sent by the Father, had

I not referred to Him the glory of what was done, some of you might perhaps
have suspected that desiring to gain honor for Myself, I said the thing that is not;
but if I impute and refer what is done to another, wherefore and whence can you
have cause to suspect My words?" Do you see how He confirmed His discourse,
and asserted that "His judgment was just" by an argument which any common
man might have used in defending himself? Do you see how what I have often
said is clearly visible? What is that? It is that the exceeding humility of the
expressions most persuades men of sense not to receive the words off hand and
then fall down [into low thoughts], but rather to take pains that they reach to the
height of their meaning; this humility too with much ease then raises up those
who were once groveling on the ground.
Now bearing all this in mind, let us not, I exhort you, carelessly pass by
Christ's words, but enquire closely into them all, everywhere considering the
reason of what has been said; and let us not deem that ignorance and simplicity
will be sufficient to excuse us, for He has bidden us not merely to be "harmless,"
but "wise." [Matthew 10:16] Let us therefore practice wisdom with simplicity,
both as to doctrines and the right actions of our lives; let us judge ourselves here,
that we be not condemned with the world hereafter; let us act towards our
fellow-servants as we desire our Master to act towards us: for (we say), "Forgive
us our debts, as we forgive our debtors." [Matthew 6:12] I know that the smitten
soul endures not meekly, but if we consider that by so doing we do a kindness
not to him who has grieved us but to ourselves, we shall soon let go the venom
of our wrath; for he who forgave not the hundred pence to him who had
transgressed against him, wronged not his fellow-servant but himself, by
rendering himself liable for the ten thousand talents of which he had before
received forgiveness. [Matthew 18:30-34] When therefore we forgive not others,
we forgive not ourselves. And so let us not merely say to God, "remember not
our offenses"; but let each also say to himself, "let us not remember the offenses
of our fellow-servants done against us." For you first give judgment on your
own sins, and God judges after; you propose the law concerning remission and