deprived of the one advantage they seemed to have over poverty? For this reason
also, from the beginning, God tied the man to labour, not for the purpose of
punishing or chastising, but for amendment and education. When Adam lived an
unlabourious life, he fell from Paradise, but when the Apostle laboured
abundantly, and toiled hard, and said, "In labour and travail, working night and
day," [1 Thessalonians 2:9] then he was taken up into Paradise, and ascended to
the third heaven!
24. Let us not then despise labour; let us not despise work; for before the
kingdom of Heaven, we receive the greatest recompense from thence, deriving
pleasure from that circumstance; and not pleasure only, but what is greater than
pleasure, the purest health. For in addition to their want of relish, many diseases
also attack the rich; but the poor are freed from the hands of physicians; and if at
times they do fall into a sickness, they recover themselves quickly, being far
removed from all effeminacy, and having robust constitutions. Poverty, to those
who bear it wisely, is a great possession, a treasure that cannot be taken away;
the stoutest of staves; a way of gain that cannot be thwarted; a lodging that is
safe from snares. The poor man, it may be objected, is oppressed. But then the
rich man is still more subject to adverse designs. The poor man is looked down
upon and insulted. But the rich man is the subject of envy. The poor man is not
so easily assailed as the rich man, offering, as the latter does on every side,
countless handles to the devil, and to his secret foes; and being the servant of all,
on account of the great extent of his business. Standing in need of many things,
he is compelled to flatter many persons, and to minister to them with much
servility. But the poor man, if he knows how to be spiritually wise, is not
assailable even by the devil himself. Job therefore, strong as he was before this,
when he lost all, became still more powerful, and bore away an illustrious
victory from the devil!
25. But besides this, the poor man cannot possibly be injured, if he knows
how to be spiritually wise. Now what I said of pleasure, that it consisted not in a
costly provision of meats, but in the disposition of those who eat, this also I say

respecting an insult; that the insult is either created or destroyed, not by the
intention of those who insult, but by the disposition of those who bear it. For
example. Some one has insulted you with much language, fit or unfit to repeat. If
you shall laugh at the insults, if you take not the words to heart, if you show
yourself superior to the blow, you are not insulted. And just as if we possessed
an adamantine body, we should not be hurt, were we even attacked on all sides
by a thousand darts, for darts beget wounds not from the hand of him who hurls
them, but from the bodies of those who receive them, so too in this case, insults
are constituted real and dishonourable ones, not from the folly of those who offer
them, but from the weakness of the insulted. For if we know how to be truly
wise, we are incapable of being insulted, or of suffering any serious evils. Some
one it may be has offered you an insult, but you have not felt it? You have not
been pained. Then you are not insulted, but hast given rather than received a
blow! For when the insulting person perceives that his blow did not reach the
soul of those who were reviled, he is himself the more severely fretted; and
while those who are reproached remain silent, the insulting blow is turned
backwards, and recoils of its own accord upon him who aimed it.
26. In all things then, beloved, let us be spiritually wise, and poverty will be
able to do us no harm, but will benefit us exceedingly, and render us more
illustrious and wealthy than the richest. For tell me who was poorer than Elias?
Yet for this reason he surpassed all the wealthy, in that he was so poor, and this
very poverty of his was his own choice from an opulence of mind. For since he
accounted the wealth of all riches to be beneath his magnanimity, and not worthy
of his spiritual wisdom, therefore he welcomed this kind of poverty; so that if he
had considered present things as of much worth, he would not have possessed
only a mantle. But so did he contemn the vanity of the life that now is, and
regard all gold as clay cast into the street, that he possessed himself of nothing
more than that covering. Therefore the king had need of the poor man, and he
who had so much gold hung upon the words of him who had nothing more than
a sheepskin. Thus was the sheepskin more splendid than the purple, and the cave