FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.102, C.6.

With regard to the high-priests and priests the consecration was
performed as follows. First, when they had been washed, they were
clothed with certain special garments in designation of their dignity.
In particular, the high-priest was anointed on the head with the oil of
unction: to denote that the power of consecration was poured forth
by him on to others, just as oil flows from the head on to the lower
parts of the body; according to Ps. 132:2: "Like the precious
ointment on the head that ran down upon the beard, the beard of
Aaron." But the Levites received no other consecration besides
being offered to the Lord by the children of Israel through the hands
of the high-priest, who prayed for them. The lesser priests were
consecrated on the hands only, which were to be employed in the
sacrifices. The tip of their right ear and the thumb of their right hand,
and the great toe of their right foot were tinged with the blood of the
sacrificial animal, to denote that they should be obedient to God's
law in offering the sacrifices (this is denoted by touching their right
ear); and that they should be careful and ready in performing the
sacrifices (this is signified by the moistening of the right foot and
hand). They themselves and their garments were sprinkled with the
blood of the animal that had been sacrificed, in memory of the blood
of the lamb by which they had been delivered in Egypt. At their
consecration the following sacrifices were offered: a calf, for sin, in
memory of Aaron's sin in fashioning the molten calf; a ram, for a
holocaust, in memory of the sacrifice of Abraham, whose obedience
it behooved the high-priest to imitate; again, a ram of consecration,
which was a peace-offering, in memory of the delivery form Egypt
through the blood of the lamb; and a basket of bread, in memory of
the manna vouchsafed to the people.
In reference to their being destined to the ministry, the fat of the ram,
one roll of bread, and the right shoulder were placed on their hands,
to show that they received the power of offering these things to the
Lord: while the Levites were initiated to the ministry by being
brought into the tabernacle of the covenant, as being destined to the
ministry touching the vessels of the sanctuary.
The figurative reason of these things was that those who are to be
consecrated to the spiritual ministry of Christ, should be first of all
purified by the waters of Baptism, and by the waters of tears, in their
faith in Christ's Passion, which is a sacrifice both of expiation and of
purification. They have also to shave all the hair of their body, i.e. all
evil thoughts. They should, moreover, be decked with virtues, and be
consecrated with the oil of the Holy Ghost, and with the sprinkling of