he has not solved the difficulty he raised. For the more obscure that point
remained, the more the Jew was put to silence. And the difficulty of his position
passed over to the other, and this become clearer from it (Mar. and 4 manuscripts
"than that"). So in this passage also, it is by raising other difficulties that he
meets the questions raised, inasmuch as it was against Jews that he was
contending. Hence he takes no pains to solve the examples which he has brought
before us. For he was not answerable for them as in the fight against the Jews.
But from them he makes his own subject throughout clearer. Why do you feel
surprised, he means, that some of the Jews were saved, and some not saved at
this time? Why of old, in the patriarch's times, one may see this happening. For
why was Isaac only called the seed, and yet he was the father of Ishmael also,
and of several others. "But he was of a mother that was a slave." And what has
this to do with his father? Still I will not be captious. Let this son be set aside on
his mother's account. What are we to say of those sprung from Keturah? Were
they not free, and from a mother that was free? How came they not to be
honored with the same preference as Isaac? And why do I speak of these? For
Rebecca was even Isaac's only wife, and bearing two children she bore them
both to Isaac; still those so born, though of the same father, and the same mother,
and the fruit of the same labor, being both of one father and one mother, and
twins besides, yet did not enjoy the same lot. And yet here you have no mother's
slavery to account for it, as in Ishmael's case, nor can you say that one was
begotten of this womb and the other of a different one, as in the case of Keturah
and Sarah, since in this case they had the same hour in common to them for their
birth. This was why Paul then, in order to give a clearer example, says that this
happened not in Isaac's case only, "but when Rebecca also had conceived by one,
even by our father Isaac."
Ver. 11-13. "For the children being not yet born, neither having done any
good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of
works, but of him that calls, it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the
younger. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated."

What was the cause then why one was loved and the other hated? Why was
it that one served, the other was served? It was because one was wicked, and the
other good. And yet the children being not yet born, one was honored and the
other condemned. For when they were not as yet born, God said, "the elder shall
serve the younger." With what intent then did God say this? Because He does not
wait, as man does, to see from the issue of their acts the good and him who is not
so, but even before these He knows which is the wicked and which not such.
And this took place in the Israelites' case also, in a still more wonderful way.
Why, he says, do I speak of Esau and of Jacob, of whom one was wicked and the
other good? For in the Israelites' case, the sin belonged to all, since they all
worshipped the calf. Yet notwithstanding some had mercy shown them, and
others had not.
Ver. 15. "For I will have mercy, He says, on whom I will have mercy, and I
will show compassion on whom I will show compassion." [Exodus 33:19]
This one may see also in the case of those who are punished, for what
would you say of Pharaoh who was punished, and had to pay so heavy a
penalty? You say he was hardened and disobedient. Was he then alone such, and
not even one person else? How came he then to be so severely punished? Why
even in the case of the Jews did he call that a people which was no people, or
again, why not count all worthy of equal honor? "For if they be" (it says) "as the
sand of the sea, yet shall a remnant be saved." [Isaiah 10:22] And why is it to be
only a remnant? You see what difficulty he has filled the subject with. And with
great propriety. For when you have power to throw your adversary into
perplexity, do not at once bring forward the answer, because if he be found
himself responsible for the same ignorance, why take unnecessary dangers upon
yourself? Why make him more bold, by drawing it all upon yourself? Now tell
me, O thou Jew, that hast so many perplexing questions, and art unable to
answer any of them, how you come to annoy us on account of the call of the
Gentiles? I, however, have a good reason to give you why the Gentiles were
justified and you were cast out. And what is the reason? It is that they are of