## Homily 4 on First Thessalonians

[1 Thessalonians 3:5-8]
"For this cause I also, when I could no longer forbear, sent that I might
know your faith, lest by any means the tempter had tempted you, and our labor
should be in vain. But when Timothy came even now unto us from you, and
brought us glad tidings of your faith and love, and that you have good
remembrance of us always, longing to see us, even as we also to see you; for this
cause, brethren, we were comforted over you in all our distress and affliction
through your faith: for now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord."
A question lies before us today, which is much disputed, and which is
gathered from many sources. But what is this question? "For this cause," he
says, "when I could no longer forbear, I sent Timothy that I might know your
faith." What do you say? He, who knew so many things, who heard unutterable
words, who ascended even to the third heaven, does not he know, even when he
is in Athens? And yet the distance is not great, nor has he been long parted from
them. For he says, "Being bereaved of you for a short season." He does not
know the affairs of the Thessalonians, but is compelled to send Timothy to know
their faith, "lest," he says, "the tempter had tempted you, and our labors should
be in vain."
What then is one to say? That the Saints knew not all things. And this one
might learn from many instances, both of the early ones, and of those who came
after them, as Elisha knew not concerning the woman [2 Kings 4:27]; as Elijah
said to God, "I only am left, and they seek my life." Wherefore he heard from
God, "I have left me seven thousand men." [1 Kings 19:10 and 18] Samuel again,
when he was sent to anoint David; "The Lord said to him, Look not on his
countenance, nor on the height of his stature; because I have rejected him: for
God sees not as man sees; for man looks on the outward appearance, but God

looks on the heart." [1 Samuel 16:7]
And this comes to pass out of great care on God's part. How, and in what
way? For the sake both of the Saints themselves, and of those who believe in
them. For as He permits that there should be persecutions, so He permits that
they should also be ignorant of many things, that they may be kept humble. On
this account also Paul said, "There was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a
messenger of Satan to buffet me, that I should not be exalted over much." [2
Corinthians 12:7] And again, lest others also should have great imaginations
concerning them. For if they thought they were gods from their miracles, much
more if they had continued always knowing all things. And this again he also
says: "Lest any man should account of me above that which he sees me to be, or
hears from me." [2 Corinthians 12:6] And again hear Peter, when he healed the
lame man, saying, "Why fasten ye your eyes on us, as though by our own power
or godliness we had made him to walk." [Acts 3:12] And if even when they were
saying and doing these things, and from these few and small miracles, evil
imaginations were thus engendered, much more would they have been from
great ones.
But for another reason too these things were allowed. For that no one might
be able to say it was as being other than men that they performed those excellent
actions, and so all should become supine, he shows their infirmity, that from
their folly he might cut off every pretext of shamelessness. For this reason he is
ignorant, for this reason also, after having purposed, he frequently does not
come, that they might perceive there were many things he knew not. Great
advantage then came of this. For if there were some yet saying, "This man is that
power of God which is called Great" [Acts 8:10], and some, that it is this person,
or that; unless these things had been so, what would they not have thought?
But here, however, there seems to be a censure on them. But quite
otherwise, it even shows their admirable conduct, and proves the excess of their
temptations. How? Attend. For if you first sayest "that we are appointed
thereunto," and "let no man be moved," why again do you send Timothy, fearing