grievous one than that; for either a man under provocation blasphemes, and so
throws all away: or he forswears himself under the sway of his wrath, and that
way falls into hell: or he strikes a blow and commits murder, and thus again
suffers the very same shipwreck. Go then, and put a stop to the evil; pull out
them that are drowning, though you descend into the very depth of the surge; and
having broken up the theatre of the devil, take each one of them apart, and
admonish him to quell the flame, and to lull the waves.
But if the burning pile wax greater, and the furnace more grievous, be not
terrified; for you have many to help you, and stretch forth the hand, if you
furnish but a beginning; and above all you surely have with you the God of
peace. And if you will first turn aside the flames, many others also will follow,
and of what they do well, you will yourself receive the reward.
Hear what precept Christ gave to the Jews, creeping as they did upon the
earth: "If you see," says He, "your enemy's beast of burden falling down, do not
hasten by, but raise it." And you must see that to separate and reconcile men that
are fighting is a much lighter thing than to lift up the fallen beast. And if we
ought to help in raising our enemies' ass, much more our friends' souls: and most
when the fall is more grievous; for not into mire do these fall, but into the fire of
hell, not bearing the burden of their wrath. And you, when you see your brother
lying under the load, and the devil standing by, and kindling the pile, you run by,
cruelly and unmercifully; a kind of thing not safe to do, even where brutes are
concerned.
And whereas the Samaritan, seeing a wounded man, unknown, and not at
all appertaining to him, both staid, and set him on a beast, and brought him home
to the inn, and hired a physician, and gave some money, and promised more:
you, seeing one fallen not among thieves, but among a band of demons, and
beset by anger; and this not in a wilderness, but in the midst of the forum; not
having to lay out money, nor to hire a beast, nor to bring him on a long way, but
only to say some words:— are you slow to do it? And holdest back, and hurriest
by cruelly and unmercifully? And how do you think, calling upon God, ever to

find Him propitious?
15. But let me speak also to you, who publicly disgrace yourselves: to him
who is acting despitefully, and doing wrong. Are you inflicting blows? Tell me;
and kicking, and biting? Are you become a wild boar, and a wild ass? And are
you not ashamed? Do you not blush at thus being changed into a wild beast, and
betraying your own nobleness? For though you be poor, you are free; though you
be a working man, you are a Christian.
Nay, for this very reason, that you are poor, you should be quiet. For
fightings belong to the rich, not to the poor; to the rich, who have many causes to
force them to war. But you, not having the pleasure of wealth, go about
gathering to yourself the evils of wealth, enmities, and strifes, and fightings; and
takest your brother by the throat, and go about to strangle him, and throwest him
down publicly in the sight of all men: and do you not think that you are yourself
rather disgraced, imitating the violent passions of the brutes; nay rather,
becoming even worse than they? For they have all things in common; they herd
one with another, and go about together: but we have nothing in common, but all
in confusion: fightings, strifes, revilings, and enmities, and insults. And we
neither reverence the heaven, unto which we are called all of us in common; nor
the earth, which He has left free to us all in common; nor our very nature; but
wrath and the love of money sweeps all away.
Have you not seen him who owed the ten thousand talents, and then, after
he was forgiven that debt, took his fellow-servant by the throat for an hundred
pence, what great evils he underwent, and how he was delivered over to an
endless punishment? Have you not trembled at the example? Have you no fear,
lest you too incur the same? For we likewise owe to our Lord many and great
debts: nevertheless, He forbears, and suffers long, and neither urges us, as we do
our fellow-servants, nor chokes and takes us by the throat; yet surely had he
been minded to exact of us but the least part thereof, we had long ago perished.
16. Let us then, beloved, bearing these things in mind, be humbled, and feel
thankful to those who are in debt to us. For they become to us, if we command