did not the Jews act in the same way? For now again I am reminded of yet
another prison. The first was that at Rome, next, was this at Cæsarea, now we
come to that at Jerusalem. When then the chief Priests and the Pharisees heard
from those whom they had sent to the prison to bring Peter out, that "they found
no man within," but both doors "closed," and "the keepers standing at the
doors," why was it that they not only did not put the keepers to death, but, so far
from it, "they were much perplexed concerning them whereunto this would
grow." Now if the Jews, murderous as they were in their designs against them,
yet entertained not a thought of the kind, much more should not thou, who did
every thing to please those Jews. For this unrighteous sentence vengeance
quickly overtook Herod.
But now if any complain of this, then complain too about those who are
killed on the highway, and about the ten thousand others who are unjustly put to
death, and further, of the infants also that were slaughtered at the time of Christ's
birth; for Christ also, according to what you allege, was the cause of their deaths.
But it was not Christ, but rather the madness and tyranny of Herod's father. Do
you ask, Why then did He not snatch Him out of Herod's hands? True, He might
have done so, but there would have been nothing gained by so doing. How many
times, at least, did Christ escape even from the grasp of their hands? And yet
what good did this do to that unfeeling people? Whereas here there is even much
profit arising to the faithful from what was done. For as there were records
made, and the enemies themselves bore testimony to the facts, the testimony was
above suspicion. As therefore in that instance the mouths of the enemies were
stopped in no other way whatever, but only by the persons who came
acknowledging the facts, so was it also here. For why did the jailor here do
nothing like what Herod did? Nay, and the things which Herod witnessed were
not at all less wonderful than those which this man witnessed. So far as wonder
goes, it is no less wonderful to be assured that a prisoner came out when the
doors were closed, than it is to behold them set open. Indeed this last might
rather have seemed to be perhaps a vision of the imagination, the other never

could, when exactly and circumstantially reported. So that, had this man been as
wicked as Herod, he would have slain Paul, as Herod did the soldiers; but such
he was not.
If any one should ask, 'Why was it that God permitted the children also to
be murdered?' I should fall, probably, into a longer discourse, than was originally
intended to be addressed to you.
At this point, however, let us terminate our discourse, with many thanks to
Paul's chain, for that it has been made to us the source of so many blessings, and
exhorting you, should you have to suffer any thing for Christ's sake, not only not
to repine, but to rejoice, as the Apostles did, yea, and to glory; as Paul said,
"Most gladly, therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities," [2 Corinthians 12:9]
for because of this it was that he heard also those words, "My grace is sufficient
for you." Paul glories in bonds; and do you pride yourself in riches? The
Apostles rejoiced that they were counted worthy to be scourged, and do you seek
for ease and self-indulgence? On what ground then, do you wish to attain the
same end as they, if here on earth you are traveling the contrary road from them?
"And now," says Paul, "I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the
things that shall befall me there; save that the Holy Ghost testifies unto me in
every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me." [Acts 20:22] And why
then do you set out, if bonds and afflictions abide you? For this very reason, says
he, that I may be bound for Christ's sake, that I may die for His sake. "For I am
ready not to be bound only, but also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus." [Acts
21:13]
Moral. Nothing can be more blessed than that soul. In what does he glory?
In bonds, in afflictions, in chains, in scars; "I bear branded on my body," says he,
"the marks of Jesus," [Galatians 6:17] as though they were some great trophy.
And again, "For because of the hope of Israel," says he, "I am bound with this
chain." [Acts 28:20] And again, "For which I am an ambassador in chains."
[Ephesians 6:20] What is this? Are you not ashamed, are you not afraid going
about the world as a prisoner? Do you not fear lest any one should charge your