THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.2.

and in this way a sacrament is a kind of sign.
Reply to Objection 1: Because medicine is an efficient cause of
health, consequently whatever things are denominated from
medicine are to be referred to some first active cause: so that a
medicament implies a certain causality. But sanctity from which a
sacrament is denominated, is not there taken as an efficient cause,
but rather as a formal or a final cause. Therefore it does not follow
that a sacrament need always imply causality.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument considers sacrament in the
sense of a "sacred secret." Now not only God's but also the king's,
secret, is said to be sacred and to be a sacrament: because
according to the ancients, whatever it was unlawful to lay violent
hands on was said to be holy or sacrosanct, such as the city walls,
and persons of high rank. Consequently those secrets, whether
Divine or human, which it is unlawful to violate by making them
known to anybody whatever, are called "sacred secrets or
sacraments."
Reply to Objection 3: Even an oath has a certain relation to sacred
things, in so far as it consists in calling a sacred thing to witness.
And in this sense it is called a sacrament: not in the sense in which
we speak of sacraments now; the word "sacrament" being thus used
not equivocally but analogically, i.e. by reason of a different relation
to the one thing, viz. something sacred.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.60, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether every sign of a holy thing is a

sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that not every sign of a sacred thing is a
sacrament. For all sensible creatures are signs of sacred things;
according to Rm. 1:20: "The invisible things of God are clearly seen
being understood by the things that are made." And yet all sensible
things cannot be called sacraments. Therefore not every sign of a
sacred thing is a sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, whatever was done under the Old Law was a
figure of Christ Who is the "Holy of Holies" (Dan. 9:24), according to
1 Cor. 10:11: "All (these) things happened to them in figure"; and
Col. 2:17: "Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is
Christ's." And yet not all that was done by the Fathers of the Old
Testament, not even all the ceremonies of the Law, were sacraments,
but only in certain special cases, as stated in the FS, Question 101,
Article 4. Therefore it seems that not every sign of a sacred thing is a
sacrament.
Objection 3: Further, even in the New Testament many things are
done in sign of some sacred thing; yet they are not called
sacraments; such as sprinkling with holy water, the consecration of
an altar, and such like. Therefore not every sign of a sacred thing is a
sacrament.
On the contrary, A definition is convertible with the thing defined.
Now some define a sacrament as being "the sign of a sacred thing";
moreover, this is clear from the passage quoted above (Article 1)
from Augustine. Therefore it seems that every sign of a sacred thing
is a sacrament.
I answer that, Signs are given to men, to whom it is proper to
discover the unknown by means of the known. Consequently a
sacrament properly so called is that which is the sign of some
sacred thing pertaining to man; so that properly speaking a
sacrament, as considered by us now, is defined as being the "sign of
a holy thing so far as it makes men holy."
Reply to Objection 1: Sensible creatures signify something holy, viz.
Divine wisdom and goodness inasmuch as these are holy in