you say, "Give me not Heaven, but instead of Heaven the gold that perishes,"
this is for one who wishes to continue in poverty. Even as he surely who desires
wealth and abundance will choose things abiding rather than things perishing;
the inexhaustible, rather than such as waste away; much rather than little, the
incorruptible rather than the corruptible. For so the other sort too will follow. For
as he who seeks earth before Heaven, will surely lose earth also, so he that
prefers Heaven to earth, shall enjoy both in great excellency. And that this may
be the case with us, let us despise all things here, and choose the good things to
come. For thus shall we obtain both the one and the other, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be glory and might for ever and
ever. Amen.

## Homily 6 on Matthew

Matthew 2:1-2.
"When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judæa in the days of Herod the
king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, saying, Where is
He that is born King of the Jews? For we have seen His star in the east, and
have come to worship Him."
We have need of much wakefulness, and many prayers, that we may arrive
at the interpretation of the passage now before us, and that we may learn who
these wise men were, and whence they came, and how; and at whose persuasion,
and what was the star. Or rather, if you will, let us first bring forward what the
enemies of the truth say. Because the devil has blown upon them with so violent
a blast, as even from this passage try to arm them against the words of truth.
What then do they allege? "Behold," say they, "even when Christ was born
a star appeared; which is a sign that astrology may be depended on." How then,
if He had His birth according to that law, did He put down astrology, and take
away fate, and stop the mouths of demons, and cast out error, and overthrow all
such sorcery?
And what moreover do the wise men learn from the star of itself? That He
was King of the Jews? And yet He was not king of this kingdom; even as He
said also to Pilate, "My kingdom is not of this world." At any rate He made no
display of this kind, for He had neither guards armed with spear or shield, nor
horses, nor chariots of mules, nor any other such thing around Him; but He
followed this life of meanness and poverty, carrying about with Him twelve men
of mean estate.
And even if they knew Him to be a king, for what intent are they come? For
surely this is not the business of astrology, to know from the stars who are born,
but from the hour when men are born to predict what shall befall them: so it is

said. But these were neither present with the mother in her pangs, nor did they
know the time when He was born, neither did they, beginning at that moment,
from the motion of the stars compute what was to happen: but conversely,
having a long time before seen a star appear in their own country, they come to
see Him that was born.
Which circumstance in itself would afford a still greater difficulty even than
the former. For what reason induced them, or the hope of what benefits, to
worship one who was king so far off? Why, had He been to reign over
themselves, most assuredly not even so would the circumstance be capable of a
reasonable account. To be sure, if He had been born in royal courts, and with His
father, himself a king, present by Him, any one would naturally say, that they,
from a wish to pay court to the father, had worshipped the child that was born,
and in this way were laying up for themselves beforehand much ground of
patronage. But now when they did not so much as expect Him to be their own
king, but of a strange nation, far distant from their country, neither seeing Him as
yet grown to manhood; wherefore do they set forth on so long a journey, and
offer gifts, and this when dangers were sure to beset their whole proceeding? For
both Herod, when he heard it, was exceedingly troubled, and the whole people
was confounded on being told of these things by them.
"But these men did not foresee this." Nay, this is not reasonable. For let
them have been ever so foolish, of this they could not be ignorant, that when
they came to a city under a king, and proclaimed such things as these, and set
forth another king besides him who then reigned, they must needs be bringing
down on themselves a thousand deaths.
2. And why did they at all worship one who was in swaddling clothes? For
if He had been a grown man, one might say, that in expectation of the succor
they should receive from Him, they cast themselves into a danger which they
foresaw; a thing however to the utmost degree unreasonable, that the Persian, the
barbarian, and one that had nothing in common with the nation of the Jews,
should be willing to depart from his home, to give up country, and kindred, and