him that has not believed, in such way as to draw him on to his own view. For he
that has been saved, if he be high-minded in that he abides by the Law, will be
told that he himself has stopped his own mouth, himself has accused himself,
himself has renounced claims to his own salvation, and has excluded boasting.
But he that has not believed again, being humbled by these same means, will be
capable of being brought over to the faith. Do you see how great faith's
preëminence is? How it has removed us from the former things, not even
allowing us to boast of them?
Ver. 28. "Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the
deeds of the Law."
When he had shown that by faith they were superior to the Jews, then he
goes on with great confidence to discourse upon it also, and what seemed therein
to annoy he again heals up. For these two things were what confused the Jews;
one, if it were possible for men, who with works were not saved, to be saved
without them, and another, if it were just for the uncircumcised to enjoy the same
blessings with those, who had during so long a period been nurtured in the Law;
which last confused them more by far than the former. And on this ground
having proved the former, he goes on to the other next, which perplexed the Jews
so far, that they even complained on account of this position against Peter after
they believed. What does he say then? "Therefore we conclude, that by faith a
man is justified." He does not say, a Jew, or one under the Law, but after leading
forth his discourse into a large room, and opening the doors of faith to the world,
he says "a man," the name common to our race. And then having taken occasion
from this, he meets an objection not set down. For since it was likely that the
Jews, upon hearing that faith justifies every man, would take it ill and feel
offended, he goes on,
Ver. 29. "Is He the God of the Jews only?"
As if he said, On what foot does it then seem to you amiss that every man
should be saved? Is God partial? So showing from this, that in wishing to flout
the Gentiles, they are rather offering an insult to God's glory, if, that is, they

would not allow Him to be the God of all. But if He is of all, then He takes care
of all; and if He care for all, then He saves all alike by faith. And this is why he
says, "Is He the God of the Jews only? Is He not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the
Gentiles also." For He is not partial as the fables of the Gentiles (cf. Ov. Tr. I. ii.
5. sqq) are, but common to all, and One. And this is why he goes on,
Ver. 30. "Seeing it is one God."
That is, the same is the Master of both these and those. But if you tell me of
the ancient state of things, then too the dealings of Providence were shared by
both, although in diverse ways. For as to you was given the written law, so to
them was the natural; and they came short in nothing, if, that is, only they were
willing, but were even able to surpass you. And so he proceeds, with an allusion
to this very thing, "Who shall justify the circumcision by faith, and the
uncircumcision through faith," so reminding them of what he said before about
uncircumcision and circumcision, whereby he showed that there was no
difference. But if then there was no difference, much less is there any now. And
this accordingly he now establishes upon still clearer grounds, and so
demonstrates, that either of them stand alike in need of faith.
Ver. 31. "Do we then," he says, "make void the Law through faith? God
forbid: yea, we establish the Law."
Do you see his varied and unspeakable judgment? For the bare use of the
word "establish" shows that it was not then standing, but was worn out
([καταλελυμένον]). And note also Paul's exceeding power, and how
superabundantly he maintains what he wishes. For here he shows that the faith,
so far from doing any disparagement to the "Law," even assists it, as it on the
other hand paved the way for the faith. For as the Law itself before bore witness
to it (for he says, "being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets"), so here this
establishes that, now that it is unnerved. And how did it establish? He would say.
What was the object of the Law and what the scope of all its enactments? Why,
to make man righteous. But this it had no power to do. "For all," it says, "have
sinned:" but faith when it came accomplished it. For when a man is once a