people too suspected not Him but John to be the Christ; what would not the
result have been, had none of these things taken place? For this cause both
Matthew distinctly notes, that "from that time He began to preach;" and when
He began His preaching, He Himself also taught this same doctrine, which the
other used to preach; and no word as yet concerning Himself does the doctrine
which he preached say. Because it was for the time a great thing even for this to
be received, forasmuch as they had not as yet the proper opinion about Him.
Therefore also at the beginning He puts nothing severe or grievous, as the other
did, mentioning an axe, and a tree cut down; a fan, and a threshing-floor, and
unquenchable fire; but His preludes are gracious: the Heavens and the kingdom
there are the good tidings which he declares to His hearers.
3. "And walking by the sea of Galilee, He saw two brethren, Simon that was
surnamed Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were
fishers. And He says unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you fishers of
men. And they left their nets, and followed Him." [Matthew 4:18-19]
And yet John says that they were called in another manner. Whence it is
evident that this was a second call; and from many things one may perceive this.
For there it is said, that they came to Him when "John was not yet cast into
prison;" but here, after he was in confinement. And there Andrew calls Peter, but
here Jesus calls both. And John says, Jesus seeing Simon coming, says, "You are
Simon, the Son of Jona, you shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a
stone." [John 1:42] But Matthew says that he was already called by that name;
for his words are, "Seeing Simon that was called Peter." And from the place
whence they were called, and from many other things, one may perceive this;
and from their ready obedience, and abandonment of all. For now they were well
instructed beforehand. Thus, in the other case, Andrew is seen coming into His
house, and hearing many things; but here, having heard one bare word, they
followed immediately. Since neither was it unnatural for them to follow Him at
the beginning, and then leave Him again and return anew to their own craft,
when they saw both John thrown into prison, and Himself departing.

Accordingly you see that He finds them actually fishing. But He neither forbad
them at the first when minded to withdraw, nor having withdrawn themselves,
did He let them go altogether; but He gave way when they started aside from
Him, and comes again to win them back; which kind of thing is the great point in
fishing.
But mark both their faith, and their obedience. For though they were in the
midst of their work (and you know how greedy a thing fishing is), when they
heard His command, they delayed not, they procrastinated not, they said not, "let
us return home, and converse with our kinsfolk," but "they forsook all and
followed," even as Elisha did to Elijah. [1 Kings 19:20-21] Because such is the
obedience which Christ seeks of us, as that we delay not even a moment of time,
though something absolutely most needful should vehemently press on us.
Wherefore also when some other had come unto Him, and was asking leave to
bury his own father, [Matthew 8:21-22] not even this did He permit him to do; to
signify that before all we ought to esteem the following of Himself.
But if you should say, "the promise is very great;" even for this do I most
admire them, for that when they had not as yet seen any sign, they believed in so
great a reach of promise, and accounted all but second to that attendance. And
this, because they believed that by what words they were caught, by the same
they would be able to catch others also.
To these, then, such was His promise: but to James and John He says no
such thing. For the obedience of those that had gone before had by this time
paved the way for these. And besides they had also heard many things before
concerning Him.
And see how he does with exact care intimate unto us their poverty also: in
that He found them sewing up their nets. So exceeding great was their poverty,
that they were mending what was worn out, not being able to buy others. And
this too was for the time no small proof of virtue, their beating poverty with
ease, their supporting themselves by honest labor, their being bound one to
another by the power of love, their having their father with them, and attending