(B.) Some professing the Catholic faith, but imbued with Platonic doctrines, have taken
a middle course [between Platonists, who held that individual souls were from eternity,
now united with bodies, now released by turns; and Alexander, Averroes, -- and
possibly Aristotle himself, -- deniers of personal immortality]. These men, seeing that
according to the Catholic faith nothing is eternal but God, have supposed human souls
not to be eternal, but to have been created with the world, or rather before the visible
world, and to be united with bodies recurrently as required. Origen was the first
professor of the Christian faith to take up this position, and he has since had many
followers. The position seems assailable on these grounds.
1. The soul is united with the body as the form and actualising principle thereof. Now
though actuality is naturally prior to potentiality, yet, in the same subject, it is posterior to
it in time: for a thing moves from potentiality to actuality. Therefore the seed, which
is potentially alive, was before the soul, which is the actuality of life.
2. It is natural to every form to be united to its own proper matter: otherwise the
compound of matter and form would be something unnatural. Now that which belongs to
a thing according to its nature is assigned to it before that which belongs to it against its
nature: for what belongs to a thing against its nature attaches to it incidentally, but what
belongs to it according to its nature attaches to it ordinarily; and the incidental is always
posterior to the ordinary. It belongs to the soul therefore to be united to the body before
being apart from the body.
3. Every part, separated from its whole, is imperfect. But the soul, being the form (Chap.

an accident; and man, the result of that union, will not be an ordinary, regular entity (ens
per se), but a casual, incidental being (ens per accidens).
(E.) But if it is said that souls are united with bodies neither violently nor naturally, but of
their own spontaneous will, that cannot be. For none is willing to come to a worse state
except under deception. But the soul is in a higher state away from the body, especially
according to the Platonists, who say that by union with the body the soul suffers
forgetfulness of what it knew before, and is hindered from the contemplation of pure
truth. At that rate it has no willingness to be united with a body except for some deceit
practised upon it. Threfore, supposing it to have pre-existed before the body, it would
not be united therewith of its own accord.
(F.) But if as an alternative it is said that the soul is united with the body neither by
nature, nor by its own will, but by a divine ordinance, this again does not appear a
suitable arrangement, on the supposition that souls were created before bodies. For
God has established everything according to the proper mode of its nature: hence it is
said: God saw all things that he had made, and they were very good (Gen. i, 31). If then
He created souls apart from bodies, we must say that this mode of being is better suited
to their nature. But it is not proper for an ordinance of divine goodness to reduce things
to a lower state, but rather to rise them to a higher. At that rate the union of soul with
body could not be the result of a divine ordinance.
(G.) This consideration moved Origen to suppose that when souls, created from the
beginning of time, came by divine ordinance to be united with bodies, it was for their
punishment. He supposed that they had sinned before they came into bodies, and that
according to the amount of their guilt they were united with bodies of various degrees of
nobility, shut up in them as in prisons. But this supposition cannot stand for reasons
alleged above (Chap.XLIV).