For we too have an account to give of the commandments wherewith we have
been trusted, and we are not able to pay all, no not whatever we may do.
Therefore God has given us a way to repayment both ready and easy, and which
is able to cancel all these things, I mean, not to be revengeful.
In order then that we may learn this well, let us hear the whole parable,
going on regularly through it. "For there was brought unto Him," it says, "one
which owed ten thousand talents, and when he had not to pay, He commanded
him to be sold, and his wife, and his children." Wherefore, I pray you? Not of
cruelty, nor of inhumanity (for the loss came back again upon himself, for she
too was a slave), but of unspeakable tenderness.
For it is His purpose to alarm him by this threat, that He might bring him to
supplication, not that he should be sold. For if He had done it for this intent, He
would not have consented to his request, neither would He have granted the
favor.
Wherefore then did He not do this, nor forgive the debt before the account?
Desiring to teach him, from how many obligations He is delivering him, that in
this way at least he might become more mild towards his fellow servant. For
even if when he had learned the weight of his debt, and the greatness of the
forgiveness, he continued taking his fellow-servant by the throat; if He had not
disciplined him beforehand with such medicines, to what length of cruelty might
he not have gone?
What then says the other? "Have patience with me, and I will pay you all.
And his Lord was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the
debt." [Matthew 18:26-27]
Do you see again surpassing benevolence? The servant asked only for delay
and putting off the time, but He gave more than he asked, remission and
forgiveness of the entire debt. For it had been his will to give it even from the
first, but he did not desire the gift to be his only, but also to come of this man's
entreaty, that he might not go away uncrowned. For that the whole was of him,
although this other fell down to him and prayed, the motive of the forgiveness

showed, for "moved with compassion" he forgave him. But still even so he
willed that other also to seem to contribute something, that he might not be
exceedingly covered with shame, and that he being schooled in his own
calamities, might be indulgent to his fellow-servant.
4. Up to this point then this man was good and acceptable; for he confessed,
and promised to pay the debt, and fell down before him, and entreated, and
condemned his own sins, and knew the greatness of the debt. But the sequel is
unworthy of his former deeds. For going out straightway, not after a long time
but straightway, having the bene fit fresh upon him, he abused to wickedness the
gift, even the freedom bestowed on him by his master.
For, "he found one of his fellow-servants, which owed him an hundred
pence, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me what you owe."
[Matthew 18:28]
Do you see the master's benevolence? Do you see the servant's cruelty?
Hear, you who do these things for money. For if for sins we must not do so,
much more not for money.
What then says the other? "Have patience with me, and I will pay you all."
But he did not regard even the words by which he had been saved (for he himself
on saying this was delivered from the ten thousand talents), and did not
recognize so much as the harbor by which he escaped shipwreck; the gesture of
supplication did not remind him of his master's kindness, but he put away from
him all these things, from covetousness and cruelty and revenge, and was more
fierce than any wild beast, seizing his fellow-servant by the throat.
What doest thou, O man? Do you not perceive, you are making the demand
upon yourself, thou an thrusting the sword into yourself, and revoking the
sentence and the gift? But none of these things did he consider, neither did he
remember his own state, neither did he yield; although the entreaty was not for
equal objects.
For the one besought for ten thousand talents, the other for a hundred
pence; the one his fellow-servant, the other his lord; the one received entire