man," it is said, "lends to the Lord." [Proverbs 19:17] He gave you also an
earnest, and bail, and this being God! What sort of earnest? The things in the
present life, the visible, the spiritual things, the foretaste of the things to come.
Why then do you delay, and why are you backward, having received so
many things already, looking for so many things?
For what you have received are these: He Himself made you a body, He
Himself put in you a soul, He honored with speech you alone of the things on the
earth, He gave you the use of all the things that are seen, He bestowed on you
the knowledge of Himself, He gave up His Son for you, He gave you a baptism
full of so many good things, He gave you a holy table, He promised a kingdom,
and the good things that cannot be told.
Having then received so many good things, having to receive so many,
again I say the same thing, are you making petty reckoning about perishing
riches, and what excuse will you have?
But are you looking altogether at your children? And dost draw back for the
sake of these? Nay, rather teach them also to gain such gains. For if you had
money lent out and bearing interest, and you had a grateful debtor, you would
ten thousand times rather choose instead of the gold to leave the bond to your
child, so that he should have the large income from it, and not be constrained to
go about, and seek for others to borrow it.
And now give this bond to your children, and leave God a debtor to them.
Thou dost not sell your lands, and give to your children, but leavest them, that
the income may remain, and that they may have a greater increase of riches from
thence; but this bond, which is more productive than any land or revenue, and
bears so many fruits, this are you afraid to leave to them? What great folly must
this be, and frenzy. And this when you know, that though you should leave it to
them, you yourself also shall again take it away with you.
Of this nature are the things spiritual; they have great munificence. Let us
not then be beggarly; neither be inhuman and savage towards ourselves, but let
us traffic in that good merchandise; that we may both ourselves take it away with

us when we depart, and leave it to our own children, and attain to the good
things to come, by the grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with whom be unto the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, glory, might,
honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

## Homily 67 on Matthew

Matthew 21:12-13.
" And Jesus went into the temple, and cast out all them that sold and bought
in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers and the seats of
them that sold doves, and says unto them, It is written, my house shall be called
a house of prayer; but you have made it a den of thieves."
This John likewise says, but he in the beginning of his Gospel, this at the
end. Whence it is probable this was done twice, and at different seasons.
And it is evident both from the times, and from their reply. For there He
came at the very passover, but here much before. And there the Jews say, "What
sign do you show us?" [John 2:18] but here they hold their peace, although
reproved, because He was now marvelled at among all men.
And this is a heavier charge against the Jews, that when He had done this
not once only, but a second time, they continued in their trafficking, and said that
He was an adversary of God, when they ought even from hence to have learned
His honor for His Father and His own might. For indeed He also wrought
miracles, and they saw His words agreeing with His works.
But not even so were they persuaded, but "were sore displeased," and this
while they heard the prophet crying aloud, and the children in a manner beyond
their age proclaiming Him. Wherefore also He Himself sets up Isaiah against
them as an accuser, saying, "My house shall be called a house of prayer."
[Isaiah 56:7]
But not in this way only does He show His authority, but also by His
healing various infirmities. "For the blind and the lame came unto Him, and He
healed them," [Matthew 21:14] and His power and authority He indicates.
But they not even so would be persuaded, but together with the rest of the
miracles hearing even the children proclaiming, were ready to choke, and say,