themselves to witness who had made trial of the matter. As if he had said, "that I
lie not nor rashly traduce the religion of the Gentiles, feigning like an enemy, do
ye yourselves bear me witness: knowing as you do, when you were Gentiles, how
you were pulled and dragged away then."
But if any should say that these too are suspected as believers, come, even
from them that are without will I make this manifest to you. Hear, for example,
Plato saying thus: (Apol. Soc. c. 7.) "Even as they who deliver oracles and the
soothsayers say many and excellent things, but know nothing of what they utter."
Hear again another, a poet, giving the same intimation. For whereas by certain
mystical rites and witchcrafts a certain person had imprisoned a demon in a man,
and the man divined, and in his divination was thrown down and torn, and was
unable to endure the violence of the demon, but was on the point of perishing in
that convulsion; he says to the persons who were practicing such mystical arts,
Loose me, I pray you:
The mighty God no longer mortal flesh
Can hold.
And again,
Unbind my wreaths, and bathe my feet in drops
From the pure stream; erase these mystic lines,
And let me go.
For these and such like things, (for one might mention many more,) point
out to us both of these facts which follow; the compulsion which holds down the
demons and makes them slaves; and the violence to which they submit who have
once given themselves up to them, so as to swerve even from their natural
reason. And the Pythoness too : (for I am compelled now to bring forward and
expose another disgraceful custom of theirs, which it were well to pass by,
because it is unseemly for us to mention such things; but that you may more

clearly know their shame it is necessary to mention it, that hence at least ye may
come to know the madness and exceeding mockery of those that make use of the
soothsayers): this same Pythoness then is said, being a female, to sit at times
upon the tripod of Apollo astride, and thus the evil spirit ascending from beneath
and entering the lower part of her body, fills the woman with madness, and she
with dishevelled hair begins to play the bacchanal and to foam at the mouth, and
thus being in a frenzy to utter the words of her madness. I know that you are
ashamed and blush when you hear these things: but they glory both in the
disgrace and in the madness which I have described. These then and all such
things. Paul was bringing forward when he said, "You know that when you were
Gentiles, you were led away unto those dumb idols, howsoever ye might be led."
And because he was discoursing with those who knew well, he states not all
things with exact care, not wishing to be troublesome to them, but having
reminded them only and brought all into their recollection, he soon quits the
point, hastening to the subject before him.
But what is, "unto those dumb idols?" These soothsayers used to be led and
dragged unto them.
But if they be themselves dumb, how did they give responses to others?
And wherefore did the demon lead them to the images? As men taken in war,
and in chains, and rendering at the same time his deceit plausible. Thus, to keep
men from the notion that it was just a dumb stone, they were earnest to rivet the
people to the idols that their own style and title might be inscribed upon them.
But our rites are not such. He did not however state ours, I mean the
prophesyings. For it was well known to them all, and prophecy was exercised
among them, as was meet for their condition, with understanding and with entire
freedom. Therefore, you see, they had power either to speak or to refrain from
speaking. For they were not bound by necessity, but were honored with a
privilege. For this cause Jonah fled; [Jonah 1:3] for this cause Ezekiel delayed;
[Ezekiel 3:15] for this cause Jeremiah excused himself. [Jeremiah 1:6] And God
thrusts them not on by compulsion, but advising, exhorting, threatening; not