saying, [Isaiah 52:7] "How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel
of peace!" Have you seen how fair are the feet? Will you see the bosom too?
Come, let me show you this also, and you shall behold it far more splendid than
these beautiful, yea even than the bosom itself of the ancient lawgiver. For
Moses indeed carried tablets of stone: but this man within him had Christ
Himself: it was the very image of the King which he bore.
For this cause he was more awful than the Mercy Seat and the Cherubim.
For no such voice went out from them as from hence; but from them it talked
with men chiefly about things of sense, from the tongue of Paul on the other
hand about the things above the heavens. Again, from the Mercy Seat it spoke
oracles to the Jews alone; but from hence to the whole world: and there it was by
things without life; but here by a soul instinct with virtue.
This Mercy Seat was brighter even than heaven, not shining forth with
variety of stars nor with rays from the sun, but the very Sun of righteousness was
there, and from hence He sent forth His rays. Again, from time to time in this
our heaven, any cloud coursing over at times makes it gloomy; but that bosom
never had any such storm sweeping across it. Or rather there did sweep over it
many storms and oft: but the light they darkened not; rather in the midst of the
temptation and dangers the light shone out. Wherefore also he himself when
bound with his chain kept exclaiming, [2 Timothy 2:9] "The word of God is not
bound." Thus continually by means of that tongue was It sending forth its rays.
And no fear, no danger made that bosom gloomy. Perhaps the bosom seems to
outdo the feet; however, both they as feet are beautiful, and this as a bosom.
Will you see also the belly with its proper beauty? Hear what he says about
it, [1 Corinthians 8:13] "If meat make my brother to stumble, I will eat no flesh
while the world stands: [Romans 14:21] It is good neither to eat flesh nor to
drink wine, nor anything whereby your brother stumbles, or is offended, or is
made weak: [1 Corinthians 6:13] Meats for the belly and the belly for meats."
What can be more beautiful in its kind than this belly thus instructed to be quiet,
and taught all temperance, and knowing how both to hunger and be famished,

and also to suffer thirst? For as a well-trained horse with a golden bridle, so also
did this walk with measured paces, having vanquished the necessity of nature.
For it was Christ walking in it. Now this being so temperate, it is quite plain that
the whole body of vice besides was done away.
Would you see the hands too? Those which he now has? Or would you
rather behold first their former wickedness? [Acts 8:3] "Entering (this very man)
into the houses, he haled," of late, "men and women," with the hands not of man,
but of some fierce wild beast. But as soon as he had received the colors of the
Truth and the spiritual experience, no longer were these the hands of a man, but
spiritual; day by day being bound with chains. And they never struck any one,
but they were stricken times without number. Once even a viper [Acts 28:3-5]
reverenced those hands: for they were the hands of a human being no longer; and
therefore it did not even fasten on them.
And will you see also the back, resembling as it does the other members?
Hear what he says about this also. [2 Corinthians 11:24-25] "Five times I
received of the Jews forty stripes save one; thrice was I beaten with rods, once
was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the
deep."
7. But lest we too should fall into an interminable deep, and be carried away
far and wide, going over each of his members severally; come let us quit the
body and look at another sort of beauty, that, namely, which proceeds from his
garments; to which even devils showed reverence; and therefore both they made
off, and diseases took flight. And wheresoever Paul happened to show himself,
they all retired and got out of the way, as if the champion of the whole world had
appeared. And as they who have been often wounded in war, should they see but
some part of the armor of him that wounded them feel a shuddering; much in the
same way the devils also, at sight of "handkerchiefs" only were astonied. Where
be now the rich, and they that have high thoughts about wealth? Where they who
count over their own titles and their costly robes? With these things if they
compare themselves, it will be clay in their sight and dirt, all they have of their