FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.2.

the very essence of good, if a thing be lacking in its due fulness of
being, it is not said to be good simply, but in a certain respect,
inasmuch as it is a being; although it can be called a being simply,
and a non-being in a certain respect, as was stated in the FP,
Question 5, Article 1, ad 1. We must therefore say that every action
has goodness, in so far as it has being; whereas it is lacking in
goodness, in so far as it is lacking in something that is due to its
fulness of being; and thus it is said to be evil: for instance if it lacks
the quantity determined by reason, or its due place, or something of
the kind.
Reply to Objection 1: Evil acts in virtue of deficient goodness. For it
there were nothing of good there, there would be neither being nor
possibility of action. On the other hand if good were not deficient,
there would be no evil. Consequently the action done is a deficient
good, which is good in a certain respect, but simply evil.
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing hinders a thing from being in act in a
certain respect, so that it can act; and in a certain respect deficient in
act, so as to cause a deficient act. Thus a blind man has in act the
power of walking, whereby he is able to walk; but inasmuch as he is
deprived of sight he suffers a defect in walking by stumbling when
he walks.
Reply to Objection 3: An evil action can have a proper effect,
according to the goodness and being that it has. Thus adultery is the
cause of human generation, inasmuch as it implies union of male
and female, but not inasmuch as it lacks the order of reason.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.18, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the good or evil of a man's action is

derived from its object?
Objection 1: It would seem that the good or evil of an action is not
derived from its object. For the object of any action is a thing. But
"evil is not in things, but in the sinner's use of them," as Augustine
says (De Doctr. Christ. iii, 12). Therefore the good or evil of a human
action is not derived from their object.
Objection 2: Further, the object is compared to the action as its
matter. But the goodness of a thing is not from its matter, but rather
from the form, which is an act. Therefore good and evil in actions is
not derived from their object.
Objection 3: Further, the object of an active power is compared to
the action as effect to cause. But the goodness of a cause does not
depend on its effect; rather is it the reverse. Therefore good or evil in
actions is not derived from their object.
On the contrary, It is written (Osee 9:10): "They became abominable
as those things which they loved." Now man becomes abominable to
God on account of the malice of his action. Therefore the malice of
his action is according to the evil objects that man loves. And the
same applies to the goodness of his action.
I answer that, as stated above (Article 1) the good or evil of an
action, as of other things, depends on its fulness of being or its lack
of that fulness. Now the first thing that belongs to the fulness of
being seems to be that which gives a thing its species. And just as a
natural thing has its species from its form, so an action has its
species from its object, as movement from its term. And therefore
just as the primary goodness of a natural thing is derived from its
form, which gives it its species, so the primary goodness of a moral
action is derived from its suitable object: hence some call such an
action "good in its genus"; for instance, "to make use of what is
one's own." And just as, in natural things, the primary evil is when a
generated thing does not realize its specific form (for instance, if
instead of a man, something else be generated); so the primary evil
in moral actions is that which is from the object, for instance, "to
take what belongs to another." And this action is said to be "evil in
its genus," genus here standing for species, just as we apply the