after all he amazes him by adding the marvellous fact, saying, "Before they came
together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost." He says not, "before she
was brought to the bridegroom's house;" for indeed she was therein. It being the
way of the ancients for the most part to keep their espoused wives in their house:
[Genesis 19:8, 14] in those parts, at least, where one may see the same practised
even now. Thus also Lot's sons-in-law were in his house with him. Mary then
herself likewise was in the house with Joseph.
And wherefore did she not conceive before her espousal? It was, as I said at
first, that what had been done might be concealed awhile, and that the Virgin
might escape every evil suspicion. For when he, who had most right of all to feel
jealousy, so far from making her a show, or degrading her, is found even
receiving and cherishing her after her conception; it was quite clear that, unless
he had fully persuaded himself that what was done was of the operation of the
Holy Spirit, he would not have kept her with him, and ministered to her in all
other things. And most properly has he said, that "she was 'found' with child,"
the sort of expression that is wont to be used with respect to things strange, and
such as happen beyond all expectation, and are unlooked for.
Proceed therefore no further, neither require anything more than what has
been said; neither say thou, "But how was it that the Spirit wrought this of a
virgin?" For if, when nature is at work, it is impossible to explain the manner of
the formation; how, when the Spirit is working miracles, shall we be able to
express these? And lest you should weary the evangelist, or disturb him by
continually asking these things, he has said who it was that wrought the miracle,
and so withdrawn himself. "For I know," says he, "nothing more, but that what
was done was the work of the Holy Ghost."
6. Shame on them who busy themselves touching the generation on high.
For if this birth, which has witnesses without number, and had been proclaimed
so long a time before, and was manifested and handled with hands, can by no
man be explained; of what excess of madness do they come short who make
themselves busy and curious touching that unutterable generation? For neither

Gabriel nor Matthew was able to say anything more, but only that it was of the
Spirit; but how, of the Spirit, or in what manner, neither of them has explained;
for neither was it possible.
Nor think that you have learned all, by hearing "of the Spirit;" nay, for we
are ignorant of many things, even when we have learned this; as, for instance,
how the Infinite is in a womb, how He that contains all things is carried, as
unborn, by a woman; how the Virgin bears, and continues a virgin. How, I pray
you, did the Spirit frame that Temple? How did He take not all the flesh from the
womb, but a part thereof, and increased it, and fashioned it? For that He did
come forth of the Virgin's flesh, He has declared by speaking of "that which was
conceived in her;" [Galatians 4:4] and Paul, by saying, "made of a woman;"
whereby he stops the mouths of them that say, Christ came among us as through
some conduit. For, if this were so, what need of the womb? If this were so, He
has nothing in common with us, but that flesh is of some other kind, and not of
the mass which belongs to us. How then was He of the root of Jesse? How was
He a rod? How Son of man? How was Mary His mother? How was He of
David's seed? How did he "take the form of a servant?" [Philippians 2:7] how
"was the Word made flesh?" [John 1:14] and how says Paul to the Romans, "Of
whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all?" [Romans 9:5]
Therefore that He was of us, and of our substance, and of the Virgin's womb, is
manifest from these things, and from others beside; but how, is not also manifest.
Do not either thou then inquire; but receive what is revealed, and be not curious
about what is kept secret.
7. "And Joseph her husband, being," says he "a just man, and not willing to
make her a public example, was minded to put her away privily." [Matthew 1:19]
Having said that it was of the Holy Ghost, and without cohabitation, he
establishes his statement in another way again. Lest any one should say,
"Whence does this appear? Who has heard, who has seen any such thing ever
come to pass?"— or lest you should suspect the disciple as inventing these
things to favor his Master;— he introduces Joseph as contributing, by what he