Ps. i. 2.

they believe in the Father and the Son, but they never meditate as they should upon the things of
God, neither are they adorned with works of righteousness; but, as I have already observed, they
have adopted the lives of swine and of dogs, giving themselves over to filthiness, to gluttony, and
recklessness of all sorts. Justly, therefore, did the apostle call all such "carnal" and "animal,"
—[all those, namely], who through their own unbelief and luxury do not receive the Divine Spirit,
and in their various phases cast out from themselves the life-giving Word, and walk stupidly after
their own lusts: the prophets, too, spake of them as beasts of burden and wild beasts; custom likewise
has viewed them in the light of cattle and irrational creatures; and the law has pronounced them
unclean.

### Chapter IX.—Showing how that passage of the apostle which the heretics pervert, should be
understood; viz., "Flesh and blood shall not possess the kingdom of God."

1. Among the other [truths] proclaimed by the apostle, there is also this one, "That flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God." This is [the passage] which is adduced by all the
heretics in support of their folly, with an attempt to annoy us, and to point out that the handiwork
of God is not saved. They do not take this fact into consideration, that there are three things out of
which, as I have shown, the complete man is composed —flesh, soul, and spirit. One of these does
indeed preserve and fashion [the man]—this is the spirit; while as to another it is united and
formed—that is the flesh; then [comes] that which is between these two—that is the soul, which
sometimes indeed, when it follows the spirit, is raised up by it, but sometimes it sympathizes with
the flesh, and falls into carnal lusts. Those then, as many as they be, who have not that which saves
and forms [us] into life [eternal], shall be, and shall be called, [mere] flesh and blood; for these are
they who have not the Spirit of God in themselves. Wherefore men of this stamp are spoken of by
the Lord as "dead;" for, says He, "Let the dead bury their dead," because they have not the Spirit
which quickens man.
2. On the other hand, as many as fear God and trust in His Son's advent, and who through faith
do establish the Spirit of God in their hearts,—such men as these shall be properly called both
"pure," and "spiritual," and "those living to God," because they possess the Spirit of the Father,
who purifies man, and raises him up to the life of God. For as the Lord has testified that "the flesh
is weak," so [does He also say] that "the spirit is willing." For this latter is capable of working
out its own suggestions. If, therefore, any one admix the ready inclination of the Spirit to be, as it
were, a stimulus to the infirmity of the flesh, it inevitably follows that what is strong will prevail