above stated (Question 29, Article 4), signifies relation as subsisting
in the divine nature. But relation as referred to the essence does not
differ therefrom really, but only in our way of thinking; while as
referred to an opposite relation, it has a real distinction by virtue of
that opposition. Thus there are one essence and three persons.
Reply to Objection 1: There cannot be a distinction of "suppositum"
in creatures by means of relations, but only by essential principles;
because in creatures relations are not subsistent. But in God
relations are subsistent, and so by reason of the opposition between
them they distinguish the "supposita"; and yet the essence is not
distinguished, because the relations themselves are not
distinguished from each other so far as they are identified with the
essence.
Reply to Objection 2: As essence and person in God differ in our way
of thinking, it follows that something can be denied of the one and
affirmed of the other; and therefore, when we suppose the one, we
need not suppose the other.
Reply to Objection 3: Divine things are named by us after the way of
created things, as above explained (Question 13, Articles 1,3). And
since created natures are individualized by matter which is the
subject of the specific nature, it follows that individuals are called
"subjects," "supposita," or "hypostases." So the divine persons are
named "supposita" or "hypostases," but not as if there really existed
any real "supposition" or "subjection."

### ARTICLE 2. Whether it must be said that the three persons are

of one essence?
Objection 1: It would seem not right to say that the three persons are
of one essence. For Hilary says (De Synod.) that the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost "are indeed three by substance, but one in harmony."
But the substance of God is His essence. Therefore the three
persons are not of one essence.
Objection 2: Further, nothing is to be affirmed of God except what
can be confirmed by the authority of Holy Writ, as appears from
Dionysius (Div. Nom. i). Now Holy Writ never says that the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost are of one essence. Therefore this should not be
asserted.
Objection 3: Further, the divine nature is the same as the divine
essence. It suffices therefore to say that the three persons are of one
nature.
Objection 4: Further, it is not usual to say that the person is of the
essence; but rather that the essence is of the person. Therefore it
does not seem fitting to say that the three persons are of one
essence.
Objection 5: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. vii, 6) that we do not
say that the three persons are "from one essence [ex una essentia],"
lest we should seem to indicate a distinction between the essence
and the persons in God. But prepositions which imply transition,
denote the oblique case. Therefore it is equally wrong to say that the
three persons are "of one essence [unius essentiae]."
Objection 6: Further, nothing should be said of God which can be
occasion of error. Now, to say that the three persons are of one
essence or substance, furnishes occasion of error. For, as Hilary
says (De Synod.): "One substance predicated of the Father and the
Son signifies either one subsistent, with two denominations; or one
substance divided into two imperfect substances; or a third prior
substance taken and assumed by the other two." Therefore it must
not be said that the three persons are of one substance.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Contra Maxim. iii) that the word