is it not those who despise it? Certainly then, these are they that are glorified.
For as he is rich, not who is in need of many things, but who is in need of
nothing; so he is glorious, not who loves glory, but who despises it; for this glory
is but a shadow of glory. No one having seen a loaf painted, though he should be
pressed with hunger ever so much, will attack the picture. Neither then do thou
pursue these shadows, for this is a shadow of glory, not glory. And that you may
know that this is the manner of it and that it is a shadow, consider this that it
must be so, when the thing has a bad name among men, when all consider it a
thing to be avoided, they even who desire it; and when he who has it and he
covets it are ashamed to be called after it. 'Whence then is this desire,' says one,
'and how is the passion engendered?' By littleness of soul, (for one ought not
only to accuse it, but also to correct it,) by an imperfect mind, by a childish
judgment. Let us then cease to be children, and let us become men: and let us
every where pursue the reality, not the shadows, both in wealth, and in pleasure,
and in luxury, and in glory, and in power; and this disease will cease, and many
others also. For to pursue shadows is a madman's part. Wherefore also Paul said,
"Awake up righteously and sin not." [1 Corinthians 15:34] For there is yet
another madness, sorer than that caused by devils, than that from frenzy. For that
admits of forgiveness, but this is destitute of excuse, seeing the soul itself is
corrupted and its right judgment lost; and that of frenzy indeed is an affection of
the body, but this madness has its seat in the artificer mind. As then of fevers
those are sorer, yea incurable, which seize upon firm bodies and lurk in the
recesses of the nerves and are hidden away in the veins, so truly is this madness
also, seeing it lurks in the recesses of the mind itself, perverting and destroying
it. For how is it not clear and evident madness, yea, a distemper sorer than any
madness, to despise the things which abide forever, and to cling with great
eagerness to those which perish? For, tell me, if one were to chase the wind or
try to hold it, should we not say that he was mad? And what? If one should grasp
a shadow and neglect the reality; if one should hate his own wife and embrace
her shadow; or loathe his son and again love his shadow, would you seek any

other clearer sign in proof of madness? Such are they also who greedily follow
the present things. For they are all shadow, yea, whether thou mention glory, or
power, or good report, or wealth, or luxury, or any other thing of this life. And
therefore truly it is that the prophet said, "Surely man walks in a shadow, yea, he
disquiets himself in vain;" [Psalm 39:6] and again, "Our days decline like a
shadow." [Psalm 102:11] And in another place, he calls human things smoke and
the flower of grass. But it is not only his good things which are shadow, but his
evils also, whether it be death thou mention, or poverty, or disease, or any other
thing. What then are those things which abide, both good and evil? The eternal
kingdom and the everlasting hell. For "neither shall the worm die, nor shall the
fire be quenched:" [Mark 9:44] and "these shall rise again to everlasting life:
and these to everlasting punishment." [Mark 25:46] That then we may escape the
one and enjoy the other, letting go the shadow, let us cling to the real things with
all earnestness, for so shall we obtain the kingdom of heaven, which may we all
obtain though the grace and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
Whom be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.