from the singular. Hence to be in one singular subject or in many is
outside the idea of the nature of the species. So, given the idea of a
species, it can be understood as existing in many. But the singular,
from the fact that it is singular, is divided off from all others. Hence
every name imposed to signify any singular thing is incommunicable
both in reality and idea; for the plurality of this individual thing
cannot be; nor can it be conceived in idea. Hence no name signifying
any individual thing is properly communicable to many, but only by
way of similitude; as for instance a person can be called "Achilles"
metaphorically, forasmuch as he may possess something of the
properties of Achilles, such as strength. On the other hand, forms
which are individualized not by any "suppositum," but by and of
themselves, as being subsisting forms, if understood as they are in
themselves, could not be communicable either in reality or in idea;
but only perhaps by way of similitude, as was said of individuals.
Forasmuch as we are unable to understand simple self-subsisting
forms as they really are, we understand them as compound things
having forms in matter; therefore, as was said in the first article, we
give them concrete names signifying a nature existing in some
"suppositum." Hence, so far as concerns images, the same rules
apply to names we impose to signify the nature of compound things
as to names given to us to signify simple subsisting natures.
Since, then, this name "God" is given to signify the divine nature as
stated above (Article 8), and since the divine nature cannot be
multiplied as shown above (Question 11, Article 3), it follows that
this name "God" is incommunicable in reality, but communicable in
opinion; just in the same way as this name "sun" would be
communicable according to the opinion of those who say there are
many suns. Therefore, it is written: "You served them who by nature
are not gods," (Gal. 4:8), and a gloss adds, "Gods not in nature, but
in human opinion." Nevertheless this name "God" is communicable,
not in its whole signification, but in some part of it by way of
similitude; so that those are called gods who share in divinity by
likeness, according to the text, "I have said, You are gods" (Ps. 81:6).
But if any name were given to signify God not as to His nature but as
to His "suppositum," accordingly as He is considered as "this
something," that name would be absolutely incommunicable; as, for
instance, perhaps the Tetragrammaton among the Hebrew; and this
is like giving a name to the sun as signifying this individual thing.
Reply to Objection 1: The divine nature is only communicable

according to the participation of some similitude.
Reply to Objection 2: This name "God" is an appellative name, and
not a proper name, for it signifies the divine nature in the possessor;
although God Himself in reality is neither universal nor particular.
For names do not follow upon the mode of being in things, but upon
the mode of being as it is in our mind. And yet it is incommunicable
according to the truth of the thing, as was said above concerning the
name "sun."
Reply to Objection 3: These names "good," "wise," and the like, are
imposed from the perfections proceeding from God to creatures; but
they do not signify the divine nature, but rather signify the
perfections themselves absolutely; and therefore they are in truth
communicable to many. But this name "God" is given to God from
His own proper operation, which we experience continually, to
signify the divine nature.