THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.7.

commenced, unless the consecration be completed either by the
priest who began it, or by the one who follows him: because they
cannot be completed except they be performed in perfect order. For
since we are all one in Christ, the change of persons makes no
difference, since unity of faith insures the happy issue of the
mystery. Yet let not the course we propose for cases of natural
debility, be presumptuously abused: and let no minister or priest
presume ever to leave the Divine offices unfinished, unless he be
absolutely prevented from continuing. If anyone shall have rashly
presumed to do so, he will incur sentence of excommunication."
Reply to Objection 2: Where difficulty arises, the less dangerous
course should always be followed. But the greatest danger regarding
this sacrament lies in whatever may prevent its completion, because
this is a heinous sacrilege; while that danger is of less account
which regards the condition of the receiver. Consequently, if after
the consecration has been begun the priest remembers that he has
eaten or drunk anything, he ought nevertheless to complete the
sacrifice and receive the sacrament. Likewise, if he recalls a sin
committed, he ought to make an act of contrition, with the firm
purpose of confessing and making satisfaction for it: and thus he
will not receive the sacrament unworthily, but with profit. The same
applies if he calls to mind that he is under some excommunication;
for he ought to make the resolution of humbly seeking absolution;
and so he will receive absolution from the invisible High Priest Jesus
Christ for his act of completing the Divine mysteries.
But if he calls to mind any of the above facts previous to the
consecration, I should deem it safer for him to interrupt the mass
begun, especially if he has broken his fast, or is under
excommunication, unless grave scandal were to be feared.
Reply to Objection 3: If a fly or a spider falls into the chalice before
consecration, or if it be discovered that the wine is poisoned, it
ought to be poured out, and after purifying the chalice, fresh wine
should be served for consecration. But if anything of the sort happen
after the consecration, the insect should be caught carefully and
washed thoroughly, then burned, and the "ablution," together with
the ashes, thrown into the sacrarium. If it be discovered that the wine
has been poisoned, the priest should neither receive it nor
administer it to others on any account, lest the life-giving chalice
become one of death, but it ought to be kept in a suitable vessel with
the relics: and in order that the sacrament may not remain

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.83, C.7.

incomplete, he ought to put other wine into the chalice, resume the
mass from the consecration of the blood, and complete the sacrifice.
Reply to Objection 4: If before the consecration of the blood, and
after the consecration of the body the priest detect that either the
wine or the water is absent, then he ought at once to add them and
consecrate. But if after the words of consecration he discover that
the water is absent, he ought notwithstanding to proceed straight on,
because the addition of the water is not necessary for the sacrament,
as stated above (Question 74, Article 7): nevertheless the person
responsible for the neglect ought to be punished. And on no account
should water be mixed with the consecrated wine, because
corruption of the sacrament would ensue in part, as was said above
(Question 77, Article 8). But if after the words of consecration the
priest perceive that no wine has been put in the chalice, and if he
detect it before receiving the body, then rejecting the water, he ought
to pour in wine with water, and begin over again the consecrating
words of the blood. But if he notice it after receiving the body, he
ought to procure another host which must be consecrated together
with the blood; and I say so for this reason, because if he were to
say only the words of consecration of the blood, the proper order of
consecrating would not be observed; and, as is laid down by the
Council of Toledo, quoted above (ad 1), sacrifices cannot be perfect,
except they be performed in perfect order. But if he were to begin
from the consecration of the blood, and were to repeat all the words
which follow, it would not suffice, unless there was a consecrated
host present, since in those words there are things to be said and
done not only regarding the blood, but also regarding the body; and
at the close he ought once more to receive the consecrated host and
blood, even if he had already taken the water which was in the
chalice, because the precept of the completing this sacrament is of
greater weight than the precept of receiving the sacrament while
fasting, as stated above (Question 80, Article 8).
Reply to Objection 5: Although the priest may not recollect having
said some of the words he ought to say, he ought not to be disturbed
mentally on that account; for a man who utters many words cannot
recall to mind all that he has said; unless perchance in uttering them
he adverts to something connected with the consecration; for so it is
impressed on the memory. Hence, if a man pays attention to what he
is saying, but without adverting to the fact that he is saying these
particular words, he remembers soon after that he has said them;
for, a thing is presented to the memory under the formality of the