SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.6.

work of a devil the sleeper's phantasms are disturbed so as to
induce the aforesaid result. Sometimes this is associated with a
previous sin, namely the neglect to guard against the wiles of the
devil. Hence the words of the hymn at even: "Our enemy repress,
that so our bodies no uncleanness know".
On the other hand, this may occur without any fault on man's part,
and through the wickedness of the devil alone. Thus we read in the
Collationes Patrum (Coll. xxii, 6) of a man who was ever wont to
suffer from nocturnal pollution on festivals, and that the devil
brought this about in order to prevent him from receiving Holy
Communion. Hence it is manifest that nocturnal pollution is never a
sin, but is sometimes the result of a previous sin.
Reply to Objection 1: Solomon did not merit to receive wisdom from
God while he was asleep. He received it in token of his previous
desire. It is for this reason that his petition is stated to have been
pleasing to God (3 Kgs. 3:10), as Augustine observes (Gen. ad lit. xii,
15).
Reply to Objection 2: The use of reason is more or less hindered in
sleep, according as the inner sensitive powers are more or less
overcome by sleep, on account of the violence or attenuation of the
evaporations. Nevertheless it is always hindered somewhat, so as to
be unable to elicit a judgment altogether free, as stated in the FP,
Question 84, Article 8, ad 2. Therefore what it does then is not
imputed to it as a sin.
Reply to Objection 3: Reason's apprehension is not hindered during
sleep to the same extent as its judgment, for this is accomplished by
reason turning to sensible objects, which are the first principles of
human thought. Hence nothing hinders man's reason during sleep
from apprehending anew something arising out of the traces left by
his previous thoughts and phantasms presented to him, or again
through Divine revelation, or the interference of a good or bad angel.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.153, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether seduction should be reckoned a species

of lust?
Objection 1: It would seem that seduction should not be reckoned a
species of lust. For seduction denotes the unlawful violation of a
virgin, according to the Decretals (XXXVI, qu. 1) [Append. Grat. ad
can. Lex illa]. But this may occur between an unmarried man and an
unmarried woman, which pertains to fornication. Therefore
seduction should not be reckoned a species of lust, distinct from
fornication.
Objection 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Patriarch. [De Abraham i, 4]):
"Let no man be deluded by human laws: all seduction is adultery."
Now a species is not contained under another that is differentiated in
opposition to it. Therefore since adultery is a species of lust, it
seems that seduction should not be reckoned a species of lust.
Objection 3: Further, to do a person an injury would seem to pertain
to injustice rather than to lust. Now the seducer does an injury to
another, namely the violated maiden's father, who "can take the
injury as personal to himself" [Gratian, ad can. Lex illa], and sue the
seducer for damages. Therefore seduction should not be reckoned a
species of lust.
On the contrary, Seduction consists properly in the venereal act
whereby a virgin is violated. Therefore, since lust is properly about
venereal actions, it would seem that seduction is a species of lust.
I answer that, When the matter of a vice has a special deformity, we
must reckon it to be a determinate species of that vice. Now lust is a
sin concerned with venereal matter, as stated above (Question 153,
Article 1). And a special deformity attaches to the violation of a virgin
who is under her father's care: both on the part of the maid, who
through being violated without any previous compact of marriage is
both hindered from contracting a lawful marriage and is put on the
road to a wanton life from which she was withheld lest she should
lose the seal of virginity: and on the part of the father, who is her
guardian, according to Ecclus. 42:11, "Keep a sure watch over a
shameless daughter, lest at any time she make thee become a
laughing-stock to thy enemies." Therefore it is evident that seduction
which denotes the unlawful violation of a virgin, while still under the