other things, but rather other things to Him. Justice, therefore, in
God is sometimes spoken of as the fitting accompaniment of His
goodness; sometimes as the reward of merit. Anselm touches on
either view where he says (Prosolog. 10): "When Thou dost punish
the wicked, it is just, since it agrees with their deserts; and when
Thou dost spare the wicked, it is also just; since it befits Thy
goodness."
Reply to Objection 4: Although justice regards act, this does not
prevent its being the essence of God; since even that which is of the
essence of a thing may be the principle of action. But good does not
always regard act; since a thing is called good not merely with
respect to act, but also as regards perfection in its essence. For this
reason it is said (De Hebdom.) that the good is related to the just, as
the general to the special.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the justice of God is truth?

Objection 1: It seems that the justice of God is not truth. For justice
resides in the will; since, as Anselm says (Dial. Verit. 13), it is a
rectitude of the will, whereas truth resides in the intellect, as the
Philosopher says (Metaph. vi; Ethic. vi, 2,6). Therefore justice does
not appertain to truth.
Objection 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 7), truth
is a virtue distinct from justice. Truth therefore does not appertain to
the idea of justice.
On the contrary, it is said (Ps. 84:11): "Mercy and truth have met
each other": where truth stands for justice.
I answer that, Truth consists in the equation of mind and thing, as
said above (Question 16, Article 1). Now the mind, that is the cause
of the thing, is related to it as its rule and measure; whereas the
converse is the case with the mind that receives its knowledge from
things. When therefore things are the measure and rule of the mind,
truth consists in the equation of the mind to the thing, as happens in
ourselves. For according as a thing is, or is not, our thoughts or our
words about it are true or false. But when the mind is the rule or
measure of things, truth consists in the equation of the thing to the
mind; just as the work of an artist is said to be true, when it is in
accordance with his art.
Now as works of art are related to art, so are works of justice related
to the law with which they accord. Therefore God's justice, which
establishes things in the order conformable to the rule of His
wisdom, which is the law of His justice, is suitably called truth. Thus
we also in human affairs speak of the truth of justice.
Reply to Objection 1: Justice, as to the law that governs, resides in
the reason or intellect; but as to the command whereby our actions
are governed according to the law, it resides in the will.
Reply to Objection 2: The truth of which the Philosopher is speaking
in this passage, is that virtue whereby a man shows himself in word
and deed such as he really is. Thus it consists in the conformity of
the sign with the thing signified; and not in that of the effect with its