Only-begotten was produced by the former of the world, whom again ye wish to be considered
the Nous (mind) of the Father of all, and [yet maintain] that this image was ignorant of itself,
ignorant of creation,—ignorant, too, of the Mother,—ignorant of everything that exists, and of
those things which were made by it; and are you not ashamed while, in opposition to yourselves,
you ascribe ignorance even to the Only-begotten Himself? For if these things [below] were made
by the Saviour after the similitude of those which are above, while He (the Demiurge) who was
made after such similitude was in so great ignorance, it necessarily follows that around Him, and
in accordance with Him, after whose likeness he that is thus ignorant was formed, ignorance of the
kind in question spiritually exists. For it is not possible, since both were produced spiritually, and
neither fashioned nor composed, that in some the likeness was preserved, while in others the likeness
of the image was spoiled, that image which was here produced that it might be according to the
image of that production which is above. But if it is not similar, the charge will then attach to the
Saviour, who produced a dissimilar image,—of being, so to speak, an incompetent workman. For
it is out of their power to affirm that the Saviour had not the faculty of production, since they style
Him All Things. If, then, the image is dissimilar, he is a poor workman, and the blame lies, according
to their hypothesis, with the Saviour. If, on the other hand, it is similar, then the same ignorance
will be found to exist in the Nous (mind) of their Propator, that is, in the Only-begotten. The Nous
of the Father, in that case, was ignorant of Himself; ignorant, too, of the Father; ignorant, moreover,
of those very things which were formed by Him. But if He has knowledge, it necessarily follows
also that he who was formed after his likeness by the Saviour should know the things which are
like; and thus, according to their own principles, their monstrous blasphemy is overthrown.
3. Apart from this, however, how can those things which belong to creation, various, manifold,
and innumerable as they are, be the images of those thirty Æons which are within the Pleroma,
whose names, as these men fix them, I have set forth in the book which precedes this? And not
only will they be unable to adapt the [vast] variety of creation at large to the [comparative] smallness
of their Pleroma, but they cannot do this even with respect to any one part of it, whether [that
possessed by] celestial or terrestrial beings, or those that live in the waters. For they themselves
testify that their Pleroma consists of thirty Æons; but any one will undertake to show that, in a
single department of those [created beings] which have been mentioned, they reckon that there are
not thirty, but many thousands of species. How then can those things, which constitute such a
multiform creation, which are opposed in nature to each other, and disagree among themselves,
and destroy the one the other, be the images and likenesses of the thirty Æons of the Pleroma, if
indeed, as they declare, these being possessed of one nature, are of equal and similar properties,
and exhibit no differences [among themselves]? For it was incumbent, if these things are images
of those Æons,—inasmuch as they declare that some men are wicked by nature, and some, on the
other hand, naturally good,—to point out such differences also among their Æons, and to maintain