And hence it comes to pass, that if there can be in the mind any
knowledge that is eternal, while the thought of that knowledge cannot be
eternal, and any inner and true word of ours is only said by our thought,
then God alone can be understood to have a Word that is eternal, and coeternal with Himself. Unless, perhaps, we are to say that the very
possibility of thought—since that which is known is capable of being truly
thought, even at the time when it is not being thought—constitutes a
word as perpetual as the knowledge itself is perpetual. But how is that a
word which is not yet formed in the vision of the thought? How will it be
like the knowledge of which it is born, if it has not the form of that
knowledge, and is only now called a word because it can have it? For it is
much as if one were to say that a word is to be so called because it can be
a word. But what is this that can be a word, and is therefore already held
worthy of the name of a word? What, I say, is this thing that is formable,
but not yet formed, except a something in our mind, which we toss to and
fro by revolving it this way or that, while we think of first one thing and
then another, according as they are found by or occur to us? And the true
word then comes into being, when, as I said, that which we toss to and fro
by revolving it arrives at that which we know, and is formed by that, in
taking its entire likeness; so that in what manner each thing is known, in
that manner also it is thought, i.e. is said in this manner in the heart,
without articulate sound, without thought of articulate sound, such as no
doubt belongs to some particular tongue. And hence if we even admit, in
order not to dispute laboriously about a name, that this something of our
mind, which can be formed from our knowledge, is to be already called a
word, even before it is so formed, because it is, so to say, already
formable, who would not see how great would be the unlikeness between
it and that Word of God, which is so in the form of God, as not to have
been formable before it was formed, or to have been capable at any time
of being formless, but is a simple form, and simply equal to Him from
whom it is, and with whom it is wonderfully co-eternal?

### CHAP. 16.—OUR WORD IS NEVER TO BE EQUALLED TO THE DIVINE WORD, NOT EVEN WHEN WE SHALL BE LIKE GOD

Wherefore that Word of God is in such wise so called, as not to be called a
thought of God, lest we believe that there is anything in God which can be

revolved, so that it at one time receives and at another recovers a form, so
as to be a word, and again can lose that form and be revolved in some
sense formlessly. Certainly that excellent master of speech knew well the
force of words, and had looked into the nature of thought, who said in his
poem, "And revolves with himself the varying issues of war," i.e. thinks of
them. That Son of God, then, is not called the Thought of God, but the
Word of God. For our own thought, attaining to what we know, and
formed thereby, is our true word. And so the Word of God ought to be
understood without any thought on the part of God, so that it be
understood as the simple form itself, but containing nothing formable
that can be also unformed. There are, indeed, passages of Holy Scripture
that speak of God's thoughts; but this is after the same mode of speech by
which the forgetfulness of God is also there spoken of, whereas in strict
propriety of language there is in Him certainly no forgetfulness.
26. Wherefore, since we have found now in this enigma so great an
unlikeness to God and the Word of God, wherein yet there was found
before some likeness, this, too, must be admitted, that even when we
shall be like Him, when "we shall see Him as He is" (and certainly he who
said this was aware beyond doubt of our present unlikeness), not even
then shall we be equal to Him in nature. For that nature which is made is
ever less than that which makes. And at that time our word will not
indeed be false, because we shall neither lie nor be deceived. Perhaps,
too, our thoughts will no longer revolve by passing and repassing from
one thing to another, but we shall see all our knowledge at once, and at
one glance. Still, when even this shall have come to pass, if indeed it shall
come to pass, the creature which was formable will indeed have been
formed, so that nothing will be wanting of that form to which it ought to
attain; yet nevertheless it will not be to be equalled to that simplicity
wherein there is not anything formable, which has been formed or
reformed, but only form; and which being neither formless nor formed,
itself is eternal and unchangeable substance.