FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.3.

future. Consequently sorrow can regard present, past and future:
whereas bodily pain, which follows apprehension of the external
sense, can only regard something present.
Reply to Objection 3: The sensibles of touch are painful, not only in
so far as they are disproportionate to the apprehensive power, but
also in so far as they are contrary to nature: whereas the objects of
the other senses can indeed be disproportionate to the apprehensive
power, but they are not contrary to nature, save as they are
subordinate to the sensibles of touch. Consequently man alone, who
is a perfectly cognizant animal, takes pleasure in the objects of the
other senses for their own sake; whereas other animals take no
pleasure in them save as referable to the sensibles of touch, as
stated in Ethic. iii, 10. Accordingly, in referring to the objects of the
other senses, we do not speak of pain in so far as it is contrary to
natural pleasure: but rather of sorrow, which is contrary to joy. So
then if pain be taken as denoting bodily pain, which is its more usual
meaning, then it is contrasted with sorrow, according to the
distinction of interior and exterior apprehension; although, on the
part of the objects, pleasure extends further than does bodily pain.
But if pain be taken in a wide sense, then it is the genus of sorrow,
as stated above.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.35, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether sorrow or pain is contrary to pleasure?

Objection 1: It would seem that sorrow is not contrary to pleasure.
For one of two contraries is not the cause of the other. But sorrow
can be the cause of pleasure; for it is written (Mt. 5:5): "Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted." Therefore they are not
contrary to one another.
Objection 2: Further, one contrary does not denominate the other.
But to some, pain or sorrow gives pleasure: thus Augustine says
(Confess. iii, 2) that in stage-plays sorrow itself gives pleasure: and
(Confess. iv, 5) that "weeping is a bitter thing, and yet it sometimes
pleases us." Therefore pain is not contrary to pleasure.
Objection 3: Further, one contrary is not the matter of the other;
because contraries cannot co-exist together. But sorrow can be the
matter of pleasure; for Augustine says (De Poenit. xiii): "The penitent
should ever sorrow, and rejoice in his sorrow." The Philosopher too
says (Ethic. ix, 4) that, on the other hand, "the evil man feels pain at
having been pleased." Therefore pleasure and pain are not contrary
to one another.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 6) that "joy is the
volition of consent to the things we wish: and that sorrow is the
volition of dissent from the things we do not wish." But consent and
dissent are contraries. Therefore pleasure and sorrow are contrary to
one another.
I answer that, As the Philosopher says (Metaph. x, 4), contrariety is a
difference in respect of a form. Now the form or species of a passion
or movement is taken from the object or term. Consequently, since
the objects of pleasure and sorrow or pain, viz. present good and
present evil, are contrary to one another, it follows that pain and
pleasure are contrary to one another.
Reply to Objection 1: Nothing hinders one contrary causing the other
accidentally: and thus sorrow can be the cause of pleasure. In one
way, in so far as from sorrow at the absence of something, or at the
presence of its contrary, one seeks the more eagerly for something
pleasant: thus a thirsty man seeks more eagerly the pleasure of a
drink, as a remedy for the pain he suffers. In another way, in so far