Grecian discipline, so much the brighter does what we have with us appear. For
when a barbarian and an untaught person utters things which no man on earth
ever knew, and does not only utter, (though if this were the only thing it were a
great marvel,) but besides this, affords another and a stronger proof that what he
says is divinely inspired, namely, the convincing all his hearers through all time;
who will not wonder at the power that dwells in him? Since this is, as I said, the
strongest proof that he lays down no laws of his own. This barbarian then, with
his writing of the Gospel, has occupied all the habitable world. With his body he
has taken possession of the center of Asia, where of old philosophized all of the
Grecian party, shining forth in the midst of his foes, dispersing their darkness,
and breaking down the stronghold of devils: but in soul he has retired to that
place which is fit for one who has done such things.
5. And as for the writings of the Greeks, they are all put out and vanished,
but this man's shine brighter day by day. For from the time that he (was) and the
other fishermen, since then the (doctrines) of Pythagoras and of Plato, which
seemed before to prevail, have ceased to be spoken of, and most men do not
know them even by name. Yet Plato was, they say, the invited companion of
kings, had many friends, and sailed to Sicily. And Pythagoras occupied Magna
Græcia, and practiced there ten thousand kinds of sorcery. For to converse with
oxen, (which they say he did,) was nothing else but a piece of sorcery. As is
most clear from this. He that so conversed with brutes did not in anything benefit
the race of men, but even did them the greatest wrong. Yet surely, the nature of
men was better adapted for the reasoning of philosophy; still he did, as they say,
converse with eagles and oxen, using sorceries. For he did not make their
irrational nature rational, (this was impossible to man,) but by his magic tricks
he deceived the foolish. And neglecting to teach men anything useful, he taught
that they might as well eat the heads of those who begot them, as beans. And he
persuaded those who associated with him, that the soul of their teacher had
actually been at one time a bush, at another a girl, at another a fish.
Are not these things with good cause extinct, and vanished utterly? With

good cause, and reasonably. But not so the words of him who was ignorant and
unlettered; for Syrians, and Egyptians, and Indians, and Persians, and
Ethiopians, and ten thousand other nations, translating into their own tongues the
doctrines introduced by him, barbarians though they be, have learned to
philosophize. I did not therefore idly say that all the world has become his
theater. For he did not leave those of his own kind, and waste his labor on the
irrational creatures, (an act of excessive vainglory and extreme folly,) but being
clear of this as well as of other passions, he was earnest on one point only, that
all the world might learn somewhat of the things which might profit it, and be
able to translate it from earth to heaven.
For this reason too, he did not hide his teaching in mist and darkness, as
they did who threw obscurity of speech, like a kind of veil, around the mischiefs
laid up within. But this man's doctrines are clearer than the sunbeams, wherefore
they have been unfolded to all men throughout the world. For he did not teach as
Pythagoras did, commanding those who came to him to be silent for five years,
or to sit like senseless stones; neither did he invent fables defining the universe
to consist of numbers; but casting away all this devilish trash and mischief, he
diffused such simplicity through his words, that all he said was plain, not only to
wise men, but also to women and youths. For he was persuaded that the words
were true and profitable to all that should hearken to them. And all time after
him is his witness; since he has drawn to him all the world, and has freed our life
when we have listened to these words from all monstrous display of wisdom;
wherefore we who hear them would prefer rather to give up our lives, than the
doctrines by him delivered to us.
6. From this then, and from every other circumstance, it is plain, that
nothing of this man's is human, but divine and heavenly are the lessons which
come to us by this divine soul. For we shall observe not sounding sentences, nor
magnificent diction, nor excessive and useless order and arrangement of words
and sentences, (these things are far from all true wisdom,) but strength invincible
and divine, and irresistible force of right doctrines, and a rich supply of