Accordingly, there are two kinds of theology or divine science. (1) There is one that treats of
divine things, not as the subject of the science but as the principles of the subject. This is the
kind of theology pursued by the philosophers and that is also called metaphysics. (2) There is
another theology, however, that investigates divine things for their own sakes as the subject of
the science. This is the theology taught in Sacred Scripture.

Both treat of beings that exist separate from matter and motion, but with a difference, for
something can exist separate from matter and motion in two distinct ways: (1) first, because by
its nature the thing that is called separate in no way can exist in matter and motion, as God and
the angels are said to be separate from matter and motion. (2) Second, because by its nature it
does not exist in matter and motion; but it can exist without them, though we sometimes find it

with them. In this way being, substance, potency, and act are separate from matter and motion,
because they do not depend on them for their existence, unlike the objects of mathematics, which
can only exist in matter, though they can be understood without sensible matter.

Thus philosophical theology investigates beings separate in the second sense as its subjects, and
beings separate in the first sense as the principles of its subject. But the theology of Sacred
Scripture treats of beings separate in the first sense as its subjects, though it concerns some items
in matter and motion insofar as this is needed to throw light on divine things.

#### Replies to Opposing Arguments:

Reply to 1. When something is incorporated into a science only to throw light on something
else, it does not belong to the science essentially, but, in a way, incidentally, as some mathematics
are incorporated into the natural sciences. In this way nothing prevents some things in matter and
motion being in divine science.

Reply to 2. We do not attribute motion to God properly, but by a kind of metaphor, and this in
two ways, first, according as the operation of the intellect or will is improperly called motion; and
in this way a person is said to move himself when he knows or loves himself. ln this sense, as
the Commentator says, the statement of Plato is true, that the First Mover moves himself because
he knows and loves himself. Second, according as the flowing forth of effects From their causes
can be called a procession or motion of cause to effect insofar as the likeness of the cause is left
in the effect itself; and so the cause, which previously existed in itself, afterward comes to be in
the effect through its likeness. And in this way God, who has communicated his likeness to all
creatures, in a certain respect is said to be moved by all of them or to go forward to all things.
Dionysius frequently uses this manner of speaking. This also seems to be the meaning of the
statement in Wisdom, that "Wisdom is more mobile than all mobile things," and that "She
reaches from end to end mightily." However, this is not motion in the proper sense the term, and
so the argument does not follow.