FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.97, C.3.

extremely harmful. Wherefore the jurist says [Pandect. Justin. lib. i,
ff., tit. 4, De Constit. Princip.] that "in establishing new laws, there
should be evidence of the benefit to be derived, before departing
from a law which has long been considered just."
Reply to Objection 1: Rules of art derive their force from reason
alone: and therefore whenever something better occurs, the rule
followed hitherto should be changed. But "laws derive very great
force from custom," as the Philosopher states (Polit. ii, 5):
consequently they should not be quickly changed.
Reply to Objection 2: This argument proves that laws ought to be
changed: not in view of any improvement, but for the sake of a great
benefit or in a case of great urgency, as stated above. This answer
applies also to the Third Objection.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.97, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether custom can obtain force of law?

Objection 1: It would seem that custom cannot obtain force of law,
nor abolish a law. Because human law is derived from the natural
law and from the Divine law, as stated above (Question 93, Article 3;
Question 95, Article 2). But human custom cannot change either the
law of nature or the Divine law. Therefore neither can it change
human law.
Objection 2: Further, many evils cannot make one good. But he who
first acted against the law, did evil. Therefore by multiplying such
acts, nothing good is the result. Now a law is something good; since
it is a rule of human acts. Therefore law is not abolished by custom,
so that the mere custom should obtain force of law.
Objection 3: Further, the framing of laws belongs to those public
men whose business it is to govern the community; wherefore
private individuals cannot make laws. But custom grows by the acts
of private individuals. Therefore custom cannot obtain force of law,
so as to abolish the law.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. ad Casulan. xxxvi): "The
customs of God's people and the institutions of our ancestors are to
be considered as laws. And those who throw contempt on the
customs of the Church ought to be punished as those who disobey
the law of God."
I answer that, All law proceeds from the reason and will of the
lawgiver; the Divine and natural laws from the reasonable will of
God; the human law from the will of man, regulated by reason. Now
just as human reason and will, in practical matters, may be made
manifest by speech, so may they be made known by deeds: since
seemingly a man chooses as good that which he carries into
execution. But it is evident that by human speech, law can be both
changed and expounded, in so far as it manifests the interior
movement and thought of human reason. Wherefore by actions also,
especially if they be repeated, so as to make a custom, law can be
changed and expounded; and also something can be established
which obtains force of law, in so far as by repeated external actions,
the inward movement of the will, and concepts of reason are most
effectually declared; for when a thing is done again and again, it