or image found in creatures for the manifestation of the divine
persons, so also in the same manner do we make use of the
essential attributes. And such a manifestation of the divine persons
by the use of the essential attributes is called "appropriation."
The divine person can be manifested in a twofold manner by the
essential attributes; in one way by similitude, and thus the things
which belong to the intellect are appropriated to the Son, Who
proceeds by way of intellect, as Word. In another way by
dissimilitude; as power is appropriated to the Father, as Augustine
says, because fathers by reason of old age are sometimes feeble;
lest anything of the kind be imagined of God.
Reply to Objection 1: The essential attributes are not appropriated to
the persons as if they exclusively belonged to them; but in order to
make the persons manifest by way of similitude, or dissimilitude, as
above explained. So, no error in faith can arise, but rather
manifestation of the truth.
Reply to Objection 2: If the essential attributes were appropriated to
the persons as exclusively belonging to each of them, then it would
follow that one person would be as a form as regards another; which
Augustine altogether repudiates (De Trin. vi, 2), showing that the
Father is wise, not by Wisdom begotten by Him, as though only the
Son were Wisdom; so that the Father and the Son together only can
be called wise, but not the Father without the Son. But the Son is
called the Wisdom of the Father, because He is Wisdom from the
Father Who is Wisdom. For each of them is of Himself Wisdom; and
both together are one Wisdom. Whence the Father is not wise by the
wisdom begotten by Him, but by the wisdom which is His own
essence.
Reply to Objection 3: Although the essential attribute is in its proper
concept prior to person, according to our way of understanding;
nevertheless, so far as it is appropriated, there is nothing to prevent
the personal property from being prior to that which is appropriated.
Thus color is posterior to body considered as body, but is naturally
prior to "white body," considered as white.

### ARTICLE 8. Whether the essential attributes are appropriated

to the persons in a fitting manner by the holy doctors?
Objection 1: It would seem that the essential attributes are
appropriated to the persons unfittingly by the holy doctors. For
Hilary says (De Trin. ii): "Eternity is in the Father, the species in the
Image; and use is in the Gift." In which words he designates three
names proper to the persons: the name of the "Father," the name
"Image" proper to the Son (Question 35, Article 2), and the name
"Bounty" or "Gift," which is proper to the Holy Ghost (Question 38,
Article 2). He also designates three appropriated terms. For he
appropriates "eternity" to the Father, "species" to the Son, and "use"
to the Holy Ghost. This he does apparently without reason. For
"eternity" imports duration of existence; "species," the principle of
existence; and 'use' belongs to the operation. But essence and
operation are not found to be appropriated to any person. Therefore
the above terms are not fittingly appropriated to the persons.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 5): "Unity is
in the Father, equality in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost is the
concord of equality and unity." This does not, however, seem fitting;
because one person does not receive formal denomination from
what is appropriated to another. For the Father is not wise by the
wisdom begotten, as above explained (Question 37, Article 2, ad 1).
But, as he subjoins, "All these three are one by the Father; all are
equal by the Son, and all united by the Holy Ghost." The above,
therefore, are not fittingly appropriated to the Persons.
Objection 3: Further, according to Augustine, to the Father is
attributed "power," to the Son "wisdom," to the Holy Ghost
"goodness." Nor does this seem fitting; for "strength" is part of
power, whereas strength is found to be appropriated to the Son,
according to the text, "Christ the strength of God" (1 Cor. 1:24). So it
is likewise appropriated to the Holy Ghost, according to the words,
"strength came out from Him and healed all" (Lk. 6:19). Therefore
power should not be appropriated to the Father.
Objection 4: Likewise Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 10): "What the
Apostle says, "From Him, and by Him, and in Him," is not to be taken
in a confused sense." And (Contra Maxim. ii) "'from Him' refers to the
Father, 'by Him' to the Son, 'in Him' to the Holy Ghost.'" This,