THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.2.

His nearness to God His grace is the highest and first, though not in
time, since all have received grace on account of His grace,
according to Rm. 8:29: "For whom He foreknew, He also
predestinated to be made conformable to the image of His Son; that
He might be the first-born amongst many brethren." Secondly, He
had perfection as regards the fulness of all graces, according to Jn.
1:14, "We saw Him . . . full of grace and truth," as was shown,
Question 7, Article 9. Thirdly, He has the power of bestowing grace
on all the members of the Church, according to Jn. 1:16: "Of His
fulness we have all received." And thus it is plain that Christ is
fittingly called the Head of the Church.
Reply to Objection 1: To give grace or the Holy Ghost belongs to
Christ as He is God, authoritatively; but instrumentally it belongs
also to Him as man, inasmuch as His manhood is the instrument of
His Godhead. And hence by the power of the Godhead His actions
were beneficial, i.e. by causing grace in us, both meritoriously and
efficiently. But Augustine denies that Christ as man gives the Holy
Ghost authoritatively. Even other saints are said to give the Holy
Ghost instrumentally, or ministerially, according to Gal. 3:5: "He . . .
who giveth to you the Spirit."
Reply to Objection 2: In metaphorical speech we must not expect a
likeness in all respects; for thus there would be not likeness but
identity. Accordingly a natural head has not another head because
one human body is not part of another; but a metaphorical body, i.e.
an ordered multitude, is part of another multitude as the domestic
multitude is part of the civil multitude; and hence the father who is
head of the domestic multitude has a head above him, i.e. the civil
governor. And hence there is no reason why God should not be the
Head of Christ, although Christ Himself is Head of the Church.
Reply to Objection 3: The head has a manifest pre-eminence over the
other exterior members; but the heart has a certain hidden influence.
And hence the Holy Ghost is likened to the heart, since He invisibly
quickens and unifies the Church; but Christ is likened to the Head in
His visible nature in which man is set over man.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.2.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.8, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ is the Head of men as to their

bodies or only as to their souls?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ is not the Head of men as to
their bodies. For Christ is said to be the Head of the Church
inasmuch as He bestows spiritual sense and the movement of grace
on the Church. But a body is not capable of this spiritual sense and
movement. Therefore Christ is not the Head of men as regards their
bodies.
Objection 2: Further, we share bodies with the brutes. If therefore
Christ was the Head of men as to their bodies, it would follow that He
was the Head of brute animals; and this is not fitting.
Objection 3: Further, Christ took His body from other men, as is clear
from Mt. 1 and Luke 3. But the head is the first of the members, as
was said above (Article 1, ad 3). Therefore Christ is not the Head of
the Church as regards bodies.
On the contrary, It is written (Phil. 3:21): "Who will reform the body of
our lowness, made like to the body of His glory."
I answer that, The human body has a natural relation to the rational
soul, which is its proper form and motor. Inasmuch as the soul is its
form, it receives from the soul life and the other properties which
belong specifically to man; but inasmuch as the soul is its motor, the
body serves the soul instrumentally. Therefore we must hold that the
manhood of Christ had the power of "influence," inasmuch as it is
united to the Word of God, to Whom His body is united through the
soul, as stated above (Question 6, Article 1). Hence the whole
manhood of Christ, i.e. according to soul and body, influences all,
both in soul and body; but principally the soul, and secondarily the
body: First, inasmuch as the "members of the body are presented as
instruments of justice" in the soul that lives through Christ, as the
Apostle says (Rm. 6:13): secondly, inasmuch as the life of glory
flows from the soul on to the body, according to Rm. 8:11: "He that
raised up Jesus from the dead shall quicken also your mortal bodies,
because of His Spirit that dwelleth in you."
Reply to Objection 1: The spiritual sense of grace does not reach to
the body first and principally, but secondarily and instrumentally, as