SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.3.

whose authority neither Jerome nor Augustine nor any of the holy
doctors defended their opinion." Hence Jerome says (Exposit.
Symbol): "This, most blessed Pope, is the faith that we have been
taught in the Catholic Church. If anything therein has been
incorrectly or carelessly expressed, we beg that it may be set aright
by you who hold the faith and see of Peter. If however this, our
profession, be approved by the judgment of your apostleship,
whoever may blame me, will prove that he himself is ignorant, or
malicious, or even not a catholic but a heretic."

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether heretics ought to be tolerated?

Objection 1: It seems that heretics ought to be tolerated. For the
Apostle says (2 Tim. 2:24,25): "The servant of the Lord must not
wrangle . . . with modesty admonishing them that resist the truth, if
peradventure God may give them repentance to know the truth, and
they may recover themselves from the snares of the devil." Now if
heretics are not tolerated but put to death, they lose the opportunity
of repentance. Therefore it seems contrary to the Apostle's
command.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is necessary in the Church should be
tolerated. Now heresies are necessary in the Church, since the
Apostle says (1 Cor. 11:19): "There must be . . . heresies, that
they . . . who are reproved, may be manifest among you." Therefore it
seems that heretics should be tolerated.
Objection 3: Further, the Master commanded his servants (Mt. 13:30)
to suffer the cockle "to grow until the harvest," i.e. the end of the
world, as a gloss explains it. Now holy men explain that the cockle
denotes heretics. Therefore heretics should be tolerated.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Titus 3:10,11): "A man that is a
heretic, after the first and second admonition, avoid: knowing that
he, that is such an one, is subverted."
I answer that, With regard to heretics two points must be observed:
one, on their own side; the other, on the side of the Church. On their
own side there is the sin, whereby they deserve not only to be
separated from the Church by excommunication, but also to be
severed from the world by death. For it is a much graver matter to
corrupt the faith which quickens the soul, than to forge money,
which supports temporal life. Wherefore if forgers of money and
other evil-doers are forthwith condemned to death by the secular
authority, much more reason is there for heretics, as soon as they
are convicted of heresy, to be not only excommunicated but even
put to death.
On the part of the Church, however, there is mercy which looks to
the conversion of the wanderer, wherefore she condemns not at
once, but "after the first and second admonition," as the Apostle

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.10, C.4.