1 Corinthians 15:53
"For this corruptible must put on incorruption."
Thus lest any, hearing that "flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
God," should suppose that our bodies do not rise again; he adds, "this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality."
Now the body is "corruptible," the body is "mortal:" so that the body indeed
remains, for it is the body which is put on; but its mortality and corruption
vanish away, when immortality and incorruption come upon it. Do not thou
therefore question hereafter how it shall live an endless life, now that you have
heard of its becoming incorruptible.

1 Corinthians 15:54
4. "But when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this moral
shall have put on immortality, then shall come to pass the saying that is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory."
Thus, since he was speaking of great and secret things, he again takes
prophecy [Hosea 13:14] to confirm his word. "Death is swallowed up in victory:
" i.e., utterly; not so much as a fragment of it remains nor a hope of returning,
incorruption having consumed corruption.

1 Corinthians 15:55
"O death, where is your sting? O grave, where is your victory?"
Do you see his noble soul? How even as one who is offering sacrifices for
victory, having become inspired and seeing already things future as things past,
he leaps and tramples upon death fallen at his feet, and shouts a cry of triumph
over its head where it lies, exclaiming mightily and saying, "O death, where is
your sting? O grave, where is your victory?" It is clean gone, it is perished, it is
utterly vanished away, and in vain have you done all those former things. For He
not only disarmed death and vanquished it, but even destroyed it, and made it
quite cease from being.

1 Corinthians 15:56
"Now the sting of death is sin; and the power of sin is the law."
Do you see how the discourse is of the death of the body? Therefore also of
the resurrection of the body. For if these bodies do not rise again, how is death
"swallowed up?" And not this only, but how is "the law the power of sin?" For
that "sin" indeed is "the sting of death," and more bitter than it, and by it has its
power, is evident; but how is "the law also the power" thereof? Because without
the law sin was weak, being practised indeed, but not able so entirely to
condemn: since although the evil took place, it was not so clearly pointed out. So
that it was no small change which the law brought in, first causing us to know
sin better, and then enhancing the punishment. And if meaning to check sin it did
but develop it more fearfully, this is no charge against the physician, but against
the abuse of the remedy. Since even the presence of Christ made the Jews'
burden heavier, yet must we not therefore blame it, but while we the more
admire it, we must hate them the more, for having been injured by things which
ought to have profited them? Yea, to show that it was not the law of itself which
gives strength to sin, Christ Himself fulfilled it all and was without sin.
But I would have you consider how from this topic also he confirms the
resurrection. For if this were the cause of death, viz. our committing sin, and if
Christ came and took away sin, and delivered us from it through baptism, and
together with sin put an end also to the law in the transgression of which sin
consists, why do you doubt any more of the resurrection? For whence, after all
this, is death to prevail? Through the law? Nay, it is done away. Through sin?
Nay, it is clean destroyed.