Gospel. The Lord did not want to leave the Church without this icon of womanhood. Mary, who
brought him into the world with great faith, also accompanies “the rest of her offspring, those who
keep the commandments of God and bear testimony to Jesus” (Rev 12:17). The close connection
between Mary, the Church and each member of the faithful, based on the fact that each in his or
her own way brings forth Christ, has been beautifully expressed by Blessed Isaac of Stella: “In the
inspired Scriptures, what is said in a universal sense of the virgin mother, the Church, is
understood in an individual sense of the Virgin Mary... In a way, every Christian is also believed to
be a bride of God’s word, a mother of Christ, his daughter and sister, at once virginal and fruitful...
Christ dwelt for nine months in the tabernacle of Mary’s womb. He dwells until the end of the ages
in the tabernacle of the Church’s faith. He will dwell forever in the knowledge and love of each
faithful soul”.

286. Mary was able to turn a stable into a home for Jesus, with poor swaddling clothes and an
abundance of love. She is the handmaid of the Father who sings his praises. She is the friend who
is ever concerned that wine not be lacking in our lives. She is the woman whose heart was pierced
by a sword and who understands all our pain. As mother of all, she is a sign of hope for peoples
suffering the birth pangs of justice. She is the missionary who draws near to us and accompanies
us throughout life, opening our hearts to faith by her maternal love. As a true mother, she walks at
our side, she shares our struggles and she constantly surrounds us with God’s love. Through her
many titles, often linked to her shrines, Mary shares the history of each people which has received
the Gospel and she becomes a part of their historic identity. Many Christian parents ask that their
children be baptized in a Marian shrine, as a sign of their faith in her motherhood which brings
forth new children for God. There, in these many shrines, we can see how Mary brings together
her children who with great effort come as pilgrims to see her and to be seen by her. Here they
find strength from God to bear the weariness and the suffering in their lives. As she did with Juan
Diego, Mary offers them maternal comfort and love, and whispers in their ear: “Let your heart not
be troubled… Am I not here, who am your Mother?”

Star of the new Evangelization

287. We ask the Mother of the living Gospel to intercede that this invitation to a new phase of
evangelization will be accepted by the entire ecclesial community. Mary is the woman of faith, who
lives and advances in faith, and “her exceptional pilgrimage of faith represents a constant
point of reference for the Church”. Mary let herself be guided by the Holy Spirit on a journey
of faith towards a destiny of service and fruitfulness. Today we look to her and ask her to help us
proclaim the message of salvation to all and to enable new disciples to become evangelizers in
turn. Along this journey of evangelization we will have our moments of aridity, darkness and
even fatigue. Mary herself experienced these things during the years of Jesus’ childhood in
Nazareth: “This is the beginning of the Gospel, the joyful good news. However, it is not difficult to
see in that beginning a particular heaviness of heart, linked with a sort of night of faith – to use the
words of Saint John of the Cross – a kind of ‘veil’ through which one has to draw near to the