SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.132, C.2.

Wherefore as presumption is a sin, so is pusillanimity. Hence it is
that the servant who buried in the earth the money he had received
from his master, and did not trade with it through fainthearted fear,
was punished by his master (Mt. 25; Lk. 19).
Reply to Objection 1: The Philosopher calls those evil who injure
their neighbor: and accordingly the fainthearted is said not to be evil,
because he injures no one, save accidentally, by omitting to do what
might be profitable to others. For Gregory says (Pastoral. i) that if
"they who demur to do good to their neighbor in preaching be
judged strictly, without doubt their guilt is proportionate to the good
they might have done had they been less retiring."
Reply to Objection 2: Nothing hinders a person who has a virtuous
habit from sinning venially and without losing the habit, or mortally
and with loss of the habit of gratuitous virtue. Hence it is possible for
a man, by reason of the virtue which he has, to be worthy of doing
certain great things that are worthy of great honor, and yet through
not trying to make use of his virtue, he sins sometimes venially,
sometimes mortally.
Again it may be replied that the fainthearted is worthy of great things
in proportion to his ability for virtue, ability which he derives either
from a good natural disposition, or from science, or from external
fortune, and if he fails to use those things for virtue, he becomes
guilty of pusillanimity.
Reply to Objection 3: Even pusillanimity may in some way be the
result of pride: when, to wit, a man clings too much to his own
opinion, whereby he thinks himself incompetent for those things for
which he is competent. Hence it is written (Prov. 26:16): "The
sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men that speak
sentences." For nothing hinders him from depreciating himself in
some things, and having a high opinion of himself in others.
Wherefore Gregory says (Pastoral. i) of Moses that "perchance he
would have been proud, had he undertaken the leadership of a
numerous people without misgiving: and again he would have been
proud, had he refused to obey the command of his Creator."
Reply to Objection 4: Moses and Jeremias were worthy of the office
to which they were appointed by God, but their worthiness was of
Divine grace: yet they, considering the insufficiency of their own

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.132, C.2.

weakness, demurred; though not obstinately lest they should fall
into pride.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.132, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether pusillanimity is opposed to

magnanimity?
Objection 1: It seems that pusillanimity is not opposed to
magnanimity. For the Philosopher says (Ethic., 3) that "the
fainthearted man knows not himself: for he would desire the good
things, of which he is worthy, if he knew himself." Now ignorance of
self seems opposed to prudence. Therefore pusillanimity is opposed
to prudence.
Objection 2: Further our Lord calls the servant wicked and slothful
who through pusillanimity refused to make use of the money.
Moreover the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3) that the fainthearted
seem to be slothful. Now sloth is opposed to solicitude, which is an
act of prudence, as stated above (Question 47, Article 9). Therefore
pusillanimity is not opposed to magnanimity.
Objection 3: Further, pusillanimity seems to proceed from inordinate
fear: hence it is written (Is. 35:4): "Say to the fainthearted: Take
courage and fear not." It also seems to proceed from inordinate
anger, according to Col. 3:21, "Fathers, provoke not your children to
indignation, lest they be discouraged." Now inordinate fear is
opposed to fortitude, and inordinate anger to meekness. Therefore
pusillanimity is not opposed to magnanimity.
Objection 4: Further, the vice that is in opposition to a particular
virtue is the more grievous according as it is more unlike that virtue.
Now pusillanimity is more unlike magnanimity than presumption is.
Therefore if pusillanimity is opposed to magnanimity, it follows that
it is a more grievous sin than presumption: yet this is contrary to the
saying of Ecclus. 37:3, "O wicked presumption, whence camest
thou?" Therefore pusillanimity is not opposed to magnanimity.
On the contrary, Pusillanimity and magnanimity differ as greatness
and littleness of soul, as their very names denote. Now great and
little are opposites. Therefore pusillanimity is opposed to
magnanimity.
I answer that, Pusillanimity may be considered in three ways. First,
in itself; and thus it is evident that by its very nature it is opposed to
magnanimity, from which it differs as great and little differ in