Gal. iv. 4.

made no remark; but by thus acknowledging His human nature He baffled His adversary, and
exhausted the force of his first attack by means of His Father's word. The corruption of man,
therefore, which occurred in paradise by both [of our first parents] eating, was done away with by
[the Lord's] want of food in this world. But he, being thus vanquished by the law, endeavoured
again to make an assault by himself quoting a commandment of the law. For, bringing Him to the
highest pinnacle of the temple, he said to Him, "If thou art the Son of God, cast thyself down. For
it is written, That God shall give His angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall
bear thee up, lest perchance thou dash thy foot against a stone;" thus concealing a falsehood
under the guise of Scripture, as is done by all the heretics. For that was indeed written, [namely],
"That He hath given His angels charge concerning Him;" but "cast thyself down from hence" no
Scripture said in reference to Him: this kind of persuasion the devil produced from himself. The
Lord therefore confuted him out of the law, when He said, "It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt
the Lord thy God;" pointing out by the word contained in the law that which is the duty of man,
that he should not tempt God; and in regard to Himself, since He appeared in human form, [declaring]
that He would not tempt the Lord his God. The pride of reason, therefore, which was in the
serpent, was put to nought by the humility found in the man [Christ], and now twice was the devil
conquered from Scripture, when he was detected as advising things contrary to God's commandment,
and was shown to be the enemy of God by [the expression of] his thoughts. He then, having been
thus signally defeated, and then, as it were, concentrating his forces, drawing up in order all his
available power for falsehood, in the third place "showed Him all the kingdoms of the world, and
the glory of them," saying, as Luke relates, "All these will I give thee,—for they are delivered
to me; and to whom I will, I give them,—if thou wilt fall down and worship me." The Lord then,
exposing him in his true character, says, "Depart, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve." He both revealed him by this name, and showed
[at the same time] who He Himself was. For the Hebrew word "Satan" signifies an apostate. And
thus, vanquishing him for the third time, He spurned him from Him finally as being conquered out
of the law; and there was done away with that infringement of God's commandment which had
per eam, quæ fuit in hoc mundo, indigentiam. Harvey thinks that repletio is an error of the translation reading !"#$%&'()*+ for
!"#$&'()*+. This conjecture is adopted above.

occurred in Adam, by means of the precept of the law, which the Son of man observed, who did
not transgress the commandment of God.
3. Who, then, is this Lord God to whom Christ bears witness, whom no man shall tempt, whom
all should worship, and serve Him alone? It is, beyond all manner of doubt, that God who also gave
the law. For these things had been predicted in the law, and by the words (sententiam) of the law
the Lord showed that the law does indeed declare the Word of God from the Father; and the apostate
angel of God is destroyed by its voice, being exposed in his true colours, and vanquished by the
Son of man keeping the commandment of God. For as in the beginning he enticed man to transgress
his Maker's law, and thereby got him into his power; yet his power consists in transgression and
apostasy, and with these he bound man [to himself]; so again, on the other hand, it was necessary
that through man himself he should, when conquered, be bound with the same chains with which
he had bound man, in order that man, being set free, might return to his Lord, leaving to him (Satan)
those bonds by which he himself had been fettered, that is, sin. For when Satan is bound, man is
set free; since "none can enter a strong man's house and spoil his goods, unless he first bind the
strong man himself." The Lord therefore exposes him as speaking contrary to the word of that
God who made all things, and subdues him by means of the commandment. Now the law is the
commandment of God. The Man proves him to be a fugitive from and a transgressor of the law,
an apostate also from God. After [the Man had done this], the Word bound him securely as a fugitive
from Himself, and made spoil of his goods,— namely, those men whom he held in bondage, and
whom he unjustly used for his own purposes. And justly indeed is he led captive, who had led men
unjustly into bondage; while man, who had been led captive in times past, was rescued from the
grasp of his possessor, according to the tender mercy of God the Father, who had compassion on
His own handiwork, and gave to it salvation, restoring it by means of the Word—that is, by
Christ—in order that men might learn by actual proof that he receives incorruptibility not of himself,
but by the free gift of God.