THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.2.

Lord's own declaring and by our faith His flesh is truly food, and His
blood is truly drink." And Ambrose says (De Sacram. vi): "As the
Lord Jesus Christ is God's true Son so is it Christ's true flesh which
we take, and His true blood which we drink."
I answer that, The presence of Christ's true body and blood in this
sacrament cannot be detected by sense, nor understanding, but by
faith alone, which rests upon Divine authority. Hence, on Lk. 22:19:
"This is My body which shall be delivered up for you," Cyril says:
"Doubt not whether this be true; but take rather the Saviour's words
with faith; for since He is the Truth, He lieth not."
Now this is suitable, first for the perfection of the New Law. For, the
sacrifices of the Old Law contained only in figure that true sacrifice
of Christ's Passion, according to Heb. 10:1: "For the law having a
shadow of the good things to come, not the very image of the
things." And therefore it was necessary that the sacrifice of the New
Law instituted by Christ should have something more, namely, that it
should contain Christ Himself crucified, not merely in signification or
figure, but also in very truth. And therefore this sacrament which
contains Christ Himself, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii), is
perfective of all the other sacraments, in which Christ's virtue is
participated.
Secondly, this belongs to Christ's love, out of which for our salvation
He assumed a true body of our nature. And because it is the special
feature of friendship to live together with friends, as the Philosopher
says (Ethic. ix), He promises us His bodily presence as a reward,
saying (Mt. 24:28): "Where the body is, there shall the eagles be
gathered together." Yet meanwhile in our pilgrimage He does not
deprive us of His bodily presence; but unites us with Himself in this
sacrament through the truth of His body and blood. Hence (Jn. 6:57)
he says: "He that eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood, abideth in
Me, and I in him." Hence this sacrament is the sign of supreme
charity, and the uplifter of our hope, from such familiar union of
Christ with us.
Thirdly, it belongs to the perfection of faith, which concerns His
humanity just as it does His Godhead, according to Jn. 14:1: "You
believe in God, believe also in Me." And since faith is of things
unseen, as Christ shows us His Godhead invisibly, so also in this
sacrament He shows us His flesh in an invisible manner.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.75, C.2.

Some men accordingly, not paying heed to these things, have
contended that Christ's body and blood are not in this sacrament
except as in a sign, a thing to be rejected as heretical, since it is
contrary to Christ's words. Hence Berengarius, who had been the
first deviser of this heresy, was afterwards forced to withdraw his
error, and to acknowledge the truth of the faith.
Reply to Objection 1: From this authority the aforesaid heretics have
taken occasion to err from evilly understanding Augustine's words.
For when Augustine says: "You are not to eat this body which you
see," he means not to exclude the truth of Christ's body, but that it
was not to be eaten in this species in which it was seen by them.
And by the words: "It is a mystery that I put before you; in its
spiritual sense it will quicken you," he intends not that the body of
Christ is in this sacrament merely according to mystical
signification, but "spiritually," that is, invisibly, and by the power of
the spirit. Hence (Tract. xxvii), expounding Jn. 6:64: "the flesh
profiteth nothing," he says: "Yea, but as they understood it, for they
understood that the flesh was to be eaten as it is divided piecemeal
in a dead body, or as sold in the shambles, not as it is quickened by
the spirit . . . Let the spirit draw nigh to the flesh . . . then the flesh
profiteth very much: for if the flesh profiteth nothing, the Word had
not been made flesh, that It might dwell among us."
Reply to Objection 2: That saying of Augustine and all others like it
are to be understood of Christ's body as it is beheld in its proper
species; according as our Lord Himself says (Mt. 26:11): "But Me you
have not always." Nevertheless He is invisibly under the species of
this sacrament, wherever this sacrament is performed.
Reply to Objection 3: Christ's body is not in this sacrament in the
same way as a body is in a place, which by its dimensions is
commensurate with the place; but in a special manner which is
proper to this sacrament. Hence we say that Christ's body is upon
many altars, not as in different places, but "sacramentally": and
thereby we do not understand that Christ is there only as in a sign,
although a sacrament is a kind of sign; but that Christ's body is here
after a fashion proper to this sacrament, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 4: This argument holds good of Christ's bodily
presence, as He is present after the manner of a body, that is, as it is
in its visible appearance, but not as it is spiritually, that is, invisibly,