Reply to 5. Although a universal is not mutable, it is nevertheless the nature of a mutable thing.

Reply to 6. Although the soul and other natural forms are not themselves subject to motion, they
are moved accidentally, and they are, moreover, the perfections of mutable things; and for this
reason they come within the domain of natural science. But even though the earth as a whole is
not moved (for it happens to be in its natural place, where a thing is at rest in virtue of the same
nature through which it is moved to a place), nevertheless, when its parts are outside their proper
place, they are moved to a place. Thus the earth falls within the domain of natural science both by
reason of the immobility of the whole earth and by reason of the movement of its parts.

Reply to 7. The mutability characteristic of all creatures is not with respect to any natural motion,
but with respect to their dependence on God, separation from whom entails destruction of their
very being. And that dependence falls under the consideration of metaphysics rather than under
that of natural philosophy. Spiritual creatures, moreover, are mutable only with regard to choice;
and this sort of motion is not the concern of the natural philosopher but rather of the
metaphysician.

### ARTICLE THREE

Does Mathematics Treat, Without Motion and Matter, of What Exists in Matter?

We proceed as follows to the third article:

It seems that mathematical thinking does not treat, without motion and matter, of what exists in

matter, for:

1. Since truth consists in the conformity of thing to intellect, there must be falsehood whenever
we think of something otherwise than it is. If then in mathematics we consider what is in matter
in abstraction from matter, we will consider it falsely; and so mathematics will not be a science,
for every science is concerned with what is true.

2. Again, as the Philosopher states, every science has the task of considering a subject and the
parts of the subject. Now in actual existence matter is a part of all material things. So it is
impossible for a science to treat of what is in matter without treating of matter.

3. Again, all straight lines are specifically the same. But the mathematician treats of straight lines
by numbering them; otherwise he would not treat of the triangle and the square. It follows that he
considers lines as specifically the same and numerically different. But it is clear from the above
that matter is the principle differentiating things specifically the same. So the mathematician treats
of matter.

4. Again, no science completely abstracting from matter demonstrates through a material cause.
But in mathematics some demonstrations are made which can only be reduced to a material
cause, as when we demonstrate something about a whole by its parts. For, as the Physics says,
parts are the matter of the whole. Thus in the Posterior Analytics the demonstration that the angle
in a semi-circle is a right angle from the fact that each of its two parts is half of a right angle, is
reduced to a material cause. Therefore, mathematics does not entirely abstract from matter.