FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.7.

reach the glory of life everlasting, but so as to lead others to it,
inasmuch as He is the Head of the Church, and the Author of human
salvation, according to Heb. 2:10: "Who hath brought many children
into glory [to perfect] the Author of their salvation."
But one may merit the first grace for another congruously; because a
man in grace fulfils God's will, and it is congruous and in harmony
with friendship that God should fulfil man's desire for the salvation
of another, although sometimes there may be an impediment on the
part of him whose salvation the just man desires. And it is in this
sense that the passage from Jeremias speaks.
Reply to Objection 1: A man's faith avails for another's salvation by
congruous and not by condign merit.
Reply to Objection 2: The impetration of prayer rests on mercy,
whereas condign merit rests on justice; hence a man may impetrate
many things from the Divine mercy in prayer, which he does not
merit in justice, according to Dan. 9:18: "For it is not for our
justifications that we present our prayers before Thy face, but for the
multitude of Thy tender mercies."
Reply to Objection 3: The poor who receive alms are said to receive
others into everlasting dwellings, either by impetrating their
forgiveness in prayer, or by meriting congruously by other good
works, or materially speaking, inasmuch as by these good works of
mercy, exercised towards the poor, we merit to be received into
everlasting dwellings.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.114, C.8.

### ARTICLE 7. Whether a man may merit restoration after a fall?

Objection 1: It would seem that anyone may merit for himself
restoration after a fall. For what a man may justly ask of God, he may
justly merit. Now nothing may more justly be besought of God than
to be restored after a fall, as Augustine says [Ennar. i super Ps. lxx.],
according to Ps. 70:9: "When my strength shall fail, do not Thou
forsake me." Hence a man may merit to be restored after a fall.
Objection 2: Further, a man's works benefit himself more than
another. Now a man may, to some extent, merit for another his
restoration after a fall, even as his first grace. Much more, therefore,
may he merit for himself restoration after a fall.
Objection 3: Further, when a man is once in grace he merits life
everlasting by the good works he does, as was shown above (Article
2; Question 109, Article 5). Now no one can attain life everlasting
unless he is restored by grace. Hence it would seem that he merits
for himself restoration.
On the contrary, It is written (Ezech. 18:24): "If the just man turn
himself away from his justice and do iniquity . . . all his justices
which he hath done shall not be remembered." Therefore his
previous merits will nowise help him to rise again. Hence no one can
merit for himself restoration after a fall.
I answer that, No one can merit for himself restoration after a future
fall, either condignly or congruously. He cannot merit for himself
condignly, since the reason of this merit depends on the motion of
Divine grace, and this motion is interrupted by the subsequent sin;
hence all benefits which he afterwards obtains from God, whereby
he is restored, do not fall under merit---the motion of the preceding
grace not extending to them. Again, congruous merit, whereby one
merits the first grace for another, is prevented from having its effect
on account of the impediment of sin in the one for whom it is
merited. Much more, therefore, is the efficacy of such merit impeded
by the obstacle which is in him who merits, and in him for whom it is
merited; for both these are in the same person. And therefore a man
can nowise merit for himself restoration after a fall.
Reply to Objection 1: The desire whereby we seek for restoration