FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.4.

contract, a promise, or a favor already conferred. And corresponding
to these various kinds of debt there are various virtues: e.g.
"Religion" whereby we pay our debt to God; "Piety," whereby we pay
our debt to our parents or to our country; "Gratitude," whereby we
pay our debt to our benefactors, and so forth.
Reply to Objection 1: Justice properly so called is one special virtue,
whose object is the perfect due, which can be paid in the equivalent.
But the name of justice is extended also to all cases in which
something due is rendered: in this sense it is not as a special virtue.
Reply to Objection 2: That justice which seeks the common good is
another virtue from that which is directed to the private good of an
individual: wherefore common right differs from private right; and
Tully (De Inv. ii) reckons as a special virtue, piety which directs man
to the good of his country. But that justice which directs man to the
common good is a general virtue through its act of command: since
it directs all the acts of the virtues to its own end, viz. the common
good. And the virtues, in so far as they are commanded by that
justice, receive the name of justice: so that virtue does not differ,
save logically, from legal justice; just as there is only a logical
difference between a virtue that is active of itself, and a virtue that is
active through the command of another virtue.
Reply to Objection 3: There is the same kind of due in all the
operations belonging to special justice. Consequently, there is the
same virtue of justice, especially in regard to commutations. For it
may be that distributive justice is of another species from
commutative justice; but about this we shall inquire later on (SS,
Question 61, Article 1).

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.60, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether there are different moral virtues about

different passions?
Objection 1: It would seem that there are not different moral virtues
about different passions. For there is but one habit about things that
concur in their source and end: as is evident especially in the case
of sciences. But the passions all concur in one source, viz. love; and
they all terminate in the same end, viz. joy or sorrow, as we stated
above (Question 25, Articles 1,2,4; Question 27, Article 4). Therefore
there is but one moral virtue about all the passions.
Objection 2: Further, if there were different moral virtues about
different passions, it would follow that there are as many moral
virtues as passions. But this clearly is not the case: since there is
one moral virtue about contrary passions; namely, fortitude, about
fear and daring; temperance, about pleasure and sorrow. Therefore
there is no need for different moral virtues about different passions.
Objection 3: Further, love, desire, and pleasure are passions of
different species, as stated above (Question 23, Article 4). Now there
is but one virtue about all these three, viz. temperance. Therefore
there are not different moral virtues about different passions.
On the contrary, Fortitude is about fear and daring; temperance
about desire; meekness about anger; as stated in Ethic. iii, 6,10; iv,
5.
I answer that, It cannot be said that there is only one moral virtue
about all the passions: since some passions are not in the same
power as other passions; for some belong to the irascible, others to
the concupiscible faculty, as stated above (Question 23, Article 1).
On the other hand, neither does every diversity of passions
necessarily suffice for a diversity of moral virtues. First, because
some passions are in contrary opposition to one another, such as
joy and sorrow, fear and daring, and so on. About such passions as
are thus in opposition to one another there must needs be one same
virtue. Because, since moral virtue consists in a kind of mean, the
mean in contrary passions stands in the same ratio to both, even as
in the natural order there is but one mean between contraries, e.g.
between black and white. Secondly, because there are different