be inwardly learned ; for as yet they know not the word of truth as they ought to
know. "That He would sow His fear in them." But this is not enough; for "some
fell by the wayside, and some upon the rock." But we ask not thus; but as on rich
soil the plough opens the furrows, so we pray it may be here also, that having the
fallow ground of their minds tilled deep, they may receive what is dropped upon
them and accurately retain everything they have heard. Whence also he adds,
"And confirm His faith in their minds;" that is, that it may not lie on the surface,
but strike its root deep downwards. "That He would unveil to them the Gospel of
Righteousness." He shows that the veil is two-fold, partly that the eyes of their
understanding were shut, partly that the Gospel was hidden from them. Whence
he said a little above, "that He would open the ears of their hearts," and here,
"that he would unveil unto them the Gospel of Righteousness;" that is, both that
He would render them wise and apt for receiving seed, and that He would teach
them and drop the seed into them; for though they should be apt, yet if God
reveal not, this profits nothing; and if God should unveil but they receive not,
there results like unprofitableness. Therefore we ask for both: that He would
both open their hearts and unveil the Gospel. For neither if kingly ornaments lie
underneath a veil, will it profit at all that the eyes be looking; nor yet that they be
laid bare, if the eyes be not waking. But both will be granted, if first they
themselves desire it. But what then is "the Gospel of Righteousness?" That
which makes righteous. By these words he leads them to the desire of Baptism,
showing that the Gospel is for the working not only of the remission of sins, but
also of righteousness.
8. "That He would grant to them a godly mind, sound judgment, and
virtuous manner of life. " Let such of the faithful attend as are rivetted to the
things of [this] life. For if we are bidden to ask these things for the uninitiated:
think in what things we ought to be occupied who ask these things for others.
For the manner of life ought to keep pace with the Gospel. Whence surely also
the order of the prayer shifts from the doctrines [of the Gospel] to the
deportment: for to the words, "that He would unveil to them the Gospel of

Righteousness;" it has added, "that He would give unto them a Godly mind."
And what is this "Godly?" That God may dwell in it. For He says, "I will dwell
in them, and walk in them;" [Leviticus 26:12] for when the mind has become
righteous, when it has put off its sins, it becomes God's dwelling. [Romans 6:16]
But when God indwells, nothing of man will be left. And thus does the mind
become Godly, speaking every word from Him, even as in truth an house of God
dwelling in it. Surely then the filthy in speech has not a Godly mind, nor he who
delights in jesting and laughter.
"Sound judgment." And what can it be to have "a sound judgment?" To
enjoy the health that pertains to the soul: for he that is held down by wicked lusts
and dazzled with present things, never can be sound, that is, healthy. But as one
who is diseased lusts even after things which are unfit for him, so also does he.
"And a virtuous mode of life," for the doctrines need a mode of life [answerable].
Attend to this, you who come to baptism at the close of life, for we indeed pray
that after baptism ye may have also this deportment, but you are seeking and
doing your utmost to depart without it. For, what though thou be justified : yet is
it of faith only. But we pray that you should have as well the confidence that
comes of good works.
"Continually to think those things which be His, to mind those things which
be His, to practise those things which be His:" for we ask not to have sound
judgment and virtuous deportment for one day only, or for two or three, but
through the whole tenor and period of our life; and as the foundation of all good
things, "to mind those things which be His." For the many "seek their own, not
the things which are Jesus Christ's." [Philippians 2:21] How then might this be?
(For besides prayer, need is that we contribute also our own endeavors.) If we be
occupied in His law day and night. Whence he goes on to ask this also, "to be
occupied in His law;" and as he said above, "continually," so here "day and
night." Wherefore I even blush for these who scarce once in the year are seen in
church. For what excuse can they have who are bidden not simply "day and
night" to commune with the law but "to be occupied in," that is, to be for ever