and confusion. First of all, then, even by what follows, He has pointed out to
them that have understanding the excellency of this law, saying, "Why do you
behold the mote that is in your brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is
in your own eye?" [Matthew 7:3]
But if to many of the less attentive, it seem yet rather obscure, I will
endeavor to explain it from the beginning. In this place, then, as it seems at least
to me, He does not simply command us not to judge any of men's sins, neither
does He simply forbid the doing of such a thing, but to them that are full of
innumerable ills, and are trampling upon other men for trifles. And I think that
certain Jews too are here hinted at, for that while they were bitter accusing their
neighbors for small faults, and such as came to nothing, they were themselves
insensibly committing deadly sins. Herewith towards the end also He was
upbraiding them, when He said, "You bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be
borne, but you will not move them with your finger," [Matthew 23:4] and, "ye
pay tithe of mint and anise, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, and faith." [Matthew 23:23]
Well then, I think that these are comprehended in His invective; that He is
checking them beforehand as to those things, wherein they were hereafter to
accuse His disciples. For although His disciples had been guilty of no such sin,
yet in them were supposed to be offenses; as, for instance, not keeping the
sabbath, eating with unwashen hands, sitting at meat with publicans; of which
He says also in another place, "You which strain at the gnat, and swallow the
camel." But yet it is also a general law that He is laying down on these matters.
And the Corinthians [1 Corinthians 4:5] too Paul did not absolutely
command not to judge, but not to judge their own superiors, and upon grounds
that are not acknowledged; not absolutely to refrain from correcting them that
sin. Neither indeed was He then rebuking all without distinction, but disciples
doing so to their teachers were the object of His reproof; and they who, being
guilty of innumerable sins, bring an evil report upon the guiltless.
This then is the sort of thing which Christ also in this place intimated; not

intimated merely, but guarded it too with a great ter ror, and the punishment from
which no prayers can deliver.
2. "For with what judgment ye judge," says He, "you shall be judged."
[Matthew 7:2]
That is, "it is not the other," says Christ, "that you condemn, but yourself,
and you are making the judgment-seat dreadful to yourself, and the account
strict." As then in the forgiveness of our sins the beginnings are from us, so also
in this judgment, it is by ourselves that the measures of our condemnation are
laid down. You see, we ought not to upbraid nor trample upon them, but to
admonish; not to revile, but to advise; not to assail with pride, but to correct with
tenderness. For not him, but yourself, do you give over to extreme vengeance, by
not sparing him, when it may be needful to give sentence on his offenses.
Do you see, how these two commandments are both easy, and fraught with
great blessings to the obedient, even as of evils on the other hand, to the
regardless? For both he that forgives his neighbor, has freed himself first of the
two from the grounds of complaint, and that without any labor; and he that with
tenderness and indulgence inquires into other men's offenses, great is the
allowance of pardon, which he has by his judgment laid up beforehand for
himself.
"What then!" say you: "if one commit fornication, may I not say that
fornication is a bad thing, nor at all correct him that is playing the wanton?"
Nay, correct him, but not as a foe, nor as an adversary exacting a penalty, but as
a physician providing medicines. For neither did Christ say, "stay not him that is
sinning," but "judge not;" that is, be not bitter in pronouncing sentence.
And besides, it is not of great things (as I have already observed), nor of
things prohibited, that this is said, but of those which are not even counted
offenses. Wherefore He said also.
"Why do you behold the mote that is in your brother's eye?" [Matthew 7:3]
Yea, for many now do this; if they see but a monk wearing an unnecessary
garment, they produce against him the law of our Lord, [Matthew 10:10] while