Ezek. i. 1.

said: "The only-begotten God, which is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared [Him];"
and He does Himself also interpret the Word of the Father as being rich and great); not in one
figure, nor in one character, did He appear to those seeing Him, but according to the reasons and
effects aimed at in His dispensations, as it is written in Daniel. For at one time He was seen with
those who were around Ananias, Azarias, Misa‘l, as present with them in the furnace of fire, in the
burning, and preserving them from [the effects of] fire: "And the appearance of the fourth," it is
said, "was like to the Son of God." At another time [He is represented as] "a stone cut out of the
mountain without hands," and as smiting all temporal kingdoms, and as blowing them away
(ventilans ea), and as Himself filling all the earth. Then, too, is this same individual beheld as the
Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, and drawing near to the Ancient of Days, and receiving
from Him all power and glory, and a kingdom. "His dominion," it is said, "is an everlasting dominion,
and His kingdom shall not perish." John also, the Lord's disciple, when beholding the sacerdotal
and glorious advent of His kingdom, says in the Apocalypse: "I turned to see the voice that spake
with me. And, being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks; and in the midst of the candlesticks
One like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment reaching to the feet, and girt about the paps
with a golden girdle; and His head and His hairs were white, as white as wool, and as snow; and
His eyes were as a flame of fire; and His feet like unto fine brass, as if He burned in a furnace. And
His voice [was] as the voice of waters; and He had in His right hand seven stars; and out of His
mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; and His countenance was as the sun shining in his strength."
For in these words He sets forth something of the glory [which He has received] from His Father,
as [where He makes mention of] the head; something in reference to the priestly office also, as in
the case of the long garment reaching to the feet. And this was the reason why Moses vested the
high priest after this fashion. Something also alludes to the end [of all things], as [where He speaks
of] the fine brass burning in the fire, which denotes the power of faith, and the continuing instant
in prayer, because of the consuming fire which is to come at the end of time. But when John could
not endure the sight (for he says, "I fell at his feet as dead;" that what was written might come
to pass: "No man sees God, and shall live"), and the Word reviving him, and reminding him that
it was He upon whose bosom he had leaned at supper, when he put the question as to who should
the belief that the present reading was that expressed by Irenæus, and that the previous quotation has been corrected to suit the
Vulgate. The former reading, however, occurs in book iii. c. xi. 5."— Harvey.