SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.151, C.5.

in respect of the contemplative life, which consists in thinking "on
the things of God", whereas marriage is directed to the good of the
body, namely the bodily increase of the human race, and belongs to
the active life, since the man and woman who embrace the married
life have to think "on the things of the world," as the Apostle says (1
Cor. 7:34). Without doubt therefore virginity is preferable to conjugal
continence.
Reply to Objection 1: Merit is measured not only by the kind of
action, but still more by the mind of the agent. Now Abraham had a
mind so disposed, that he was prepared to observe virginity, if it
were in keeping with the times for him to do so. Wherefore in him
conjugal continence was equally meritorious with the virginal
continence of John, as regards the essential reward, but not as
regards the accidental reward. Hence Augustine says (De Bono
Conjug. xxi) that both "the celibacy of John and the marriage of
Abraham fought Christ's battle in keeping with the difference of the
times: but John was continent even in deed, whereas Abraham was
continent only in habit."
Reply to Objection 2: Though virginity is better than conjugal
continence, a married person may be better than a virgin for two
reasons. First, on the part of chastity itself; if to wit, the married
person is more prepared in mind to observe virginity, if it should be
expedient, than the one who is actually a virgin. Hence Augustine
(De Bono Conjug. xxii) charges the virgin to say: "I am no better than
Abraham, although the chastity of celibacy is better than the chastity
of marriage." Further on he gives the reason for this: "For what I do
now, he would have done better, if it were fitting for him to do it then;
and what they did I would even do now if it behooved me now to do
it." Secondly, because perhaps the person who is not a virgin has
some more excellent virtue. Wherefore Augustine says (De Virgin.
xliv): "Whence does a virgin know the things that belong to the Lord,
however solicitous she be about them, if perchance on account of
some mental fault she be not yet ripe for martyrdom, whereas this
woman to whom she delighted in preferring herself is already able to
drink the chalice of the Lord?"
Reply to Objection 3: The common good takes precedence of the
private good, if it be of the same genus: but it may be that the private
good is better generically. It is thus that the virginity that is
consecrated to God is preferable to carnal fruitfulness. Hence
Augustine says (De Virgin. ix): "It must be confessed that the

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.151, C.5.

fruitfulness of the flesh, even of those women who in these times
seek naught else from marriage but children in order to make them
servants of Christ, cannot compensate for lost virginity."