old." Then the Evangelist, to rouse the hearer, has added,

John 21:19
"This spoke He, signifying by what death he should glorify God."
He said not, "Should die," but, "Should glorify God," that you may learn,
that to suffer for Christ, is glory and honor to the sufferer.
"And when He had spoken this, He says, Follow Me."
Here again He alludes to his tender carefulness, and to his being very
closely attached to Himself. And if any should say, "How then did James receive
the chair at Jerusalem?" I would make this reply, that He appointed Peter
teacher, not of the chair, but of the world.

John 21:20-21
"Then Peter turning about, sees the disciple whom Jesus loved following; who
also leaned on His breast at supper; and says, Lord, and what shall this man
do?"
2. Wherefore has he reminded us of that reclining? Not without cause or in
a chance way, but to show us what boldness Peter had after the denial. For he
who then did not dare to question Jesus, but committed the office to another, was
even entrusted with the chief authority over the brethren, and not only does not
commit to another what relates to himself, but himself now puts a question to his
Master concerning another. John is silent, but Peter speaks. He shows also here
the love which he bare towards him; for Peter greatly loved John, as is clear
from what followed, and their close union is shown through the whole Gospel,
and in the Acts. When therefore Christ had foretold great things to him, and
committed the world to him, and spoke beforehand of his martyrdom, and
testified that his love was greater than that of the others, desiring to have John
also to share with him, he said, "And what shall this man do?" "Shall he not
come the same way with us?" And as at that other time not being able himself to
ask, he puts John forward, so now desiring to make him a return, and supposing
that he would desire to ask about the matters pertaining to himself, but had not
courage, he himself undertook the questioning. What then says Christ?

John 21:22
"If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to you?"
Since he spoke from strong affection, and wishing not to be torn away from
him, Christ, to show that however much he might love, he could not go beyond
His love, says, "If I will that he tarry— what is that to you?" By these words
teaching us not to be impatient, nor curious beyond what seems good to Him.
For because Peter was ever hot, and springing forward to enquiries such as this,
to cut short his warmth, and to teach him not to enquire farther, He says this.

John 21:23
"Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not
die; yet Jesus said not that he shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to you?"
"Do not thou on any account suppose," He says, "that I order your matters
after a single rule." And this He did to withdraw them from their unseasonable
sympathy for each other; for since they were about to receive the charge of the
world, it was necessary that they should no longer be closely associated together;
for assuredly this would have been a great loss to the world. Wherefore He says
unto him, "You have had a work entrusted to you, look to it, accomplish it, labor
and struggle. What if I will that he tarry here? Look thou to and care for your
own matters." And observe, I pray you, here also the absence of pride in the
Evangelist; for having mentioned the opinion of the disciples, he corrects it, as
though they had not comprehended what Jesus meant. "Jesus said not," he tells
us, "that 'he shall not die, but, If I will that he tarry.'"