On St. Babylas
1. I was anxious today to pay the debt which I promised you when I was
lately here. But what am I to do? In the meanwhile, the blessed Babylas has
appeared, and has called me to himself, uttering no voice, but attracting our
attention by the brightness of his countenance. Be not, therefore, displeased at
the delay in my payment; at all events, the longer the time is, the more the
interest will increase. For we will deposit this money with interest. [Luke 19:23]
Since thus did the master command who entrusted it to us. Being confident,
therefore, about what is lent, that both the principal and the profit await you, let
us not pass by the gain which falls in our way today, but revel in the noble
actions of the blessed Babylas.
How, indeed, he presided over the Church which is among us, and saved
that sacred ship, in storm, and in wave, and billow; and what a bold front he
showed to the emperor, and how he lay down his life for the sheep and
underwent that blessed slaughter; these things and such as these, we will leave to
the elder among our teachers, and to our common father, to speak of. For the
more remote matters, the aged can relate to you but as many things as happened
lately, and within our lifetime, these, I a young man will relate to you, I mean
those after death, those after the burial of the martyr, those which happened
while he remained in the suburbs of the city. And I know indeed that the Greeks
will laugh at my promise, if I promise to speak of the noble deeds after death and
burial of one who was buried, and had crumbled to dust. We shall not assuredly
on this account keep silence, but on this very account shall especially speak, in
order that by showing this marvel truly, we may turn their laughter upon their
own head. For of an ordinary man there would be no noble deeds after death.
But of a martyr, many and great deeds, not in order that he might become more
illustrious (for he has no need of glory from the multitude), but that thou, the

unbeliever may learn that the death of the martyrs is not death, but the beginning
of a better life, and the prelude of a more spiritual conversation, and a change
from the worse to the better. Do not then look at the fact, that the mere body of
the martyr lies destitute of energy of soul; but observe this, that a greater power
takes its place by the side of it, different from the soul itself— I mean the grace
of the Holy Spirit, which pleads to all on behalf of the resurrection, by means of
the wonders which it works. For if God has granted greater power to bodies dead
and crumbled to dust, than to all living, much more will he grant to them a better
life than the former, and a longer, at the time of the bestowal of his crowns; what
then are this saint's noble deeds? But be not disturbed, if we take our discourse a
little further back. For they who wish to display their portraits to advantage, do
not uncover them until they have placed the spectators a little way off from the
picture, making the view clearer by the distance. Do you then also have patience
with me while I direct my discourse into the past.
For when Julian who surpassed all in impiety, ascended the imperial throne,
and grasped the despotic sceptre, straightway he lifted up his hands against the
God who created him, and ignored his benefactor, and looking from the earth
beneath to the heavens, howled after the manner of mad dogs, who alike bay at
those who do not feed them and those who do feed them. But he rather was mad
with a more savage madness than theirs. For they indeed turn from, and hate
their friends and strangers alike. But this man used to fawn upon demons,
strangers to his salvation, and used to worship them with every mode of worship.
But his benefactor, and Saviour, and him who spared not the only Begotten, for
his sake, he turned from and used to hate, and made havoc of the cross, the very
thing which uplifted the whole world when it was lying prostrate, and drove
away the darkness on all sides, and brought in light more brilliant than the
sunbeams; nor yet even then did he desist from his frenzy, but promised that he
would tear the nation of the Galilæans, out of the midst of the world; for thus he
was wont to call us; and yet if he thought the names of the Christians an
abomination, and Christianity itself to be full of much shame, for what reason