that he calls it a "course" and a "ministry," on the one hand, showing it to be
glorious from its being a race, on the other, showing what was due from it, as
being a ministry. I am a minister: nothing more. Having comforted them, that
they might not grieve that he was so evil entreated, and having told them that he
endured those things "with joy," and having shown the fruits of them, then (and
not before) he brings in that which would give them pain, that he may not
overwhelm their minds. "And now behold," etc. "Wherefore I take you to record,
that I am pure from the blood of all men, because I have not shrunk from
declaring unto you the whole counsel of God" [Acts 20:25-27]: * * * that
(counsel) which concerns the present matter. "For I know this," etc. [Acts 20:29]
"What then," someone might say, "thinkest you yourself so great? If you should
depart, are we to die?" I say not this, he replies, that my absence causes this: but
what? That there should rise up against you certain of another sort: he says not,
"because of my departing," but "after my departing:" that is, after his going on
his journey.— And yet this thing has happened already: much more (then will it
happen) hereafter. Then we have the cause, "to draw away disciples after them."
[Acts 20:30]. That there are heresies, this is the cause, and no other than this.
Then comes also consolation. But if He "purchased" it "with His own blood," He
will assuredly stand forward in its defence. "Night and day," he says, "I cease
not to warn with tears." [Acts 20:31] This might well be said in our case also:
and though the speech seems to refer peculiarly to the teachers, it is common
also to the disciples. For what, though I speak and exhort and weep night and
day, while the disciple obeys not? Therefore it is that he says, "I take you to
record:" since also himself says, "I am pure from the blood of all men: for I have
not shunned to declare unto you." (v. 26, 27.) Why then, this only is to be a
teacher, to declare, to preach, to instruct, shrink from nothing, to exhort night
and day: but if, while one is doing all this, nothing comes of it, you know what
remains. Then you have another justification: "I am pure from the blood of all
men." Think not that these words are spoken to us only: for indeed this speech is
addressed to you also, that you should attend to the things spoken, that you

should not start away from the hearing. What can I do? Lo! each day I rend
myself with crying out, "Depart from the theatres:" and many laugh at us:
"Desist from swearing, from covetousness:" numberless are our exhortations, and
there is none to hear us. But I do not discourse during night? Fain would I do this
also in the night time, and at your tables, if it were possible that one could be
divided into ten thousand pieces, so as to be present with you and discourse. But
if once in the week we call to you, and you shrink back, and some of you do not
even come here, and you that do come, depart having received no profit—what
shall we do? Many I know even sneer at us, that we are forever discoursing
about the same things: so wearisome are we become to you by very satiety. But
for this not we are to blame, but the hearers may thank themselves. For he
indeed who is making good progress, rejoices to hear the same things always; it
seems to be his praises that he hears spoken: but he who does not wish to get on,
seems even to be annoyed, and though he hear the same thing but twice, it seems
to him that he is hearing it often.
"I am pure," he says, "from the blood of all men." [Acts 20:26] This was fit
and proper for Paul to say, but we dare not say it, conscious as we are of
numberless faults. Wherefore for him the ever vigilant, ever at hand, the man
enduring all things for the sake of the salvation of his disciples, it was fit and
proper to say this: but we must say that of Moses, "The Lord was angry with me
for your sakes" [Deuteronomy 3:26], because ye lead us also into many sins. For
when we are dispirited at seeing you make no progress, is not the greater part of
our strength struck down? For what, I ask you has been done? Lo! By the grace
of God we also have now passed the space of three years, not indeed night and
day exhorting you, but doing this, often every third day, or every seventh. What
more has come of it? We accuse, we rebuke, we weep, we are in anguish,
although not openly, yet in heart. But those (inward) tears are far more bitter
than these (outward ones): for these indeed bring a kind of relief to the feelings
of the sorrowful, whereas those aggravate it, and bind it fast. Since when there is
any cause of grief, and one cannot give vent to the sorrow, lest he should seem to