subduing lust, is overcome by money, often he does not in fact subdue lust, but
has received from nature the gift of suffering no great uneasiness of that sort; for
all are not equally inclined to it. Knowing then these things, and revolving
frequently with ourselves the example of the virgins, let us shun this evil wild
beast. For if virginity profited them nothing, but after countless toils and labors
they perished through the love of money, who shall deliver us if we fall into this
passion? Wherefore I beseech you to do all you can, both that you be not taken
captive by it, and that if taken, you continue not in captivity, but break asunder
those hard bonds. For so shall we be able to secure a footing in heaven and to
obtain the countless good things; whereunto may all we attain, through the grace
and love towards men of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father, with
the Holy Ghost, be glory, might, honor, now and for ever, and world without
end. Amen.

## Homily 24 on Second Corinthians

2 Corinthians 11:13
For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, fashioning themselves into
Apostles of Christ.
What do you say? They that preach Christ, they that take not money, they
that bring not in a different gospel, "false apostles?" 'Yes,' he says, and for this
very reason most of all, because they make pretense of all these things for the
purpose of deceiving. "Deceitful workers," for they do work indeed, but pull up
what has been planted. For being well aware that otherwise they would not be
well received, they take the mask of truth and so enact the drama of error. 'And
yet,' says one, 'they take no money.' That they may take greater things; that they
may destroy the soul. Yea rather, even that was a falsehood; and they took
money but did it secretly: and he shows this in what follows. And indeed he
already hinted this where he said, "that wherein they glory, they may be found
even as we:" [2 Corinthians 11:12] in what follows, however, he hinted it more
plainly, saying, "If a man devour you, if a man take you captive, if a man exalt
himself, you bear with him." [2 Corinthians 11:20] But at present he accuses
them on another account, saying, "fashioning themselves." They had only a
"fashion;" the skin of the sheep was but outside clothing.

2 Corinthians 11:14-15
"And no marvel; for if even Satan fashions himself into an angel of light, is
it a great thing if his ministers also fashion themselves as ministers of
righteousness?"
So that if one ought to marvel, this is what he ought to marvel at, and not at
their transformation. For when their teacher dares do any thing, no marvel that
the disciples also follow. But what is "an angel of light?" That has free liberty to
speak, that stands near to God. For there are also angels of darkness; those which
be the devil's, those dark and cruel ones. And the devil has deceived many so,
fashioning himself "into," not becoming, "an angel of light." So do also do these
bear about them the form of an Apostle, not the power itself, for this they cannot.
But nothing is so like the devil as to do things for display. But what is "a
ministry of righteousness?" That which we are who preach to you a Gospel
having righteousness. For he either means this, or else that they invest
themselves with the character of righteous men. How then shall we know them?
"By their works," as Christ said. Wherefore he is compelled to place his own
good deeds and their wickedness side by side, that the spurious may become
evident by the comparison. And when about again to enter upon his own praises,
he first accuses them, in order to show that such an argument was forced upon
him, lest any should accuse him for speaking about himself, and says,