THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.2.

knowledge and love, to which it is necessary for human nature to be
raised by grace. Thirdly, on account of the relation of Christ to the
human race. For Christ, as man, is the "Mediator of God and men,"
as is written, 1 Tim. 2:5; and hence it behooved Him to have grace
which would overflow upon others, according to Jn. 1:16: "And of
His fulness we have all received, and grace for grace."
Reply to Objection 1: Christ is the true God in Divine Person and
Nature. Yet because together with unity of person there remains
distinction of natures, as stated above (Question 2, Articles 1,2), the
soul of Christ. is not essentially Divine. Hence it behooves it to be
Divine by participation, which is by grace.
Reply to Objection 2: To Christ, inasmuch as He is the natural Son of
God, is due an eternal inheritance, which is the uncreated beatitude
through the uncreated act of knowledge and love of God, i.e. the
same whereby the Father knows and loves Himself. Now the soul
was not capable of this act, on account of the difference of natures.
Hence it behooved it to attain to God by a created act of fruition
which could not be without grace. Likewise, inasmuch as He was the
Word of God, He had the power of doing all things well by the Divine
operation. And because it is necessary to admit a human operation,
distinct from the Divine operation, as will be shown (Question 19,
Article 1), it was necessary for Him to have habitual grace, whereby
this operation might be perfect in Him.
Reply to Objection 3: The humanity of Christ is the instrument of the
Godhead---not, indeed, an inanimate instrument, which nowise acts,
but is merely acted upon; but an instrument animated by a rational
soul, which is so acted upon as to act. And hence the nature of the
action demanded that he should have habitual grace.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether in Christ there were virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that in Christ there were no virtues. For
Christ had the plenitude of grace. Now grace is sufficient for every
good act, according to 2 Cor. 12:9: "My grace is sufficient for thee."
Therefore there were no virtues in Christ.
Objection 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 1),
virtue is contrasted with a "certain heroic or godlike habit" which is
attributed to godlike men. But this belongs chiefly to Christ.
Therefore Christ had not virtues, but something higher than virtue.
Objection 3: Further, as was said above (FS, Question 65, Articles
1,2), all the virtues are bound together. But it was not becoming for
Christ to have all the virtues, as is clear in the case of liberality and
magnificence, for these have to do with riches, which Christ
spurned, according to Mt. 8:20: "The Son of man hath not where to
lay His head." Temperance and continence also regard wicked
desires, from which Christ was free. Therefore Christ had not the
virtues.
On the contrary, on Ps. 1:2, "But His will is in the law of the Lord," a
gloss says: "This refers to Christ, Who is full of all good." But a good
quality of the mind is a virtue. Therefore Christ was full of all virtue.
I answer that, As was said above (FS, Question 110, Articles 3,4), as
grace regards the essence of the soul, so does virtue regard its
power. Hence it is necessary that as the powers of the soul flow from
its essence, so do the virtues flow from grace. Now the more perfect
a principle is, the more it impresses its effects. Hence, since the
grace of Christ was most perfect, there flowed from it, in
consequence, the virtues which perfect the several powers of the
soul for all the soul's acts; and thus Christ had all the virtues.
Reply to Objection 1: Grace suffices a man for all whereby he is
ordained to beatitude; nevertheless, it effects some of these by
itself---as to make him pleasing to God, and the like; and some
others through the medium of the virtues which proceed from grace.
Reply to Objection 2: A heroic or godlike habit only differs from
virtue commonly so called by a more perfect mode, inasmuch as one