who yet love Him not. Not only, says he, shall you not persuade me to deny
Him, but, not even to love Him less. And if the powers above had not strength to
do this, who else should move him? Not, however, that he says this, as though
they were actually attempting it, but upon the supposition; wherefore also he
said, "I am persuaded." So then he did not wrestle, yet nevertheless he fears his
artifices; for hear what he says, "I fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled
Eve in his craftiness, your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is
toward Christ." [2 Corinthians 11:3] True, you will say, but he uses this word
touching himself also, where he says, "For I fear lest, by any means, after that I
have preached to others, I myself should be rejected." How then are you
"persuaded that no one shall separate you"? Perceivest thou that the expression
is that of lowliness and of humility? For he already dwelt in Heaven. And hence
also it was that he said, "For I know nothing against myself" [1 Corinthians 4:4];
and again, "I have finished the course." [2 Timothy 4:7] So that it was not with
regard to these matters that the devil placed obstacles in his way, but with
reference to the interests of the disciples. And why forsooth? Because in these
points he was not himself sole master, but also their own will. There the devil
prevailed in some cases; nay, neither there was it over him that he prevailed, but
over the indolence of persons who took no heed. If indeed, whether from
slothfulness, or anything else of the sort, he had failed to fulfill his own duty,
then had the devil prevailed over him; but if he himself on his part did all he
could, and they obeyed not it was not over him he prevailed, but over their
disobedience; and the disease prevailed not over the physician, but over the
unruliness of the patient; for, when the physician takes every precaution, and the
patient undoes all, the patient is defeated, not the physician. Thus then in no
instance did he prevail over Paul. But in our own case, it is matter for
contentment that we should be so much as able to wrestle. For the Romans
indeed this is not what he asks, but what? "He shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly." [Romans 16:20] And for these Ephesians he invokes, "Him that is able
to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think." [Ephesians 3:20] He

that wrestles is still held fast, but it is enough for him that he has not fallen.
When we depart hence, then, and not till then, will the glorious victory be
achieved. For instance, take the case of some evil lust. The extraordinary thing
would be, not even to entertain it, but to stifle it. If, however, this be not
possible, then though we may have to wrestle with it, and retain it to the last, yet
if we depart still wrestling, we are conquerors. For the case is not the same here
as it is with wrestlers; for there if you throw not your antagonist, you have not
conquered; but here if you be not thrown, you have conquered; if you are not
thrown, you have thrown him; and with reason, because there both strive for the
victory, and when the one is thrown, the other is crowned; here, however, it is
not thus, but the devil is striving for our defeat; when then I strip him of that
upon which he is bent, I am conqueror. For it is not to overthrow us, but to make
us share his overthrow that he is eager. Already then am I conqueror, for he is
already cast down, and in a state of ruin; and his victory consists not in being
himself crowned, but in effecting my ruin; so that though I overthrow him not,
yet if I be not overthrown, I have conquered. What then is a glorious victory? It
is, over and above, to trample him underfoot, as Paul did, by regarding the things
of this present world as nothing. Let us too imitate him, and strive to become
above them, and nowhere to give him a hold upon us. Wealth, possessions, vainglory, give him a hold. And oftentimes indeed this has roused him, and
oftentimes exasperated him. But what need is there of wrestling? What need of
engaging with him? He who is engaged in the act of wrestling has the issue in
uncertainty, whether he may not be himself defeated and captured. Whereas he
that tramples him under foot, has the victory certain.
Oh then, let us trample under foot the power of the devil; let us trample
under foot our sins, I mean everything that pertains to this life, wrath, lust, vainglory, every passion; that when we depart to that world, we may not be convicted
of betraying that power which God has given us; for thus shall we attain also the
blessings that are to come. But if in this we are unfaithful, who will entrust us
with those things which are greater? If we were not able to trample down one