have rolled yourselves in this mire, cease from such defilement, and restrain
your rage for such banquets, if even now we may by any means be able to have
God propitious to us, and to attain to the good things which have been promised:
which may we all obtain in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father
together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and for ever, and
world without end. Amen.

## Homily 26 on Hebrews

Hebrews 11:20-22
"By faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. By
faith, Jacob when he was a dying blessed both the sons of Joseph, and
worshipped leaning on the top of his staff. By faith, Joseph when he died made
mention of the departing of the children of Israel, and gave commandment
concerning his bones."
1. " Many prophets and righteous men" (it is said) "have desired to see
those things which you see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which you hear and have not heard them." [Matthew 13:17] Did then those
righteous men know all the things to come? Yea, most certainly. For if because
of the weakness of those who were not able to receive Him, the Son was not
revealed,— He was with good reason revealed to those conspicuous in virtue.
This Paul also says, that they knew "the things to come," that is the resurrection
of Christ.
Or he does not mean this: but that "By faith, concerning things to come"
[means] not [concerning] the world to come, but "concerning things to come" in
this world. For how [except by faith] could a man sojourning in a strange land,
give such blessings?
But on the other hand he obtained the blessing, and yet did not receive it.
You see that what I said with regard to Abraham, may be said also of Jacob, that
they did not enjoy the blessing, but the blessings went to his posterity, while he
himself obtained the "things to come." For we find that his brother rather
enjoyed the blessing. For [Jacob] spent all his time in servitude and working as a
hireling, and [amid] dangers, and plots, and deceits, and fears; and when he was
asked by Pharaoh, he says, "Few and evil have my days been" [Genesis 47:9];

while the other lived in independence and great security, and afterwards was an
object of terror to [Jacob]. Where then did the blessings come to their
accomplishment, save in the [world] to come?
Do you see that from the beginning the wicked have enjoyed things here,
but the righteous the contrary? Not however all. For behold, Abraham was a
righteous man, and he enjoyed things here as well, though with affliction and
trials. For indeed wealth was all he had, seeing all else relating to him was full of
affliction. For it is impossible that the righteous man should not be afflicted,
though he be rich: for when he is willing to be overreached, to be wronged, to
suffer all other things, he must be afflicted. So that although he enjoy wealth,
[yet is it] not without grief. Why? You ask. Because he is in affliction and
distress. But if at that time the righteous were in affliction, much more now.
"By Faith," he says, "Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to
come" (and yet Esau was the elder; but he puts Jacob first for his excellence). Do
you see how great was his Faith? Whence did he promise to his sons so great
blessings? Entirely from his having faith in God.
2. "By Faith, Jacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph."
Here we ought to set down the blessings entire, in order that both his faith and
his prophesying may be made manifest. "And worshipped leaning," he says,
"upon the top of his staff." Here, he means, he not only spoke, but was even so
confident about the future things, as to show it also by his act. For inasmuch as
another King was about to arise from Ephraim, therefore it is said, "And he
bowed himself upon the top of his staff." That is, even though he was now an old
man, "he bowed himself" to Joseph, showing the obeisance of the whole people
which was to be [directed] to him. And this indeed had already taken place,
when his brethren "bowed down" to him: but it was afterwards to come to pass
through the ten tribes. Do you see how he foretold the things which were to be
afterwards? Do you see how great faith they had? How they believed
"concerning the things to come"?
For some of the things here, the things present, are examples of patience