We must also observe, in comparing sin with punishment, that some
punishments are inseparable from offense of God, e.g. separation
from God; and some also are everlasting, e.g. the punishment of hell.
Therefore the punishment to which is connected offense of God is to
be shunned in the same way as sin; whereas that which is
everlasting is simply to be shunned more than sin. If, however, we
separate from these punishments the notion of offense, and
consider only the notion of punishment, they have the character of
malice, less than sin has as an offense against God: and for this
reason should cause less displeasure.
We must, however, take note that, although the contrite should be
thus disposed, yet he should not be questioned about his feelings,
because man cannot easily measure them. Sometimes that which
displeases least seems to displease most, through being more
closely connected with some sensible hurt, which is more known to
us.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether the sorrow of contrition can be too

great?
Objection 1: It would seem that the sorrow of contrition cannot be
too great. For no sorrow can be more immoderate than that which
destroys its own subject. But the sorrow of contrition, if it be so
great as to cause death or corruption of the body, is praiseworthy.
For Anselm says (Orat. lii): "Would that such were the exuberance of
my inmost soul, as to dry up the marrow of my body"; and Augustine
[De Contritione Cordis] confesses that "he deserves to blind his eyes
with tears." Therefore the sorrow of contrition cannot be too great.
Objection 2: Further, the sorrow of contrition results from the love of
charity. But the love of charity cannot be too great. Neither,
therefore, can the sorrow of contrition be too great.
Objection 3: On the contrary, Every moral virtue is destroyed by
excess and deficiency. But contrition is an act of a moral virtue, viz.
penance, since it is a part of justice. Therefore sorrow for sins can
be too great.
I answer that, Contrition, as regards the sorrow in the reason, i.e. the
displeasure, whereby the sin is displeasing through being an offense
against God, cannot be too great; even as neither can the love of
charity be too great, for when this is increased the aforesaid
displeasure is increased also. But, as regards the sensible sorrow,
contrition may be too great, even as outward affliction of the body
may be too great. In all these things the rule should be the
safeguarding of the subject, and of that general well-being which
suffices for the fulfillment of one's duties; hence it is written (Rm.
12:1): "Let your sacrifice be reasonable."
Reply to Objection 1: Anselm desired the marrow of his body to be
dried up by the exuberance of his devotion, not as regards the
natural humor, but as to his bodily desires and concupiscences.
And, although Augustine acknowledged that he deserved to lose the
use of his bodily eyes on account of his sins, because every sinner
deserves not only eternal, but also temporal death, yet he did not
wish his eyes to be blinded.
Reply to Objection 2: This objection considers the sorrow which is in