who preaches and has a right to receive. So that here is a man far better than
those who merely forego possessions. "Thus it is right to support the weak:" this
is (indeed) sympathy with the weak; for to give from the labors of others, is easy.
"And they fell on his neck," it says, "and wept." [Acts 20:37] He shows their
affection also by saying, "Upon his neck," as taking a last and yet a last embrace,
such was the love they conceived from his discourse, such the spell of love that
bound them. For if we groan when simply parting from each other, although we
know that we shall receive one another back again, what a tearing away of
themselves it must have been to them! Methinks Paul also wept. "Having torn
ourselves away," he says: he shows the violence of it by saying, "having torn
ourselves away from them." And with reason: otherwise they could never have
got to sea. What means, "We came with a straight course unto Coos?" Instead of
saying, "we did not go round nor make stay in other places." Then "unto
Rhodes." [Acts 21:1] See how he hastes on. And finding a ship sailing over unto
Phenicia. [Acts 21:2] Possibly that ship (in which they had come) was making a
stay there: wherefore they shifted to another, and not having found one going to
Cæsarea, but (finding this) for Phenice, they embarked in it (and pursued their
voyage), having left Cyprus also and Syria: but the expression, "having left it on
the left hand," is not said simply (in that meaning), but that they made speed not
to get to Syria either. "We landed at Tyre." [Acts 21:3] Then they tarry with the
brethren seven days. Now that they had come near to Jerusalem, they no longer
run. (b) "Who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to
Jerusalem." [Acts 21:4] Observe how, when the Spirit does not forbid, he
complies. They said, "Adventure not yourself into the theatre, and he did not
adventure" [Acts 19:31]: often they bore him off (from dangers), and he
complied: again he escaped by a window: and now, though numberless persons,
so to say, beseech him, both those at Tyre and those at Cæsarea, weeping also
and predicting numberless dangers, he refuses to comply. And yet it is not
(merely), they predicted the dangers, but "said by the Spirit." If then the Spirit
bade, why did he gainsay? "By the Spirit," that is, they knowing "by the Spirit"

(what would be the consequences, said to him): for of course it does not mean
that the exhortation they made was by the Spirit. For they did not simply foretell
to him the dangers (through the Spirit), but (added of themselves) that it
behooved him not to go up— sparing him. But "after we had accomplished the
days," i.e. had fulfilled the appointed days, "we separated, and went on our way:
they all bringing us on our way with wives and children." [Acts 21:5]— See how
great was the entreaty. And again they part with prayer. Also in Ptolemais they
stay one day, but in Cæsarea many. [Acts 21:6-8] (a) Now that they are near to
Jerusalem, they no longer hurry. For observe, I pray you, all the days. "After the
day of unleavened bread" they came "to Troas in five days" [Acts 20:6]; then
they there spent "seven;" in all, twelve: then to "Thasos," to "Mytilene," to
"Trogylium" and "over against Chios," and to "Samos" and "Miletus" [Acts
20:13-17]; eighteen in all. Then to "Cos," to "Rhodes," to "Patara," twenty-one:
then say five to "Tyre;" twenty-six: there "seven;" thirty-three; "Ptolemais,"
thirty-four; then to "Cæsarea, many days" [Acts 21:1-10]; and then, thereafter,
the prophet puts them up thence. (c) When Paul has heard that he has to suffer
numberless perils, then he is in haste, not flinging himself upon the dangers but
accounting it to be the command of the Spirit. (e) And Agabus does not say,
"They shall bind" Paul, that he may not seem to speak upon agreement (with
Paul), but "the man that owns this girdle" [Acts 21:11]— so then he had a girdle
also. But when they could not persuade him— this was why they wept— then
they "held their peace." Do you mark the resignation? Do you mark the
affection? "They held their peace," it says, "saying, The will of the Lord be
done." [Acts 21:12-14] (g) The Lord, say they, Himself will do that which is
pleasing in his sight. For they perceived that it was the will of God. Else Paul
would not be so bent (upon going)— he that on all (other occasions delivers
himself out of dangers. (d) "And after these, days," it says, "having taken up our
baggage"— i.e. having received the (supplies) necessary for the journey— "we
went up to Jerusalem." [Acts 21:15] "And there went with us also certain of the
disciples from Cæsarea, bringing us to one with whom we should lodge, one