2 Corinthians 7:5
"For even when we had come into Macedonia, our flesh had no relief."
For since he said, "our tribulation;" he both explains of what sort it was,
and magnifies it by his words, in order to show that the consolation and joys
received from them was great, seeing it had repelled so great a sorrow. "But we
were afflicted on every side."
How on every side? For "without were fightings," from the unbelievers;
"within were fears;" because of the weak among the believers, lest they should
be drawn aside. For not among the Corinthians only did these things happen, but
elsewhere also.

2 Corinthians 7:6-7
"Nevertheless He that comforts the lowly comforted us by the coming of
Titus."
For since he had testified great things of them in what he said, that he may
not seem to be flattering them he cites as witness Titus the brother , who had
come from them to Paul after the first Epistle to declare unto him the particulars
of their amendment. But consider, I pray you, how in every place he makes a
great matter of the coming of Titus. For he says also before, "Furthermore when
I came to Troas for the Gospel, I had no relief for my spirit because I found not
Titus my brother;" [c. ii. 12, 13] and in this place again "we were comforted," he
says, "by the coming of Titus." For he is desirous also of establishing the man in
their confidence and of making him exceedingly dear to them. And observe how
he provides for both these things. For by saying on the one hand, "I had no relief
for my spirit," he shows the greatness of his virtue; and by saying on the other,
that, in our tribulation his coming sufficed unto comfort; yet "not by his coming
only, but also by the comfort wherewith he was comforted in you," he endears the
man unto the Corinthians. For nothing does so produce and cement friendships
as the saying something sound and favorable of any one. And such he testifies
Titus did; when he says that 'by his coming he has given us wings with pleasure;
such things did he report of you. On this ground his coming made us glad. For
we were delighted not "only by his coming, but also for the comfort wherewith
he was comforted in you." And how was he comforted? By your virtue, by your
good deeds.' Wherefore also he adds,
"While he told us your longing, your mourning, your zeal for me." 'These
things made him glad,' he says, 'these things comforted him.' Do you see how he
shows that he also is an earnest lover of theirs, seeing he considers their good
report as a consolation to himself; and when he had come, gloried, as though on

account of his own good things, unto Paul.
And observe with what warmth of expression he reports these things, "Your
longing, your mourning, your zeal." For it was likely that they would mourn and
grieve why the blessed Paul was so much displeased, why he had kept away
from them so long. And therefore he did not say simply tears, but "mourning;"
nor desire, but "longing;" nor anger, but "zeal;" and again "zeal toward him,"
which they displayed both about him that had committed fornication and about
those who were accusing him. 'For,' says he, 'you were inflamed and blazed out
on receiving my letters.' On these accounts he abounds in joy, on these accounts
he is filled with consolation, because he made them feel. It seems to me,
however, that these things are said not only to soften what has gone before, but
also in encouragement of those who had acted in these things virtuously. For
although I suppose that some were obnoxious to those former accusations and
unworthy of these praises; nevertheless, he does not distinguish them, but makes
both the praises and the accusations common, leaving it to the conscience of his
hearers to select that which belongs to them. For so both the one would be void
of offense, and the other lead them on to much fervor of mind.
4. Such also now should be the feelings of those who are reprehended; thus
should they lament and mourn; thus yearn after their teachers; thus, more than
fathers, seek them. For by those indeed living comes, but by these good living.
Thus ought they to bear the rebukes of their fathers, thus to sympathize with
their rulers on account of those that sin. For it does not rest all with them, but
with you also. For if he that has sinned perceives that he was rebuked indeed by
his father, but flattered by his brethren; he becomes more easy of mind. But
when the father rebukes, be thou too angry as well, whether as concerned for
your brother or as joining in your father's indignation; only be the earnestness
you show great; and mourn, not that he was rebuked, but that he sinned. But if I
build up and thou pull down, what profit have we had but labor? [Sirach 34:23]
Yea, rather, your loss stops not here, but you bring also punishment on yourself.
For he that hinders the wound from being healed is punished not less than he that