THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.4.

Wherefore, also (Jn. 4:14), it is said: "Sin no more, lest some worse
thing happen to thee." Whence, says Chrysostom, "we learn that his
sickness was the result of sin."
Nevertheless, as Chrysostom says on Mt. 9:5: "By how much a soul
is of more account than a body, by so much is the forgiving of sins a
greater work than healing the body; but because the one is unseen
He does the lesser and more manifest thing in order to prove the
greater and more unseen."
Reply to Objection 4: On Mt. 9:30, "See that no man know this,"
Chrysostom says: "If in another place we find Him saying, 'Go and
declare the glory of God' (cf. Mk. 5:19; Lk. 8:39), that is not contrary
to this. For He instructs us to forbid them that would praise us on
our own account: but if the glory be referred to God, then we must
not forbid, but command, that it be done."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.44, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether Christ worked miracles fittingly on

irrational creatures?
Objection 1: It would seem that Christ worked miracles unfittingly on
irrational creatures. For brute animals are more noble than plants.
But Christ worked a miracle on plants as when the fig-tree withered
away at His command (Mt. 21:19). Therefore Christ should have
worked miracles also on brute animals.
Objection 2: Further, punishment is not justly inflicted save for fault.
But it was not the fault of the fig-tree that Christ found no fruit on it,
when fruit was not in season (Mk. 11:13). Therefore it seems unfitting
that He withered it up.
Objection 3: Further, air and water are between heaven and earth.
But Christ worked some miracles in the heavens, as stated above
(Article 2), and likewise in the earth, when it quaked at the time of His
Passion (Mt. 27:51). Therefore it seems that He should also have
worked miracles in the air and water, such as to divide the sea, as
did Moses (Ex. 14:21); or a river, as did Josue (Josue 3:16) and Elias
(4 Kgs. 2:8); and to cause thunder to be heard in the air, as occurred
on Mount Sinai when the Law was given (Ex. 19:16), and like to what
Elias did (3 Kgs. 18:45).
Objection 4: Further, miraculous works pertain to the work of Divine
providence in governing the world. But this work presupposes
creation. It seems, therefore, unfitting that in His miracles Christ
made use of creation: when, to wit, He multiplied the loaves.
Therefore His miracles in regard to irrational creatures seem to have
been unfitting.
On the contrary, Christ is "the wisdom of God" (1 Cor. 1:24), of
whom it is said (Wis. 8:1) that "she ordereth all things sweetly."
I answer that, As stated above, Christ's miracles were ordained to
the end that He should be recognized as having Divine power, unto
the salvation of mankind. Now it belongs to the Divine power that
every creature be subject thereto. Consequently it behooved Him to
work miracles on every kind of creature, not only on man, but also
on irrational creatures.