them remember Paul's tears, and groan: as many of you as are counted blest, as
many as are in bridal chambers, as many as are in pleasure, remember these; as
many as are in mourning, exchange tears for tears. He mourned not for the dead;
but for those that were perishing while alive. Shall I tell of other tears? Timothy
also wept; for he was this man's disciple; wherefore also when writing to him he
said, "Remembering your tears, that I may be filled with joy." [2 Timothy 1:4]
Many weep even from pleasure. So it is also a matter of pleasure, and that of the
utmost intensity. So the tears are not painful: yea, the tears that flow from such
sorrow are even better far than those due to worldly pleasure. Hear the Prophet
saying, "The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, he has heard the voice of
my supplication." [Psalm 6:8] For where is the tear not useful? In prayers? In
exhortations? We get them an ill name, by using them not to what they are given
us for. When we entreat a sinning brother, we ought to weep, grieving and
groaning; when we exhort any one, and he gives us no heed, but goes on
perishing, we ought to weep. These are the tears of heavenly wisdom. When
however one is in poverty, or bodily disease, or dead, not so; for these are not
things worthy of tears.
As then we gain an ill name for laughter also, when we use it out of season;
so too do we for tears, by having recourse to them unseasonably. For the virtue
of each thing then discovers itself when it is brought to its own fitting work, but
when to one that is alien, it does no longer so. For instance, wine is given for
cheerfulness, not drunkenness, bread for nourishment, sexual intercourse for the
procreation of children. As then these things have gained an ill name, so also
have tears. Be there a law laid down, that they be used in prayers and
exhortations only, and see how desirable a thing they will become. Nothing does
so wipe out sins, as tears. Tears show even this bodily countenance beautiful; for
they win the spectator to pity, they make it respected in our eyes. Nothing is
sweeter than tearful eyes. For this is the noblest member we have, and the most
beautiful, and the soul's own. And therefore we are so bowed therewith, as
though we saw the soul itself lamenting.

I have not spoken these things without a reason; but in order that you may
cease your attendance at weddings, at dancings, at Satanical performances. For
see what the devil has invented. Since nature itself has withheld women from the
stage, and the disgraceful things enacted there, he has introduced into the
women's apartment the furniture of the theater, I mean, wanton men and harlots.
This pestilence the custom of marriages has introduced, or rather, not of
marriages, far be it, but of our own silliness. What is it you do, O man? Do you
not know what you are at? Thou marriest a wife for chastity, and procreation of
children; what then mean these harlots? That there may be, one answers, greater
gladness. And yet is not this rather madness? Thou insultest your bride, you
insult the women that are invited. For if they are delighted with such
proceedings, the thing is an insult. If to see harlots acting indecorously confers
any honor, wherefore do you not drag your bride also there, that she too may
see? It is quite indecent and disgraceful to introduce into one's house lewd
fellows and dancers, and all that Satanic pomp.
"Remember," he says, "my bonds." Marriage is a bond, a bond ordained of
God, a harlot is a severing and a dissolving. It is permitted you to embellish
marriage with other things, such as full tables, and apparel. I do not cut off these
things, lest I should seem to be clownish to an extreme; and yet Rebecca was
content with her veil only [Genesis 24:65]; still I do not cut them off. It is
permitted you to embellish and set off marriage with apparel, with the presence
of reverend men and reverend women. Why do you introduce those mockeries?
why those monsters? Tell us what it is you hear from them? What? Do you blush
to tell? Do you blush, and yet force them to do it? If it is honorable, wherefore
do you not do it yourself as well? But if disgraceful, wherefore do you compel
another? Everything should be full of chasteness, of gravity, of orderliness; but I
see the reverse, people frisking like camels and mules. For the virgin, her
chamber is the only befitting place. "But," says one, "she is poor." Because she is
poor, she ought to be modest also; let her have her character in the place of a
fortune. Has she no dowry to give with herself? Then why do you make her