it in their power not to do it; but those who do it not shall receive the just judgment of God, because
they did not work good when they had it in their power so to do.
2. But if some had been made by nature bad, and others good, these latter would not be deserving
of praise for being good, for such were they created; nor would the former be reprehensible, for
thus they were made [originally]. But since all men are of the same nature, able both to hold fast
and to do what is good; and, on the other hand, having also the power to cast it from them and not
to do it,—some do justly receive praise even among men who are under the control of good laws
(and much more from God), and obtain deserved testimony of their choice of good in general, and
of persevering therein; but the others are blamed, and receive a just condemnation, because of their
rejection of what is fair and good. And therefore the prophets used to exhort men to what was good,
to act justly and to work righteousness, as I have so largely demonstrated, because it is in our power
so to do, and because by excessive negligence we might become forgetful, and thus stand in need
of that good counsel which the good God has given us to know by means of the prophets.
3. For this reason the Lord also said, "Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good deeds, and glorify your Father who is in heaven." And, "Take heed to yourselves,
lest perchance your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and worldly cares."
And, "Let your loins be girded about, and your lamps burning, and ye like unto men that wait for
their Lord, when He returns from the wedding, that when He cometh and knocketh, they may open
to Him. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when He cometh, shall find so doing." And
again, "The servant who knows his Lord's will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes."
And, "Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say?" And again, "But if the
servant say in his heart, The Lord delayeth, and begin to beat his fellow-servants, and to eat, and
drink, and to be drunken, his Lord will come in a day on which he does not expect Him, and shall
cut him in sunder, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites." All such passages demonstrate
the independent will of man, and at the same time the counsel which God conveys to him, by
which He exhorts us to submit ourselves to Him, and seeks to turn us away from [the sin of] unbelief
against Him, without, however, in any way coercing us.
4. No doubt, if any one is unwilling to follow the Gospel itself, it is in his power [to reject it],
but it is not expedient. For it is in man's power to disobey God, and to forfeit what is good; but
[such conduct] brings no small amount of injury and mischief. And on this account Paul says, "All