from the Lord the Spirit. See how here also he calls the Spirit, Lord. And in
other places too one may see that lordship of His. For, says he, "As they
ministered and fasted unto the Lord, the Spirit said, Separate me Paul and
Barnabas." [Acts 13:2] For therefore he said, "as they ministered unto the Lord,
Separate me," in order to show the [Spirit's] equality in honor. And again Christ
says, "The servant knows not what his lord does;" but even as a man knows his
own things, so does the Spirit know the things of God; not by being taught
[them,] for so the similitude holds not good. Also the working as He wills shows
His authority and lordship. This transforms us. This suffers not to be conformed
to this world; for such is the creation of which This is the Author. For as he says,
"Created in Christ Jesus," [Ephesians 2:10] so says he, "Create in me a clean
heart, O God, and renew a right spirit in my inward parts." [Psalm 51:10,
Septuagint]
6. Will you that I show you this also from the Apostles more obviously to
the sense. Consider Paul, whose garments wrought: Peter, whose very shadows
were mighty. [Acts 19:12; 5:15] For had they not borne a King's image and their
radiancy been unapproachable, their garments and shadows had not wrought so
mightily. For the garments of a king are terrible even to robbers. Would you see
this beaming even through the body? "Looking steadfastly," said he, "upon the
face of Stephen, they saw it as it had been the face of an angel." [Acts 6:15] But
this was nothing to the glory flashing within. For what Moses had upon his
countenance, that did these carry about with them on their souls, yea 'rather' even
far more. For that of Moses indeed was more obvious to the senses, but this was
incorporeal. And like as fire-bright bodies streaming down from the shining
bodies upon those which lie near them, impart to them also somewhat of their
own splendor, so truly does it also happen with the faithful. Therefore surely
they with whom it is thus are set free from earth, and have their dreams of the
things in the heavens. Woe is me! For well is it that we should here even groan
bitterly, for that we who enjoy a birth so noble do not so much as know what is
said, because we quickly lose the reality, and are dazzled about the objects of

sense. For this glory, the unspeakable and awful, remains in us for a day or two,
and then we quench it, bringing over it the winter of worldly concerns, and with
the thickness of those clouds repelling its rays. For worldly things are a winter,
and than winter more lowering. For not frost is engendered thence nor rain,
neither does it produce mire and deep swamps; but, things than all these more
grievous, it forms hell and the miseries of hell. And as in severe frost all the
limbs are stiffened and are dead, so truly the soul shuddering in the winter of
sins also, performs none of its proper functions, stiffened, as it were, by a frost,
as to conscience. For what cold is to the body, that an evil conscience is to the
soul, whence also comes cowardice. For nothing is more cowardly than the man
that is rivetted to worldly things; for such an one lives the life of Cain, trembling
every day. And why do I mention deaths, and losses, and offenses, and flatteries,
and services? For even without these he is in fear of ten thousand vicissitudes.
And his coffers indeed are full of gold, but his soul is not freed from the fear of
poverty. And very reasonably. For he is moored as it were on rotten and swiftly
shifting things, and even though in his own case he experienced not the reverse,
yet is he undone by seeing it happen in others; and great is his cowardice, great
his unmanliness. For not only is such an one spiritless as to danger, but also as to
all other things. And if desire of wealth assail him, he does not like a free man
beat off the assault; but like a bought slave, does all [it bids], serving the love of
money as it were a severe mistress. If again he have beheld some comely
damsel, down he crouches at once made captive, and follows like a raging dog,
though it behooves to do the opposite. For when you have beheld a beautiful
woman, consider not how you may enjoy your lust, but how be delivered from
your lust. 'And how is this possible,' says one? 'for loving is not my own doing.'
Whose then? Tell me. It is from the Devil's malice. You are quite convinced that
that which plots against you is a devil; wrestle then and fight with a distemper.
But I cannot, he says. Come then, let us first teach you this, that what happens is
from your own listlessness, and that thou at the first gavest entrance to the Devil,
and now if you have a mind, with much ease may drive him off. They that