appearance: nevertheless, hear what Paul says of them after grace came: "That
which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that
surpasses." [2 Corinthians 3:10]
But that what I say may be made yet clearer, let us apply the argument to
some one of the rites then performed, and then you will see how great is the
difference. And if you will, let us bring forward that passover and this, and then
shall you be aware of our superiority. For the Jews indeed celebrated it, but they
celebrated it "so as in a mirror, and darkly." But these hidden mysteries they
never at any time did even conceive in their mind, nor what things they
prefigured. They saw a lamb slain, and the blood of a beast, and door-posts
sprinkled with it; but that the Son of God incarnate shall be slain, and shall set
free the whole world, and shall grant both to Greeks and Barbarians to taste of
this Blood, and shall open heaven to all, and shall offer what is there to the
whole human race, and having taken His blood-stained flesh shall exalt it above
the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, and, in a word, above all the hosts on
high, of the angels and archangels and all the other powers, and shall cause it
shining in unspeakable glory—to sit down upon the throne itself of the King, on
the right hand of the Father these things, I say, no one, either of them or of the
rest of mankind, either foreknew or was able ever to conceive.
4. But what say those who shrink from nothing? That the expression, "now I
know in part," is spoken in dispensations; for that the Apostle had the perfect
knowledge of God. And now he calls himself a child? How sees he "in a
mirror?" How "darkly," if he has the sum of knowledge? And why does he refer
to it as something peculiar to the Spirit, and to no other power in the creation,
saying, "For who among men knows the things of a man, save the spirit of the
man which is in him? Even so the things of God none knows, save the Spirit of
God." [1 Corinthians 2:11] And Christ again says that this belongs to Himself
alone, thus saying, "Not that any man has seen the Father, save He which is from
God, He has seen the Father," [John 6:46] giving the name, "sight," to the most
clear and perfect knowledge.

And how shall he who knows the Essence, be ignorant of the dispensations?
Since that knowledge is greater than this.
"Are we then," says he, "ignorant of God?" Far from it. That He is, we
know, but what He is, as regards His Essence, we know not yet. And that you
may understand that not concerning the dispensations did he speak the words,
"now I know in part," hear what follows. He adds then, "but then shall I know,
even as also I have been known." He was surely known not by the dispensations,
but by God.
Let none therefore consider this to be a small or simple transgression, but
twofold, and threefold, yea and manifold. For not only is there this impiety that
they boast of knowing those things which belong to the Spirit alone; and to the
only-begotten Son of God, but also that when Paul could not acquire even this
knowledge "which is in part" without the revelation from above, these men say
that they have obtained the whole from their own reasonings. For neither are
they able to point out that the Scripture has any where discoursed to us of these
things.
5. But however, leaving their madness, let us give heed to the words which
follow concerning love. For he was not content with these things, but adds again,
saying,