then it best keeps its own proper rank.
Ver. 13. "Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness
unto sin...but as instruments of righteousness."
The body then is indifferent between vice and virtue, as also instruments (or
arms) are. But either effect is wrought by him that uses it. As if a soldier fighting
in his country's behalf, and a robber who was arming against the inhabitants, had
the same weapons for defence. For the fault is not laid to the suit of armor, but to
those that use it to an ill end. And this one may say of the flesh too which
becomes this or that owing to the mind's decision, not owing to its own nature.
For if it be curious after the beauty of another, the eye becomes an instrument of
iniquity, not through any agency of its own (for what is of the eye, is but seeing,
not seeing amiss), but through the fault of the thought which commands it. But if
you bridle it, it becomes an instrument of righteousness. Thus with the tongue,
thus with the hands, thus with all the other members. And he well calls sin
unrighteousness. For by sinning a man deals unrighteously either by himself or
by his neighbor, or rather by himself more than by his neighbor. Having then led
us away from wickedness, he leads us to virtue, in these words:
"But yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead."
See how by his bare words he exhorts them, on that side naming "sin" and
on this "God." For by showing what a difference there is between the rulers, he
casts out of all excuse the soldier that leaves God, and desires to serve under the
dominion of sin. But it is not only in this way, but also by the sequel, that he
establishes this; by saying, "as alive from the dead." For by these he shows the
wretchedness of the other, and the greatness of God's gift. For consider, he says,
what you were, and what you have been made. What then were ye? Dead, and
ruined by a destruction which could not from any quarter be repaired. For neither
was there any one who had the power to assist you. And what have you been
made out of those dead ones? Alive with immortal life. And by whom? By the
all-powerful God. You ought therefore to marshal yourselves under Him with as
much cheerful readiness, as men would who had been made alive from being

dead.
"And your members as instruments of righteousness."
Hence, the body is not evil, since it may be made an arm of righteousness.
But by calling it an arm, he makes it clear that there is a hard warfare at hand for
us. And for this reason we need strong armor, and also a noble spirit, and one
acquainted too with the ways of this warfare; and above all we need a
commander. The Commander however is standing by, ever ready to help us, and
abiding unconquerable, and has furnished us with strong arms likewise. Farther,
we have need of a purpose of mind to handle them as should be, so that we may
both obey our Commander, and take the field for our country. Having then given
us this vigorous exhortation, and reminded us of arms, and battle, and wars, see
how he encourages the soldier again and cherishes his ready spirit.
Ver. 14. "For sin shall no more have dominion over you; for you are not
under the Law, but under grace."
If then sin has no more dominion over us, why does he lay so great a charge
upon them as he does in the words, "Let not sin reign in your mortal body," and,
"yield not ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin?" What
does that here said mean then? He is sowing a kind of seed in this statement,
which he means to develop afterwards, and to cultivate in a powerful argument.
What then is this statement? It is this; that our body, before Christ's coming, was
an easy prey to the assaults of sin. For after death a great swarm of passions
entered also. And for this cause it was not lightsome for running the race of
virtue. For there was no Spirit present to assist, nor any baptism of power to
mortify. [John 7:39] But as some horse (Plato Phædr. §74) that answers not the
rein, it ran indeed, but made frequent slips, the Law meanwhile announcing what
was to be done and what not, yet not conveying into those in the race anything
over and above exhortation by means of words. But when Christ had come, the
effort became afterwards more easy, and therefore we had a more distant goal
([μείζονα τὰ σκάμματα]) set us, in that the assistance we had given us was
greater. Wherefore also Christ says, "Unless your righteousness shall exceed the