myself;" yet we are not therefore compelled to admit that he was wont to
behold the face of God with his bodily eyes in any visible form, although
he had heard the voice of God questioning and speaking with him of his
sin. But what manner of speech it was that God then uttered to the
outward ears of men, especially in speaking to the first man, it is both
difficult to discover, and we have not undertaken to say in this discourse.
But if words alone and sounds were wrought, by which to bring about
some sensible presence of God to those first men, I do not know why I
should not there understand the person of God the Father, seeing that
His person is manifested also in that voice, when Jesus appeared in glory
on the mount before the three disciples; and in that when the dove
descended upon Him at His baptism;2 and in that where He cried to the
Father concerning His own glorification, and it was answered Him, "I
have both glorified, and will glorify again." Not that the voice could be
wrought without the work of the Son and of the Holy Spirit (since the
Trinity works indivisibly), but that such a voice was wrought as to
manifest the person of the Father only; just as the Trinity wrought that
human form from the Virgin Mary, yet it is the person of the Son alone;
for the invisible Trinity wrought the visible person of the Son alone.
Neither does anything forbid us, not only to understand those words
spoken to Adam as spoken by the Trinity, but also to take them as
manifesting the person of that Trinity. For we are compelled to
understand of the Father only, that which is said, "This is my beloved
Son." For Jesus can neither be believed nor understood to be the Son of
the Holy Spirit, or even His own Son. And where the voice uttered, "I
have both glorified, and will glorify again," we confess it was only the
person of the Father; since it is the answer to that word of the Lord, in
which He had said, "Father, glorify thy Son," which He could not say
except to God the Father only, and not also to the Holy Spirit, whose Son
He was not. But here, where it is written, "And the Lord God said to
Adam," no reason can be given why the Trinity itself should not be
understood.
19. Likewise, also, in that which is written, "Now the Lord had said unto
Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and thy
father's house," it is not clear whether a voice alone came to the ears of
Abraham, or whether anything also appeared to his eyes. But a little while

after, it is somewhat more clearly said, "And the Lord appeared unto
Abraham, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this land." But neither there
is it expressly said in what form God appeared to him, or whether the
Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit appeared to him. Unless, perhaps,
they think that it was the Son who appeared to Abraham, because it is not
written, God appeared to him, but "the Lord appeared to him." For the
Son seems to be called the Lord as though the name was appropriated to
Him; as e.g. the apostle says, "For though there be that are called gods,
whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many and lords many,)
but to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we
in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
Him." But since it is found that God the Father also is called Lord in
many places,—for instance, "The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my
Son; this day have I begotten Thee;" and again, "The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand;" since also the Holy Spirit is found to be
called Lord, as where the apostle says, "Now the Lord is that Spirit;" and
then, lest any one should think the Son to be signified, and to be called
the Spirit on account of His incorporeal substance, has gone on to say,
"And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty;" and no one ever
doubted the Spirit of the Lord to be the Holy Spirit: therefore, neither
here does it appear plainly whether it was any person of the Trinity that
appeared to Abraham, or God Himself the Trinity, of which one God it is
said, "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve."
But under the oak at Mamre he saw three men, whom he invited, and
hospitably received, and ministered to them as they feasted. Yet Scripture
at the beginning of that narrative does not say, three men appeared to
him, but, "The Lord appeared to him." And then, setting forth in due
order after what manner the Lord appeared to him, it has added the
account of the three men, whom Abraham invites to his hospitality in the
plural number, and afterwards speaks to them in the singular number as
one; and as one He promises him a son by Sara, viz. the one whom the
Scripture calls Lord, as in the beginning of the same narrative, "The
Lord," it says, "appeared to Abraham." He invites them then, and washes
their feet, and leads them forth at their departure, as though they were
men; but he speaks as with the Lord God, whether when a son is
promised to him, or when the destruction is shown to him that was
impending over Sodom.