poverty. I say poverty: since some of them that were with out, when it was in
their power to receive, for admiration's sake forbore to receive. But not so the
Apostles: that they were pure from vainglory, they showed by their doings: in
that, when some were calling them Gods and were ready to sacrifice-unto them
oxen with garlands, they did not merely just forbid what was doing, but they
even rent their clothes. [Acts 14:13-14] And after they had set the lame man
upright, when all with open mouths were gazing at them, they said, "Why look ye
so earnestly on us, as though by our own power we had made this man to walk
?" And those, among men who admired poverty, chose to themselves a state of
poverty: but these among persons who despised poverty and gave praise to
wealth. And these, if they received anything, ministered to the needy. Thus, not
vain-glory but benevolence, was the motive of all they did. But those quite the
reverse; as enemies and pests of our common nature, and no otherwise, did they
such things. Thus one sunk all his goods in the sea for no good purpose,
imitating fools and madmen: and another let all his land go to sheep common.
Thus they did every thing for vain-glory. But not so the Apostles; rather they
both received what was given them, and distributed to the needy with so great
liberality that they even lived in continual hunger. But if they had been enamored
of glory, they would not have practiced this, the receiving and distributing, for
fear of some suspicion arising against them. For he who throws away his own
for glory, will much more refuse to receive the things of others, that he may not
be accounted to stand in need of others nor incur any suspicion. But these you
see both ministering to the poor, and themselves begging for them. So truly were
they more loving than any fathers.
9. And observe also their laws, how moderate and freed from all vain-glory.
Thus: "Having" says he, food and covering, let us therewith be content. [1
Timothy 6:8] Not like him of Sinope , who clothed in rags and living in a cask to
no good end, astonished many, but profited none: whereas Paul did none of these
things; (for neither had he an eye to ostentation;) but was both clothed in
ordinary apparel with all decency, and lived in a house continually, and

displayed all exactness in the practice of all other virtue; which the cynic
despised, living impurely and publicly disgracing himself, and dragged away by
his mad passion for glory. For if any one ask the reason of his living in a cask, he
will find no other but vain-glory alone. But Paul also paid rent for the house
wherein he abode at Rome. Although he who was able to do things far severer,
could much more have had strength for this. But he looked not to glory, that
savage monster, that fearful demon, that pest of the world, that poisonous viper.
Since, as that animal tears through the womb of her parent with her teeth, so also
this passion tears in pieces him that begets it.
10. By what means then may one find a remedy for this manifold
distemper? By bringing forward those that have trodden it under foot, and with
an eye to their image so ordering one's own life. For so the patriarch Abraham.—
nay, let none accuse me of tautology if I often make mention of him, and on all
occasions: this being that which most of all shows him wonderful, and deprives
them that refuse to imitate him of all excuse. For, if we exhibit one doing well in
this particular, and another in that, some one might say that virtue is hardly to be
attained; for that it is scarcely possible to succeed in all those things together,
whereof each one of the saints has performed only a part. But when one and the
same person is found to possess all, what excuse will they have, who after the
law and grace are not able to attain unto the same measure with them that were
before the law and grace? How then did this Patriarch overcome and subdue this
monster, when he had a dispute with his nephew? [Genesis 13:8] For so it was,
that coming off worst and losing the first share, he was not vexed. But ye know
that in such matters the shame is worse than the loss to the vulgar-minded, and
particularly when a person having all in his own power, as he had then, and
having been the first to give honor, was not honored in return. Nevertheless,
none of these things vexed him, but he was content to receive the second place,
and when wronged by the young man, himself old, an uncle by a nephew, he was
not indignant nor took it ill, but loved him equally and ministered to him. Again,
having been victorious in that great and terrible fight, and having mightily put to