255. The Synod Fathers spoke of the importance of respect for religious freedom, viewed as a
fundamental human right. This includes “the freedom to choose the religion which one judges
to be true and to manifest one’s beliefs in public”. A healthy pluralism, one which genuinely
respects differences and values them as such, does not entail privatizing religions in an attempt to
reduce them to the quiet obscurity of the individual’s conscience or to relegate them to the
enclosed precincts of churches, synagogues or mosques. This would represent, in effect, a new
form of discrimination and authoritarianism. The respect due to the agnostic or non-believing
minority should not be arbitrarily imposed in a way that silences the convictions of the believing
majority or ignores the wealth of religious traditions. In the long run, this would feed resentment
rather than tolerance and peace.

256. When considering the effect of religion on public life, one must distinguish the different ways
in which it is practiced. Intellectuals and serious journalists frequently descend to crude and
superficial generalizations in speaking of the shortcomings of religion, and often prove incapable
of realizing that not all believers – or religious leaders – are the same. Some politicians take
advantage of this confusion to justify acts of discrimination. At other times, contempt is shown for
writings which reflect religious convictions, overlooking the fact that religious classics can prove
meaningful in every age; they have an enduring power to open new horizons, to stimulate thought,
to expand the mind and the heart. This contempt is due to the myopia of a certain rationalism. Is it
reasonable and enlightened to dismiss certain writings simply because they arose in a context of
religious belief? These writings include principles which are profoundly humanistic and, albeit
tinged with religious symbols and teachings, they have a certain value for reason.

257. As believers, we also feel close to those who do not consider themselves part of any religious
tradition, yet sincerely seek the truth, goodness and beauty which we believe have their highest
expression and source in God. We consider them as precious allies in the commitment to
defending human dignity, in building peaceful coexistence between peoples and in protecting
creation. A special place of encounter is offered by new Areopagi such as the Court of the
Gentiles, where “believers and non-believers are able to engage in dialogue about fundamental
issues of ethics, art and science, and about the search for transcendence”. This too is a path
to peace in our troubled world.

258. Starting from certain social issues of great importance for the future of humanity, I have tried
to make explicit once again the inescapable social dimension of the Gospel message and to
encourage all Christians to demonstrate it by their words, attitudes and deeds.