THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.45, C.4.

He had been foretold by the Law, which Moses gave them, and by
the prophets, of whom Elias was the principal.
Reply to Objection 4: Lofty mysteries should not be immediately
explained to everyone, but should be handed down through
superiors to others in their proper turn. Consequently, as
Chrysostom says (on Mt. 17:3), "He took these three as being
superior to the rest." For "Peter excelled in the love" he bore to
Christ and in the power bestowed on him; John in the privilege of
Christ's love for him on account of his virginity, and, again, on
account of his being privileged to be an Evangelist; James on
account of the privilege of martyrdom. Nevertheless He did not wish
them to tell others what they had seen before His Resurrection;
"lest," as Jerome says on Mt. 17:19, "such a wonderful thing should
seem incredible to them; and lest, after hearing of so great glory,
they should be scandalized at the Cross" that followed; or, again,
"lest [the Cross] should be entirely hindered by the people" [Bede,
Hom. xviii; Catena Aurea]; and "in order that they might then be
witnesses of spiritual things when they should be filled with the Holy
Ghost" [Hilary, in Matth. xvii].

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.45, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether the testimony of the Father's voice,

saying, "This is My beloved Son," was fittingly added?
Objection 1: It would seem that the testimony of the Father's voice,
saying, "This is My beloved Son," was not fittingly added; for, as it is
written (Job 33:14), "God speaketh once, and repeateth not the
selfsame thing the second time." But the Father's voice had testified
to this at the time of (Christ's) baptism. Therefore it was not fitting
that He should bear witness to it a second time.
Objection 2: Further, at the baptism the Holy Ghost appeared under
the form of a dove at the same time as the Father's voice was heard.
But this did not happen at the transfiguration. Therefore it seems
that the testimony of the Father was made in an unfitting manner.
Objection 3: Further, Christ began to teach after His baptism.
Nevertheless, the Father's voice did not then command men to hear
him. Therefore neither should it have so commanded at the
transfiguration.
Objection 4: Further, things should not be said to those who cannot
bear them, according to Jn. 16:12: "I have yet many things to say to
you, but you cannot bear them now." But the disciples could not
bear the Father's voice; for it is written (Mt. 17:6) that "the disciples
hearing, fell upon their face, and were very much afraid." Therefore
the Father's voice should not have been addressed to them.
On the contrary is the authority of the Gospel.
I answer that, The adoption of the sons of God is through a certain
conformity of image to the natural Son of God. Now this takes place
in two ways: first, by the grace of the wayfarer, which is imperfect
conformity; secondly, by glory, which is perfect conformity,
according to 1 Jn. 3:2: "We are now the sons of God, and it hath not
yet appeared what we shall be: we know that, when He shall appear,
we shall be like to Him, because we shall see Him as He is." Since,
therefore, it is in baptism that we acquire grace, while the clarity of
the glory to come was foreshadowed in the transfiguration, therefore
both in His baptism and in His transfiguration the natural sonship of
Christ was fittingly made known by the testimony of the Father:
because He alone with the Son and Holy Ghost is perfectly