communion in the Spirit, if you have any tender mercies and compassions, fulfil
ye my joy. "If any tender mercies and compassions." Paul speaks of the concord
of his disciples as compassion towards himself, thus showing that the danger
was extreme, if they were not of one mind. If I can obtain comfort from you, if I
can obtain any consolation from our love, if I can communicate with you in the
Spirit, if I can have fellowship with you in the Lord, if I can find mercy and
compassion at your hands, show by your love the return of all this. All this have
I gained, if you love one another.
Ver. 2. "Fulfil ye my joy."
That the exhortation might not seem to be made to people who were still
deficient, see how he says not, "do me joy," but "fulfil my joy"; that is, You have
begun to plant it in me, you have already given me some portion of peacefulness,
but I desire to arrive at its fullness? Say, what would you? That we deliver you
from dangers? That we supply somewhat to your need? Not so, but "that you be
of the same mind, having the same love," in which you have begun, "being of
one accord, of one mind." Just see, how often he repeats the same thing by
reason of his great affection! "That ye be of the same mind," or rather, "that you
be of one mind." For this is more than "the same."
"Having the same love." That is, let it not be simply about faith alone, but
also in all other things; for there is such a thing as to be of the same mind, and
yet not to have love. "Having the same love," that is, love and be loved alike; do
not thou enjoy much love, and show less love, so as to be covetous even in this
matter; but do not suffer it in yourself. "Of one accord," he adds, that is,
appropriating with one soul, the bodies of all, not in substance, for that is
impossible, but in purpose and intention. Let all things proceed as from one soul.
What means "of one accord"? He shows when he says "of one mind." Let your
mind be one, as if from one soul.
Ver. 3. "Doing nothing through faction."
He finally demands this of them, and tells them the way how this may be.
"Doing nothing through faction or vainglory." This, as I always say, is the cause

of all evil. Hence come fightings and contentions. Hence come envyings and
strifes. Hence it is that love waxes cold, when we love the praise of men, when
we are slaves to the honor which is paid by the many, for it is not possible for a
man to be the slave of praise, and also a true servant of God. How then shall we
flee vainglory? For you have not yet told us the way. Listen then to what follows.
"But in lowliness of mind, each counting other better than himself." Oh how
full of true wisdom, how universal a gathering-word of our salvation is the
lesson he has put forth! If you deem, he means, that another is greater than
yourself, and persuadest yourself so, yea more, if you not only sayest it, but art
fully assured of it, then you assign him the honor, and if you assign him the
honor, you will not be displeased at seeing him honored by another. Do not then
think him simply greater than yourself, but "better," which is a very great
superiority, and thou dost not think it strange nor be pained thereby, if you see
him honored. Yea, though he treat you with scorn, thou dost bear it nobly, for
you have esteemed him greater than yourself. Though he revile you, thou dost
submit. Though he treat you ill, you bear it in silence. For when once the soul is
fully assured that he is greater, it falls not into anger when it is ill-treated by him,
nor yet into envy, for no one would envy those who are very far above himself,
for all things belong to his superiority.
Here then he instructs the one party to be thus minded. But when he too,
who enjoys such honor from you, is thus affected toward you, consider what a
double wall there is erected of gentle forbearance [comp. Philip. iv. 5.]; for when
you esteem him thus worthy of honor, and he you likewise, no painful thing can
possibly arise; for if this conduct when shown by one is sufficient to destroy all
strife, who shall break down the safeguard, when it is shown by both? Not even
the Devil himself. The defense is threefold, and fourfold, yea manifold, for
humanity is the cause of all good; and that you may learn this, listen to the
prophet, saying, "Had you desired sacrifice, I would have given it: You will not
delight in burnt offerings. The sacrifice for God is a broken spirit, a broken and
a contrite heart God will not despise." [Psalm 51:16-17] Not simply humility,