spend labor and time rather on those whom he understands.2 Yet let him
not think on that account that I ought to have been silent, because I have
not been able to express myself so smoothly and clearly to him as those
do whom he understands. For neither do all things, which all men have
written, come into the hands of all. And possibly some, who are capable
of understanding even these our writings, may not find those more lucid
works, and may meet with ours only. And therefore it is useful that many
persons should write many books, differing in style but not in faith,
concerning even the same questions, that the matter itself may reach the
greatest number—some in one way, some in another. But if he who
complains that he has not understood these things has never been able to
comprehend any careful and exact reasonings at all upon such subjects,
let him in that case deal with himself by resolution and study, that he may
know better; not with me by quarrellings and wranglings, that I may hold
my peace. Let him, again, who says, when he reads my book, Certainly I
understand what is said, but it is not true, assert, if he pleases, his own
opinion, and refute mine if he is able. And if he do this with charity and
truth, and take the pains to make it known to me (if I am still alive), I
shall then receive the most abundant fruit of this my labor. And if he
cannot inform myself, most willing and glad should I be that he should
inform those whom he can. Yet, for my part, "I meditate in the law of the
Lord," if not "day and night," at least such short times as I can; and I
commit my meditations to writing, lest they should escape me through
forgetfulness; hoping by the mercy of God that He will make me hold
steadfastly all truths of which I feel certain; "but if in anything I be
otherwise minded, that He will himself reveal even this to me," whether
through secret inspiration and admonition, or through His own plain
utterances, or through the reasonings of my brethren. This I pray for, and
this my trust and desire I commit to Him, who is sufficiently able to keep
those things which He has given me, and to render those which He has
promised.
6. I expect, indeed, that some, who are more dull of understanding, will
imagine that in some parts of my books I have held sentiments which I
have not held, or have not held those which I have. But their error, as
none can be ignorant, ought not to be attributed to me, if they have
deviated into false doctrine through following my steps without

apprehending me, whilst I am compelled to pick my way through a hard
and obscure subject: seeing that neither can any one, in any way, rightly
ascribe the numerous and various errors of heretics to the holy
testimonies themselves of the divine books; although all of them
endeavor to defend out of those same Scriptures their own false and
erroneous opinions. The law of Christ, that is, charity, admonishes me
clearly, and commands me with a sweet constraint, that when men think
that I have held in my books something false which I have not held, and
that same falsehood displeases one and pleases another, I should prefer
to be blamed by him who reprehends the falsehood, rather than praised
by him who praises it. For although I, who never held the error, am not
rightly blamed by the former, yet the error itself is rightly censured;
whilst by the latter neither am I rightly praised, who am thought to have
held that which the truth censures, nor the sentiment itself, which the
truth also censures. Let us therefore essay the work which we have
undertaken in the name of the Lord.