brings the cross in again, which had wrought these things, and in this way too he
puts us under an engagement. For you have not been freed merely, he means, but
it was through the Lord's death. For he says,
"You have become dead to the Law by the Body of Christ."
Now it is not on this only he grounds his exhortation, but also on the
superiority of this second husband. And so he proceeds: "that you should be
married to another, even to Him Who is raised from the dead."
Then to prevent their saying, If we do not choose to live with another
husband, what then? For the Law does not indeed make an adulteress of the
widow who lives in a second marriage, but for all that it does not force her to
live in it. Now that they may not say this, he shows that from benefits already
conferred, it is binding on us to choose it: and this he lays down more clearly in
other passages, where he says, "You are not your own;" and, "You are bought
with a price;" and, "Be not ye the servants of men" [1 Corinthians 6:19-20;
7:23]; and again, "One died for all, that they which live should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto Him which died for them." [2 Corinthians 5:15]
This is then what he here alludes to in the words, "By the Body." And next he
exhorts to better hopes, saying, "That we should bring forth fruit unto God." For
then, he means, you brought forth fruit unto death, but now unto God.
Ver. 5. "For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by
the Law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death."
You see then the gain to be got from the former husband! And he does not
say when we were in the Law, so in every passage shrinking from giving a
handle to heretics; but "when we were in the flesh," that is, in evil deeds, in a
carnal life. What he says then is, not that they were in the flesh before, but now
they went about without any bodies; but by saying what he does, he neither says
that the Law is the cause of sins, nor yet frees it from odium. For it held the rank
of a bitter accuser, by making their sins bare: since that, which enjoins more to
him who is not minded to obey at all, makes the offense greater. And this is why
he does not say, the "motions of sins" which were produced by the Law, but

which "were through the Law" [Romans 2:27], without adding any "produced,"
but simply "through the Law," that is to say, which through the Law were made
apparent, were made known. Next that he might not accuse the flesh either; he
does not say which the members wrought, but "which did work (or were
wrought) in our members," to show that the origin of the mischief was
elsewhere, from the thoughts which wrought in us, not from the members which
had them working in them. For the soul ranks as a performer, and the fabric of
the flesh as a lyre, sounding as the performer obliges it. So the discordant tune is
to be ascribed not to the latter, but to the former sooner than to the latter.
Ver. 6. "But now," he says, "we are delivered from the Law."
([κατηργήθημεν], "made of no effect.")
See how he again in this place spares the flesh and the Law. For he does not
say that the Law was made of no effect, or that the flesh was made of no effect,
but that we were made of no effect (i.e., were delivered). And how were we
delivered? Why by the old man, who was held down by sin, being dead and
buried. For this is what he sets forth in the words, "being dead to that, wherein
we were held." As if he had said, the chain by which we were held down was
deadened and broken through, so that that which held down, namely sin, held
down no more. But do not fall back or grow listless. For you have been freed
with a view to being servants again, though not in the same way, but "in newness
of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter." Now what does he mean here? For
it is necessary to disclose it here, that when we come upon the passage, we may
not be perplexed with it. When then Adam sinned (he means), and his body
became liable to death and sufferings, it received also many physical losses, and
the horse became less active and less obedient. But Christ, when He came, made
it more nimble for us through baptism, rousing it with the wing of the Spirit.
And for this reason the marks for the race, which they of old time had to run, are
not the same as ours. Since then the race was not so easy as it is now. For this
reason, He desires them to be clear not from murder only, as He did them of old
time, but from anger also; nor is it adultery only that He bids them keep clear of,