many; but how made He peace among "the things in the heavens"? Was war and
battle there also? How then do we pray, saying, "Your will be done, as in heaven,
so on earth"? [Matthew 6:10] What is it then? The earth was divided from
heaven, the Angels had become enemies to men, through seeing the Lord
insulted. "To sum up," he says, "all things in Christ, the things in the heavens,
and the things upon the earth." [Ephesians 1:10] How? The things in heaven
indeed in this way: He translated Man there, He brought up to them the enemy,
the hated one. Not only made He the things on earth to be at peace, but He
brought up to them him that was their enemy and foe. Here was peace profound.
Angels again appeared on the earth thereafter, because that Man too had
appeared in heaven. And it seems to me that Paul was caught up on this account
[2 Corinthians 12:2], and to show that the Son also had been received up there.
For in the earth indeed, the peace was twofold; with the things of heaven, and
with themselves; but in heaven it was simple. For if the Angels rejoice over one
sinner that repents, much more will they over so many.
All this God's power has wrought. Why then place ye confidence in
Angels? says he. For so far are they from bringing you near, that they were ever
your enemies, except God Himself had reconciled you with them. Why then run
ye to them? Would you know the hatred which the Angels had against us, how
great it was; and how averse to us they always were? They were sent to take
vengeance in the cases of the Israelites, of David, of the Sodomites, of the Valley
of weeping. [Exodus 23:20] Not so however now, but, on the contrary, they sang
upon the earth [2 Samuel 24:16] with exceeding joy. And He led these down to
men [Genesis 19:13], and led men up to them.
And observe, I pray you, the marvel in this: He brought these first down
hither, and then he took up man to them; earth became heaven, because that
heaven was about to receive the things of earth. Therefore when we give thanks,
we say, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will to men."
Behold, he says, even men appeared well-pleasing to Him thereafter. What is
"good will"? [Ephesians 2:14; Deuteronomy 32:8, Septuagint] Reconciliation.

No longer is the heaven a wall of partition. At first the Angels were according to
the number of the nations; but now, not to the number of the nations, but that of
the believers. Whence is this evident? Hear Christ saying, "See that you despise
not one of these little ones, for their Angels do always behold the face of My
Father which is in heaven." [Matthew 18:10] For each believer has an Angel;
since even from the beginning, every one of those that were approved had his
Angel, as Jacob says, "The Angel that feeds me, and delivers me from my youth."
[Genesis 48:15-16], nearly If then we have Angels, let us be sober, as though we
were in the presence of tutors; for there is a demon present also. Therefore we
pray, asking for the Angel of peace, and everywhere we ask for peace (for there
is nothing equal to this); peace, in the Churches, in the prayers, in the
supplications, in the salutations; and once, and twice, and thrice, and many
times, does he that is over the Church give it, "Peace be unto you." Wherefore?
Because this is the Mother of all good things; this is the foundation of joy.
Therefore Christ also commanded the Apostles on entering into the houses
straightway to say this, as being a sort of symbol of the good things; for He says,
"When ye come into the houses, say, Peace be unto you;" for where this is
wanting, everything is useless. And to His disciples Christ said, "Peace I leave
with you, My peace I give unto you." [John 14:27] This prepares the way for
love. And he that is over the Church, says not, "Peace be unto you," simply, but
"Peace be unto all." For what if with this man we have peace, but with another,
war and fighting? What is the gain? For neither in the body, should some of its
elements be at rest and others in a state of variance, is it possible that health
should ever be upheld; but only when the whole of them are in good order, and
harmony, and peace, and except the whole are at rest, and continue within their
proper limits, all will be overturned. And, further, in our minds, except all our
thoughts are at rest, peace will not exist. So great a good is peace, as that the
makers and producers of it are called the sons of God [Matthew 5:9-45], with
reason; because the Son of God for this cause came upon the earth, to set at
peace the things in the earth, and those in the heavens. But if the peacemakers