this prerogative by grace, as will be shown later (Question 12). He is
said to be thus in the saints by grace.
But how He is in other things created by Him, may be considered
from human affairs. A king, for example, is said to be in the whole
kingdom by his power, although he is not everywhere present. Again
a thing is said to be by its presence in other things which are subject
to its inspection; as things in a house are said to be present to
anyone, who nevertheless may not be in substance in every part of
the house. Lastly, a thing is said to be by way of substance or
essence in that place in which its substance may be. Now there were
some (the Manichees) who said that spiritual and incorporeal things
were subject to the divine power; but that visible and corporeal
things were subject to the power of a contrary principle. Therefore
against these it is necessary to say that God is in all things by His
power.
But others, though they believed that all things were subject to the
divine power, still did not allow that divine providence extended to
these inferior bodies, and in the person of these it is said, "He
walketh about the poles of the heavens; and He doth not consider
our things" (Job 22:14). Against these it is necessary to say that God
is in all things by His presence.
Further, others said that, although all things are subject to God's
providence, still all things are not immediately created by God; but
that He immediately created the first creatures, and these created the
others. Against these it is necessary to say that He is in all things by
His essence.
Therefore, God is in all things by His power, inasmuch as all things
are subject to His power; He is by His presence in all things, as all
things are bare and open to His eyes; He is in all things by His
essence, inasmuch as He is present to all as the cause of their being.
Reply to Objection 1: God is said to be in all things by essence, not
indeed by the essence of the things themselves, as if He were of
their essence; but by His own essence; because His substance is
present to all things as the cause of their being.
Reply to Objection 2: A thing can be said to be present to another,
when in its sight, though the thing may be distant in substance, as

was shown in this article; and therefore two modes of presence are
necessary; viz. by essence and by presence.
Reply to Objection 3: Knowledge and will require that the thing
known should be in the one who knows, and the thing willed in the
one who wills. Hence by knowledge and will things are more truly in
God than God in things. But power is the principle of acting on
another; hence by power the agent is related and applied to an
external thing; thus by power an agent may be said to be present to
another.
Reply to Objection 4: No other perfection, except grace, added to
substance, renders God present in anything as the object known and
loved; therefore only grace constitutes a special mode of God's
existence in things. There is, however, another special mode of
God's existence in man by union, which will be treated of in its own
place (TP).