haughtiness of the Jews. For since they, negligent about virtue in their own souls,
were parading the name of Abraham, thinking they had for a plea their
forefathers' virtue; he shows from the very beginning that it is not in these things
men ought to glory, but in their own good deeds.
Besides this, he is establishing another point also, to show that all are under
sin, even their forefathers themselves. At least their patriarch and namesake is
shown to have committed no small sin, for Thamar stands against him, to accuse
his whoredom. And David too had Solomon by the wife whom he corrupted. But
if by the great ones the law was not fulfilled, much more by the less. And if it
was not fulfilled, all have sinned, and Christ's coming has become necessary.
For this cause he made mention also of the twelve patriarchs, by this again
bringing down their pride at the noble birth of their fathers. Because many of
these also were born of women that were slaves; but nevertheless the difference
of the parents did not make a difference in the children. For all were equally both
patriarchs and heads of tribes. For this is the precedence of the Church, this the
prerogative of the nobility that is among us, taking its type from the beginning.
So that whether thou be bond or free, you have from thence nothing more nor
less; but the question is all about one thing only, namely, the mind, and the
disposition of the soul.
4. But besides what we have said, there is another cause also, wherefore he
has mentioned even this history; for to be sure, Zara's name was not cast at
random on that of Phares. (For indeed it was irrelevant, and superfluous, when
he had mentioned Phares, from whom he was to trace Christ's genealogy, to
mention Zara also.) Wherefore then did he mention him? When Thamar was on
the point of giving birth to them, the pangs having come upon her, Zara put forth
his hand first. [Genesis 38:27] Then the midwife, when she saw this, in order
that the first should be known, bound his hand with scarlet; but the child, when
he was bound, drew in his hand, and when he had drawn it in, Phares came forth
first, and then Zara. The midwife when she saw this said, "Why was the hedge
broken up for you?"

Do you see the dark expression of mysteries? For it was not without
purpose that these things were recorded for us: since neither was it worth our
study to learn, what it might be that the midwife said; nor worth a narrative to
know, that he who came out second, put forth his hand first. What then is the
mysterious lesson? First, from the name of the child we learn what is inquired,
for Phares is "a division," and "a breach." And moreover from the thing itself,
which took place; for it was not in the order of nature that, having thrust out his
hand, he should draw it in again when bound; these thing neither belonged to a
movement directed by reason, nor did they take place in the way of natural
consequence. For after the hand had found its way out, that another child should
come forth before was perhaps not unnatural; but that he should draw it back,
and give a passage for another, was no longer after the manner of children at the
birth, but the grace of God was present with the children, ordering these things,
and sketching out for us by them a sort of image of the things that were to come.
What then? Some of those who have examined these things accurately say,
that these children are a type of the two nations. And so in order that you might
learn that the polity of the latter people shone forth previously to the origin of
the former, the child that has the hand stretched forth does not show itself entire,
but draws even it in again; and after his brother had glided forth whole, then he
too appears entire. And this took place also with regard to the two nations. I
mean, that after the polity of the Church had been manifested in the times of
Abraham, and then had been withdrawn in the midst of its course, the Jewish
people came, and the legal polity, and then the new people appeared entire with
their own laws. Wherefore also the midwife says, "Why was the hedge broken up
for you?" because the law coming in had broken in upon the freedom of the
polity. For indeed the Scripture is ever wont to call the law a hedge; as the
prophet says: "You have broken down her hedge, so that all they which pass by
the way do pluck off her grapes:" and, "I have set a hedge about it:" and Paul,
"Having broken down the middle wall of the hedge." But others say, that the
saying, "Why was the hedge broken up for you?" was spoken touching the new