hell and hell-fire are threatened against those who are angry without a cause.
[Matthew 5:22] As then the lover of vainglory, when he takes upon him the
government of numbers, supplies additional fuel to the fire, so he who by
himself, or in the company of a few, is unable to control his anger, but readily
carried away by it, should he be entrusted with the direction of a whole
multitude, like some wild beast goaded on all sides by countless tormentors,
would never be able to live in tranquillity himself, and would cause incalculable
mischief to those who have been committed to his charge.
14. For nothing clouds the purity of the reason, and the perspicuity of the
mental vision so much as undisciplined wrath, rushing along with violent
impetuosity. "For wrath," says one, "destroys even the prudent." For the eye of
the soul being darkened as in some nocturnal battle is not able to distinguish
friends from foes, nor the honorable from the unworthy, but handles them all in
turn in the same way; even if some harm must be suffered, readily enduring
everything, in order to satisfy the pleasure of the soul. For the fire of wrath is a
kind of pleasure, and tyrannizes over the soul more harshly than pleasure,
completely upsetting its healthy organization. For it easily impels men to
arrogance, and unseasonable enmities, and unreasonable hatred, and it
continually makes them ready to commit wanton and vain offenses; and forces
them to say and do many other things of that kind, the soul being swept along by
the rush of passion, and having nothing on which to fasten its strength and resist
so great an impulse.
Basil: I will not endure this irony of yours any longer: for who knows not
how far removed you are from this infirmity?
Chrysostom: Why then, my good friend, do you wish to bring me near the
pyre, and to provoke the wild beast when he is tranquil? Are you not aware that I
have achieved this condition, not by any innate virtue, but by my love of
retirement? And that when one who is so constituted remains contented by
himself, or only associates with one or two friends, he is able to escape the fire
which arises from this passion, but not if he has plunged into the abyss of all

these cares? For then he drags not only himself but many others with him to the
brink of destruction, and renders them more indifferent to all consideration for
mildness. For the mass of people under government are generally inclined to
regard the manners of those who govern as a kind of model type, and to
assimilate themselves to them. How then could any one put a stop to their fury
when he is swelling himself with rage? And who among the multitude would
straightway desire to become moderate when he sees the ruler irritable? For it is
quite impossible for the defects of priests to be concealed, but even trifling ones
speedily become manifest. So an athlete, as long as he remains at home, and
contends with no one, can dissemble his weakness even if it be very great, but
when he strips for the contest he is easily detected. And thus for some who live
this private and inactive life, their isolation serves as a veil to hide their defects;
but when they have been brought into public they are compelled to divest
themselves of this mantle of seclusion, and to lay bare their souls to all through
their visible movements. As therefore their right deeds profit many, by
provoking them to equal zeal, so their shortcomings make men more indifferent
to the practice of virtue, and encourage them to indolence in their endeavours
after what is excellent. Wherefore his soul ought to gleam with beauty on every
side, that it may be able to gladden and to enlighten the souls of those who
behold it. For the faults of ordinary men, being committed as it were in the dark,
ruin only those who practise them: but the errors of a man in a conspicuous
position, and known to many, inflicts a common injury upon all, rendering those
who have fallen more supine in their efforts for good, and driving to desperation
those who wish to take heed to themselves. And apart from these things, the
faults of insignificant men, even if they are exposed, inflict no injury worth
speaking of upon any one: but they who occupy the highest seat of honor are in
the first place plainly visible to all, and if they err in the smallest matters these
trifles seem great to others: for all men measure the sin, not by the magnitude of
the offense, but by the rank of the offender. Thus the priest ought to be protected
on all sides by a kind of adamantine armour, by intense earnestness, and