144. To speak from the heart means that our hearts must not just be on fire, but also enlightened
by the fullness of revelation and by the path travelled by God’s word in the heart of the Church and
our faithful people throughout history. This Christian identity, as the baptismal embrace which the
Father gave us when we were little ones, makes us desire, as prodigal children – and favourite
children in Mary – yet another embrace, that of the merciful Father who awaits us in glory. Helping
our people to feel that they live in the midst of these two embraces is the difficult but beautiful task
of one who preaches the Gospel.

### III. Preparing to preach

145. Preparation for preaching is so important a task that a prolonged time of study, prayer,
reflection and pastoral creativity should be devoted to it. With great affection I wish to stop for a
moment and offer a method of preparing homilies. Some may find these suggestions self-evident,
but I consider it helpful to offer them as a way of emphasizing the need to devote quality time to
this precious ministry. Some pastors argue that such preparation is not possible given the vast
number of tasks which they must perform; nonetheless, I presume to ask that each week a
sufficient portion of personal and community time be dedicated to this task, even if less time has to
be given to other important activities. Trust in the Holy Spirit who is at work during the homily is not
merely passive but active and creative. It demands that we offer ourselves and all our abilities as
instruments (cf. Rom 12:1) which God can use. A preacher who does not prepare is not “spiritual”;
he is dishonest and irresponsible with the gifts he has received.

Reverence for truth

146. The first step, after calling upon the Holy Spirit in prayer, is to give our entire attention to the
biblical text, which needs to be the basis of our preaching. Whenever we stop and attempt to
understand the message of a particular text, we are practising “reverence for the truth”. This
is the humility of heart which recognizes that the word is always beyond us, that “we are neither its
masters or owners, but its guardians, heralds and servants”. This attitude of humble and awe-
filled veneration of the word is expressed by taking the time to study it with the greatest care and a
holy fear lest we distort it. To interpret a biblical text, we need to be patient, to put aside all other
concerns, and to give it our time, interest and undivided attention. We must leave aside any other
pressing concerns and create an environment of serene concentration. It is useless to attempt to
read a biblical text if all we are looking for are quick, easy and immediate results. Preparation for
preaching requires love. We only devote periods of quiet time to the things or the people whom we
love; and here we are speaking of the God whom we love, a God who wishes to speak to us.
Because of this love, we can take as much time as we need, like every true disciple: “Speak, Lord,
for your servant is listening” (1 Sam 3:9).