THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.7.

### ARTICLE 6. Whether the pain of Christ's Passion was greater

than all other pains?
Objection 1: It would seem that the pain of Christ's Passion was not
greater than all other pains. For the sufferer's pain is increased by
the sharpness and the duration of the suffering. But some of the
martyrs endured sharper and more prolonged pains than Christ, as
is seen in St. Lawrence, who was roasted upon a gridiron; and in St.
Vincent, whose flesh was torn with iron pincers. Therefore it seems
that the pain of the suffering Christ was not the greatest.
Objection 2: Further, strength of soul mitigates pain, so much so that
the Stoics held there was no sadness in the soul of a wise man; and
Aristotle (Ethic. ii) holds that moral virtue fixes the mean in the
passions. But Christ had most perfect strength of soul. Therefore it
seems that the greatest pain did not exist in Christ.
Objection 3: Further, the more sensitive the sufferer is, the more
acute will the pain be. But the soul is more sensitive than the body,
since the body feels in virtue of the soul; also, Adam in the state of
innocence seems to have had a body more sensitive than Christ had,
who assumed a human body with its natural defects. Consequently,
it seems that the pain of a sufferer in purgatory, or in hell, or even
Adam's pain, if he suffered at all, was greater than Christ's in the
Passion.
Objection 4: Further, the greater the good lost, the greater the pain.
But by sinning the sinner loses a greater good than Christ did when
suffering; since the life of grace is greater than the life of nature:
also, Christ, who lost His life, but was to rise again after three days,
seems to have lost less than those who lose their lives and abide in
death. Therefore it seems that Christ's pain was not the greatest of
all.
Objection 5: Further, the victim's innocence lessens the sting of his
sufferings. But Christ died innocent, according to Jer. 9:19: "I was as
a meek lamb, that is carried to be a victim." Therefore it seems that
the pain of Christ's Passion was not the greatest.
Objection 6: Further, there was nothing superfluous in Christ's
conduct. But the slightest pain would have sufficed to secure man's

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.46, C.7.

salvation, because from His Divine Person it would have had infinite
virtue. Therefore it would have been superfluous to choose the
greatest of all pains.
On the contrary, It is written (Lam. 1:12) on behalf of Christ's Person:
"O all ye that pass by the way attend, and see if there be any sorrow
like unto My sorrow."
I answer that, As we have stated, when treating of the defects
assumed by Christ (Question 15, Articles 5,6), there was true and
sensible pain in the suffering Christ, which is caused by something
hurtful to the body: also, there was internal pain, which is caused
from the apprehension of something hurtful, and this is termed
"sadness." And in Christ each of these was the greatest in this
present life. This arose from four causes. First of all, from the
sources of His pain. For the cause of the sensitive pain was the
wounding of His body; and this wounding had its bitterness, both
from the extent of the suffering already mentioned (Article 5) and
from the kind of suffering, since the death of the crucified is most
bitter, because they are pierced in nervous and highly sensitive
parts---to wit, the hands and feet; moreover, the weight of the
suspended body intensifies the agony. and besides this there is the
duration of the suffering because they do not die at once like those
slain by the sword. The cause of the interior pain was, first of all, all
the sins of the human race, for which He made satisfaction by
suffering; hence He ascribes them, so to speak, to Himself, saying
(Ps. 21:2): "The words of my sins." Secondly, especially the fall of
the Jews and of the others who sinned in His death chiefly of the
apostles, who were scandalized at His Passion. Thirdly, the loss of
His bodily life, which is naturally horrible to human nature.
The magnitude of His suffering may be considered, secondly, from
the susceptibility of the sufferer as to both soul and body. For His
body was endowed with a most perfect constitution, since it was
fashioned miraculously by the operation of the Holy Ghost; just as
some other things made by miracles are better than others, as
Chrysostom says (Hom. xxii in Joan.) respecting the wine into which
Christ changed the water at the wedding-feast. And, consequently,
Christ's sense of touch, the sensitiveness of which is the reason for
our feeling pain, was most acute. His soul likewise, from its interior
powers, apprehended most vehemently all the causes of sadness.
Thirdly, the magnitude of Christ's suffering can be estimated from