had come together, and not mention the cause either; for assuredly many would
have gone back, but now as though she were going to weep, all followed her. By
these means again it is proved that Lazarus was dead.

John 11:32
"And she fell at His feet."
She is more ardent than her sister. She regarded not the multitude, nor the
suspicion which they had concerning Him, for there were many of His enemies,
who said, "Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused
that even this man should not have died?" [John 11:37]; but cast out all mortal
things in the presence of her Master, and was given up to one thing only, the
honor of that Master. And what says she?
"Lord, if You had been here, my brother had not died."
What does Christ? He converses not at all with her for the present, nor says
to her what He said to her sister, (for a great multitude was by, and this was no fit
time for such words,) He only acts measurably and condescends; and to prove
His human nature, weeps in silence, and defers the miracle for the present. For
since that miracle was a great one, and such as He seldom wrought, and since
many were to believe by means of it, lest to work it without their presence
should prove a stumbling-block to the multitude, and so they should gain
nothing by its greatness, in order that He might not lose the quarry, He draws to
Him many witnesses by His condescension, and shows proof of His human
nature. He weeps, and is troubled; for grief is wont to stir up the feelings. Then
rebuking those feelings, (for He "groaned in spirit" means, "restrained His
trouble,") He asked,

John 11:34
"Where have ye laid him?"
So that the question might not be attended with lamentation. But why does
He ask? Because He desired not to cast Himself on (the miracle), but to learn all
from them, to do all at their invitation, so as to free the miracle from any
suspicion.
"They say unto Him, Come and see."

John 11:35
"Jesus wept."
Do you see that He had not as yet shown any sign of the raising, and goes
not as if to raise Lazarus, but as if to weep? For the Jews show that He seemed to
them to be going to bewail, not to raise him; at least they said,

John 11:36-37
"Behold how he loved him! And some of them said, Could not this man, which
opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have
died?"
Not even amid calamities did they relax their wickedness. Yet what He was
about to do was a thing far more wonderful; for to drive away death when it has
come and conquered, is far more than to stay it when coming on. They therefore
slander Him by those very points through which they ought to have marveled at
His power. They allow for the time that He opened the eyes of the blind, and
when they ought to have admired Him on account of that miracle, they, by
means of this latter case, cast a slur upon it, as though it had not even taken
place. And not from this only are they shown to be all corrupt, but because when
He had not yet come, nor exhibited any action, they prevent Him with their
accusations without waiting the end of the matter. Do you see how corrupt was
their judgment?
2. He comes then to the tomb; and again rebukes His feelings. Why does
the Evangelist carefully in several places mention that "He wept," and that, "He
groaned"? That you may learn that He had of a truth put on our nature. For when
this Evangelist is remarkable for uttering great things concerning Christ more
than the others, in matters relating to the body, here he also speaks much more
humbly than they. For instance, concerning His death he has said nothing of the
kind; the other Evangelists declare that He was exceedingly sorrowful, that He
was in an agony; but John, on the contrary, says, that He even cast the officers
backwards. So that he has made up here what is omitted there, by mentioning
His grief. When speaking of His death, Christ says, "I have power to lay down
My life" [John 10:18], and then He utters no lowly word; therefore at the Passion
they attribute to Him much that is human, to show the reality of the
Dispensation. And Matthew proves this by the Agony, the trouble, the trembling,