confident henceforward.
For suppose not, he says, because He once died, that He is mortal, for this is
the very reason of His being immortal. For His death has been the death of
death, and because He did die, He therefore does not die. For even that death
Ver. 10. "He died unto sin."
What does "unto sin" mean? It means that He was not subject even to that
one, but for our sin, that He might destroy it, and cut away its sinews and all its
power, therefore He died. Do you see how he affrights them? For if He does not
die again, then there is no second laver, then do thou keep from all inclinableness
to sin. For all this he says to make a stand against the "let us do evil that good
may come. Let us remain in sin that grace may abound." To take away this
conception then, root and branch, it is, that he sets down all this. But in that "He
lives, He lives unto God," he says—that is, unchangeably, so that death has no
more any dominion over Him. For if it was not through any liability to it that He
died the former death, save only for the sin of others, much less will He die
again now that He has done that sin away. And this he says in the Epistle to the
Hebrews also, "But now once," he says, "in the end of the world has He
appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of Himself. And as it is appointed unto
men once to die, and after that the judgment; so Christ was once offered to bear
the sins of many, and unto them that look for Him shall He appear the second
time without sin unto salvation." [Hebrews 9:26-28] And he both points out the
power of the life that is according to God, and also the strength of sin. For with
regard to the life according to God, he shows that Christ shall die no more. With
regard to sin, that if it brought about the death even of the Sinless, how can it do
otherwise than be the ruin of those that are subject to it? And then as he had
discoursed about His life; that none might say, What has that which you have
been saying to do with us? He adds,
Ver. 11. "Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God."
He well says, "reckon," because there is no setting that, which he is

speaking of, before the eyes as yet. And what are we to reckon? One may ask.
That we "are dead unto sin, but alive unto God. In Jesus Christ our Lord." For
he that so lives will lay hold of every virtue, as having Jesus Himself for his ally.
For that is what, "in Christ," means, for if He raised them when dead, much
more when alive will He be able to keep them so.
Ver. 12. "Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that you should
obey it in the lusts thereof."
He does not say, let not the flesh live or act, but, "let not sin reign," for He
came not to destroy our nature, but to set our free choice aright. Then to show
that it is not through any force or necessity that we are held down by iniquity, but
willingly, he does not say, let it not tyrannize, a word that would imply a
necessity, but let it not reign. For it is absurd for those who are being conducted
to the kingdom of heaven to have sin empress over them, and for those who are
called to reign with Christ to choose to be the captives of sin, as though one
should hurl the diadem from off his head, and choose to be the slave of a frantic
woman, who came begging, and was clothed in rags. Next since it was a heavy
task to get the upper hand of sin, see how he shows it to be even easy, and how
he allays the labor by saying, "in your mortal body." For this shows that the
struggles were but for a time, and would soon bring themselves to a close. At the
same time he reminds us of our former evil plight, and of the root of death, as it
was from this that, contrary even to its beginning, it became mortal. Yet it is
possible even for one with a mortal body not to sin. Do you see the abundancy of
Christ's grace? For Adam, though as yet he had not a mortal body, fell. But you,
who hast received one even subject to death, canst be crowned. How then, is it
that "sin reigns?" he says. It is not from any power of its own, but from your
listlessness. Wherefore after saying, "let it not reign," he also points out the
mode of this reigning, by going on to say "that you should obey it in the lusts
thereof." For it is not honor to concede to it (i.e. to the body) all things at will,
nay, it is slavery in the extreme, and the height of dishonor; for when it does
what it lists, then is it bereft of all liberties; but when it is put under restraints,