someone even by divine right.
I answer that, Wherever there are several authorities directed to one
purpose, there must needs be one universal authority over the
particular authorities, because in all virtues and acts the order is
according to the order of their ends (Ethic. i, 1,2). Now the common
good is more Godlike than the particular good. Wherefore above the
governing power which aims at a particular good there must be a
universal governing power in respect of the common good,
otherwise there would be no cohesion towards the one object. Hence
since the whole Church is one body, it behooves, if this oneness is
to be preserved, that there be a governing power in respect of the
whole Church, above the episcopal power whereby each particular
Church is governed, and this is the power of the Pope. Consequently
those who deny this power are called schismatics as causing a
division in the unity of the Church. Again, between a simple bishop
and the Pope there are other degrees of rank corresponding to the
degrees of union, in respect of which one congregation or
community includes another; thus the community of a province
includes the community of a city, and the community of a kingdom
includes the community of one province, and the community of the
whole world includes the community of one kingdom.
Reply to Objection 1: Although the power of binding and loosing was
given to all the apostles in common, nevertheless in order to indicate
some order in this power, it was given first of all to Peter alone, to
show that this power must come down from him to the others. For
this reason He said to him in the singular: "Confirm thy
brethren" (Lk. 22:32), and: "Feed My sheep" (Jn. 21:17), i.e.
according to Chrysostom: "Be thou the president and head of thy
brethren in My stead, that they, putting thee in My place, may preach
and confirm thee throughout the world whilst thou sittest on thy
throne."
Reply to Objection 2: The Jewish rite was not spread abroad in
various kingdoms and provinces, but was confined to one nation;
hence there was no need to distinguish various pontiffs under the
one who had the chief power. But the rite of the Church, like that of
the Gentiles, is spread abroad through various nations; and
consequently in this respect it is necessary for the constitution of
the Church to be like the rite of the Gentiles rather than that of the
Jews.

Reply to Objection 3: The priestly power is surpassed by the
episcopal power, as by a power of a different kind; but the episcopal
is surpassed by the papal power as by a power of the same kind.
Hence a bishop can perform every hierarchical act that the Pope can;
whereas a priest cannot perform every act that a bishop can in
conferring the sacraments. Wherefore as regards matters pertaining
to the episcopal Order, all bishops are equal, and for this reason any
bishop can consecrate another bishop.