THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.11, C.2.

power of a creature. Now both powers of Christ's soul were reduced
to act by this divinely imprinted knowledge. And hence, by it the soul
of Christ knew: First, whatever can be known by force of a man's
active intellect, e.g. whatever pertains to human sciences; secondly,
by this knowledge Christ knew all things made known to man by
Divine revelation, whether they belong to the gift of wisdom or the
gift of prophecy, or any other gift of the Holy Ghost; since the soul of
Christ knew these things more fully and completely than others. Yet
He did not know the Essence of God by this knowledge, but by the
first alone, of which we spoke above (Question 10).
Reply to Objection 1: This reason refers to the natural power of an
intellective soul in comparison with its natural agent, which is the
active intellect.
Reply to Objection 2: The human soul in the state of this life, since it
is somewhat fettered by the body, so as to be unable to understand
without phantasms, cannot understand separate substances. But
after the state of this life the separated soul will be able, in a
measure, to know separate substances by itself, as was said in the
FP, Question 89, Articles 1,2, and this is especially clear as regards
the souls of the blessed. Now before His Passion, Christ was not
merely a wayfarer but also a comprehensor; hence His soul could
know separate substances in the same way that a separated soul
could.
Reply to Objection 3: The knowledge of singulars pertains to the
perfection of the intellective soul, not in speculative knowledge, but
in practical knowledge, which is imperfect without the knowledge of
singulars, in which operations exist, as is said Ethic. vi, 7. Hence for
prudence are required the remembrance of past things, knowledge
of present things, and foresight of future things, as Tully says (De
Invent. ii). Therefore, since Christ had the fulness of prudence by the
gift of counsel, He consequently knew all singular things---present,
past, and future.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.11, C.3.

### ARTICLE 2. Whether Christ could use this knowledge by

turning to phantasms?
Objection 1: It would seem that the soul of Christ could not
understand by this knowledge except by turning to phantasms,
because, as is stated De Anima iii, 18,31,39, phantasms are
compared to man's intellective soul as colors to sight. But Christ's
power of seeing could not become actual save by turning to colors.
Therefore His intellective soul could understand nothing except by
turning to phantasms.
Objection 2: Further, Christ's soul is of the same nature as ours.
otherwise He would not be of the same species as we, contrary to
what the Apostle says (Phil. 2:7) " . . . being made in the likeness of
men." But our soul cannot understand except by turning to
phantasms. Hence, neither can Christ's soul otherwise understand.
Objection 3: Further, senses are given to man to help his intellect.
Hence, if the soul of Christ could understand without turning to
phantasms, which arise in the senses, it would follow that in the soul
of Christ the senses were useless, which is not fitting. Therefore it
seems that the soul of Christ can only understand by turning to
phantasms.
On the contrary, The soul of Christ knew certain things which could
not be known by the senses, viz. separate substances. Therefore it
could understand without turning to phantasms.
I answer that, In the state before His Passion Christ was at the same
time a wayfarer and a comprehensor, as will be more clearly shown
(Question 15, Article 10). Especially had He the conditions of a
wayfarer on the part of the body, which was passible; but the
conditions of a comprehensor He had chiefly on the part of the soul.
Now this is the condition of the soul of a comprehensor, viz. that it is
nowise subject to its body, or dependent upon it, but wholly
dominates it. Hence after the resurrection glory will flow from the
soul to the body. But the soul of man on earth needs to turn to
phantasms, because it is fettered by the body and in a measure
subject to and dependent upon it. And hence the blessed both before
and after the resurrection can understand without turning to
phantasms. And this must be said of the soul of Christ, which had