joined with the declarations of the Council of Trent. I hardly need say that the proof is
not complete in the one word sacramentum, musterion, (verse 32).

## CHAPTER LXXIX--That through Christ the Resurrection of our Bodies will take place
AS we have been delivered by Christ from the penalties incurred by the death of the first
man; and as by the sin of the first man there has been bequeathed to us not only sin,
but also death, which is the punishment of sin; we must by Christ be delivered from both
these consequences, both from guilt and from sin (Rom. iv, 12, 17). To show to us both
effects in Himself, He chose both to die and to rise again; to die, to deliver us from sin
(Heb. ix, 28); to rise again, to deliver us from death (1 Cor. xv, 20) [cf. Rom. iv, 25]. We
gather the effect of Christ's death in the Sacraments so far as remission of guilt goes: at
the end of the world we shall gain the effect of Christ's resurrection in our deliverance
from death.
But some do not believe in the resurrection of the body; and what is said in Scripture on
that subject they perversely understand of a spiritual resurrection from the death of sin
to grace: which error is reproved by the Apostle in Hymenaeus and Philetus (2 Tim. ii,
16). Moreover the Lord promises both resurrections, when He says: The hour cometh,
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live: which refers to the resurrection of souls, then beginning by men
beginning to adhere to Christ by faith. But presently He makes explicit promise of a
bodily resurrection: The hour cometh in which all who are in the tombs shall hear the
voice of the Son of God: for manifestly not souls are in the tombs, but bodies. Cf.
Job xix, 25.
Reason too gives evident support to the resurrection of the flesh. -- 1. The souls of men
are immortal (B. II, Chap.LXXIX). But the soul is naturally united with the body,
being essentially the form of the body (B. II, Chap.LVII). Therefore it is against the
nature of the soul to be without the body. But nothing that is against nature can be
lasting. Therefore the soul will not be for ever without the body. Thus the immortality of
the soul seems to require the resurrection of the body.
2. The natural desire of man tends to happiness, or final perfection (B. III, Chap.

disciples after His death was a mere wraith, or ghost, then there is no resurrection of the
body awaiting us. I take it some ghost stories are true statements of an objective reality
seen. But the appearance of the ghost is not the removal of the body from the grave.
The corpse lies still where it was laid, even while the ghost walks. Now, Holy Scripture
assures us, this is precisely what did not happen in the case of Christ. The body was
not in the tomb (Matt. xxviii, 6: Mark xvi, 6: Luke xxiv, 3: John xx, 2). St Peter appeals
publicly to the fact in Jerusalem a few weeks after, and says that Christ's flesh did not
see corruption (Acts ii, 24-32). The Jews, Annas the high priest and Caiphas and John
and Alexander, and all that were of the high priest's kin (Acts iv, 6), had every interest in
producing the body of the Man, whose resurrection was proclaimed (Acts iv, 10), and
whose blood was being brought upon their heads (Acts v, 28). They did not produce it,
they were unable to trace it. All that they could produce was the lame story of the
'sleeping witnesses' (Matt. xxviii, 11-15). The `wraith theory' is a direct contradiction of
the witness of the Apostles (Acts iv, 33). It transforms the upper chamber (Acts i, 13),
where the spirit of truth descended (John xvi, 13: Acts ii, 4) into a den of thieves (Mark
xi, 17) A Christian at least will beware of such a theory.