Now then, having to partake of such blessings, do I see you minding
money, and clinging to the pomp which is here? And do you not esteem all that
is seen to be more vile than beggars rags? And how will you appear worthy of
this honor? And what excuse will you have to plead? Or rather, what punishment
will you not have to suffer, who after so great a gift art running to your former
vomit? For no longer are you punished merely as a man, but as a son of God that
has sinned; and the greatness of your honor becomes a mean of bringing a sorer
punishment on you. Since we too punish not equally slaves that do wrong, and
sons committing the same offense; and most of all when they have received
some great kindness from us.
For if he who had paradise for his portion, for one disobedience underwent
such dreadful things after his honor; we, who have received Heaven, and have
become joint heirs with the Only Begotten, what excuse shall we have, for
running to the serpent after the dove? For it will be no longer, "Dust you are, and
unto dust shall you return," [Genesis 3:19] and you "till the ground," and those
former words, that will be said to us; but what is far more grievous than these,
the "outer darkness," [Matthew 25:30] the bonds that may not be burst, the
venomous worm, the "gnashing of teeth;" and this with great reason. For he that
is not made better even by so great a benefit, would justly suffer the most
extreme, and a yet more grievous punishment. Elias once opened and shut
Heaven, but that was to bring down rain, and restrain it; whereas to you the
heaven is not so opened, but in order for you to ascend there; and what is yet
more, not to ascend only, but to lead up others also, if you will; such great
confidence and power has He bestowed on you in all that is His.
5. Forasmuch then as our house is there, there let us store up all, and leave
nothing here, lest we lose it. For here, though you put a lock on it, and doors, and
bars, and set thousands of servants to watch it; though you get the better of all
the crafty ones, though you escape the eyes of the envious, the worms, the
wasting that comes of time; which is impossible—death at any rate you will
never escape, but will be deprived of all those things in one moment of time; and

not deprived of them only, but wilt have to transfer them into the hands often of
your very enemies. Whereas if you would transfer them into that house, you will
be far above all. For there is no need to apply either key, or doors, or bars; such
is the virtue of that city, so inviolable is this place, and by nature inaccessible to
corruption and all wickedness.
How then is it not of the utmost folly, where destruction and waste is the lot
of all that is stored, there to heap up all, but where things abide untouched and
increase, there not to lay up even the least portion; and this, when we are to live
there forever? For this cause the very heathens disbelieve the things that we say,
since our doings, not our sayings, are the demonstration which they are willing
to receive from us; and when they see us building ourselves fine houses, and
laying out gardens and baths, and buying fields, they are not willing to believe
that we are preparing for another sort of residence away from our city.
"For if this were so," say they, "they would turn to money all they have
here, and lay them up beforehand there;" and this they divine from the things
that are done in this world. For so we see those who are very rich getting
themselves houses and fields and all the rest, chiefly in those cities in which they
are to stay. But we do the contrary; and with all earnest zeal we get possession of
the earth, which we are soon after to leave; giving up not money only, but even
our very blood for a few acres and tenements: while for the purchase of Heaven
we do not endure to give even what is beyond our wants, and this though we are
to purchase it at a small price, and to possess it forever, provided we had once
purchased it.
Therefore I say we shall suffer the utmost punishment, departing there
naked and poor; or rather it will not be for our own poverty that we shall
undergo these irremediable calamities, but also for our making others to be such
as ourselves. For when heathens see them that have partaken of so great
mysteries earnest about these matters, much more will they cling themselves to
the things heaping much fire upon our head. For when we, who ought to teach
them to despise all things that appear, do ourselves most of all urge them to the