world and all that is therein." Do you mark the conciseness, and in conciseness,
clearness? Mark what were the things that were strange to them: that God made
the world! Things which now any of the most ordinary persons know, these the
Athenians and the wise men of the Athenians knew not. "Seeing He is Lord of
heaven and earth:" for if He made them, it is clear that He is Lord. Observe
what he affirms to be the note of Deity— creation. Which attribute the Son also
has.
For the Prophets everywhere affirm this, that to create is God's prerogative.
Not as those affirm that another is Maker but not Lord, assuming that matter is
uncreated. Here now he covertly affirms and establishes his own, while he
overthrows their doctrine. "Dwells not in temples made with hands." For He does
indeed dwell in temples, yet not in such, but in man's soul. He overthrows the
corporeal worship. What then? Did He not dwell in the temple at Jerusalem? No
indeed: but He wrought therein. "Neither is worshipped by men's hands." [Acts
17:25] How then was He worshipped by men's hands among the Jews? Not by
hands, but by the understanding. "As though He needed anything:" since even
those (acts of worship) He did not in this sort seek, "as having need. Shall I eat,"
says He, "the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?" [Psalm 50:13] Neither
is this enough— the having need of naught— which he has affirmed: for though
this is Divine, yet a further attribute must be added. "Seeing it is He that gives
unto all, life and breath and all things." Two proofs of Godhead: Himself to
have need of naught, and to supply all things to all men. Produce here Plato
(and) all that he has philosophized about God, all that Epicurus has: and all is but
trifling to this! "Gives," he says, "life and breath." Lo, he makes Him the Creator
of the soul also, not its begetter. See again how he overthrows the doctrine about
matter. "And made," he says, "of one blood every nation of men to dwell upon all
the face of the earth." [Acts 17:26] These things are better than the former: and
what an impeachment both of the atoms and of matter, that (creation) is not
partial (work), nor the soul of man either. But this, which those say, is not to be
Creator. — But by the mind and understanding He is worshipped.— "It is He

that gives," etc. He not the partial ([μερικοὶ δαίμονες]) deities. "And all things."
It is "He," he says.— How man also came into being. — First he showed that
"He dwells not," etc., and then declared that He "is not worshipped as though He
had need of anything." If God, He made all: but if He made not, He is not God.
Gods that made not heaven and earth, let them perish. He introduces much
greater doctrines, though as yet he does not mention the great doctrines; but he
discoursed to them as unto children. And these were much greater than those.
Creation, Lordship, the having need of naught, authorship of all good— these he
has declared. But how is He worshipped? Say. It is not yet the proper time. What
equal to this sublimity? Marvellous is this also— of one, to have made so many:
but also, having made, Himself sustains them ([συγκρατεἵ]) in being, "giving life
and breath and all things. (b) And has determined the times appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation, that they should seek God, if haply they might feel
after Him and find Him." [Acts 17:27] (a) It means either this, that He did not
compel them to go about and seek God, but according to the bounds of their
habitation: (c) or this, that He determined their seeking God, yet not determined
this (to be done) continually, but (determined) certain appointed times (when
they should do so): showing now, that not having sought they had found: for
since, having sought, they had not found, he shows that God was now as
manifest as though He were in the midst of them palpably ([ψηλαφώμενος]). (e)
"Though He be not far," he says, "from every one of us," but is near to all. See
again the power (or, "what it is to be God,") of God. What says he? Not only He
gave "life and breath and all things," but, as the sum and substance of all, He
brought us to the knowledge of Himself, by giving us these things by which we
are able to find and to apprehend Him. But we did not wish to find Him, albeit
close at hand. "Though He be not far from every one of us." Why look now, He
is near to all, to every one all the world over! What can be greater than this? See
how he makes clear riddance of the parcel deities ([τοὺς μερικούς])! What say I,
"afar off?" He is so near, that without Him we live not: "for in Him we live and
move and have our being." [Acts 17:28] "In him;" to put it by way of corporeal