will I also deny." [Matthew 10:32-33] Again, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God." [Matthew 5:8] And again, "Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven." [Matthew 5:3] And again, "Blessed are you
which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for great is your reward in
Heaven." [Matthew 5:11-12] Observe, how every where He speaks of Heaven,
no where of earth, or of the things on the earth. And again, "Our citizenship is in
Heaven, from whence also we wait for a Saviour the Lord Jesus Christ."
[Philippians 3:20] And again, "Not setting your mind on the things that are on
the earth, but on the things which are above." [Colossians 3:3]
"In Christ."
That is to say, this blessing was not by the hand of Moses, but by Christ
Jesus: so that we surpass them not only in the quality of the blessings, but in the
Mediator also. As moreover he says in the Epistle to the Hebrews; "And Moses
indeed was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of those things
which were afterward to be spoken; but Christ as a Son over His house, whose
house are we." [Hebrews 3:5-6]
Ver. 4. "Even as," he proceeds, "He chose us in Him before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy and without blemish before Him in love."
His meaning is somewhat of this sort. Through whom He has blessed us,
through Him He has also chosen us. And He, then, it is that shall bestow upon us
all those rewards hereafter. He is the very Judge that shall say, "Come, you
blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world." [Matthew 25:34] And again, "I will that where I am they will also
be with Me." [John 17:24] And this is a point which he is anxious to prove in
almost all his Epistles, that ours is no novel system, but that it had thus been
figured from the very first, that it is not the result of any change of purpose, but
had been in fact a divine dispensation and fore-ordained. And this is a mark of
great solicitude for us.
What is meant by, "He chose us in Him?" By means of the faith which is in
Him, Christ, he means, happily ordered this for us before we were born; nay

more, before the foundation of the world. And beautiful is that word
"foundation," as though he were pointing to the world as cast down from some
vast height. Yea, vast indeed and ineffable is the height of God, so far removed
not in place but in incommunicableness of nature; so wide the distance between
creation and Creator! A word which heretics may be ashamed to hear.
But wherefore has He chosen us? "That we should be holy and without a
blemish before Him." That you may not then, when you hear that "He has chosen
us," imagine that faith alone is sufficient, he proceeds to add life and conduct. To
this end, says he, has He chosen us, and on this condition, "that we should be
holy and without blemish." And so formerly he chose the Jews. On what terms?
"This nation, says he, has He chosen from the rest of the nations." [Deuteronomy
14:2] Now if men in their choices choose what is best, much more does God.
And indeed the fact of their being chosen is at once a token of the loving
kindness of God, and of their moral goodness. For by all means would he have
chosen those who were approved. He has Himself rendered us holy, but then we
must continue holy. A holy man is he who is a partaker of faith; a blameless man
is he who leads an irreproachable life. It is not however simply holiness and
irreproachableness that He requires, but that we should appear such "before
Him." For there are holy and blameless characters, who yet are esteemed as such
only by men, those who are like whited sepulchres, and like such as wear sheep's
clothing. It is not such, however, He requires, but such as the Prophet speaks of;
"And according to the cleanness of my hands." [Psalm 18:24] What cleanness?
That which is so "in His eyesight." He requires that holiness on which the eye of
God may look.
Having thus spoken of the good works of these, he again recurs to His
grace. "In love," says he, "having predestinated us." Because this comes not of
any pains, nor of any good works of ours, but of love; and yet not of love alone,
but of our virtue also. For if indeed of love alone, it would follow that all must
be saved; whereas again were it the result of our virtue alone, then were His
coming needless, and the whole dispensation. But it is the result neither of His