SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.5.

Reply to Objection 2: In the very fact that a man takes God as
witness by way of an oath, he acknowledges Him to be greater: and
this pertains to the reverence and honor of God, so that he offers
something to God, namely, reverence and honor.
Reply to Objection 3: Whatsoever we do, we should do it in honor of
God: wherefore there is no hindrance, if by intending to assure a
man, we show reverence to God. For we ought so to perform our
actions in God's honor that they may conduce to our neighbor's
good, since God also works for His own glory and for our good.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.88, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether oaths are desirable and to be used

frequently as something useful and good?
Objection 1: It would seem that oaths are desirable and to be used
frequently as something useful and good. Just as a vow is an act of
religion, so is an oath. Now it is commendable and more meritorious
to do a thing by vow, because a vow is an act of religion, as stated
above (Question 88, Article 5). Therefore for the same reason, to do
or say a thing with an oath is more commendable, and consequently
oaths are desirable as being good essentially.
Objection 2: Further, Jerome, commenting on Mt. 5:34, says that "he
who swears either reveres or loves the person by whom he swears."
Now reverence and love of God are desirable as something good
essentially. Therefore swearing is also.
Objection 3: Further, swearing is directed to the purpose of
confirming or assuring. But it is a good thing for a man to confirm
his assertion. Therefore an oath is desirable as a good thing.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 23:12): "A man that sweareth
much shall be filled with iniquity": and Augustine says (De Mendacio
xv) that "the Lord forbade swearing, in order that for your own part
you might not be fond of it, and take pleasure in seeking occasions
of swearing, as though it were a good thing."
I answer that, Whatever is required merely as a remedy for an
infirmity or a defect, is not reckoned among those things that are
desirable for their own sake, but among those that are necessary:
this is clear in the case of medicine which is required as a remedy
for sickness. Now an oath is required as a remedy to a defect,
namely, some man's lack of belief in another man. Wherefore an oath
is not to be reckoned among those things that are desirable for their
own sake, but among those that are necessary for this life; and such
things are used unduly whenever they are used outside the bounds
of necessity. For this reason Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte i, 17): "He who understands that swearing is not to be held as
a good thing," i.e. desirable for its own sake, "restrains himself as far
as he can from uttering oaths, unless there be urgent need."
Reply to Objection 1: There is no parity between a vow and an oath: