amazed at the very same things. Thus did the prophets cry aloud in the person of
Christ, saying, "A people whom I have not known, have served Me; as soon as
they heard Me, they obeyed Me; the strange children have dealt falsely with Me.
The strange children have waxed aged, and have halted from their paths."
[Psalm 18:43-45, Septuagint] And again, "They to whom it had not been told
concerning Him, shall see, and they which had not heard, shall understand."
And, "I was found of them that sought Me not" [Isaiah 52:15]; "I was made
manifest unto them that asked not after me." [Isaiah 45:1, as quoted in Romans
10:20] And Paul, in his Epistles to the Romans, has said, "What then? Israel has
not obtained that which he seeks for: but the election has obtained it." [Romans
11:7] And again; "What shall we say then? That the Gentiles which followed not
after righteousness, have attained unto righteousness: but Israel which followed
after the law of righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness."
[Romans 9:30]
For it is a thing indeed worthy of our amazement, how they who were
nurtured in (knowledge of) the prophetical books, who heard Moses every day
telling them ten thousand things concerning the coming of the Christ, and the
other prophets afterwards, who moreover themselves beheld Christ Himself
daily working miracles among them, giving up His time to them alone, neither as
yet allowing His disciples to depart into the way of the Gentiles, or to enter into
a city of Samaritans, nor doing so Himself, but everywhere declaring that He
was sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel [Matthew 10:5]: how, (I say),
while they saw the signs, and heard the Prophets, and had Christ Himself
continually putting them in remembrance, they yet made themselves once for all
so blind and dull, as by none of these things to be brought to faith in Christ.
[Matthew 15:24] While they of the Gentiles, who had enjoyed none of these
things, who had never heard the oracles of God, not, as one may say, so much as
in a dream, but ever ranging among the fables of madmen, (for heathen
philosophy is this,) having ever in their hands the sillinesses of their poets,
nailed to stocks and stones, and neither in doctrines nor in conversation

possessing anything good or sound. (For their way of life was more impure and
more accursed than their doctrine. As was likely; for when they saw their gods
delighting in all wickedness, worshipped by shameful words, and more shameful
deeds, reckoning this festivity and praise, and moreover honored by foul
murders, and child-slaughters, how should not they emulate these things?) Still,
fallen as they were as low as the very depth of wickedness, on a sudden, as by
the agency of some machine, they have appeared to us shining from on high, and
from the very summit of heaven.
How then and whence came it to pass? Hear Paul telling you. For that
blessed person searching exactly into these things, ceased not until he had found
the cause, and had declared it to all others. What then is it? And whence came
such blindness upon the Jews? Hear him who was entrusted with this
stewardship declare. What then does he say in resolving this doubt of the many?
[1 Corinthians 9:17] "For they," says he, "being ignorant of God's righteousness
and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God." [Romans 10:3] Wherefore they have
suffered this. And again, explaining the same matter in other terms, he says,
"What shall we say then? That the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness, have attained unto righteousness, even the righteousness which is
of faith; but Israel, which followed after the law of righteousness, has not
attained to the law of righteousness. Wherefore? Because they sought it not by
faith. For they stumbled at that stumbling stone." [Romans 9:30-32] His
meaning is this: "These men's unbelief has been the cause of their misfortunes,
and their haughtiness was parent of their unbelief." For when having before
enjoyed greater privileges than the heathen, through having received the law,
through knowing God, and the rest which Paul enumerates, they after the coming
of Christ saw the heathen and themselves called on equal terms through faith,
and after faith received one of the circumcision in nothing preferred to the
Gentile, they came to envy and were stung by their haughtiness, and could not
endure the unspeakable and exceeding lovingkindness of the Lord. So this has