as "know not the power of God" [Matthew 22:29], that we may not impute this to
them, they allege: We do not say it with this meaning, but because there is no
need of the body. Truly it may be seasonably said, "The fool will speak
foolishness." [Isaiah 32:6] Are you not ashamed not to grant, that God can create
from nothing? If he creates from matter already existing, wherein does He differ
from men? But whence, you demand, are evils? Though you should not know
whence, ought you for that to introduce another evil in the knowledge of evils?
Hereupon two absurdities follow. For if you do not grant, that from things which
are not, God made the things which are, much more shall you be ignorant
whence are evils: and then, again, you introduce another evil, the affirming that
Evil ([τὴν κακίαν]) is uncreated. Consider now what a thing it is, when you wish
to find the source of evils, to be both ignorant of it, and to add another to it.
Search after the origin of evils, and do not blaspheme God. And how do I
blaspheme? Says he. When you make out that evils have a power equal to God's;
a power uncreated. For, observe what Paul says; "For the invisible things of Him
from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made." [Romans 1:20] But the devil would have both to be of matter,
that there may be nothing left from which we may come to the knowledge of
God. For tell me, whether is harder: to take that which is by nature evil (if indeed
there be ought such; for I speak upon your principles, since there is no such thing
as evil by nature), and make it either good, or even coefficent of good? Or, to
make of nothing? Whether is easier (I speak of quality); to induce the nonexistent quality; or to take the existing quality, and change it into its contrary?
Where there is no house, to make the house; or where it is utterly destroyed, to
make it identically exist again? Why, as this is impossible, so is that: to make a
thing into its opposite. Tell me, whether is harder; to make a perfume, or to make
filth have the effect of perfume? Say, whether of these is easier (since we subject
God to our reasonings: nay, not we, but you); to form eyes, or to make a blind
man to see continuing blind, and yet more sharp-sighted, than one who does see?
To make blindness into sight, and deafness into hearing? To me the other seems

easier. Say then do you grant God that which is harder, and not grant the easier?
But souls also they affirm to be of His substance. Do you see what a number of
impieties and absurdities are here! In the first place, wishing to show that evils
are from God, they bring in another thing more impious than this, that they are
equal with Him in majesty, and God prior in existence to none of them, assigning
this great prerogative even to them! In the next place, they affirm evil to be
indestructible: for if that which is uncreated can be destroyed, you see the
blasphemy! So that it comes to this, either that nothing is of God if not these; or
that these are God! Thirdly, what I have before spoken of, in this point they
defeat themselves, and prepare against themselves fresh indignation. Fourthly,
they affirm unordered matter to possess such inherent ([ἐ] [πιτηδειότητα])
power. Fifthly, that evil is the cause of the goodness of God, and that without this
the Good had not been good. Sixthly, they bar against us the ways of attaining
unto the knowledge of God. Seventhly, they bring God down into men, yea
plants and logs. For if our soul be of the substance of God, but the process of its
transmigration into new bodies brings it at last into cucumbers, and melons, and
onions, why then the substance of God will pass into cucumbers! And if we say,
that the Holy Ghost fashioned the Temple [of our Lord's body] in the Virgin,
they laugh us to scorn: and if, that He dwelt in that spiritual Temple, again they
laugh; while they themselves are not ashamed to bring down God's substance
into cucumbers, and melons, and flies, and caterpillars, and asses, thus
excogitating a new fashion of idolatry: for let it not be as the Egyptians have it,
"The onion is God;" but let it be, "God in the onion"! Why do you shrink from
the notion of God's entering into a body? 'It is shocking,' says he. Why then this
is much more shocking. But, forsooth, it is not shocking— how should it be?—
this same thing which is so, if it be into us! 'But your notion is indeed shocking.'
Do ye see the filthiness of their impiety?— But why do they not wish the body
to be raised? And why do they say the body is evil? By what then, tell me, do
you know God? By what have you the knowledge of existing things? The
philosopher too: by means of what is he a philosopher, if the body does nothing