a necessary thing, (for how should it be?) but that the wicked also have their
work. For if all were of gold or of silver, there would be no need of the viler sort.
For instance, if all were hardy, there would be no need of houses; if all were free
from luxury, there would be no need of dainties. If all were careful only for
necessaries, there would be no need of splendid building.
"If therefore a man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto
honor, sanctified." Do you see that it is not of nature, nor of the necessity of
matter, to be a vessel of gold or of earth, but of our own choice? For otherwise
the earthen could not become gold, nor could the golden descend to the vileness
of the other. But in this case there is much change, and alteration of state. Paul
was an earthen vessel, and became a golden one. Judas was a golden vessel, and
became an earthen one. The earthen vessels, therefore, are such from
uncleanness. The fornicator and the covetous man become earthen vessels. "But
how then does he say elsewhere, 'We have this treasure in earthen vessels,' so
that he does not despise but honor the earthen vessel, speaking of it as the
recipient of the treasure?" There he shows the nature itself, and not the form of
the material. For he means to say that our body is an earthen vessel. For as
earthenware is nothing else but baked clay, so is our body nothing but clay
consolidated by the heat of the soul; for that it is earthen, is evident. For as such
a vessel is often by falling broken and dashed to pieces, so our body falls and is
dissolved by death. For how do our bones differs from a potsherd, hard and dry
as they are? Or our flesh from clay, being, like it, composed of water? But, as I
said, how is it that he does not speak contemptuously of it? Because there he is
discoursing of its nature, here of our choice. "If a man," he says, "purge himself
from these," not merely "cleanse," but "cleanse out," that is, cleanse himself
perfectly, "he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the Master's
use." The others therefore are useless for any good purpose, though some use is
made of them. "And prepared unto every good work." Even though he do it not,
he is fit for it, and has a capacity for it. We ought therefore to be prepared for
everything, even for death, for martyrdom, for a life of virginity, or for all these.

Ver. 22. "Flee also youthful lusts."
Not only the lust of fornication, but every inordinate desire is a youthful
lust. Let the aged learn that they ought not to do the deeds of the youthful. If one
be given to insolence, or a lover of power, of riches, of bodily pleasures, it is a
youthful lust, and foolish. These things must proceed from a heart not yet
established, from a mind not deeply grounded, but in a wavering state. What
then does he advise in order that none may be captivated by these things? "Flee
youthful" imaginations, but
"Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord
out of a pure heart."
He calls virtue in general, "righteousness": godliness of life, "faith,
meekness, charity."
What is meant by "those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart"? It is
as if he said, Rejoice not in those who only call upon the Lord; but those who
call upon Him sincerely and unfeignedly, who have nothing of deceit about
them, who approach Him in peace, who are not contentious. With these associate
yourself. But with others be not easy, but only as far as lies in you, be peaceable.
Ver. 23. "But foolish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do
gender strifes."
Do you see how he everywhere draws him off from questions; not that he
was not able to overthrow them; for he was well able. For had he not been able
he would have said, Be diligent, that you may be able to refute them; as when he
says, "Give attendance to reading, for by so doing you shall both save yourself
and them that hear you." [1 Timothy 4:13-16] But he knew that it was useless to
enter at all into these disputes, that there will be no end of it, save contentions,
enmities, insults, and reproaches. These "questions" therefore "avoid"; so that
there are other questions, some relating to the Scriptures, some to other things.
Ver. 24. "And the servant of the Lord must not strive."
Not even in questions ought he to strive, for the servant of the Lord must
keep far from strife, since God is the God of peace, and what should the servant