Homily 40 on the Acts of the Apostles
Acts XVIII. 18
"And Paul after this tarried there yet a good while, and then took his leave
of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him Priscilla and Aquila;
having shorn his head in Cenchrea: for he had a vow."
See how the Law was breaking up; see how they were bound by
conscience. This, namely, was a Jewish custom, to shear their heads agreeably
with a vow. But then there ought to be also a sacrifice [Acts 21:26], which was
not the case here. — "Having yet tarried:" after the beating of Sosthenes. For it
was necessary that he should yet tarry, and comfort them concerning these
things. "He sailed for Syria." Why does he desire again to come to Syria? It was
there that "the disciples were ordered to be called Christians" [Acts 11:26]:
there, that he had been "commended to the grace of God" [Acts 14:26]: there,
that he had effected such things concerning the doctrine. "And with him
Priscilla"— lo, a woman also — "and Aquila." But these he left at Ephesus.
With good reason, namely, that they should teach. For having been with him so
long time, they were learning many things: and yet he did not at present
withdraw them from their custom as Jews. "And he came to Ephesus, and left
them there: but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the
Jews. When they desired him to tarry longer time with them, he consented not;
but bade them farewell, saying, I must by all means keep this feast that comes in
Jerusalem." Therefore it was that he was hindered from coming into Asia, being
impelled to what was of pressing moment. Thus observe him here, entreated (by
them) to stay, but because he could not comply, being in haste to depart, "he
bade them farewell." However, he did not leave them without more ado, but with
promise (to return): "But I will return again unto you, if God will. And he sailed
from Ephesus." [Acts 18:19-21] "And when he had landed at Cæsarea, and gone

up, and saluted the Church, he went down to Antioch. And after he had spent
some time there, he departed, and went over all the country of Galatia and
Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples." [Acts 18:22-23] He came
again to those places which he had previously visited. "And a certain Jew named
Apollos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures,
came to Ephesus." [Acts 18:24] Lo, even learned men are now urgent, and the
disciples henceforth go abroad. Do you mark the spread of the preaching? "This
man was instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in the Spirit, he
spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of
John. And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when Aquila and
Priscilla had heard, they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way
of God more perfectly." [Acts 18:25-26] If this man knew only the baptism of
John, how is it that he was "fervent in the Spirit," for the Spirit was not given in
that way? And if those after him needed the baptism of Christ, much more would
he need it. Then what is to be said? For it is not without a meaning that the
writer has strung the two incidents together. It seems to me that this was one of
the hundred and twenty who were baptized with the Apostles: or, if not so, then
the same that took place in the case of Cornelius, took place also in the case of
this man. But neither does he receive baptism. That expression, then, "they
expounded more perfectly," seems to me to be this, that he behooved also to be
baptized. Because the other twelve knew nothing accurate, not even what related
to Jesus. And it is likely that he did in fact receive baptism. But if these
(disciples) of John, after that baptism again received baptism, was this needful
for the disciples also? And wherefore the need of water? These are very different
from him, men who did not even know whether there were a Holy Ghost. "He
was fervent," then, "in the Spirit, knowing only the baptism of John:" but these
"expounded to him more perfectly. And when he was disposed to pass into
Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the disciples to receive him; who, when he
had come, helped them much which had believed through grace." [Acts 18:27]
He wished then also to depart into Achaia, and these also encouraged (him to do