with the Father, have immortality?
"Dwelling in the light which no man can approach unto." Is He then
Himself one Light, and is there another in which He dwells? Is He then
circumscribed by place? Think not of it. By this expression is represented the
Incomprehensibleness of the Divine Nature. Thus he speaks of God, in the best
way he is able. Observe, how when the tongue would utter something great, it
fails in power.
"Whom no man has seen nor can see." As, indeed, no one has seen the Son,
nor can see Him.
"To whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen." Thus properly, and
much to the purpose, has he spoken of God. For as he had called Him to witness,
he speaks much of that Witness, that his disciple may be in the greater awe. In
these terms he ascribes glory to Him, and this is all we can do, or say. We must
not enquire too curiously, who He is. If power everlasting is His, fear not. Yea
though now it take not place, to Him is honor, to Him is power evermore.
Ver. 17. "Charge them that are rich in this world that they be not highminded."
He has well said, "rich in this world." For there are others rich in the future
world. And this advice he gives, knowing that nothing so generally produces
pride and arrogance as wealth. To abate this, therefore, he immediately adds,
"Nor trust in uncertain riches"; since that was the source of pride; inasmuch as
he who hopes in God, is not elated. Why do you place your hopes upon what is
instantly transferable? For such is wealth! And why do you hope on that of
which you can not be confident? But you say, how can they avoid being highminded? By considering the instability and uncertainty of riches, and that hope
in God is infinitely more valuable; God being the Author of wealth itself.
Ver. 17. "But in the living God," he says, "who gives us richly all things to
enjoy."
This "all things richly" is justly spoken, in reference to the changes of the
year, to air, light, water, and other gifts. For how richly and ungrudgingly are all

these bestowed! If you seek riches, seek those that are stable and enduring, and
which are the fruit of good works. He shows that this is his meaning by what
follows.
Ver. 18. "That they do good," he says, "that they be rich in good works,
ready to distribute, willing to communicate."
The first phrase refers to wealth, the second to charity. For to be willing to
communicate, implies that they are sociable and kind.
Ver. 19. "Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come."
There nothing is uncertain, for the foundation being firm, there is no
instability, all is firm, fixed, immovable, fast, and enduring.
Ver. 19. "That they may lay hold," he says, "on eternal life."
For the doing of good works can secure the enjoyment of eternal life.
Ver. 20. "O Timothy, keep that which is committed to your trust."
Let it not suffer diminution. It is not your own. You are entrusted with the
property of another, do not lessen it.
Ver. 20. "Avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of science
falsely so called."
Well did he thus call it. For where there is not faith, there is not knowledge;
when anything springs from our reasonings, it is not knowledge. Or perhaps he
says this, because some then assumed the name of Gnostics, as knowing more
than others.
Ver. 21. "Which some professing have erred concerning the faith."
You see how again he commands Timothy not even to meet them.
"Avoiding opposition." There are therefore oppositions to which we ought not to
vouchsafe an answer, because they turn men from faith, and do not suffer one to
be firmly established or fixed in it. Let us not then pursue this science, but
adhere to faith, that unshaken rock. For neither floods nor winds assailing will be
able to harm us, since we stand on the rock immovable. Thus even in this life, if
we choose Him, Who is truly the foundation, we stand, and no harm assails us.