1 Corinthians 14:2
"For he that speaks in a tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God: for no
man understands; but in the Spirit he speaks mysteries."

1 Corinthians 14:3
"But he that prophesies speaks unto men edification, and exhortation, and
comfort."
At this point he makes a comparison between the gifts, and lowers that of
the tongues, showing it to be neither altogether useless, nor very profitable by
itself. For in fact they were greatly puffed up on account of this, because the gift
was considered to be a great one. And it was thought great because the Apostles
received it first, and with so great display; it was not however therefore to be
esteemed above all the others. Wherefore then did the Apostles receive it before
the rest? Because they were to go abroad every where. And as in the time of
building the tower the one tongue was divided into many; so then the many
tongues frequently met in one man, and the same person used to discourse both
in the Persian, and the Roman, and the Indian, and many other tongues, the Spirit
sounding within him: and the gift was called the gift of tongues because he could
all at once speak various languages. See accordingly how he both depresses and
elevates it. Thus, by saying, "He that speaks with tongues, speaks not unto men,
but unto God, for no man understands," he depressed it, implying that the profit
of it was not great; but by adding, "but in the Spirit he speaks mysteries" he
again elevated it, that it might not seem to be superfluous and useless and given
in vain.
"But he that prophesies speaks unto men edification, and exhortation, and
comfort."
Do you see by what he signifies the choice nature of this gift? I.e., by the
common benefit? And how every where he gives the higher honor to that which
tends to the profit of the many? For do not the former speak unto men also? Tell
me. But not so much "edification, and exhortation, and comfort." So that the
being powered by the Spirit is common to both, as well to him that prophesies,

as to him that speaks with tongues; but in this, the one (he, I mean, who
prophesies) has the advantage in that he is also profitable unto the hearers. For
they who with tongues were not understood by them that had not the gift.
What then? Did they edify no man? "Yes," says he, "themselves alone:"
wherefore also he adds,

1 Corinthians 14:4
"He that speaks in tongue edifies himself."
And how, if he know not what he says? Why, for the present, he is speaking
of them who understand what they say—understand it themselves, but know not
how to render it unto others.
"But he that prophesies edifies the Church." Now as great as is the
difference between a single person and the Church, so great is the interval
between these two. Do you see his wisdom, how he does not thrust out the gift
and make nothing of it, but signifies it to have some advantage, small though it
be, and such as to suffice the possessor only?
2. Next, lest they should suppose that in envy to them he depresses the
tongues, (for the more part had this gift,) to correct their suspicion he says,