not sincere; for it is attended by a certain emulation and envy. But the natural are
such as that of father to son, son to father, brother to brother, grandfather to
descendant, mother to children, and if you like let us add also that of wife to
husband; for all matrimonial attachments are also of this life, and earthly. Now
these latter appear stronger than the former: appear, I said, because often they are
surpassed by them. For friends have at times shown a more genuinely kind
disposition than brothers, or than sons toward fathers; and when he whom a man
has begotten would not succor him, one who knew him not has stood by him,
and succored him. But the spiritual love is higher than all, as it were some queen
ruling her subjects; and in her form is bright: for not as the other, has she
anything of earth for her parent; neither habitual intercourse, nor benefits, nor
nature, nor time; but she descends from above, out of heaven. And why do you
wonder that she needs no benefits in order that she should subsist, seeing that
neither by injuries is she overthrown?
Now that this love is greater than the other, hear Paul saying; "For I could
wish that I myself were anathema from Christ for my brethren." [Romans 9:3]
What father would have thus wished himself in misery? And again, "To depart,
and to be with Christ" is "very far better; yet to abide in the flesh" is "more
needful for your sake." [Philippians 1:23-24] What mother would have chosen so
to speak, regardless of herself? And again hear him saying, "For being bereaved
of you for a short season, in presence, not in heart." [1 Thessalonians 2:17] And
here indeed [in the world], when a father has been insulted, he withdraws his
love; not so however there, but he went to those who stoned him, seeking to do
them good. For nothing, nothing is so strong as the bond of the Spirit. For he
who became a friend from receiving benefits, will, should these be discontinued,
become an enemy; he whom habitual intercourse made inseparable, will, when
the habit is broken through, let his friendship become extinct. A wife again,
should a broil have taken place, will leave her husband, and withdraw affection;
the son, when he sees his father living to a great age, is dissatisfied. But in case
of spiritual love there is nothing of this. For by none of these things can it be

dissolved; seeing it is not composed out of them. Neither time, nor length of
journey, nor ill usage, nor being evil spoken of, nor anger, nor insult, nor any
other thing, make inroads upon it, nor have the power of dissolving it. And that
you may know this Moses was stoned, and yet he made entreaty for them.
[Exodus 17:4] What father would have done this for one that stoned him, and
would not rather have stoned him too to death?
Let us then follow after these friendships which are of the Spirit, for they
are strong, and hard to be dissolved, and not those which arise from the table, for
these we are forbidden to carry in Thither. For hear Christ saying in the Gospel,
Call not your friends nor your neighbors, if you make a feast, but the lame, the
maimed. [Luke 14:12] With reason: for great is the recompense for these. But
you can not, nor endurest to feast with lame and blind, but thinkest it grievous
and offensive, and refusest. Now it were indeed best that you should not refuse,
however it is not necessary to do it. If you seat them not with you, send to them
of the dishes on your own table. And he that invites his friends, has done no
great thing: for he has received his recompense here. But he that called the
maimed, and poor, has God for his Debtor. Let us then not repine when we
receive not a reward here, but when we do receive; for we shall have nothing
more to receive There. In like manner, if man recompense, God recompenses
not; if man recompense not, then God will recompense. Let us then not seek
those out for our benefits, who have it in their power to requite us again, nor
bestow our favors on them with such an expectation: this were a cold thought. If
you invite a friend, the gratitude lasts till evening; and therefore the friendship
for the nonce is spent more quickly than the expenses are paid. But if you call
the poor and the maimed, never shall the gratitude perish, for God, who
remembers ever, and never forgets, you have even Him for your Debtor. What
squeamishness is this, pray, that you can not sit down in company with the poor?
What do you say? He is unclean and filthy? Then wash him, and lead him up to
your table. But he has filthy garments? Then change them, and give him clean
apparel. Do you see not how great the gain is? Christ comes unto you through