John i. 18.

of the creation, affords life to all living in the earth, much more does that revelation of the Father
which comes through the Word, give life to those who see God.
8. Inasmuch, then, as the Spirit of God pointed out by the prophets things to come, forming and
adapting us beforehand for the purpose of our being made subject to God, but it was still a future
thing that man, through the good pleasure of the Holy Spirit, should see [God], it necessarily behoved
those through whose instrumentality future things were announced, to see God, whom they intimated
as to be seen by men; in order that God, and the Son of God, and the Son, and the Father, should
not only be prophetically announced, but that He should also be seen by all His members who are
sanctified and instructed in the things of God, that man might be disciplined beforehand and
previously exercised for a reception into that glory which shall afterwards be revealed in those who
love God. For the prophets used not to prophesy in word alone, but in visions also, and in their
mode of life, and in the actions which they performed, according to the suggestions of the Spirit.
After this invisible manner, therefore, did they see God, as also Esaias says, "I have seen with mine
eyes the King, the Lord of hosts," pointing out that man should behold God with his eyes, and
hear His voice. In this manner, therefore, did they also see the Son of God as a man conversant
with men, while they prophesied what was to happen, saying that He who was not come as yet was
present proclaiming also the impassible as subject to suffering, and declaring that He who was then
in heaven had descended into the dust of death. Moreover, [with regard to] the other arrangements
concerning the summing up that He should make, some of these they beheld through visions, others
they proclaimed by word, while others they indicated typically by means of [outward] action, seeing
visibly those things which were to be seen; heralding by word of mouth those which should be
heard; and performing by actual operation what should take place by action; but [at the same time]
announcing all prophetically. Wherefore also Moses declared that God was indeed a consuming
fire (igneum) to the people that transgressed the law, and threatened that God would bring upon
them a day of fire; but to those who had the fear of God he said, "The Lord God is merciful and
gracious, and long-suffering, and of great commiseration, and true, and keeps justice and mercy
for thousands, forgiving unrighteousness, and transgressions, and sins."
9. And the Word spake to Moses, appearing before him, "just as any one might speak to his
friend." But Moses desired to see Him openly who was speaking with him, and was thus
addressed: "Stand in the deep place of the rock, and with My hand I will cover thee. But when My
splendour shall pass by, then thou shalt see My back parts, but My face thou shalt not see: for no
man sees My face, and shall live." Two facts are thus signified: that it is impossible for man to