was no more place for them." And he sets forth, too, the things connected with the general
resurrection and the judgment, mentioning "the dead, great and small." "The sea," he says, "gave
up the dead which it had in it, and death and hell delivered up the dead that they contained; and the
books were opened. Moreover," he says, "the book of life was opened, and the dead were judged
out of those things that were written in the books, according to their works; and death and hell were
sent into the lake of fire, the second death." Now this is what is called Gehenna, which the Lord
styled eternal fire. "And if any one," it is said, "was not found written in the book of life, he was
sent into the lake of fire." And after this, he says, "I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the
first heaven and earth have passed away; also there was no more sea. And I saw the holy city, new
Jerusalem, coming down from heaven, as a bride adorned for her husband." "And I heard," it is
said, "a great voice from the throne, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He
will dwell with them; and they shall be His people, and God Himself shall be with them as their
God. And He will wipe away every tear from their eyes; and death shall be no more, neither sorrow,
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, because the former things have passed away."
Isaiah also declares the very same: "For there shall be a new heaven and a new earth; and there
shall be no remembrance of the former, neither shall the heart think about them, but they shall find
in it joy and exultation." Now this is what has been said by the apostle: "For the fashion of this
world passeth away." To the same purpose did the Lord also declare, "Heaven and earth shall
pass away." When these things, therefore, pass away above the earth, John, the Lord's disciple,
says that the new Jerusalem above shall [then] descend, as a bride adorned for her husband; and
that this is the tabernacle of God, in which God will dwell with men. Of this Jerusalem the former
one is an image—that Jerusalem of the former earth in which the righteous are disciplined beforehand
for incorruption and prepared for salvation. And of this tabernacle Moses received the pattern in
the mount; and nothing is capable of being allegorized, but all things are stedfast, and true, and
substantial, having been made by God for righteous men's enjoyment. For as it is God truly who
raises up man, so also does man truly rise from the dead, and not allegorically, as I have shown
repeatedly. And as he rises actually, so also shall he be actually disciplined beforehand for
incorruption, and shall go forwards and flourish in the times of the kingdom, in order that he may

Rev. xx. 15.

Matt. xxvi. 35.

be capable of receiving the glory of the Father. Then, when all things are made new, he shall truly
dwell in the city of God. For it is said, "He that sitteth on the throne said, Behold, I make all things
new. And the Lord says, Write all this; for these words are faithful and true. And He said to me,
They are done." And this is the truth of the matter.