"That now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known
by the Church the manifold wisdom of God." And this has God done in honor to
us, so that they not without us should hear the mysteries. For we, too, ourselves,
whomsoever we make our friends, use to speak of this as a sure proof of
friendship towards them, that we tell our secrets to no one in preference to them.
Let those hear who expose to shame the secrets of the Gospel, and unto all
indiscriminately display the "pearls" and the doctrine, and who cast "the holy
things" unto "dogs," and "swine," and useless reasonings. For the Mystery wants
no argumentation; but just what it is, that only is to be declared. Since it will not
be a mystery, divine and whole in all its parts, when you add any thing to it of
yourself also.
And in another sense, too, a mystery is so called; because we do not behold
the things which we see, but some things we see and others we believe. For such
is the nature of our Mysteries. I, for instance, feel differently upon these subjects
from an unbeliever. I hear, "Christ was crucified;" and immediately I admire His
loving-kindness unto men: the other hears, and esteems it weakness. I hear, "He
became a servant;" and I wonder at his care for us: the other hears, and counts it
dishonor. I hear, "He died;" and am astonished at His might, that being in death
He was not holden, but even broke the bands of death: the other hears, and
surmises it to be helplessness. He hearing of the resurrection, says, the thing is a
legend; I, aware of the facts which demonstrate it, fall down and worship the
dispensation of God. He hearing of a laver, counts it merely as water: but I
behold not simply the thing which is seen, but the purification of the soul which
is by the Spirit. He considers only that my body has been washed; but I have
believed that the soul also has become both pure and holy; and I count it the
sepulchre, the resurrection, the sanctification, the righteousness, the redemption,
the adoption, the inheritance, the kingdom of heaven, the plenary effusion
([χορηγίαν]) of the Spirit. For not by the sight do I judge of the things that
appear, but by the eyes of the mind. I hear of the "Body of Christ:" in one sense I
understand the expression, in another sense the unbeliever.

And just as children, looking on their books, know not the meaning of the
letters, neither know what they see; yea more, if even a grown man be unskilful
in letters, the same thing will befall him; but the skilful will find much meaning
stored up in the letters, even complete lives and histories: and an epistle in the
hands of one that is unskilful will be accounted but paper and ink; but he that
knows how to read will both hear a voice, and hold converse with the absent,
and will reply whatsoever he chooses by means of writing: so it is also in regard
of the Mystery. Unbelievers albeit they hear, seem not to hear: but the faithful,
having the skill which is by the Spirit, behold the meaning of the things stored
therein. For instance, it is this very thing that Paul signified, when he said that
even now the word preached is hidden: for "unto them that perish," he says, "it is
hidden." [2 Corinthians 4:3]
In another point of view, the word indicates also the Gospel's being contrary
to all expectation. By no other name is Scripture wont to call what happens
beyond all hope and above all thought of men. Wherefore also in another place,
"My mystery is for Me ," and for Mine. And Paul again, [2 Corinthians 15:51]
"Behold, I show you a mystery: we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be
changed."
3. And though it be everywhere preached, still is it a mystery; for as we
have been commanded, "what things we have heard in the ear, to speak upon the
house tops," so have we been also charged, "not to give the holy things unto dogs
nor yet to cast our pearls before swine." [Matthew 7:9] For some are carnal and
do not understand: others have a veil upon their hearts and do not see: wherefore
that is above all things a mystery, which everywhere is preached, but is not
known of those who have not a right mind; and is revealed not by wisdom but by
the Holy Ghost, so far as is possible for us to receive it. And for this cause a man
would not err, who in this respect also should entitle it a mystery, the utterance
whereof is forbidden. ([ἀπόῤῥητον]) For not even unto us, the faithful, has been
committed entire certainty and exactness. Wherefore Paul also said, [1
Corinthians 13:9] "We know in part, and we prophesy in part: for now we see in