SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.4.

of the disposition which is reducible to the genus of a material
cause, we speak of loving something for that which disposed us to
love it, e.g. we love a man for the favors received from him, although
after we have begun to love our friend, we no longer love him for his
favors, but for his virtue. Accordingly, as regards the first three
ways, we love God, not for anything else, but for Himself. For He is
not directed to anything else as to an end, but is Himself the last end
of all things; nor does He require to receive any form in order to be
good, for His very substance is His goodness, which is itself the
exemplar of all other good things; nor again does goodness accrue
to Him from aught else, but from Him to all other things. In the fourth
way, however, He can be loved for something else, because we are
disposed by certain things to advance in His love, for instance, by
favors bestowed by Him, by the rewards we hope to receive from
Him, or even by the punishments which we are minded to avoid
through Him.
Reply to Objection 1: From the things it knows the soul learns to
love what it knows not, not as though the things it knows were the
reason for its loving things it knows not, through being the formal,
final, or efficient cause of this love, but because this knowledge
disposes man to love the unknown.
Reply to Objection 2: Knowledge of God is indeed acquired through
other things, but after He is known, He is no longer known through
them, but through Himself, according to Jn. 4:42: "We now believe,
not for thy saying: for we ourselves have heard Him, and know that
this is indeed the Saviour of the world."
Reply to Objection 3: Hope and fear lead to charity by way of a
certain disposition, as was shown above (Question 17, Article 8;
Question 19, Articles 4,7,10).

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.26, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether God can be loved immediately in this

life?
Objection 1: It would seem that God cannot be loved immediately in
this life. For the "unknown cannot be loved" as Augustine says (De
Trin. x, 1). Now we do not know God immediately in this life, since
"we see now through a glass, in a dark manner" (1 Cor. 13:12).
Neither, therefore, do we love Him immediately.
Objection 2: Further, he who cannot do what is less, cannot do what
is more. Now it is more to love God than to know Him, since "he who
is joined" to God by love, is "one spirit with Him" (1 Cor. 6:17). But
man cannot know God immediately. Therefore much less can he love
Him immediately.
Objection 3: Further, man is severed from God by sin, according to
Is. 59:2: "Your iniquities have divided between you and your God."
Now sin is in the will rather than in the intellect. Therefore man is
less able to love God immediately than to know Him immediately.
On the contrary, Knowledge of God, through being mediate, is said
to be "enigmatic," and "falls away" in heaven, as stated in 1 Cor.
13:12. But charity "does not fall away" as stated in the same passage
(1 Cor. 13:12). Therefore the charity of the way adheres to God
immediately.
I answer that, As stated above (FP, Question 82, Article 3; Question
84, Article 7), the act of a cognitive power is completed by the thing
known being in the knower, whereas the act of an appetitive power
consists in the appetite being inclined towards the thing in itself.
Hence it follows that the movement of the appetitive power is
towards things in respect of their own condition, whereas the act of
a cognitive power follows the mode of the knower.
Now in itself the very order of things is such, that God is knowable
and lovable for Himself, since He is essentially truth and goodness
itself, whereby other things are known and loved: but with regard to
us, since our knowledge is derived through the senses, those things
are knowable first which are nearer to our senses, and the last term
of knowledge is that which is most remote from our senses.