ought not to deviate into profane error, so as to say anything of the
Trinity which does not suit the Creator, but rather the creature, or which
is feigned outright by mere empty thought.

### CHAP. 2.—THE THREE THINGS WHICH ARE FOUND IN LOVE MUST BE CONSIDERED.

2. And this being so, let us direct our attention to those three things
which we fancy we have found. We are not yet speaking of heavenly
things, nor yet of God the Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, but of that
inadequate image, which yet is an image, that is, man; for our feeble
mind perhaps can gaze upon this more familiarly and more easily. Well
then, when I, who make this inquiry, love anything, there are three things
concerned—myself, and that which I love, and love itself. For I do not
love love, except I love a lover; for there is no love where nothing is loved.
Therefore there are three things—he who loves, and that which is loved,
and love. But what if I love none except myself? Will there not then be
two things—that which I love, and love? For he who loves and that which
is loved are the same when any one loves himself; just as to love and to be
loved, in the same way, is the very same thing when any one loves
himself. Since the same thing is said, when it is said, he loves himself, and
he is loved by himself. For in that case to love and to be loved are not two
different things: just as he who loves and he who is loved are not two
different persons. But yet, even so, love and what is loved are still two
things. For there is no love when any one loves himself, except when love
itself is loved. But it is one thing to love one's self, another to love one's
own love. For love is not loved, unless as already loving something; since
where nothing is loved there is no love. Therefore there are two things
when any one loves himself—love, and that which is loved. For then he
that loves and that which is loved are one. Whence it seems that it does
not follow that three things are to be understood wherever love is. For let
us put aside from the inquiry all the other many things of which a man
consists; and in order that we may discover clearly what we are now
seeking, as far as in such a subject is possible, let us treat of the mind
alone. The mind, then, when it loves itself, discloses two things—mind
and love. But what is to love one's self, except to wish to help one's self to
the enjoyment of self? And when any one wishes himself to be just as

much as he is, then the will is on a par with the mind, and the love is
equal to him who loves. And if love is a substance, it is certainly not body,
but spirit; and the mind also is not body, but spirit. Yet love and mind are
not two spirits, but one spirit; nor yet two essences, but one: and yet here
are two things that are one, he that loves and love; or, if you like so to put
it, that which is loved and love. And these two, indeed, are mutually said
relatively. Since he who loves is referred to love, and love to him who
loves. For he who loves, loves with some love, and love is the love of some
one who loves. But mind and spirit are not said relatively, but express
essence. For mind and spirit do not exist because the mind and spirit of
some particular man exists. For if we subtract the body from that which is
man, which is so called with the conjunction of body, the mind and spirit
remain. But if we subtract him that loves, then there is no love; and if we
subtract love, then there is no one that loves. And therefore, in so far as
they are mutually referred to one another, they are two; but whereas they
are spoken in respect to themselves, each are spirit, and both together
also are one spirit; and each are mind, and both together one mind.
Where, then, is the trinity? Let us attend as much as we can, and let us
invoke the everlasting light, that He may illuminate our darkness, and
that we may see in ourselves, as much as we are permitted, the image of
God.