Ver. 6. "Who gave Himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time."
Was Christ then a ransom for the Heathen? Undoubtedly Christ died even
for Heathen; and you cannot bear to pray for them. Why then, you ask, did they
not believe? Because they would not: but His part was done. His suffering was a
"Testimony," he says; for He came, it is meant, "to bear witness to the truth" of
the Father, and was slain. Thus not only the Father bore witness to Him, but He
to the Father. "For I came," He says, "in my Father's name." [John 5:43] And
again, "No man has seen God at any time." [John 1:18] And again, "That they
might know You, the only true God." [John 17:3] And, "God is a Spirit," [John
4:24] And He bore witness even to the death. But this, "in due time," means, In
the fittest time.
Ver. 7. "Whereunto I am ordained a preacher and an Apostle, (I speak the
truth in Christ, and lie not:) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity."
Since therefore Christ suffered for the Gentiles, and I was separated to be a
"teacher of the Gentiles," why do you refuse to pray for them? He fully shows
his own credibility, by saying that he was "ordained" [Acts 13:2], that is,
separated, for this purpose, the other Apostles being backward in teaching the
Gentiles; he adds, "in faith and verity," to show that in that faith there was no
deceit. Here is observable the extension of grace. For the Jews had no prayers for
the Gentiles; but now grace is extended to them: and when he says that he was
separated to be a Teacher of the Gentiles, he intimates that grace was now shed
over every part of the world.
"He gave himself a ransom," he says, how then was He delivered up by the
Father? Because it was of His goodness. And what means "ransom"? God was
about to punish them, but He forbore to do it. They were about to perish, but in
their stead He gave His own Son, and sent us as heralds to proclaim the Cross.
These things are sufficient to attract all, and to demonstrate the love of Christ.
Moral. So truly, so inexpressibly great are the benefits which God has bestowed
upon us. He sacrificed Himself for His enemies, who hated and rejected Him.
What no one would do for friends, for brethren, for children, that the Lord has

done for His servants; a Lord not Himself such an one as His servants, but God
for men; for men not deserving. For had they been deserving, had they done His
pleasure, it would have been less wonderful; but that He died for such
ungrateful, such obstinate creatures, this it is which strikes every mind with
amazement. For what men would not do for their fellow-men, that has God done
for us! Yet after such a display of love towards us, we hold back, and are not in
earnest in our love of Christ. He has sacrificed Himself for us; for Him we make
no sacrifice. We neglect Him when He wants necessary food; sick and naked we
visit Him not. What do we not deserve, what wrath, what punishment, what hell?
Were there no other inducement, it should be sufficient to prevail with every one
that He condescended to make human sufferings His own, to say I hunger, I
thirst.
O the tyranny of wealth! Or rather the wickedness of those who are its
willing slaves! For it has no great power of itself, but through our weakness and
servility: it is we that are mean and groveling, that are carnal and without
understanding. For what power has money? It is mute and insensible. If the
devil, that wicked spirit, that crafty confounder of all things, has no power, what
power has money? When you look upon silver, fancy it is tin! Cannot you? Then
hold it for what it really is; for earth it is. But if you cannot reason thus, consider
that we too shall perish, that many of those who have possessed it have gained
scarce any advantage by it, that thousands who gloried in it are now dust and
ashes. That they are suffering extreme punishment, and far more beggarly than
they that fed from glass and earthenware; that those who once reclined on ivory
couches, are poorer now than those who are lying on the dunghill. But it delights
the eyes! How many other things delight them more! The flowers, the pure sky,
the firmament, the bright sun, are far more grateful to the eye. For it has much of
rust, whence some have asserted that it was black, which appears from the
images that turn black. But there is no blackness in the sun, the heaven, the stars.
Much greater delight is there in these brilliants than in its color. It is not
therefore its brilliancy that makes it please, but covetousness and iniquity; these,