For this cause Paul also, when urging us in another way to reconciliation,
said, "Let not the sun go down upon your wrath." [Ephesians 4:26] For much as
Christ by this argument of the sacrifice, so there Paul by that of the day, is urging
us on to the self-same point. Because in truth he fears the night, lest it overtake
him that is smitten alone, and make the wound greater. For whereas in the day
there are many to distract, and draw him off; in the night, when he is alone, and
is thinking it over by himself, the waves swell, and the storm becomes greater.
Therefore Paul, you see, to prevent this, would fain commit him to the night
already reconciled, that the devil may after that have no opportunity, from his
solitude, to rekindle the furnace of his wrath, and make it fiercer. Thus also
Christ permits not, though it be ever so little delay, lest, the sacrifice being
accomplished, such an one become more remiss, procrastinating from day to
day: for He knows that the case requires very speedy treatment. And as a skillful
physician exhibits not only the preventives of our diseases, but their correctives
also, even so does He likewise. Thus, to forbid our calling "fool," is a preventive
of enmity; but to command reconciliation is a means of removing the diseases
that ensue on the enmity.
And mark how both commands are set forth with earnestness. For as in the
former case He threatened hell, so here He receives not the gift before the
reconciliation, indicating great displeasure, and by all these methods destroying
both the root and the produce.
And first of all He says, "Be not angry;" and after that, "revile not." For
indeed both these are augmented, the one by the other: from enmity is reviling,
from reviling enmity. On this account then He heals now the root, and now the
fruit; hindering indeed the evil from ever springing up in the first instance: but if
perchance it may have sprouted up and borne its most evil fruit, then by all
means He burns it down the more.
13. Therefore, you see, having mentioned, first the judgment, then the
council, then hell, and having spoken of His own sacrifice, He adds other topics
again, thus speaking:

"Agree with your adversary quickly, while you are in the way with him."
[Matthew 5:25]
That is, that you may not say, "What then, if I am injured;" "what if I am
plundered, and dragged too before the tribunal?" even this occasion and excuse
He has taken away: for He commands us not even so to be at enmity. Then, since
this injunction was great, He draws His advice from the things present, which
are wont to restrain the grosser sort more than the future. "Why, what do you
say?" says He. "That your adversary is stronger, and does you wrong? Of course
then he will wrong you more, if you do not make it up, but art forced to go into
court. For in the former case, by giving up some money, you will keep your
person free; but when you have come under the sentence of the judge, you will
both be bound, and pay the utmost penalty. But if you avoid the contest there,
you will reap two good results: first, not having to suffer anything painful: and
secondly, that the good done will be thereafter your own doing, and no longer
the effect of compulsion on his part. But if you will not be ruled by these sayings,
you wrong not him, so much as yourself."
And see here also how He hastens him; for having said, "Agree with your
adversary," He added, "quickly;" and He was not satisfied with this, but even of
this quickness He has required a further increase, saying, "Whilst you are in the
way with him;" pressing and hastening him hereby with great earnestness. For
nothing does so much turn our life upside down, as delay and procrastination in
the performance of our good works. Nay, this has often caused us to lose all.
Therefore, as Paul for his part says, "Before the sun set, do away the enmity;"
and as He Himself had said above, "Before the offering is completed, be
reconciled;" so He says in this place also, "Quickly, while you are in the way
with him," before you have come to the doors of the court; before you stand at
the bar and art come to be thenceforth under the sway of him that judges. Since,
before entering in, you have all in your own control; but if you set your foot on
that threshold, you will not by ever so earnest efforts be able to arrange your
matters at your will, having come under the constraint of another.