FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.5.

from an exterior principle. Consequently it is contrary to the nature
of the will's own act, that it should be subject to compulsion and
violence: just as it is also contrary to the nature of a natural
inclination or movement. For a stone may have an upward movement
from violence, but that this violent movement be from its natural
inclination is impossible. In like manner a man may be dragged by
force: but it is contrary to the very notion of violence, that he be
dragged of his own will.
Reply to Objection 1: God Who is more powerful than the human will,
can move the will of man, according to Prov. 21:1: "The heart of the
king is in the hand of the Lord; whithersoever He will He shall turn
it." But if this were by compulsion, it would no longer be by an act of
the will, nor would the will itself be moved, but something else
against the will.
Reply to Objection 2: It is not always a violent movement, when a
passive subject is moved by its active principle; but only when this
is done against the interior inclination of the passive subject.
Otherwise every alteration and generation of simply bodies would be
unnatural and violent: whereas they are natural by reason of the
natural interior aptitude of the matter or subject to such a
disposition. In like manner when the will is moved, according to its
own inclination, by the appetible object, this movement is not violent
but voluntary.
Reply to Objection 3: That to which the will tends by sinning,
although in reality it is evil and contrary to the rational nature,
nevertheless is apprehended as something good and suitable to
nature, in so far as it is suitable to man by reason of some
pleasurable sensation or some vicious habit.

FIRST PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.6, C.6.

### ARTICLE 5. Whether violence causes involuntariness?

Objection 1: It would seem that violence does not cause
involuntariness. For we speak of voluntariness and involuntariness
in respect of the will. But violence cannot be done to the will, as
shown above (Article 4). Therefore violence cannot cause
involuntariness.
Objection 2: Further, that which is done involuntarily is done with
grief, as Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 24) and the Philosopher (Ethic.
iii, 5) say. But sometimes a man suffers compulsion without being
grieved thereby. Therefore violence does not cause involuntariness.
Objection 3: Further, what is from the will cannot be involuntary. But
some violent actions proceed from the will: for instance, when a man
with a heavy body goes upwards; or when a man contorts his limbs
in a way contrary to their natural flexibility. Therefore violence does
not cause involuntariness.
On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 1) and Damascene (De
Fide Orth. ii, 24) say that "things done under compulsion are
involuntary."
I answer that, Violence is directly opposed to the voluntary, as
likewise to the natural. For the voluntary and the natural have this in
common, that both are from an intrinsic principle; whereas violence
is from an extrinsic principle. And for this reason, just as in things
devoid of knowledge, violence effects something against nature: so
in things endowed with knowledge, it effects something against the
will. Now that which is against nature is said to be "unnatural"; and
in like manner that which is against the will is said to be
"involuntary." Therefore violence causes involuntariness.
Reply to Objection 1: The involuntary is opposed to the voluntary.
Now it has been said (Article 4) that not only the act, which proceeds
immediately from the will, is called voluntary, but also the act
commanded by the will. Consequently, as to the act which proceeds
immediately from the will, violence cannot be done to the will, as
stated above (Article 4): wherefore violence cannot make that act
involuntary. But as to the commanded act, the will can suffer
violence: and consequently in this respect violence causes