THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.4.

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.5.

### ARTICLE 4. Whether circumcision bestowed sanctifying

grace?
Objection 1: It seems that circumcision did not bestow sanctifying
grace. For the Apostle says (Gal. 2:21): "If justice be by the Law, then
Christ died in vain," i.e. without cause. But circumcision was an
obligation imposed by the Law, according to Gal. 5:3: "I testify . . . to
every man circumcising himself, that ne is a debtor to do the whole
law." Therefore, if justice be by circumcision, "Christ died in vain," i.
e. without cause. But this cannot be allowed. Therefore circumcision
did not confer grace whereby the sinner is made righteous.
Objection 2: Further, before the institution of circumcision faith
alone sufficed for justification; hence Gregory says (Moral. iv): "Faith
alone did of old in behalf of infants that for which the water of
Baptism avails with us." But faith has lost nothing of its strength
through the commandment of circumcision. Therefore faith alone
justified little ones, and not circumcision.
Objection 3: Further, we read (Joshua 5:5,6) that "the people that
were born in the desert, during the forty years . . . were
uncircumcised." If, therefore, original sin was taken away by
circumcision, it seems that all who died in the desert, both little
children and adults, were lost. And the same argument avails in
regard to those who died before the eighth day, which was that of
circumcision, which day could nol be anticipated, as stated above
(Article 3, ad 3).
Objection 4: Further, nothing but sin closes the entrance to the
heavenly kingdom. But before the Passion the entrance to the
heavenly kingdom was closed to the circumcised. Therefore men
were not justified from sin by circumcision.
Objection 5: Further, original sin is not remitted without actual sin
being remitted also: because "it is wicked to hope for half
forgiveness from God," as Augustine says (De Vera et Falsa Poenit.
ix). But we read nowhere of circumcision as remitting actual sin.
Therefore neither did it remit original sin.
On the contrary, Augustine says, writing to Valerius in answer to
Julian (De Nup. et Concup. ii): "From the time that circumcision was

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.70, C.5.

instituted among God's people, as 'a seal of the justice of the faith,' it
availed little children unto sanctification by cleansing them from the
original and bygone sin; just as Baptism also from the time of its
institution began to avail unto the renewal of man."
I answer that, All are agreed in saying that original sin was remitted
in circumcision. But some said that no grace was conferred, and that
the only effect was to remit sin. The Master holds this opinion (Sent.
iv, D, 1), and in a gloss on Rm. 4:11. But this is impossible, since
guilt is not remitted except by grace, according to Rm. 3:2: "Being
justified freely by His grace," etc.
Wherefore others said that grace was bestowed by circumcision, as
to that effect which is the remission of guilt, but not as to its positive
effects; lest they should be compelled to say that the grace
bestowed in circumcision sufficed for the fulfilling of the precepts of
the Law, and that, consequently, the coming of Christ was
unnecessary. But neither can this opinion stand. First, because by
circumcision children. received the power of obtaining glory at the
allotted time, which is the last positive effect of grace. Secondly,
because, in the order of the formal cause, positive effects naturally
precede those that denote privation, although it is the reverse in the
order of the material cause: since a form does not remove a privation
save by informing the subject.
Consequently, others said that grace was conferred in circumcision,
also as a particular positive effect consisting in being made worthy
of eternal life; but not as to all its effects, for it did not suffice for the
repression of the concupiscence of the fomes, nor again for the
fulfilment of the precepts of the Law. And this was my opinion at one
time (Sent. iv, D, 1; Question 2, Article 4). But if one consider the
matter carefully, it is clear that this is not true. Because the least
grace can resist any degree of concupiscence, and avoid every
mortal sin, that is committed in transgressing the precepts of the
Law; for the smallest degree of charity loves God more than cupidity
loves "thousands of gold and silver" (Ps. 118:72).
We must say, therefore, that grace was bestowed in circumcision as
to all the effects of grace, but not as in Baptism. Because in Baptism
grace is bestowed by the very power of Baptism itself, which power
Baptism has as the instrument of Christ's Passion already
consummated. Whereas circumcision bestowed grace, inasmuch as
it was a sign of faith in Christ's future Passion: so that the man who