price." belongs to us peculiarly. For he reminds us of the greatness of the benefit
and of the mode of our salvation, signifying that when we were alienated, we
were "bought:" and not simply "bought," but, "with a price."
"Glorify then, take up and bear, God in your body, and in your spirit." Now
these things he says, that we may not only flee fornication in the body, but also
in the spirit of our mind abstain from every wicked thought, and from driving
away grace.
"Which are God's." For as he had said "your," he added therefore, "which
are God's:" continually reminding us that all things belong to the Lord, both
body and soul and spirit: For some say, that the words "in the spirit" mean the
gracious Gift; for if That be in us, God is glorified. And this will be, if we have a
clean heart.
But He has spoken of these things as God's, not only because He brought
them into being, but also because, when they were alienated, He won them again
a second time, paying as the price, the blood of the Son. Mark how He brought
the whole to completion in Christ, how He raised us up into heaven. "You are
members of Christ," says he, "you are a temple of the Spirit." Become not then
"members of a harlot:" for it is not your body which is insulted; since it is not
your body at all, but Christ's. And these things he spoke, both to make manifest
His loving-kindness in that our body is His, and to withdraw us from all evil
license. For if the body be another's, "you have no authority," says he, "to insult
another's body; and especially when it is the Lord's; nor yet to pollute a temple
of the Spirit." For if any one who invades a private house and makes his way
revelling into it, must answer for it most severely; think what dreadful things he
shall endure who makes a temple of the King a robber's lurking place.
Considering these things therefore, reverence thou Him that dwells within.
For the Paraclete is He. Thrill before Him that is enfolded and cleaves unto you;
for Christ is He. Have you indeed made yourself members of Christ? Think thus,
and continue chaste; whose members they were, and Whose they have become.
Erewhile they were members of an harlot, and Christ has made them members of

His own Body. You have therefore henceforth no authority over them. Serve
Him that has set you free.
For supposing you had a daughter, and in extreme madness had let her out
to a procurer for hire, and made her live a harlot's life, and then a king's son were
to pass by, and free her from that slavery, and join her in marriage to himself;
you could have no power thenceforth to bring her into the brothel. For you gave
her up once for all, and sold her. Such as this is our case also. We let out our own
flesh for hire unto the Devil, that grievous procurer: Christ saw and set it free,
and withdrew it from that evil tyranny; it is not then ours any more but His who
delivered it. If you be willing to use it as a King's bride, there is none to hinder;
but if you bring it where it was before, you will suffer just what they ought who
are guilty of such outrages. Wherefore you should rather adorn instead of
disgracing it. For you have no authority over the flesh in the wicked lusts, but in
those things alone which God may enjoin. Let the thought enter your mind at
least from what great outrage God has delivered it. For in truth never did any
harlot expose herself so shamefully as our nature before this. For robberies,
murders, and every wicked thought entered in and lay with the soul, and for a
small and vulgar hire, the present pleasure. For the soul, being mixed up with all
wicked devices and deeds, reaped this reward and no other.
However, in the time before this, bad though it were to be such as these, it
was not so bad: but after heaven, after the King's courts, after partaking of the
tremendous Mysteries, again to be contaminated, what pardon shall this have?
Or, do you not think that the covetous too, and all those whom he recounted
before, have the Devil to lie with them? And do you not judge that the women
who beautify themselves for pollution have intercourse with him? Why, who
shall gainsay this word? But if any be contentious, let him uncover the soul of
the women who behave in this unseemly manner, and he will surely see that the
wicked demon closely entwined with them. For it is hard, brethren, it is hard,
perchance even impossible, when the body is thus beautified, for the soul to be
beautified at the same time: but one must needs be neglected, while the other is