every thing, as if he had an hundred eyes. Having exalted Faith, and proved its
elder claims, that the Law may not be considered superfluous, he sets right this
side of the doctrine also, and proves that the Law was not given without a view,
but altogether profitably. "Because of transgressions;" that is to say, that the
Jews might not be let live carelessly, and plunge into the depth of wickedness,
but that the Law might be placed upon them as a bridle, guiding, regulating, and
checking them from transgressing, if not all, at least some of the
commandments. Not slight then was the advantage of the Law; but for how
long?
Ver. 19. "Till the seed should come to whom the promise has been made."
This is said of Christ; if then it was given until His advent, why do you
protract it beyond its natural period?
Ver. 19. "And it was ordained through Angels by the hand of a Mediator."
He either calls the priests Angels, or he declares that the Angels themselves
ministered to the delivery of the Law. By Mediator here he means Christ, and
shows that He was before it, and Himself the Giver of it.
Ver. 20. "Now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one."
What can the heretics say to this? For as, according to them, the expression
"the Only True God" excludes the Son from being true God, so here the phrase
"God is One," excludes Him from being God in any sense. But if, although the
Father is called "One God," the Son is nevertheless God, it is very plain that
though the Father is called "Very God," the Son is very God likewise. Now a
mediator, says he, is between two parties; of whom then is Christ the Mediator?
Plainly of God and of men. Observe, he says, that Christ also gave the Law;
what therefore it was His to give, it is His to annul.
Ver. 21. "Is the Law then against the promises of God?"
For if the blessing is given in the seed of Abraham, but the Law brings in
the curse, it must be contrary to the promises. This objection he meets, first, by a
protest, in the words,
Ver. 21. "God forbid:"

And next he brings his proof;
Ver. 21. "For if there had been a law given which could make alive verily
righteousness would have been of the Law."
His meaning is as follows; If we had our hope of life in the Law, and our
salvation depended on it, the objection might be valid. But if it save you, by
means of Faith, though it brings you under the curse, you suffer nothing from it,
gain no harm, in that Faith comes and sets all right. Had the promise been by the
Law, you had reasonably feared lest, separating from the Law, you should
separate from righteousness, but if it was given in order to shut up all, that is, to
convince all and expose their individual sins, far from excluding you from the
promises, it now aids you in obtaining them. This is shown by the words,
Ver. 22. "Howbeit the scripture has shut up all things under sin, that the
promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe."
As the Jews were not even conscious of their own sins, and in consequence
did not even desire remission; the Law was given to probe their wounds, that
they might long for a physician. And the word "shut up" means "convinced" and
conviction held them in fear. You see then it is not only not against, but was
given for the promises. Had it arrogated to itself the work and the authority, the
objection would stand; but if its drift is something else, and it acted for that, how
is it against the promises of God? Had the Law not been given, all would have
been wrecked upon wickedness, and there would have been no Jews to listen to
Christ; but now being given, it has effected two things; it has schooled its
followers in a certain degree of virtue, and has pressed on them the knowledge
of their own sins. And this especially made them more zealous to seek the Son,
for those who disbelieved, disbelieved from having no sense of their own sins, as
Paul shows; "For being ignorant of God's righteousness, and seeking to
establish their own righteousness, they did not subject themselves to the
righteousness of God." [Romans 10:3]
Ver. 23. "But before faith came, we were kept inward under the Law, shut up
unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed."