short time he would bring you back to those palaces, and would there give you a
perpetual mansion; tell me, would you not indeed languish with desire, and feel
impatient, even at these few days? Thus think then of heaven, and of earth, and
groan with Paul, not because of death, but because of the present life!
6. But grant me, says one, to be like Paul, and I shall never be afraid of
death. Why, what is it that forbids you, O man, to become like Paul? Was he not
a poor man? Was he not a tent maker? Was he not a man of humble position? For
if he had been rich and high born, the poor, when called upon to imitate his zeal,
would have had their poverty to plead; but now you can say nothing of this sort.
For this man was one who exercised a manual art, and supported himself too by
his daily labours. And thou, indeed, from the first hast inherited true religion
from your fathers; and from your earliest age hast been nourished in the study of
the sacred writings; but he was "a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious,"
[1 Timothy 1:13] and ravaged the Church! Nevertheless, he so changed all at
once, as to surpass all in the vehemence of his zeal, and he cries out, saying, "Be
imitators of me, even as I also am of Christ." [1 Corinthians 11:6] He imitated
the Lord; and will not thou who hast been educated in piety from the first,
imitate a fellow-servant; one who by conversion was brought to the faith at a
later period of life? Do you not know, that they who are in sins are dead while
they live; and that they who live in righteousness, although they be dead, yet
they live? [1 Timothy 5:6] And this is not my word. It is the declaration of Christ
speaking to Martha, "He that believes in me though he were dead yet shall he
live." [John 11:5] Is our doctrine, indeed, a fable? If you are a Christian, believe
in Christ; if you believe in Christ, show me your faith by your works.
[James 2:18] But how may thou show this? By your contempt of death: for in
this we differ from the unbelievers. They may well fear death; since they have no
hope of a resurrection. But you, who art travelling toward better things, and hast
the opportunity of meditating on the hope of the future; what excuse have you, if
while assured of a resurrection, thou are yet at the same time as fearful of death,
as those who believe not the resurrection?

7. But I have no fear of death, says one, nor of the act of dying, but of a
miserable death, of being beheaded. Did John then, I ask, die miserably? For he
was beheaded. Or did Stephen die miserably? For he was stoned; and all the
martyrs have thus died wretchedly, according to this objection: since some have
ended their lives by fire; and others by the sword; and some cast into the ocean;
others down a precipice; and others into the jaws of wild beasts, have so come
by their death. To die basely, O man, is not to come to one's end by a violent
death, but to die in sin! Hear, at least, the prophet moralising on this very matter,
and saying, "The death of sinners is evil." He does not say that a violent death is
evil; but what then? "The death of sinners is evil." And justly so; for after the
departure from this life, there is an intolerable punishment; undying vengeance,
the envenomed worm; the fire unquenchable, the outer darkness, the chains
indissoluble; the gnashing of teeth, the tribulation, and the anguish, and the
eternal justice.
8. Since therefore such evils await sinners, what advantage can it be to
them, though they should end their days at home, and in their bed? Even so, on
the other hand, it can do no harm to the righteous to lay down the present life
through sword, or steel, or fire, when they are to depart to the good things that
are immortal. Truly "the death of sinners is evil." Such a death was that of the
rich man, who despised Lazarus. He, when he had terminated his life by a
natural end, at home and on his bed, and with his relatives about him,
experienced after his departure to the other world a fiery torment; nor was he
able to obtain there even a little comfort, out of all the pleasure he had enjoyed
in the present life! But not so was it with Lazarus; for when lying upon the
pavement, while the dogs came and licked his sores, he had suffered a violent
death (for what could be more painful than hunger?), but on his departing hence
he enjoyed eternal blessings, luxuriating in the bosom of Abraham! In what
respect, then, did it injure him that he died a violent death? Or what did it profit
the rich man, that he died not with violence?
9. But, says some one, "We have no fear of dying by violence, but of dying