the fathers, but puts before them what they must fear. For Stephen indeed with
good reason does this, seeing he was about to be put to death, not teaching them;
and showing them, that the Law is even now on the point of being abolished:
[Acts 7] but not so Paul; he does but threaten and put them in fear. (f) And he
does not dwell long on these, as taking it for granted that the word is of course
believed; nor enlarge upon the greatness of their punishment, and assail that
which they affectionately love, by showing the Law about to be cast out: but
dwells upon that which is for their good (telling them), that great shall be the
blessings for them being obedient, and great the evils being disobedient.
But let us look over again what has been said. "You men of Israel," etc.
[Acts 13:16-21] The Promise then, he says, the fathers received; you, the reality.
(j) And observe, he nowhere mentions right deeds of theirs, but (only) benefits
on God's part: "He chose: Exalted: Suffered their manners:" these are no matters
of praise to them: "They asked, He gave." But David he does praise (and him)
only, because from him the Christ was to come. "I have found David, the son of
Jesse, a man after My own heart, which shall fulfil all My will." [Acts 13:22] (i)
Observe also; it is with praise (that he says of him), "David after that he had
served the will of God:" just as Peter— seeing it was then the beginning of the
Gospel— making mention of him, said, "Let it be permitted me to speak freely of
the patriarch David." [Acts 2:29] Also, he does not say, Died, but, "was added to
his fathers. (k) Of this man's seed," etc. "When John," he says, "had first
preached before His entry"— by entry he means the Incarnation— "the baptism
of repentance to all the people of Israel." [Acts 13:23-25] Thus also John,
writing his Gospel, continually has recourse to him: for his name was much
thought of in all parts of the world. And observe, he does not say it "Of this
man's seed," etc. from himself, but brings John's testimony.
"Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham"— he also calls them
after their father— "unto you was the word of this salvation sent." [Acts 13:26]
Here the expression, "Unto you," does not mean, Unto (you) Jews, but it gives
them a right to sever themselves from those who dared that murder. And what he

adds, shows this plainly. "For," he says, "they that dwell at Jerusalem, because
they know Him not." [Acts 13:27] And how, you will say, could they be ignorant,
with John to tell them? What marvel, seeing they were so, with the prophets
continually crying aloud to them? Then follows another charge: "And having
found no cause of death in Him:" in which ignorance had nothing to do. For let
us put the case, that they did not hold Him to be the Christ: why did they also
kill Him? And "they desired of Pilate, he says, that He should be slain." [Acts
13:28] "And when they had fulfilled all that was written of Him." [Acts 13:29]
Observe what a point he makes of showing that the (whole) thing was a (Divine)
Dispensation. See, by saying what did they persuade men? (By telling them) that
He was crucified? Why, what could be less persuasive than this? That He was
buried— by them to whom it was promised that He should be salvation? That He
who was buried forgives sins, yea, more than the Law (has power to do)? And
(observe), he does not say, From which you would not but, "from which you
could not be justified by the Law of Moses." [Acts 13:39] "Every one," he says:
be who he may. For those (ordinances) are of no use, unless there be some
benefit (accruing therefrom.) This is why he brings in forgiveness later: and
shows it to be greater, when, the thing being (otherwise) impossible, yet this is
effected. "Who are His witnesses," he says, "unto the people"— the people that
slew Him. Who would never have been so, were they not strengthened by a
Divine Power: for they would never have borne such witness to blood-thirsty
men, to the very persons that killed Him. But, "He has raised up Jesus again:
This day," he says, "I have begotten you." [Acts 13:33] Aye, upon this the rest
follows of course. Why did he not allege some text by which they would be
persuaded that forgiveness of sins is by Him? Because the great point with them
was to show, in the first place, that He was risen: this being acknowledged, the
other was unquestionable. "Through this man," nay more, by Him, "is remission
of sins." [Acts 13:38] And besides, he wished to bring them to a longing desire
of this great thing. Well then, His death was not dereliction, but fulfilling of
Prophecy.— For the rest, he puts them in mind of historical facts, wherein they