THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.9.

announce what things were there, it would not be prophetical. And
the same appears in regard to time. For it was prophetical of Isaias
to announce that Cyrus, King of the Persians, would rebuild the
temple of God, as is clear from Is. 44:28. But it was not prophetical of
Esdras to write it, in whose time it took place. Hence if God or
angels, or even the blessed, know and announce what is beyond our
knowing, this does not pertain to prophecy, since they nowise touch
our state. Now Christ before His passion touched our state,
inasmuch as He was not merely a "comprehensor," but a "wayfarer."
Hence it was prophetical in Him to know and announce what was
beyond the knowledge of other "wayfarers": and for this reason He
is called a prophet.
Reply to Objection 1: These words do not prove that enigmatical
knowledge, viz. by dream and vision, belongs to the nature of
prophecy; but the comparison is drawn between other prophets, who
saw Divine things in dreams and visions, and Moses, who saw God
plainly and not by riddles, and who yet is called a prophet, according
to Dt. 24:10: "And there arose no more a prophet in Israel like unto
Moses." Nevertheless it may be said that although Christ had full and
unveiled knowledge as regards the intellective part, yet in the
imaginative part He had certain similitudes, in which Divine things
could be viewed, inasmuch as He was not only a "comprehensor,"
but a "wayfarer."
Reply to Objection 2: Faith regards such things as are unseen by
him who believes; and hope, too, is of such things as are not
possessed by the one who hopes; but prophecy is of such things as
are beyond the sense of men, with whom the prophet dwells and
converses in this state of life. And hence faith and hope are
repugnant to the perfection of Christ's beatitude; but prophecy is
not.
Reply to Objection 3: Angels, being "comprehensors," are above
prophets, who are merely "wayfarers"; but not above Christ, Who
was both a "comprehensor" and a "wayfarer."

THIRD PART OF THE SUMMA THEOLOGICA : L.7, C.10.

### ARTICLE 9. Whether in Christ there was the fulness of grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that in Christ there was not the fulness of
grace. For the virtues flow from grace, as was said above (FS,
Question 110, Article 4). But in Christ there were not all the virtues;
for there was neither faith nor hope in Him, as was shown above
(Articles 3,4). Therefore in Christ there was not the fulness of grace.
Objection 2: Further, as is plain from what was said above (FS,
Question 111, Article 2), grace is divided into operating and
cooperating. Now operating grace signifies that whereby the ungodly
is justified, which has no place in Christ, Who never lay under any
sin. Therefore in Christ there was not the fulness of grace.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (James 1:17): "Every best gift and
every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of
lights." But what comes thus is possessed partially, and not fully.
Therefore no creature, not even the soul of Christ, can have the
fulness of the gifts of grace.
On the contrary, It is written (Jn. 1:14): "We saw Him full of grace and
truth."
I answer that, To have fully is to have wholly and perfectly. Now
totality and perfection can be taken in two ways: First as regards
their "intensive" quantity; for instance, I may say that some man has
whiteness fully, because he has as much of it as can naturally be in
him; secondly, "as regards power"; for instance, if anyone be said to
have life fully, inasmuch as he has it in all the effects or works of life;
and thus man has life fully, but senseless animals or plants have not.
Now in both these ways Christ has the fulness of grace. First, since
He has grace in its highest degree, in the most perfect way it can be
had. And this appears, first, from the nearness of Christ's soul to the
cause of grace. For it was said above (Article 1) that the nearer a
recipient is to the inflowing cause, the more it receives. And hence
the soul of Christ, which is more closely united to God than all other
rational creatures, receives the greatest outpouring of His grace.
Secondly, in His relation to the effect. For the soul of Christ so
received grace, that, in a manner, it is poured out from it upon
others. And hence it behooved Him to have the greatest grace; as
fire which is the cause of heat in other hot things, is of all things the