2 Corinthians 9:11
"That being enriched in every thing to all liberality, which works through us
thanksgiving to God."
Not that you may consume it upon things not fitting, but upon such as bring
much thanksgiving to God. For God made us to have the disposal of great things,
and reserving to Himself that which is less yielded to us that which is greater.
For corporeal nourishment is at His sole disposal, but mental He permitted to us;
for we have it at our own disposal whether the crops we have to show be
luxuriant. For no need is here of rains and of variety of seasons, but of the will
only, and they run up to heaven itself. And largeness in giving is what he here
calls liberality. "Which works through us thanksgiving to God." For neither is
that which is done almsgiving merely, but also the ground of much thanksgiving:
yea rather, not of thanksgiving only, but of many other things besides. And these
as he goes on he mentions, that by showing it to be the cause of many good
works, he may make them thereby the forwarder.
2. What then are these many good works? Hear him saying:

2 Corinthians 9:12-14
"For the ministration of this service, not only fills up the measure of the
wants of the saints, but abounds also through many thanksgivings unto God;
seeing that through the proving of you by this ministration, they glorify God for
the obedience of your confession unto the Gospel , and for the liberality of your
contribution unto them and unto all; while they also with supplication on your
behalf, long after you by reason of the exceeding grace of God in you."
What he says is this; 'in the first place ye not only supply the wants of the
saints, but you are abundant even;' that is, 'ye furnish them with even more than
they need: next, through them ye send up thanksgiving to God, for they glorify
Him for the obedience of your confession.' For that he may not represent them as
giving thanks on this account solely, (I mean, because they received somewhat,)
see how high-minded he makes them, exactly as he himself says to the
Philippians, "Not that I desire a gift." [Philippians 4:17] 'To them too I bear
record of the same thing. For they rejoice indeed that you supply their wants and
alleviate their poverty; but far more, in that you are so subjected to the Gospel;
whereof this is an evidence, your contributing so largely.' For this the Gospel
enjoins.
"And for the liberality of your contribution unto them and unto all." 'And
on this account,' he says, 'they glorify God that you are so liberal, not unto them
only, but also unto all.' And this again is made a praise unto them that they gave
thanks even for that which is bestowed upon others. 'For,' says he, 'they do honor
, not to their own concerns only, but also to those of others, and this although
they are in the extremest poverty; which is an evidence of their great virtue. For
nothing is so full of envy as the whole race of such as are in poverty. But they
are pure from this passion; being so far from feeling pained because of the things
ye impart to others, that they even rejoice over it no less than over the things