2 Corinthians 5:17
4. "Wherefore if any man is in Christ, he is a new creature."
For seeing he had exhorted unto virtue from His love, he now leads them on
to this from what has been actually done for them; wherefore also he added, "If
any man is in Christ," he is "a new creature." "If any," says he, "have believed in
Him, he has come to another creation, for he has been born again by the Spirit."
So that for this cause also, he says, we ought to live unto Him, not because we
are not our own only, nor because He died for us only, nor because He raised up
our First-fruits only, but because we have also come unto another life. See how
many just grounds he urges for a life of virtue. For on this account he also calls
the reformation by a grosser name , in order to show the transition and the
change to be great. Then following out farther what he had said, and showing
how it is "a new creation," he adds, "The old things are passed away, behold, all
things are become new."
What old things? He means either sins and impieties, or else all the Judaical
observances. Yea rather, he means both the one and the other. "Behold, all things
have become new."

2 Corinthians 5:18
"But all things are of God."
Nothing of ourselves. For remission of sins and adoption and unspeakable
glory are given to us by Him. For he exhorts them no longer from the things to
come only, but even from those now present. For consider. He said, that we shall
be raised again, and go on unto incorruption, and have an eternal house; but
since present things have more force to persuade than things to come, with those
who believe not in these as they ought to believe, he shows how great things
they have even already received, and being themselves what. What then being,
received they them? Dead all; (for he says, "all died;" and, "He died for all;" so
loved He all alike;) inveterate all, and grown old in their vices. But behold, both
a new soul, (for it was cleansed,) and a new body, and a new worship, and
promises new, and covenant, and life, and table, and dress, and all things new
absolutely. For instead of the Jerusalem below we have received that mother city
which is above [Galatians 4:26]; and instead of a material temple have seen a
spiritual temple; instead of tables of stone, fleshy ones; instead of circumcision,
baptism; instead of the manna, the Lord's body; instead of water from a rock,
blood from His side; instead of Moses' or Aaron's rod, the Cross; instead of the
promised [land] , the kingdom of heaven; instead of a thousand priests, One
High Priest; instead of a lamb without reason , a Spiritual Lamb. With these and
such like things in his thought he said, "all things are new." But "all" these
"things are of God," by Christ, and His free gift. Wherefore also he added,
"Who reconciled us to Himself through Christ, and gave unto us the
ministry of reconciliation."
For from Him are all the good things. For He that made us friends is
Himself also the cause of the other things which God has given to His friends.
For He rendered not these things unto us, allowing us to continue enemies, but