taken away even that which he has. And cast the unprofitable servant into outer
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."
These parables are like the former parable of the faithful servant, and of
him that was ungrateful and devoured his Lord's goods. For there are four in all,
in different ways admonishing us about the same things, I mean about diligence
in almsgiving, and about helping our neighbor by all means which we are able to
use, since it is not possible to be saved in another way. But there He speaks more
generally of all assistance which should he rendered to one's neighbor; but as to
the virgins, he speaks particularly of mercifulness in alms, and more strongly
than in the former parable. For there He punishes him that beats, and is drunken,
and scatters and wastes his lord's goods, but here even him that does not help,
nor spends abundantly his goods upon the needy. For they had oil indeed, but not
in abundance, wherefore also they are punished.
But wherefore does He set forth this parable in the person of the virgins,
and does not merely suppose any person whatever? Great things had He spoken
of virginity, saying, "There are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs for
the kingdom of Heaven's sake;" and, "He that is able to receive, let him receive
it." [Matthew 19:12] He knew also that the generality of men would have a great
opinion of it. For indeed the work is by nature great, and is shown so by this, that
neither under the old dispensation was it fulfilled by these ancient and holy men,
nor under the new was it brought under the compulsion of the law. For He did
not command this, but left it to the choice of his hearers. Wherefore Paul also
said "Now, concerning virgins I have no commandment of the Lord."
[1 Corinthians 7:25] "For though I praise him that attains thereto, yet I constrain
not him that is not willing, neither do I make the thing an injunction." Since then
the thing is both great in itself and has great honor with the multitude, lest any
one attaining to this should feel as though he had attained to all, and should be
careless about the rest, He puts forth this parable sufficient to persuade them,
that virginity, though it should have everything else, if destitute of the good
things arising out of almsgiving, is cast out with the harlots, and He sets the

inhuman and merciless with them. And most reasonably, for the one was
overcome by the love of carnal pleasure, but these of money. But the love of
carnal pleasure and of money are not equal, but that of carnal pleasure is far
keener and more tyrannical. And the weaker the antagonist, the less excusable
are these that are overcome thereby. Therefore also He calls them foolish, for
that having undergone the greater labor, they have betrayed all for want of the
less. But by lamps here, He means the gift itself of virginity, the purity of
holiness; and by oil, humanity, almsgiving, succor to them that are in need.
"Then, while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept." He
shows that the time intervening will not be short, leading His disciples away
from the expectation that His kingdom was quite immediately to appear. For this
indeed they hoped, therefore He is continually holding them back from this
hope. And at the same time He intimates this too, that death is a sleep. For they
slept, He says.
"And about midnight there was a cry made." Either He was continuing the
parable, or again He shows that the resurrection will be at night. But the cry Paul
also indicates, saying, "With a shout, with a voice of an archangel, with the last
trump, He shall come down from Heaven." And what mean the trumpets, and
what says the cry? "The bridegroom comes." When therefore they had trimmed
their lamps, the foolish say unto the wise, "Give us of your oil." Again He calls
them foolish, showing that nothing can be more foolish than they who are
wealthy here, and depart naked there, where most of all we have need of
humanity, where we want much oil. But not in this respect only were they
foolish, but also because they looked to receive it there, and sought it out of
season; and yet nothing could be more humane than those virgins, who for this
especially were approved. Neither do they seek for it all, for, "Give us," they say,
"of your oil;" and the urgency of their need is indicated; "for our lamps," they
say, "are going out." But even so they failed, and neither the humanity of those
whom they asked, nor the easiness of their request, nor their necessity and want,
made them obtain.