SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.3.

Reply to Objection 6: If a man in return for money lent to him pledges
something that can be valued at a price, the lender must allow for the
use of that thing towards the repayment of the loan. Else if he wishes
the gratuitous use of that thing in addition to repayment, it is the
same as if he took money for lending, and that is usury, unless
perhaps it were such a thing as friends are wont to lend to one
another gratis, as in the case of the loan of a book.
Reply to Objection 7: If a man wish to sell his goods at a higher price
than that which is just, so that he may wait for the buyer to pay, it is
manifestly a case of usury: because this waiting for the payment of
the price has the character of a loan, so that whatever he demands
beyond the just price in consideration of this delay, is like a price for
a loan, which pertains to usury. In like manner if a buyer wishes to
buy goods at a lower price than what is just, for the reason that he
pays for the goods before they can be delivered, it is a sin of usury;
because again this anticipated payment of money has the character
of a loan, the price of which is the rebate on the just price of the
goods sold. On the other hand if a man wishes to allow a rebate on
the just price in order that he may have his money sooner, he is not
guilty of the sin of usury.

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART : L.77, C.4.

### ARTICLE 3. Whether a man is bound to restore whatever

profits he has made out of money gotten by usury?
Objection 1: It would seem that a man is bound to restore whatever
profits he has made out of money gotten by usury. For the Apostle
says (Rm. 11:16): "If the root be holy, so are the branches."
Therefore likewise if the root be rotten so are the branches. But the
root was infected with usury. Therefore whatever profit is made
therefrom is infected with usury. Therefore he is bound to restore it.
Objection 2: Further, it is laid down (Extra, De Usuris, in the Decretal:
'Cum tu sicut asseris'): "Property accruing from usury must be sold,
and the price repaid to the persons from whom the usury was
extorted." Therefore, likewise, whatever else is acquired from
usurious money must be restored.
Objection 3: Further, that which a man buys with the proceeds of
usury is due to him by reason of the money he paid for it. Therefore
he has no more right to the thing purchased than to the money he
paid. But he was bound to restore the money gained through usury.
Therefore he is also bound to restore what he acquired with it.
On the contrary, A man may lawfully hold what he has lawfully
acquired. Now that which is acquired by the proceeds of usury is
sometimes lawfully acquired. Therefore it may be lawfully retained.
I answer that, As stated above (Article 1), there are certain things
whose use is their consumption, and which do not admit of usufruct,
according to law (ibid., ad 3). Wherefore if such like things be
extorted by means of usury, for instance money, wheat, wine and so
forth, the lender is not bound to restore more than he received (since
what is acquired by such things is the fruit not of the thing but of
human industry), unless indeed the other party by losing some of his
own goods be injured through the lender retaining them: for then he
is bound to make good the loss.
On the other hand, there are certain things whose use is not their
consumption: such things admit of usufruct, for instance house or
land property and so forth. Wherefore if a man has by usury extorted
from another his house or land, he is bound to restore not only the
house or land but also the fruits accruing to him therefrom, since