how free from adulation his speech is on all occasions, and how full of humility.
"And conversing with him, he came in." (a) [Acts 10:27] Conversing about
what? I suppose saying these words: "I myself also am a man." (e) Do you mark
(Peter's) unassuming temper? He himself also shows that his coming is God's
doing: "You know that it is unlawful for a man that is a Jew," etc. [Acts 10:28]
And why did he not speak of the linen sheet? Observe Peter's freedom from all
vainglory: but, that he is sent of God, this indeed he mentions; of the manner in
which he was sent, he speaks not at present; when the need has arisen, seeing he
had said, "You know that it is unlawful for a man that is a Jew to keep company
with, or to come unto, one of another nation," he simply adds, "but to me God
has shown," etc. There is nothing of vainglory here. "All you," he says, "know."
He makes their knowledge stand surety for him. But Cornelius says, "We are
present before God to hear all things that are commanded you of the Lord" [Acts
10:33]: not, Before man, but, "Before God." This is the way one ought to attend
to God's servants. Do you see his awakened mind? Do you see how worthy he
was of all these things? "And Peter," it says, "opened his mouth, and said, Of a
truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons." [Acts 10:34] This he said
also by way of justifying himself with the Jews then present. For, being at the
point to commit the Word to these (Gentiles), he first puts this by way of
apology. What then? Was He "a respecter of persons" beforetime? God forbid!
For beforetime likewise it was just the same: "Every one," as he says, "that fears
Him, and works righteousness, would be acceptable to Him." As when Paul
says, "For when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things of
the Law." [Romans 2:14] "That fears God and works righteousness:" he assumes
both doctrine and manner of life: is "accepted with Him;" for, if He did not
overlook the Magi, nor the Ethiopian, nor the thief, nor the harlot, much more
them that work righteousness, and are willing, shall He in anywise not overlook.
"What say you then to this, that there are likely persons ([ἐ] [πιεικεἵς]), men of
mild disposition, and yet they will not believe?" (Above, p. 149, note 2.) Lo, you
have yourself named the cause: they will not. But besides the likely person he

here speaks of is not this sort of man, but the man "that works righteousness:"
that is, the man who in all points is virtuous and irreproachable, when he has the
fear of God as he ought to have it. But whether a person be such, God only
knows. See how this man was acceptable: see how, as soon as he heard, he was
persuaded. "Yes, and now too," say you, "every one would be persuaded, be who
he may." But the signs that are now, are much greater than those, and more
wonderful.— Then Peter commences his teaching, and reserves for the Jews the
privilege of their birth. "The word," he says, which He sent unto the children of
Israel, preaching peace [Acts 10:36], not bringing judgment. He is sent to the
Jews also: yet for all this He did not spare them. "Preaching peace through Jesus
Christ. He is Lord of all." First he discourses of His being Lord and in exceeding
elevated terms, seeing he had to deal with a soul more than commonly elevated,
and that took all in with ardor. Then he proves how He was Lord of all, from the
things which He achieved "throughout all Judea. For you know," says he, "the
matter which came to pass throughout all Judea:" and, what is the wonderful
part of it, "beginning at Galilee: after the baptism which John preached." [Acts
10:37] First he speaks of His success, and then again he says concerning Him,
"Jesus of Nazareth." Why, what a stumbling-block, this birthplace! "How God
anointed Him with the Holy Ghost and with power." [Acts 10:38] Then again the
proof— how does that appear?— from the good that He did. "Who went about
doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil:" and the greatness
of the power shown when He overcomes the devil; and the cause, "Because God
was with Him." Therefore also the Jews spoke thus: "We know that You are a
teacher come from God: for none can do these miracles except God be with
him." [John 3:2] Then, when he has shown that He was sent from God, he next
speaks of this, that He was slain: that you may not imagine anything absurd. Do
you see how far they are from hiding the Cross out of view, nay, that together
with the other circumstances they put also the manner? "Whom also," it says,
"they slew by hanging on a tree. And gave Him," it is added, "to be made
manifest not to all the people, but to witnesses before ordained of God, even unto