defense to him alone, and to confess ourselves to him. And yet among secular
judges, if any tell any of the robbers or grave-riflers, when they are arrested, to
tell their errors and be quit of their punishment, they would accede to this with
all readiness, despising the shame through desire of safety. But in this case there
is nothing of this kind, but he both remits the sins, nor compels us to marshal
them in array before any spectators. But one thing alone he seeks, that he who
enjoys this remission should learn the greatness of the gift. How is it not,
therefore, absurd that in case where he does us service, he should be content with
our testimony only, but in those where we serve him we seek for others as
witnesses, and do a thing for ostentation's sake? While we wonder then at his
kindliness, let us show forth our doings, and before all others let us curb the
vehemence of our tongue, and not always be giving utterance. "For in the
multitude of words there wants not transgression." [Proverbs 10:19] If indeed
then you have anything useful to say, open your lips. But if there be nothing
necessary for you to say, be silent, for it is better. Are you a handicraftsman? As
you sit at work, sing psalms. Do you not wish to sing with your mouth? Do this
in your heart; a psalm is a great companion. In this case you shall undergo
nothing serious, but shall be able to sit in your workshop as in a monastery. For
not suitableness of place, but strictness of morals will afford us quiet. Paul, at
least, pursuing his trade in a workshop suffered no injury to his own virtue.
[Acts 18:3] Do not thou therefore say, How can I, being a handicraftsman and a
poor man, be a philosopher? This is indeed the very reason why you may be a
philosopher. For poverty is far more conducive to piety for us than wealth, and
work than idleness; since wealth is even a hinderance to those who do not take
heed. For when it is needful to dismiss anger, to extinguish envy, to curb passion,
to offer prayer, to exhibit forbearance and meekness, kindliness and charity,
when would poverty be a bar? For it is not possible by spending money to
accomplish these things, but by exhibiting a right disposition; almsgiving
especially needs money, but even it shines forth in greater degree through
poverty. For she who spent the two mites was poorer than all men, and yet

surpassed all. [Luke 21:2-4] Let us not then consider wealth to be anything great,
nor gold to be better than clay. For the value of material things is not owing to
their nature, but to our estimate of them. For if any one would inquire carefully,
iron is much more necessary than gold. For the one contributes to no need of our
life, but the other has furnished us with the greater part of our needs, ministering
to countless arts; and why do I speak of a comparison between gold and iron?
For these stones are more necessary than precious stones. For of those nothing
serviceable could be made, but out of these, houses and walls and cities are
erected. But do thou show me what gain could be derived from these pearls,
rather what harm would not happen? For in order that you may wear one pearl
drop, countless poor people are pinched with hunger. What excuse will you hit
upon? What pardon?
Do you wish to adorn your face? Do so not with pearls, but with modesty,
and dignity. So your countenance will be more full of grace in the eyes of your
husband. For the other kind of adorning is wont to plunge him into a suspicion of
jealousy, and into enmity, quarrelsomeness and strife, for nothing is more
annoying than a face which is suspected. But the ornament of compassion and
modesty casts out all evil suspicion, and will draw your partner to you more
strongly than any bond. For natural beauty does not impart such comeliness to
the face as does the disposition of him who beholds it, and nothing is so wont to
produce that disposition as modesty and dignity; so that if any woman be
comely, and her husband be ill affected towards her, she appears to him the most
worthless of all women; and if she do not happen to be fair of face, but her
husband be well affected towards her, she appears more comely than all. For
sentence is given not according to the nature of what is beheld, but according to
the disposition of the beholders. Adorn your face then with modesty, dignity,
pity, lovingkindness, charity, affection for your husband, forbearance, meekness,
endurance of ill. These are the tints of virtue. By means of these you will attract
angels not human beings to be your lovers. By means of these you have God to
commend you, and when God receives you, he will certainly win over your