less than prophets and apostles and patriarchs, and all righteous men, are by us
set over you as teachers in every Church. And not even so is there any profit, but
if you have joined in chanting two or three Psalms, and making the accustomed
prayers at random and anyhow, are so dismissed, you think this enough for your
salvation. Have ye not heard the prophet, saying (or rather God by the prophet),
"This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me?"
Therefore, lest this be our case too, wipe out the letters, or rather the
impressions, which the devil has engraven in your soul; and bring me a heart set
free from worldly tumults, that without fear I may write on it what I will. Since
now at least there is nothing else to discern, except his letters—rapines,
covetings, envy, jealousy. Wherefore of course, when I receive your tablets, I am
not able so much as to read them. For I find not the letters, which we every
Lord's day inscribe on you, and so let you go; but others, instead of these,
unintelligible and misshapen. Then, when we have blotted them out, and have
written those which are of the Spirit, you departing, and giving up your hearts to
the works of the devil, give him again power to substitute his own characters in
you. What then will be the end of all this, even without any words of mine, each
man's own conscience knows. For I indeed will not cease to do my part, and to
write in you the right letters. But if you mar our diligence, for our part our
reward is unaltered, but your danger is not small.
Now, though I would fain say nothing to disgust you, yet I beseech again
and entreat you, imitate at least the little children's diligence in these matters. For
so they first learn the form of the letters, after that they practise themselves in
distinguishing them put out of shape, and then at last in their reading they
proceed orderly by means of them. Just so let us also do; let us divide virtue, and
learn first not to swear, nor to forswear ourselves, nor to speak evil; then
proceeding to another row, not to envy, not to lust, not to be gluttonous, not to be
drunken, not fierce, not slothful, so that from these we may pass on again to the
things of the Spirit, and practise continence, and neglect of the belly,
temperance, righteousness, to be above glory, and gentle and contrite in mind;

and let us join these one with another, and write them upon our soul.
10. And all these let us practise at home, with our own friends, with our
wife, with our children. And, for the present, let us begin with the things that
come first, and are easier; as for instance, with not swearing; and let us practise
this one letter continually at home. For, in truth, there are many at home to
hinder this our practice; sometimes a man's servant provoking him, sometimes
his wife annoying and angering him, sometimes an indocile and disorderly child
urges him on to threatening and swearing. If now at home, when thus continually
galled, you should attain not to be tempted into swearing, you will in the marketplace also have power with ease to abide unconquered.
Yea, and in like sort, you will attain to keep yourself from insulting any, by
not insulting your wife, nor your servants, nor any one else among those in your
house. For a man's wife too not seldom, praising this or that person, or
bemoaning herself, stirs him up to speak evil of that other. But do not let
yourself be constrained to speak evil of him that is praised, but bear it all nobly.
And if you should perceive your servants praising other masters, be not
perturbed, but stand nobly. Let your home be a sort of lists, a place of exercise
for virtue, that having trained yourself well there, you may with entire skill
encounter all abroad.
Do this with respect to vainglory also. For if you train yourself not to be
vainglorious in company of your wife and your servants, you will not ever
afterwards be easily caught by this passion with regard to any one else. For
though this malady be in every case grievous and tyrannical, yet is it so
especially when a woman is present. If we therefore in that instance put down its
power, we shall easily master it in the other cases also.
And with respect to the other passions too, let us do this self-same thing,
exercising ourselves against them at home, and anointing ourselves every day.
And that our exercise may be easier, let us further enact a penalty for
ourselves, upon our transgressing any of our purposes. And let the very penalty
again be such as brings with it not loss, but reward—such as procures some very