tongue, and when the belly is filled, not to the tongue even. But, says one,
honors are of themselves pleasant things. Yet what can be less pleasant than that
same honor, when it is rendered with a view to money? When it is not from free
choice and with a readiness of mind, it is not thou that reapest the honor, but
your wealth. So that this very thing makes the man of wealth, most of all men,
dishonored. For, tell me; suppose all men honored you, who had a friend; the
while confessing that thou, to be sure, were good for nothing, but that they were
compelled to honor you on his account; could they possibly in any other way
have so dishonored you? So that our wealth is the cause of dishonor to us, seeing
it is more honored than are its very possessors, and a proof rather of weakness
than of power. How then is it not absurd that we are not counted of as much
value as earth and ashes, (for such is gold,) but that we are honored for its sake?
With reason. But not so he that despises wealth; for it were better not to be
honored at all, than so honored. For tell me, were one to say to you, I think you
worthy of no honor at all, but for your servants' sakes I honor you, could now
anything be worse than this dishonor? But if to be honored for the sake of
servants, who are partakers of the same soul and nature with ourselves, be a
disgrace, much more then is it such, to be honored for the sake of meaner things,
such as the walls and courts of houses, and vessels of gold, and garments. A
scorn indeed were this, and shame; better die than be so honored. For, tell me, if
you were in peril in this your pride, and some low and disgusting person were to
be willing to extricate you from your peril, what could be worse than this? What
ye say one to another about the city, I wish to say to you. Once on a time our city
gave offense to the Emperor, and he gave orders that the whole of it should
utterly be destroyed, men, children, houses, and all. (For such is the wrath of
kings, they indulge their power as much as ever they choose, so great an evil is
power.) It was then in the extremest of perils. The neighboring city, however,
this one on the sea-coast, went and besought the king in our behalf: upon which
the inhabitants of our city said that this was worse than if the city had been razed
to the ground. So, to be thus honored is worse than being dishonored. For see

whence honor has its root. The hands of cooks procure us to be honored, so that
to them we ought to feel gratitude; and swineherds supplying us with a rich
table, and weavers, and spinners, and workers in metal, and confectioners, and
table furnishers.
Were it not then better not to be honored at all, than to be beholden to these
for the honor? And besides this, moreover, I will endeavor to prove clearly that
opulence is a condition full of dishonor; it embases the soul; and what is more
dishonorable than this? For tell me, suppose one had a comely person, and
passing all in beauty, and wealth were to go to him and promise to make it ugly,
and instead of healthy, diseased, instead of cool, inflamed; and having filled
every limb with dropsy, were to make the countenance bloated, and distend it all
over; and were to swell out the feet, and make them heavier than logs, and to
puff up the belly, and make it larger than any tun; and after this, it should
promise not even to grant permission to cure him, to those who should be
desirous of doing so, (for such is the way with power,) but would give him so
much liberty as to punish any one that should approach him to withdraw him
from what was harming him; well then, tell me, when wealth works these effects
in the soul, how can it be honorable?
But this power is a more grievous thing than the disease itself; as for one in
disease not to be obedient to the physician's injunctions is a more serious evil
than the being diseased; and this is the case with wealth, seeing it creates
inflammation in every part of the soul, and forbids the physicians to come near
it. So let us not felicitate these on the score of their power, but pity them; for
neither were I to see a dropsical patient lying, and nobody forbidding him to take
his fill of whatever drinks he pleased and of meats that are harmful, would I
felicitate him because of his power. For not in all cases is power a good thing,
nor are honors either, for these too fill one with much arrogance. But if you
would not choose that the body should along with wealth contract such a disease,
how do you come to overlook the soul, and when contracting not this scourge
alone, but another also? For it is on fire all over with burning fevers and