Ver. 12. "Let the Deacons be husbands of one wife."
This must be understood therefore to relate to Deaconesses. For that order
is necessary and useful and honorable in the Church. Observe how he requires
the same virtue from the Deacons, as from the Bishops, for though they were not
of equal rank, they must equally be blameless; equally pure.
"Ruling their children and their own houses well."
Ver. 13. "For they that have used the office of a Deacon well purchase to
themselves a good degree, and much boldness in the faith which is in Christ
Jesus."
Everywhere they are required to rule their children well, that others may not
be scandalized by their misconduct.
"They that use the office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good
degree," that is, advancement, "and much boldness in the faith of Jesus Christ";
as if he would say, that those who have been found vigilant in the lower degree
will soon ascend to the higher.
Ver. 14, 15. "These things write I unto you, hoping to come unto you shortly.
But if I tarry long, that you may know how you ought to behave yourself in the
house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the
truth."
That he may not plunge Timothy into dejection by giving him orders about
such matters, he says, I write thus not as though I were not coming, but I will
indeed come, still in case I should be delayed, that you may not be distressed.
And this he writes to him to prevent his being dejected, but to others in order to
rouse them to greater earnestness. For his presence, though only promised,
would have great effect. Nor let it seem strange that, though foreseeing
everything through the Spirit, he was yet ignorant of this, and only says, I hope
to come, but if I tarry, which implies uncertainty. For since he was led by the
Spirit, and did not act from his own inclination, he was naturally uncertain about
this matter.
"That you may know," he says, "how you ought to behave yourself in the

house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the
truth." Not like that Jewish house. For it is this that maintains the faith and the
preaching of the Word. For the truth is the pillar and the ground of the Church.
Ver. 16. "And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness; God
[He who] was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit."
Here he speaks of the Dispensation in our behalf. Tell me not of the bells,
nor of the holy of holies, nor of the high priest. The Church is the pillar of the
world. Consider this mystery, and you may be struck with awe: for it is indeed "a
great mystery," and "a mystery of godliness," and that "without controversy" or
question, for it is beyond all doubt. Since in his directions to the Priests he had
required nothing like what is found in Leviticus he refers the whole matter to
Another, saying, "God was manifest in the flesh." The Creator was seen
incarnate. "He was justified in the Spirit." As it is said, "Wisdom is justified of
her children," or because He practiced no guile, as the Prophet says, "Because he
had done no violence, neither was guile found in his mouth." [Isaiah 53:9; 1
Peter 2:22] "Seen of Angels." So that Angels together with us saw the Son of
God, not having before seen Him. Great, truly great, was this mystery!
"Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world." He was heard of and
believed in through all parts of the world, as the Prophet foreshowed, saying,
"Their sound is gone out into all the world." [Psalm 19:4] Think not that these
things are mere words, for they are not, but full of hidden realities. "Received up
into glory." He ascended upon clouds. "This Jesus," it is said, "Who is taken up
from you, shall so come in like manner as you have seen Him go into heaven."
[Acts 1:11]
The discretion of the blessed Paul is observable. When he would exhort the
Deacons to avoid excess in wine, he does not say, "Be not drunken," but "not"
even "given to much wine." A proper caution; for if those who served in the
Temple did not taste wine at all, much more should not these. For wine produces
disorder of mind, and where it does not cause drunkenness, it destroys the
energies and relaxes the firmness of the soul.